[6190] 



AND HEPALD OF CHRISTS" PRESENCE 


Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JANUARY 1, 1918 


No. 1 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


"The end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer, and above all things have fervent love 

amongst yourselves." — 1 Peter 4:7, 8. 


What will the year 1918 bring forth? This question is 
upon the lips of every class of men. The world looks and 
hopes for those things which constitute its highest ideals — 
peace, plenty, health and happiness. The Christian looks for 
the year to bring the full consummation of the church's hopes. 
The world says, "How may we attain to our ideals of earthly 
blessing?" The Christian asks, "When shall we enter the 
Temple of our God, and see our Lord face to face and be 
assured of his everlasting approval? And when shall we be 
permitted by his grace to participate in reconstruction and 
blessing the human race?" For that blessed time, St. Paul 
tells us, the whole creation groans and travails in pain; yet 
the creatures know not how their deliverance shall come. Only 
the children of the Lord know by faith in his Word. 

History is making at such break-neck speed that men of 
the world go breathless in pursuit. They behold the current 
events, but understand not why they are so. Christians, watching
 the transpiring of these events, by the Lord's grace understand
 them and rejoice to see their hopes about to be realized
. The truths of the present day, earthly and spiritual, 
stimulate the child of God to greater activity in the Master's 
service 

THE COAL FAMINE 

During the severest winter weather the world's metropolis 
and many other cities face a coal famine. For many days, 
coal has not been obtainable regardless of the price. Even the 
wealthy have found their money of no avail. Many such have 
driven in their expensive limousines to the coal-distributing 
points and begged the deliverers to load their fine cars with 
coal, that they might have some comfort in their homes; but 
they fail to get it. The public press announces that 300,000 
families in Greater New York were without fire to warm by 
for several days. The worldly-minded wonder why such conditions
 are permitted to exist. The students of God's Word 
see why and know that these conditions will grow worse as 
we near the end. Twenty-five hundred years ago, God through 
his Prophet, referring to the time in which we now are, said, 
"There shall not be a coal to warm at, nor a fire to sit before." 
(Isaiah 47:14) Conditions leading up to the fulfilment of this 
prophecy are mentioned by Dr. Bromley in "The New York 
Times." October 17, as follows: 

"There is plenty of coal in the ground, yet most of Europe 
is dark and cold. Both Americas are much alarmed over the 
situation as it confronts them. The present fuel crisis is here 
because we did not realize soon enough how vital a factor is 
fuel, when whole nations and not armies alone must become 
war weapons. 

"The cry that there is no coal shortage is dangerous deception
. True 500,098.175 tone in lfllfi as against 531,619,487 
tons in 1915 was the production. But these figures are misleading
 if one forgets that the world's consumption of coal is 
greater than ever before/' 

Thousands of producers have been removed from channels 
of production and put into channels of destruction. Such 
conditions will grow worse. 

THE THIOKENIKG TURMOIL 

Asked what would be proof of the end of the world, the 
great Master said: "Upon the earth, distress of nations with 
perplexity; men's hearts failing them for fear." (Luke 21:24, 
26) Today we see the fulfilment of this prophecy. "The 
Commercial and Financial Chronicle," one of the^ most conservative
 amongst financial and business journals, in a recent 
editorial says: 

"A retrospect of the week discloses a series of events, a 
status of conditions, more momentous and depressing perhaps 
than any other week of this agonizing war. The grey skies of 
February grow dark with gloom; and hoping almost against 
hope, one tries to see some signs of the coming of the end. 
But a wall of murky, steely cloud, in which pale glimmers of 
peace flame, only to fade, shuts down upon the world, lighted 

remi 


by the terrible fires of battle, and seething with the turmoil 
of man's perverted endeavor. And for that phrase bandied 
about in a sort of light-hearted contempt, 'Whither are we 
drifting?' the serious-minded must substitute another, *To 
what further and final cataclysm are we drifting?' 

"As the search-light of all-seeing Press sweeps the world 
what do we behold? A new revolution in Russia — sinister 
with socialism and eloquent of the anarchy which must prevail 
over wide stretches of that unhappy land far removed from its 
populace centers — civil blood in the streets of Moscow and 
Petrograd. the fate of the new attempt to rule hanging in 
the balance — it may be a matter of days, mayhap presage 
other feuds to come— a Russia practically out of the war as 
far as early aid to the Allies is concerned, a fact which may 
yet prove of gigantic proportions. 

"And in our own country, a week of refrnarkable events and 
of growing apprehension. Stocks reaching their lowest point 
in ten years, recording billions of dollars of losses in market 
values since the beginning of the conflict, showing few Bigns 
of any permanent recuperation. Strikes, arbitrations and compromises
 by and between employes and employers throughout 
the country in numbers and for demands never before approached
 in the history of the country. Looming up suddenly 
is an impending demand and a possible strike for its enforcement
, having an estimated 109 million dollars increase in 
wages, to meet an alleged increase in the cost of living by 
certain bodies of railway employes in the face of the showing 
of net losses by the roads upon an increased business or in 
spite of it. 

"Yet, again, a meeting of the National Foundries Association
 in New York City, which sends a telegram to the President
 in which it is unanimously declared that: 

'Autocracy of labor is fully as disturbing to the welfare 
of mankind as an autocracy of government/ 

"These are a few of the leading events and conditions 
confronting our people. The insupportable pressure of war isat
 work, and the turmoil thickens. The time calls for serious 
thought, closer devotion to every task in hand, and solemn 
study. Our hope is that we may now be in that darkness which 
almost precedes dawn." 

LABOR SEEKS OONTBOL 

"The sea and the waves roaring." (Luke 21:25) In every 
land of earth is observed the fulfilment of this prophetic statement
. The discontented, restless element of humanity is fomenting
 more trouble. Organized labor is roaring out it's discontent
, and seeking to put its grip upon the reins of power. 
And the time draws closer when the warring classes feel that 
they must have it out with the growing aggression of the 
workers. The annual report of the American Federation of 
Laboe says: 

"Working people have**never been properly represented in 
diplomatic affairs. We insist that this Government provide 
adequate and direct representation of wage earners among the 
plenipotentiaries sent to the Peace Congress." 

Th& Chronicle, the spokesman of finance and business, on 
the above statement comments: 

"Here it is again; labor arrogantly setting itself up as a 
separate factor, an entity to be dealt with; as a class, physically
 within, but not of the country; as a sort of power which 
can make terms and conditions on which it will stand more 
or less distantly behind the Government in the great struggle 
for national life. 

"We have yielded and yielded to organized labor, until the 
final clinch cannot be longer delayed. We cannot avoid or 
divert that clinch by the Government undertaking to take 
over the roads and operate them as military instruments. Such 
they have been for three years, and the men owning them are 
virtually soldiers in the ranks. The country must now, in an 
emergency which brooks no delay and no feebleness, undertake 
and accomplish the subverting of any organization within it, 


(3-4) 


(4-S) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. *. 


or else surrender to this one which defies it the more boldly 
because of having been suffered to grow by a long series of 
compromises." 

A DEFERRED HOPE ABOUT REALIZED 

The Gentile times have ended, and the kings of earth have 
had their day* The autocratic kingdoms are destroying each 
other, and their existence is but a matter of days merely. 
Concerning the Jews, Christ Jesus said: "They shall be trodden
 down of the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles be 
fulfilled/' (Luke 21:24) Zionism, organized in 1896, has all 
along had for its prime objective the establishment of a home 
government in Palestine for the Jews. Through his prophets, 
God promised to restore Palestine to the Jew; and the great 
Master said that the beginning of such restoration would be 
proof that we are at the end of the world. The English have 
wrested from the hand of the Turk the city of Jerusalem. 
Commenting editorially, the New York American says: 

"The conquest of Jerusalem is the final triumph of Zionism
. For the first time in nearly two thousand years, not only 
one, but three great powers stand ready to publicly recognize 
the Jewish nationality and its right to a land and a homo. 
Zionism means the rebuilding of Palestine by the Jews. Millions
 of Jews in every land are organized, active and intense 
in their enthusiasm for the rebuilding of Zion. It is an agelong
 dream. It is also a practical business movement of today. 
The English Rothschilds are leading it in London. The French 
Rothschilds are a part of it in Paris. In New York Nathan 
Straus, Jacob Sdhiff, Henry Morgenth&u, Max Norjiaoi and 
Schullman are in its ranks. Justice Brandeis is its apostle in 
Boston, and in Chicago the large influence and the mighty for* 
tune of Julius Bosenwald is generously behind the movement. 
Fortunately for the new home-land of the Jews, the people 
behind them include the greatest financiers in the world and 
there will be no difficulties in this line which will not be 
smoothly weathered for the Jewish state." 

Max Nordau, scientist and leader of Zionism, says : 

"We are at the turning point of the world's history. The 
gigantic war which is dissoluting humanity has inflicted more 
tortures on us than on any other people. We know our losses, 
our sufferings and our tears; but we are sustained in the trials 
of these disasters by the certainty that we are approaching the 
culmination of our national destiny." 

The London Christian World published a manifesto issued 
by some of the English clergymen to the effect that the return 
of the Jews to Palestine indicates the near establishment of 
the Lord's kingdom. The Chicago Herald interviewed a number
 of American clergymen upon this question who generally 
scoff at tine nearness of Christ's kingdom. The consensus of 
opinion by them is expressed in the words of the Rev. Oscar 
C. Helming: 

"My personal impression is that the historical interpretation
 ot the Apocalypse is a mistaken interpretation, of Jewish 
origin. I feel that the present war condition has no more 
bearing on the second coming of Christ than other wars and 
revolutions have had." 

"THAT INTERNATIONAL NUISANCE" 

The Lord's Word shows his disapproval of the alliance 
between the church systems, which claim to represent him on 
earth, and the civil and political powers. Such an unholy union 
he designates in his Word as harlotry. Even worldly men recognize
 that the mixture of politics and religion is obnoxious. 
The Wall Street Jowmal, read by the banking interest of 
Greater^ New York, speaking of the Papacy, refers to it as 
'^that ihtamaiional nuisance, the church-state." In Italy the 
Roman Catholic church is well known to be willing to sacrifice 
Italian nationality to promote its awn temporal power. It is 
claimed that not all of the weakening of the morale of the 
Italian troops was due to Teutonic influences. The Paris correspondent
 of the New York Times says: 

"No one who has not been recently in Italy would realize 
the harm done by a propaganda whose theme is America's 
abstention from war with Austria which, says the Propagandist, 
proves the justness of the Vatican's pacifism by showing that 
America also is not in sympathy with the war Italy is waging 
to complete her national unity. How far that unity is in line 
with the Vatican's dream of temporal power may be judged 
by the fact that its heart and center is Borne — the city which 
the popes regard equally as the home pivot of theiA rule on 
earth." 

The declaration of war by the United States against Austria 
was a blow to Papacy's hopes. 

The thought that the Papacy is scheming to profit through 
the present world disaster is nothing surprising to Bible Students
; for they are well aware that the word of prophecy 
points to the part, to be played by the "beast" in helping to 


establish peace and so ingratiating itself with the world as to 
make possible again the stealthy riveting of the fetters of intolerance
 upon all true freedom of religion, of the press, of 
speech and of thought. But however well such craftiness may 
succeed and induce the nations of Christendom to give their 
power and strength unto the "beast" (Rev. 17:12, 13), it will 
be but transitory; for shortly the "ten horns [nations transformed
 by revolution] shall hate the whore, and shall make 
her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh and burn 'her 
with fire" [anarchy and revolution]. — Revelation 17:10. 

THE SUN DARKENED 

As a further evidence of the end of the age and the bringing
 in of Messiah's kingdom of righteousness, Jesus said, 
"The sun shall be darkened." (Matthew 24:29) The sun is 
a symbol of the Gospel of Messiah's kingdom. On November 
12, 1917, two thousand representatives of all creeds and denominational
 systems assembled at Carnegie Hall, New York. 
Participating in this conference were Catholic cardinals, Protestant
 Doctors of Divinity and Jewish rabbis. The purpose of 
the meeting was to formulate a scheme or plan of Biblical education
. The New York American quotes Dr. John H. Finley, 
one of the speakers: 

"Here are three steps which we may take : First, the preparation
 of a book of selections from the Bible by an interdenominational
 commission appointed by the legislature or by 
the Board of Regents for use in the schools; second, the formulation
 of a plan for non-proselyting end cooperation between
 the schools and various denominations; third, the granting
 of regents credits for serious work in Bible study outside 
of the schools. The time has come for Protestants, Catholics, 
Jews and Gentiles to co-operate to the end that every child may 
have an intimation at least of his moral and religious inheritance
." 

Dr. George Albert Coe said:. 

"We religious people must join with organized labor to 
compel teaching in the schools which makes for happiness and 
not for wealth." 

The noticeable feature here is that the name of Jesus 
Christ, his redemptive sacrifice and his kingdom for restitution 
blessings, are absolutely ignored. Truly tlhis is a fulfilment 
of the prophecy of the darkening of the sun. 

CHURCH FEDERATION 

From time to time there has appeared in The Watch 
Tower much proof from the Scriptures that before the end of 
the age there would be a federation of the nominal church 
systems. Such is now practically an accomplished fact. The 
"beast" of Revelation 13:1 is the Papal system. The "other 
beast" of Revelation 13:11 is the church of England and Ireland
. The United States has entered into an alliance with 
Great Britain. Thus there is a tacit alliance between civil 
and ecclesiastical elements, The temporary cessation of the 
war between the nations with the force of revolution and 
anarchy becoming more apparent will draw closer together the 
civil and ecclesiastical powers. Practically all of the church 
systems with one mind and with one accord are "dancing" before
 the civil powers. (Mark 6:22) This federation and alliance
 is "Mystic Babylon" in a most complete sense. In the 
type the great feast of Belshazzar which preceded the fall of 
ancient Babylon would seem to represent the rejoicing of the 
federated systems, particularly wflien they haw gained federal 
recognition, either directly of indirectly. It seems quite reasonable
 to conclude that the experiences of John the Baptist 
with Herod were also typical. Commenting upon this, Brother 
Russell said: 

"Herod would represent civil government and the unlawful
 wife would represent the nominal church which throughout 
the symbolic Scriptures is represented as a woman — 'Jezebel', 
etc. Should it prove to be a type by its fulfilment, in antitype
 the fulfilment will probably be on something like the 
following lines: 

"(1) A partial reunion of church and state. 

"(2) In such ease it would become ttfie dutv of the true 
church, the forerunners and announcers of tJie Messianic kingdom
, to reprove the civil powers as well as the nominal church 
systems and to declare their union unlawful, contrary to the 
Word of God. 

"(3) The effect of this would pretty surely be to awaken 
the animosity of both civil and religious powers; but it would 
draw out especially the animosity and venom of the latter. 

"(4) The church nominal in her false position would be 
anxious to stop the reproof and to destroy the reprovers; and 
the effect would be that the civil power would be induced to 
pass such legislation as to restrain the liberty of the faithful 
ones and hinder them from public witness — as John was hin* 
dered by imprisonment. 


[6192] 


January 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(S-6) 


"(5) Jezebel's personal influence being insufficient it may 
subsequently be gained by the influence of her daughter (United 
Protestantism). Who will be so fully in sympathy with her as 
to become her tool in the destruction of the most loyal servants 
of God."— Z. '98, p. 95. 

THE WOEK BEFOEE THE CHURCH 

We cannot with certainty know what is just before us, but 
we feel sure that the Lord is pleased to have us be on the alert 
and prepared to do with our might what he may put in out 
hands to do. When the Lord speaks to his church through his 
chosen servant, then it is reasonable to conclude that he expects
 the members to be governed by the terms of that message
. There have been seven messengers to the church. It 
seems certain that the Lord purposed their messages as a 
guide for the church. We believe that we are within the 
bounds of propriety and taking the position which the Lord 
is pleased to have us take when we say that in the examination 
of these important questions due consideration should be given 
to what Brother Russell as the messenger to the Laodicean 
ehurch wrote on the subject. Such a position is not deifying 
the man, but giving due consideration to the Lord for the message
 which he sends us. That Brother Russell was not infallible
 all will admit; but he being the messenger to the Laodicean
 church and being a profound student of the Scriptures has 
express-ions should be very closely scrutinized and given careful
 consideration at this time. 

The tangible evidence that the present order is passing 
away, and that soon the kingdom of God will be fully established
, is overwhelming. Such proof causes the true saints to 
look up and lift up their heads, with rejoicing. At the same 
time it behooves them to watch and pray. Before the completion
 of the kingdom class it seems reasonable to conclude from 
the numerous evidences that we have, that a strong, vigorous, 
decisive proclamation of the kingdom message must be given; 
and that this must be given by the Lord's people, the antitypical
 "John" class, otherwise designated as "the Elijah 
class." Then surely it behooves every truly consecrated Christian
 to view the situation calmly and inquire. What is my duty 
and privilege at this timet 

In 1916 Brother Russell said: 

"Until now we have never thought much about Elijah coming
 down to the Jordan and the important work he did there as 
having any special significance. But now we see that we went 
to the Jordan in 1914, and that Elijah and Elisha stood there 
talking, as we are doing now. After they had talked a while 
Elijah wrapped up his mantle, evidently referring to some 
special power coming to the Elijah class; and then he smote 
the waters. Everything led up to that smiting, and everything
 went before to prepare for this. Now we see that what 
preceded has only been' preparing the way for this. I am 
daily looking for what the folding up of the mantle may signify
. It looks like as if it may mean a great deal of money. 
We are trying to wrap up whatever mantle comes. The smiting
 will probably affect the whole civilized world. They are 
going to feel the influence of this smiting. Let us be ready." 

If this conclusion is correct, then it follows that the wrapping
 up of the mantle and the smiting of the waters must 
take place after 1914. It is likewise clear that such work 
must be done before all the members of the body pass into 
glory beyond the veil; for it is the members of the Elijah 
class this side of the veil who must do the Bmiting. In the 
above quotation it is stated that the mantle evidently refers 
to some special power given to the Elijah class, who after 
receiving that power will smite the waters (the people). 
Brother Russell suggested that the folding of the mantle might 
mean a great deal of money. The only purpose of having 
money would be to get the message widely distributed. If the 
Lord, has provided a reasonable amount of money and other 
means to distribute the message, it would be just as reasonable 
to say that such is represented by the wrapped-up mantle. 

The mantle, in addition to representing power as above 
stated, sometimes symbolizes authority or dignity, also indentification
. (1 Sam. 28:14) The message contained in The Finished
 Mystery — the Seventh Volume of Studies in the 
Scriptures — definitely and clearly identifies Pastor Russell 
as "that servant/' the messenger to the Laodicean church, and 
shows the dignity of his office and his authority to speak as 
the Lord's mouthpiece. Hence his interpretation of Scriptures 
bearing upon the question should receive profound consideration
. Further commenting upon this same matter, Brother 
Russell in 1916 said: 

"The 149th Psalm evidently pictures a time when the 
Lord's people on this stfde the veil would in some way be prominent
 before the world. It says, *Let the saints be joyful in 
glory.' Onee we thought this meant joyful in heaven j but now 
we see that to be joyful in glory need not be on the other 


side, but on this side the veil. The Psalmist proceeds to say, 
'Let them sing aloud upon their beds.' He declares that the 
saints upon their beds have a two-edged sword in their hands. 
The bed signifies a condition of ease, so far as the faith is 
concerned. We shall, of course, be at ease on the other side, 
but this evidently means an ease of faith on this side the veil. 
The two-edged sword means the Word of God. That must 
mean here; for no one will be smiting anything with a twoedged
 sword over there. It will surely Jbe here. This twoedged
 sword in the hands of the saints means that while they 
are resting in their faith they have the Word of God, sharp 
and powerful, and with it can oppose everything opposed to 
the truth, 

"These are the saints who execute the judgments written. 
How? I cannot give all the details. Undoubtedly there will 
be a great many details when we reach that time. We should 
be ready to take any part which the Lord may give us. He 
will give all of his people a share. We Bhall see what this 
judging may mean a little later on. The River Jordan meanti 
a judgment and the smiting of this Jordan may mean to put 
the truth in such a way as to do the judging; and Elijah will 
handle this sword." 

The Lord has permitted the compilers of Volume Seven to 
bring together all the gems of truth upon the Seriptures from 
Brother Russell's pen as these relate to Babylon. From these 
gems of truth written by the one having authority and making 
clear the Scriptural testimony we see: 

(1) That just preceding the inauguration of the kingdom 
there would be a church Federation, that there would he a 
closer relationship established between church and state, and 
that the felicitations of the ecclesiastical systems would constitute
 the antitypical feast which preceded the fall of ancient 
Babylon ; 

(2) That such federation and alliance is an abomination 
unto God, and that it would be the duty of the truly consecrated
 then on earth to rebuke such arrangement by plainly 
declaring God's message of truth; 

(3) That the Prophets Elijah and John typed the same 
class, that the class typed by them would administer the rebuke
, and that such proclamation of the message of truth would 
turn the people away from the Babylonian systems, thus constituting
 a division represented by the division of the waters 
of the River Jordan; 

(4) That everything in the harvest leads up to this climax, 
and that since 1914 everything has been making for this work; 

(5) That the smiting of the Jordan and the ubo of the 
two-edged sword are two pictures of the same thing, that the 
two-edged sword means the Word of God, that Jordan may 
mean to put /the truth in such a way as to do the judging, 
that the wrapping up of the mantle evidently refers to some 
special power given to the Elijah class; that the Elijah class 
will handle the sword with which the smiting is done; 

(6) That the smiting of the Jordan represents the dividing 
of the people and the turning of them away from Babylon, 
that Babylon will fall, and that this smiting will probably 
affect the whole world; 

(7) That the Lord's people this side the veil will in some 
way be brought prominently before the world. 

Examining these points Ve see that the federation is practically
 an accomplished fact; and since the end seems to be so 
near at hand, the time for the performance of the work above 
mentioned must likewise be near at hand. When Brother 
Russell says that the two-edged sword is the Word of God or 
message of truth, and that the truth may be put in such a way 
as to do the judging, and that the Elijah class will handle the 
sword, then it follows that there must be sotme clear explanation
 of the prophecies of Ezekiel and Revelation which exposes 
Babylon, and that this message must be given public witness. 
We find in the Seventh Volume of Studies in the Scriptures 
this identical message. One of two things is absolutely certain
 — that this is the long promised Seventh Volume with 
which the smiting is to be done or else there must be another 
one written; and since this one contains all Brother Russell 
has written upon the subject it would seem unseasonable to 
conclude that another is to be written, since the Scriptures do 
not identify another messenger having authority. to write. 

If the Seventh Volume is the sword of the truth put in 
such a way as to do the judging, and if the Elijah class is to 
do it, then it follows that everyone who fails or refuses to 
grasp this sword and go forth in obedience to the Lord's direction
 repudiates the provision made for him and could not be 
designated as of the Elijah class. 

A DAT OF DECISION 

Some are having difficulty in seeing their privileges of 
taking a part in the proclamation of the Seventh Volume message
. We suggest to all such that they take the matter to the 


L6193] 


(6-7) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N« Y. 


Lord in prayer, and then being guided by fthe principles of his 
Word, ask themselves these questions: 

Is the Lord still the Chief Beaper, directing his harvest 
workt If so, would he permit the church to be engaged in 
such a world-wide activity on a line contrary to his way? 
Would he grant his blessing upon the work unless it is right? 
Was Brother Eussell, as the Master's servant, right when he 
said that the "two-edged sword is the Word of God, the message
 of truth, and that the truth may be put in such a way as 
to do the judging"? Js it true that the Lord describes Babylon
, the false systems, in the Books of Bevelation and Ezekiel; 
and is it true that Volume Seven gives an explanation of these 
books in harmony with the truth revealed by the Lord to the 
church through his messenger of the Laodicean period* 

The point of the sword is sharp on both sides, therefore a 
two-edged sword. The Psalmist describes the saints with the 
two-edged sword in their hands. Is it true that the Books of 
Ezekiel and John constitute the point — the two-edged sword 
with which Babylon is to be smitten? — Ezekiel 21:14-15; 
G- 464, 466. 

Brother BusBell said: "The Elijah class will use this sword. 
We should be ready to take any part which the Lord may give 
us. He will give all of his people a share." Was Brother 
Russell right when he uttered these words? If so, am I of 
the Elijah class if I neglect or refuse to participate in the use 
of the sword? Do I believe that the words of Revelation 14: 
18, 1«J constitute a command from the Lord? (G 227) And if 
this is a command can I show forth my love to the Lord unless 
I keep this commandment f (John 14:15) Is not Babylon 
the product of Satan f Who would be pleased to have me use 
the point of the sword against Babylon — Satan or our Lord! 
PEOSPEOTS BEFORE US 

Will not a vigorous witness of the truth as set forth in 
Volume Seven bring persecution? Yes; such is quite probable. 
If I remain aloof and have nothing to do with the message 
against Babylon, may T not preserve myself from sudh persecution
? Yes, possibly; but can you afford to take that position
? 

Long ago thei« was recorded by "that servant," in Volume 
III, these words: 

"It will probably be in an effort at self-preservation on 
the part of great Babylon — Christendom — when she sees her 
power in politics, priestcraft and superstition waning, that the 
work of truth spreading will be stopped as detrimental to her 
system; and probably at this juncture the Elijah class, persisting
 in declaring the truth to the last, will suffer violence 
and pass into glory and escape from the severest features of 
the great time of touble coming — just in the crisis of affairs, 
when men begin io feel that desperate measures must be resorted
 to, to sustain the tottering structures of Christendom. 
Although the exact time of the deliverance or change of the 
last members of the body of Christ is not stated, the approximate
 time is nevertheless clearly manifest as shortly after the 
door is shut."— C 231. 

"The door of opportunity to engage with Christ our Lord 
in the work of the Gospel age will be closed when the night 
cometh wherein no man can work; and all who have not previously
, by faithful service, developed the necessary character 
and proved their sympathy, devotion, love and zeal for the 
Lord and his truth will then be too late to do so." — C 210. 

The prospects for the year 1918 are" thrilling — yea, wonderful
! It seems that for us to be indifferent to them by 
failing or refusing to participate in the proclamation of the 
truth now due would be nothing short of disloyalty and unfaithfulness
 to the Lord. Beloved, let us gird on our armor 
and calmly, fearlessly and joyfully meet the task that he has 
set before us. "The Lord bless thee and keep thee and cause 
his face to shine upon thee"— as you go fortlh to battle. 
BROUGHT INTO PROMINENCE 

Again we quote that servant: ''This smiting will probably 
affect the whole civilized world. They are going to feel the 


influence of this smiting. The Lord's people this side the veil 
may in a way be brought prominently before the wprld." How 
could this be possible? By turning the people away from 
Babylon and while so doing "sounding out the high praises of 
God," thereby clearing his holy name from the dishonor at 
tached to it by false teachings of Babylon's Bystem. Such 
would surely affect the civilized world. But how would the 
Lord's people come into prominence? Evidently not by becoming
 popular. One might be brought into great prominence 
and yet be very unpopular. Such has always been the result 
of faithful witnessing to the truth. (Hebrews, Chapter 11) 
Elijah was prominently known far and wide in the realm of 
Ahab and Jezebel, but was far from being popular and approved
 by that kingdom and its subjects. 

THE SOCIETY THE MESSENGER 

In Revelation 14:18 we read: "And another angel c.ime 
out from the altar which had power over fire and cried witl^ a 
loud voice to him that had the sharp sickle [the message of 
present truth] saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle and gather 
the clusters of the vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully 
ripe." 

Since its organization the Lord has used the Watch Tower 
Bible and Teact Society as the messenger to bear the kingdom
 message to his people. The "altar" is the place of sacrifice
. How aptly the description fits the Society! It is the 
only institution on earth maintained by the sacrifice of the 
Lord's saints. Never yet has a plan or scheme succeeded 
which had for its avowed purpose the gathering or accumulating
 of a large sum of money to be used in the harvest work. 
Clearly the Lord desires his work to be done by the sacrifice 
of his people. He is rich in all tilings, and needs no one to 
devise ways and means for him. All of his people need the 
opportunity of sacrificing to show forth their love and zeal 
for him. The financial report of the Society for the year 
1917 shows how his faithful ones have sacrificed in order thaf 
the money might be provided for the proclamation of his message
. The money the Lord has graciously provided, and with 
the message of truth which he has also provided, and with the 
organization for his work which he is directing, the time seems 
ripe to obey the "voice" of the messenger which **had power 
over fire." Power over fire means authority to send out the 
message of truth that is destructive of error. The clear exposition
 of Ezekiel's and John's prophecies set forth in Volume 
Seven fills this requirement, and it is being sent out far and 
wide by the Society. Evoryone who truly appreciates th<> 
privilege is participating in this work according to their several 
abilities. 

YEAB TEXT IMPORTANT 

Surely the child of God can plainly see that the end of all 
things of the present order is at hand. The world is in a state 
of great excitement. Statesmen, politicians, business men, 
clergy, labor leader etc., all are at high nervous tension. 
Everyone feels it. Soon the "four winds" [evil spirits] will 
be loosened (Revelation 7:1-3); and what a fertile field they 
will find in the excited minds and high strung nerves of the 
peoples of earth. Nervous excitement, anger and lack of 
sobriety will make it much easier for the evil spirits to possess 
the mind. One who is in such condition is not fit to give attention
 to important matters. Never before has it been so im 
portant for us to remember the admonition of the Apostle — 
the words of our year text — "The end of all things is at hand ; 
be ye therefore sober and watch unto prayer. And above all 
things have fervent love among yourselves." Let us. remember 
that the victory in the battle is not with the strong alone, but 
with those who have full faith and confidence in the Lord. 
"My help cometh from the Lord." In ourselves there is no 
strength, but he who is our captain is strong. Let us be strong 
in faith, giving glory to him. Let us be calm, sober-minded, 
watchful and prayerful, using the Sword of the Spirit to his 
S'lory, and he will bring us off more than conquerors — yea, 
overcomersf 


OUR KING IS MARCHING ON 


Mine eyes can see the glory of the presence of the Lord : 

He's trampling out the wine-press where his grapes of wrath 

are stored; 
I see the flaming tempest of his swift descending sword, 
Our King is marching on. 

I see his coming judgments, as they circle all the earth, 
The signs and groanings promised to precede a second birth; 
I read his righteous sentence in the crumbling thrones of earth : 
Our King is marching on. 


The "Gentile times" are closing, for their kings have had their 

day; 
And with them sin and sorrow will forever pass away ; 
The tribe of Judaih's Lion now has come to hold the swfty: 
Our King. is marching on. 

The "Seventh Trump" i^ .sounding and our King know-; mi 

defeat, 
He will sift out the hearts of men before his judgment seat, 
Be swift, my soul, to welcome him; be jubilant, my feet: 
Our King is marching on. 


f6194] 


JESUS LORD OF THE SABBATH 

[This article, excepting the paragraph below, was a reprint of article entitled, "Which Day is Sabbath," published in issue 

of March 15, 1912, which please see.] 
February 3. — Mark 2:23-3:5. 
"The Son of Man is Lord even of the Saboath" — Verse 28. 


Few seem to get the proper thought respecting the Sabbath
. Some consider themselves as Jews under the Mosaic 
Law. Others go to an opposite extreme and, declaring that 
we aj-e not under the Law but under grace, repudiate the Sabbath
 entirely, What we believe to be the correct view is the 
intermediate one between these two extremes, as we shall endeavor
 to set forth. 

God adopted the nation of Israel, all children of Al*raham 
through Jacob, as hi a special possession in the world. With 


them he made the Law Covenant through Moses at Mount 
Sinai; to them he sent his messengers, the Prophets, and 
finally his Son. W 7 ith them, and with no other nation, it was 
his agreement that by the keeping of the Law they would 
abide in his favor and would have divine blessing upon flocks 
and herds, lands and people, instead of sickness, pain, drouth 
and dearth. To no other nation was the Law of Sinai given; 
with no other nation was that Covenant made. As it is written
: "You only have I known of all the families of the earth." 


JESUS FORGIVETH SIN 

[Paragraph 3, 4, 7 and 13 of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "The Forgiveness of Sins," published in issue 
of February' 15, 1906. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Sin Forgiveness and Healing," published in issue of 
February 15, 1912. Please see the articles named.] 

JESUS CHOOSES THE TWELVE 

[This article, excepting the paragraph below, was a reprint of article entitled, "Apostolic Succession Unscriptural," published
 in issue of April 1, 1912, which, please see.] 

Sts. Paul and John were not only Apostles, but also special 
messengers to the early Church. The special messenger in the 
harvest of the Jewish age was the Apostle Paul, who wrote 
about one-third of the Now Testament, carried the Gospel 
into Europe, suffered almost unbelievable hardships of every 
description, and died a martyr in A. 1). (10, when he was beheaded
 by the Emperor Nero. The Lord's mouthpiece to the 
second stage of the church was St. John, the beloved disciple. 
He wrote more of the New Testament than did any other, 
except St. Paul. The Apostle John died at Ephesua at the 
age of 100, about four years after writing the Apocalypse. 


REPORT OF SOUTH AFRICAN BRANCH 


Dear Brethren: — 

Enclosed herewith you will find a report of harvest work 
in South Africa during the last eighteen months. We have 
not been able to put out so many volumes as in 1914-1915; 
but this is in line, I think, with the work in other parts of 
the world. Recently, however, the colporteur work in South 
Africa received a decided impetus by the accession of a dear 
Dutch Brother to the ranks. In the last three months this 
dear Brother has put out over 2,000 volumes, averaging about 
40 per working day. This unprecedented activity, added to 
our usual output, has made a great inroad in our stock. 

Now, dear Brethren, I will give you a brief outline of the 
harvest work in South* Africa. The number of white brethren
 — other than natives — we estimate at between two hundred 
and three hundred. The larger portion of these are divided 
among four churches — Durban, Johannesburg, Pretoria and 
Cape Town, all towns of considerable size. This may seem 
a very small proportion of the people; but when we remember
 that the white population numbers only about one and a 
quarter million, scattered over 500,000 square miles, an area 
equal to one-sixth of the United States, but with only one 
sixtieth of 'your means of transportation — it will be understood
 that the difficulty of getting at the people is considerable
. Many of our dear brethren are isolated and alone, with 
no fellowship but the Lord's; yet their letters and their occasional
 presence at conventions testify low abundantly he 
is able to compensate for the lack of human fellowship. 

Then to these are to be added our dear native brethren. 
At Ndwedwe we have a flourishing class of about 80 fullbloodied
 Zulus. At Bank Location a class of. Bisutos'moet, 
numbering about 24; and a smaller class of Makosas meet 
in the East London Location. Despite the fact that we have 
no literature in the native languages, the grasp of present 
truth which these native brethren have is phenomenal. We 
can only say, "It is the Lord's doing, and marvelous in our 
eyes." Entertaining, as they all do, a profound respect for 
the Bible as the Word of God, they have listened eagerly 
to the truth imparted to them by native teachers able to read 
the volumes in English and to translate what they read into 
the vernacular. Having practically nothing to unlearn, they 
have readily embraced the Lord's message when presented. 
The intelligence and the sincerity of their consecra'tion ha\e 
been attested by their sufferings for conscience's sake. Xearly 
all of these dear native brethren have been solemnly and pub* 
licly excommunicated from Babylon — turned out of the Mission
 reserves in which they were born, and branded as dangerous
 persons in their Locations, which are their world. Yet 
none of these things move them; and they count it all joy that 
they are permitted to suffer for Christ's sake. 

In the Nyassaland Protectorate, the truth has a larger 
and older following. Nyassaland is much further away — beyond
 all possibility of visiting unless on a special tour which 
would take about three months of time and about £150 in 
money, so that our control of the work in that country is not 


so substantial. Owing to the lack of white control there, reports
 from that country are Mp.i«modi<\ But when they do 
come, however, they tell of continued interest in present 
truth on the part of many natives and of large gatherings 
more or less regularly for convention purposes. The work 
there has aronsed the opposition of the Government, spurred 
on by jealous missionaries, who see their schools emptied and 
their churches depleted, with a corresponding loss of revenue. 
As a result, several of the leading brethren have been deported
, and are now interned in Plat Island, Mauritius. Our 
hearts go out to these dear brethren; and we commend them 
to him who said, "In the world ye shall have tribulation; ; but 
be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." 

The fortunes of the Photo-Drama in Africa were varied. 
On its arrival in this country, difficulties seemed to stop our 
pathway at every turn. The crowning difficulty came when 
after snowing it to a Bioscope Advisory Committee, composed
 largely of clergymen and their henchmen, the Provincial
 Authorities prohibited its exhibition in the Cape Province 
because, forsooth I it "would offend the religious susceptibilities
" of the public! Eemembering the injunction, "When they 
persecute you in one city, flee to another," we at once took 
the Drama to the Transvaal, where we exhibited it successfully
 in Johannesburg, Pretoria and several smaller places, 
and also in the Orange Pree State and Natal. While the 
Drama has not resulted in a great ingathering, it has borne 
a great witness, and the practical results have been such as 
to cause us to thank God for its coming to Africa. Before 
leaving the subject, I wish to say that in addition to other 
contributions the brethren here raised about £250 to provide 
halls, etc., in connection with these exhibitions. This was a 
great effort on their part; for none of them is wealthy. 

It is my custom to make three and sometimes four pilgrim
 journeys each year; and owing to the scattered abodes, 
long distances, etc., the mileage amounts to considerable. 
During the past eighteen months I have traveled over 10,000 
miles in this work. 

Last Easter we held a most stimulating and refreshing 
Convention at Durban, which was a source of great blessing 
to the 65 or 70 brethren who were present. God willing, we 
hope also to have a general convention in Cape Town at the 
beginning of 1918. About 147 Brethren reported thedr memorializing
 our dear Lord's death and their dying with him. 
But I feel sure that a larger number actually sat down to 
the Table of the Lord, although they omitted to send word. 

Despite our ups and downs we have much reason to thank 
God for his great goodness to us; and our great desire is to 
press on, doing with our might what our hands find to do. 
The work in Afrioa would be greatly helped by a visit from 
our dear Brother Butherford or some other capable brbther. 
If South Africa were united to Australia for the purpose of 
a pilgrim journey, the services of some of our "mighty men 
of valor" could well be spared to make the trip. The help 
to us in the outposts of the harvest field would be enormous. 


[61951 


(7-11) 


(11-12) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


We earnestly trust, therefore, that your desire, to visit this 
part of the world will grow until it becomes uncontrollable; 
and that the Lord will speedily provide the opportunity for 
you to translate the desire into action. 

In closing, permit me to assure you of our continued love 
and loyalty to our dear Brother Rutherford, as the successor 
to our well-beloved Pastor, and to the Society as God's especially
 chosen channel of communication with his people. We 
are very jealous for the organization which, under God, has 
brought us so much blessing in the past, and very suspicious 
of all that would attempt to divide our affections. 

With much love to all the dear brethren at Brooklyn, 
Your Brother in Christ, 

Wm. W. Johnson. 


'COME, FOLLOW ME!" 


" 'Come, follow mel* the Master said; 
"Come, take the way I trod: 
And though the path be dark and drear, 
And though thy heart may faint with fear, 
It leads to home, to love-born cheer — 
The mansion of our God. 

"But oh! the way is rough and steep, 
Beset by many a stone; 
But still I hear, through brier and brake, 
'Thee will I never leave, forsake; 
Beloved one, fresh courage take, 
I trod this way alone. 1 


"And oh, he stretches forth his hands! 
And oh, he gives me grace! 
I see the nail-prints that he bore, 
The feet, enstained with dust and gore, 
The stripes, the thorny crown he wore; 
But oh, that lovelit face I 

"Dear Master, now I follow on — 

The path I cannot trace; 
The way thy love for me hath planned 
I take and keep at thy command; 
Give me the guidance of thy hand, 

The heaven of thy face!" 


SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 


CONVENTIONS RESULTING IN BLESSINGS 

Dear Brother Rutherford: — 

Loving greetings in our dear Bedeemer! Am troubling 
you with a line to mention one of the many evidences we have 
noted that the Lord is supervising every feature of the harvest
 work. We allude to the real good and blessing that is 
resulting from this year's conventions. Thank the Lord there 
are so many of them! Many have gone to these conventions, 
troubled and perplexed because of the things which have been 
sent our from Brooklyn and elsewhere — not from headquarters 
— and have returned at rest and full of confidence that the 
Lord has not lost control of his work. We are sure it is in 
the Lord's providences that such a program has been arranged. 
Praying the Father may continue to guide and bless you in 
your endeavors to serve him, the Truth and the brethren, I 
remain, with sincere Christian love, 

Yours in Him, 

W. M. Batterson. — PUgrim. 

DRAWN CLOSER TO EACH OTHER IN CHRISTIAN LOVE 

Dear Brethren: — 

Be it resolved by tihe Bible Students in Convention Assembled
, That we renew our covenant to our heavenly Father, 
and to the faithful observance of the instructions of his holy 
Word; that we pray earnestly for a greater measure of his 
holy Spirit; that we strive to increase our love to our heavenly 
Father for the- gift of his dear Son, and for the unfolding of 
his Word to us through that dear servant whom we all so 
dearly loved; that we will be so inspired by the life he lived 
that we will be drawn closer to each other in the bonds of 
Christian love and fellowship, and will put forth our best endeavors
 that we may make our calling and election sure. 

Be it further resolved, that we heartily co-operate in the 
work as mapped out by our dear Pastor, and that a copy of 
this resolution be sent to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society at Brooklyn, N. Y. 

Everett Ecclesia. — Wash, 

ABLE TO APPRECIATE TOWER MORE FTJLLY 
Dear Brethren: — 

Am sending $1.00 to renew my subscription to The Watch 
Tower, which expires this month. 

Am receiving just tthe same help from The Tower that 
I always have enjoyed for twenty-one years; in fact more, 
for I am now able to appreciate the articles more fully. 

I am in full accord with the management at Bethel and 
pray daily that love may prevail there. 

Your sister by His grace, 

A, J. R. H.— Maine. 
"GIDEON'S BRAVE THREE HUNDRED" 

Dear Editorial Committee: — 

Greetings of love, peace and joy in your daily, yea hourly, 
service in the Lord's harvest. My heart is full of desire to 
make known to you my appreciation of your suggestion in 
the March 1 Tower, page 67, especially that under the heading
, "A Word to the Pilgrims." How we do need this admonition
, "that we adhere strictly to the message which the 
Lord gave through this chosen channel"! God bless you! 

I am constrained through the great kindness of a sister, to 
note the suggestion of our dear Pastor in the Jan. 1 Tower 
of 1915, page 10, re "Gideon's brave three hundred." Could 


we have in few words a synopsis of that article, that many 
should drink properly of the water (truth)? When this dear 
sister wrote me about this article, I was at first puzzled and 
then, through the wisdom from the Father, for which I asked, 
he revealed the astounding fact that so few, even I, did not 
partake properly at all times] 

How I have wanted to shout far and wide the fact of how 
we should drink to his glory and honor, as it is so clearly 
given in that article. Your suggestion, dear brethren, surely 
i3 a direct answer to my prayer and wish. Now by his grace 
I shall drink of his Water, which is life indeed. 

I solicit an interest in your prayers, dear brethren, also 
remembering you and the harvest work daily at the throne 
of grace, and those of like precious faith. Daily I realize 
God's care and promises to his consecrated children. — Num. 
6:24-26. 

Your Sister by his grace and mercy, 

Mrs. 0. E. Norton. — Idaho. 
INSPIRING COMMENTS BE VOLUME SEVEN 

Pilgrim Brother C. E. Heard writes concerning a very effective
 method of colporteuring with the Seventh Volume, adopted 
by a class in a Canadian city, as follows: 

"This class has done remarkable work with the Seventh 
Volume. The friends left a copy in every home in town, with 
a printed slip inserted in the front telling them to read it and, 
if they wish to keep the book, to remit 60c. Fully 80 per cent 
of the homes kept the volume when the friends called to 
collect." 

"I am eighty-two years old and have often wondered, 
'Would I live to see the Seventh Volume of the world's most 
wonderful series of God's mysteries unfolded*' 'Praise tlie 
Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless His holy 
name.' " G. H., W. Va. 

"Words can but inadequately express my appreciation of 
Volume Seven ; # which will assuredly prove needful, comforting
 and beneficial to God's dear people and we pray many 
others. May the Lord bless more and more the Harvest reaping
 promulgated by Jehovah's Servant." 

Mrs. 33. M. B., A T . T. 

"I cannot express to you just how I felt on receiving 
Volume fceven. To think that I should receive the 'penny:' 
How anxious we all are to circulate the 'penny' just as Boon 
and as fas/t as we will be allowed. How it draw* His little 
ones together to feed on the wonderful things it contains, 
causing us each to spring up into newness of life and zeal. 
It will drive out the dross faster than anything yet given. 
Thank God for such a stimulus." L. M. P., Ohio. 

"I thank the Lord for the long- looked for Vdhime Seven. 
We can now siee "that it came exactly at the right time far 
the direct need of the church, and for her comfort and encouragement
. Therefore we can have now fresh courage and 
realize to a certainty that the dear Lord has not forsaken 
us, but has provided for his household meat in due season by 
that wise and faithful servant, 'Pastor Russell'; and why 
should we not be thankful and be eager to go ahead with a 
burning desire to grasp our weapon and go forth to the smiting
 of Jordan, praising the Lord for this privilege, knowing 
the kingdom of heaven is AT HAND?" 

N. N., W. Va. 


[6198] 


January 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(12-15) 


"I am truly very grateful for Volume Seven and shall 
eagerly peruse its pages that I may be the better prepared 
to endure all things, by its strength-giving food served to us 
by our Lord's dear faithful yervant. As I have glanced 
through it, it already has made me see how deeply he saw 
our need of great faith in our heavenly Father's love for them 
that are his. Surely this feast in the Seventh Volume is from 
the hand of our Lord to cheer and comfort us to the end." 

N. C. B., Mich. 

"We desire to express our appreciation of Volume Seven — 
the last of the most wonderful books! We feel sure the Lord 
has sent this for our comfort." 

F. K. &, Mo. 

"On opening Volume Seven I saw at once that dear Brother 
Russell could not have written it. He was too modest and 
humble to have stated the facts as they exist — he occupying 
the important place in the harvest." 

W. S. S., Fa. 

"I was amused at the proviso you put in the little printed 
notice in Volumo Seven, 'if you do not desire to keep the 
volume, return it!' 


"I believe that no truly consecrated child of God who has 

waited so long and anxiously for this book, would part with 
it for any price if he could not replace it. It will certainly 
cause the 'falsa shepherds' to 'take notice/ 

"How graciously and bountifully our dear Father provided 
for our wants! Just what we want, and at the very time 
that we need it. Praise his holy Name!" F. R. E., Ohio, 

"Volume Seven has been duly received. Such pleasant surprises
 have been few in my life of 52 years. I had no intimation
 that it was in process of compilation much lese on the 
press. When I found it on my table it was hard for me to 
believe my eyes were not serving me some trick. I read the 
title over several times before I was fully convincd there 
was no mistake. It was good of you to send it as you did, 
thus sparing us the suspense of waiting for it," 

H. E. K., Ala. 

"How faithfully you must have worked to get Volume 
Seven together and in print, and how wonderful it seems to 
hear from our dear Pastor after he has passed beyond! It 
seems to me like a message sent back to us." 

M. K. N., Md. 


THE BEGETTING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT SUPERNATURAL 

Question. — Is the begetting of the new creature a direct 
act of God or is it through the Word of truth? 

Answer. — The begetting of the holy Spirit is not without 
the Word; it is through the Word, But the fact that it is 
through the Word does not signify that the Word alone is 
the begetting power. Without God's message telling us of 
his character, his plan, our sinfu] condition and the arrangement
 for the forgiveness of sin through Christ and the opportunity
 to be of this special elect class, we would not be in any 
condition to understand or to receive this holy Spirit. We 
must first have the knowledge which the Bible gives. Therefore
 it is through the Word of truth that this blessing comes. 
But the blessing is not the Word of truth. The world in tho 
incoming Age will have the Word of truth, but they will not 
receive the begetting of the holy Spirit to a new nature, which 
the church alone receives. 

The fact that the church does not now receive any outward
 demonstration is no proof that we do not receive a 
supernatural enduement from the Lord. When onr Lord Jesus 
had made his consecration and was baptized, God caused an 
outward sign to be seen by John the Baptist; who perceived 
the holy Spirit in the form of a dove descending and resting 
upon the Lord. This outward manifestation was given to 
John that he could testify that Jesus was the Messiah* It 
was not necessary that all the people should see. 

This word unction has the thought of anointing, and of 
smoothness, lubrication, as from oil. Whoever was anointed 
to be a priest among the Jewish people was anointed with a 
special kind of fragrant oil, which typified the holy Spirit. 
The Scriptures represent Aaron the priest, after having received
 the anointing oil upon his head, as typical of Christ 
when he received the holy Spirit at Jordan, In the type this 
holy anointing oil "ran down to the skirts of his [Aaron's] 
garment." And so the anointing of the holy Spirit is with 
the church down to its close. The anointing oil was made 
up of a number of special ingredients. The people of Israel 
were not permitted to use these ingredients in such combination
 under penalty of death. Thus the Lord signified that 


INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


the possession of the holy Spirit, which he alone can give is 
the special designation of those who are to be the priests and 
kings of his Order, and of them only. 

MARRIAGE OF THE DIVORCED 

Question. — Under what circumstances would divorced persons
 (in the truth) be free to remarry 1 

Answer. — The many inquiries we have on this subject convince
 us that the presentation on this matter in the Sixth 
Volume of Studies in the Scriptures requires supplementing
 — although we had supposed it to be a very full examination
 of the question. Indeed, this is still our belief. The 
fault is not with the presentation, but with tho fact that the 
dear friends forget what they have read, and fail to consult 
the Volume. We again refer all inquirers to that treatise. 

There are laws governing divorce and the remarriage of 
divorced persons. Each state -makes its own laws on the subject
, and the Bible sets forth a very particular law. Everybody
 is bound to meet the requirements of the civil law. 
All questions, therefore, appertain to the higher law of the 
Bible. A simple way of deciding all such questions is indicated
 by the fact that the Bible does not set forth any laws 
for the governing of the world and its doings. The only 
persons whose conduct on this and other subjects is regulated 
by the Bible are the Jews and true Christians, 

If the man or the woman were divorced before coming 
into the family of God, his or her previous course in life, if 
approved by the civil law, is not interfered with by the divine 
law. The divine law begins to operate upon the individual 
from the time he makes a surrender of himself to the Lord 
and is accepted into God's family. It is the course of the individual
 after he has become united to the Lord that is regulated
 by the teachings of the Bible. He or she, if free according
 to the civil law, may marry — but "only in the Lord." But 
being married at the time or after coming into Christ, the 
Scriptures direct that while there may be various reasons for 
separation, there could be only one reason for an absolute divorce
, which would leave the persons free to marry again — that 
given in Matthew 5:31, 32; 19:9. 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


VICE PRESIDENT'S STATEMENT 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

True to his promise, Jehovah of hosts has sent the messenger
 of the Covenant to prepare the way for the establishment
 of his kingdom upon earth. Blessed, indeed, are our 
eyes, which have been opened to see the presence of this 
One in whom we delight. We have watched with ever-increasing
 interest the progress of the first phase of His preparatory 
work, the purification of the antitypical sons of Levi — the 
household of faith. Like unto the effect of the refiner's fire 
upon gold and silver has been uhe result produced, by the 
various purging experiences arranged by the Lord for his 
people during the period of his presence. Little by little, the 
dross of selfishness in every form has been burned away from 
the hearts of those whose golden desire is to do the will of 
God. Viewed as one of these experiences, the recent sad trial, 
affecting so many of the Lord's children everj^where. becomes 
an occasion for thanksgiving. We can "count it all joy." 

The publication of my name in connection with state 
ments circulated among the friends has brought many requests
 for an explanation of the seemingly inconsistent stand 


I had taken as an officer and director of the Society. To 
none of these have I made full reply, believing it unwise to 
attempt to explain a situation not entirely clear to my own 
mind; and further believing that such explanation, if made 
would be justly due all who had read the conflicting reports. 

Before the details of the difference were published abroad, 
I failed to see sufficient cause for the threatened breach between
 brethren in the Lord who had labored together harmoniously
 for many years. Consequently, my efforts were 
bent upon preventing a split and the sore trial it would bring 
to friends in all parts of the world who have always held 
the brethren at Bethel in the highest esteem. 

When a re-arrangement of the Board of Directors was announced
 on July 17th, I deeply regretted that such a proceeding
 was deemed necessary. By signing the resolution commending
 this action, I had no intention of identifying myself 
as a party to the controversy (believing that reconciliation 
conld even yet be affected between those at variance), but 
wished merely to share my portion of responsibility, as an 
officer of the Society, in providing an explanation to the 
comparatively small number of friends who had up to that 


[6197] 


(15-19) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


time learned of the difficulties at headquarters and were beginning
 to make inquiry. I fully realized the possibility of 
this action on my part being misconstrued as "taking a side*' 
and, therefore, added my name very reluctantly after assurances
 that the paper would )>e used in accordance with my 
understanding, viz., to satisfy inquiring friends. 

Following the circulation of this resolution my friendly 
attitude toward all the brethren concerned was called in question
. Immediately the unwisdom of my course became apparent
, and I saw that, if my efforts as a peacemaker were to 
have further weight, it would be necessary to undo what I 
seemingly had done in signing the resolution. This I attempted 
in the letter written July 26th, afterward published. But stepping
 from one "side" back to neutral ground was a difficult 
matter; in fact, I now realize that I overstepped to the other 
"side." It was in this position that, out of sympathy for those 
who I believed had been made the objects of undeserved publicity
^ I signed an open letter to the friends attending the Boston
 convention. When I discerned, after convention, that this 
action made me equally as incapable of restoring harmony as 
T had been after signing the resolution, I quietly withdrew, 
deeming it best to make no further statement at that time. 
1'he u.-^e of my mime in any publications concerning the controversy
 issued since the Boston convention has been entirely 
without my previous knowledge and consent. 

In the early part of August, the final endeavor to establish
 peace proved of no avail. My heart ached to think that 
brethren, respected and loved for their work's sake, •should 
have been held up before the friends all over the world in 
a way which to them seemed unwarranted. I pleaded with 
tihem to follow the course of our Master and suffer glaoly 
whatever bitter experiences the heavenly leather permitted, 
not even desiring to retaliate or justify themselves; but to 
commit their cause to him that judgeth righteously. What 
an opportunity to exhibit the spirit which we all have been 
striving to cultivate — the spirit of forbearance with one another
, the spirit of brotherly ^ovel Preferring not to submit
 to what they called an injustice, the four brethren chose 
to leave the home. Here I rested the case with the Lord. 

Meantime I have watched developments. Looking back, 
it is now quite evident that the Lord was pleased to permit 
the very condition which many of us tried earnestly to avert. 
But why should our loving Father take pleasure in that which 
has caused such widespread perplexity and sorrow? Surely 
he has no desire to injure those who are truly his. Bearing
 in mind that we are in the closing hours of our trial 
time, the reason for such treatment at the hands of the 
Judge of all the earth is obvious: "The Lord your God doth 
prove you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with 
all your heart." If we love our God supremely, we will love 
every one who is begotten of him — every one who is a partaker 
of his Spirit. Moved by the spirit of love, we will devote 
all our energies to provoking one another to love and good 
works. Remembering that "the Lord will judge his. people/' we 


will be content to wait for the expression of his approval or 
disapproval. 

According to all indications, the blessing of the Lord continues
 increasingly, with those who are striving to "show 
forth his praises,"" in eluding the brethren at Brooklyn who are 
endeavoring to direct the activities of the Society. Believing 
that they have been faithful to the divine commission, "to 
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance
 of our God," I am glad to cooperate heartily with. 
them. Our opportunities for service may be limited or great 
in number. Let us be faithful even in the least; for this will 
determine our worthiness of greater responsibility "in that 
day." 

Some have asked whether I would be a candidate for any 
office in connection with the Society's work during the coming
 year,. Recognizing that the Lord himself is interested 
in the appointment of those who shall help in the "perfecting 
of the saints for the work of the ministry," I hesitate to place 
myself as one eligible. The desire of my heart is to do his 
bidding, whatever that may be. 

Your brother in Christ, Andrew N. Ptebson. 

APPRECIATES THE "POINT" OF THE SWOED 

Editorial Committee, 

The Watch Tower. 
Dear Brethren: — 

Inadvertently and without due thought and consideration I 
affixed my name to the circular letter which 1 understood was 
circulated quite widely amongst the friends and sent out with 
one of the publications of the opposition. 

I desire now to go on record as repudiating absolutely, and 
having no sympathy with, the proposition contained in circular 
letter referred to on page 367 of Dec. 1st Watch Tower. 

I arn not in opposition to the Lord, the Society, nor Brother 
Rutherford, and do not wish to be. On the contrary, I Ibelieve 
the voice of the Lord was* expressed in the election last January
. I believe it was expressed in the voice of the church in 
the vote taken Nov. 21st, last, and that it will be expressed in 
the election of the Shareholders of the SoceetTY this January. 

I am fully in harmony with the "Point of the Sword"— 
Volume VII — and I believe it to be "meat in due season" furnished
 by the Lord to his hungry sheep during the present 
time. May it prove as much of a blessing to all as it has been 
to me! 

May the Lord continue to bless your efforts, dear brethren. 
to serve the interests of his people and give you a due reward 
is the prayer of 

Your brother in the One Hope, A. E. Burgess. 

OVERWHELMED IK READING IT 
Dear Fellow Servants: — 

I am sending you sixty cents for the Seventh Volume of 
Scripture Studies, Please pardon me for not sending it 
sooner. I have been^ simply overwhelmed in reading it, and it 
has been so interesting, that I just could not spare the time 
to write you a little letter until now. 

Your brother in Christ, J. A. Hetjdspeth. — Texan. 


Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, X. Y., JANUARY 15, 1!)1S 


No. 2 


ARE THE ADVERSARIES INCREASING IN POWER 


"Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, 

Why should anyone arm himself unless he expected to 
meet an enemy in combat? This seems to be the thought 
of the Apostle expressed in the text. The entire chapter 
evidently relates to the end of the Gospel age. It is in the 
nature of a warning against adversaries. "But", saya St. 
Paul, "it is not worldly warfare that we are waging; the 
weapons with which we fight are not human weapons, but 
are mighty through God in overthrowing strong fortifications." 
(2 Corinthians 10:3, 4, Weymouth.) Thus it is seen that 
it is the new creature that must arm preparatory to the final 
conflict. 

The new creation had its beginning at the baptism of 
Jesus in the Jordan. Then and there he was begotten to 
the divine nature. The progressive development of the members
 of the new creation has continued from Pentecost until 
now, and the evidence is cumulative that its completion is 
near at hand. All those who will ultimately be of this class 
must be of one mind — the mind of Christ. All the members 
thereof must meet the same adversaries and have combats 
of a similar nature. 

THE DIVINE PLAN 

Jehovah foreknew that Adam would disobey him and that 
all of his progeny would suffer sickness, sorrow and death. 
In the exercise of his loving kindness and perfect wisdom, 


arm yourselves likewise with the same mind" — 1 Peter 4:1. 
God provided redemption of mankind from death through the 
blood of Jesus, his beloved Son. He further foreordained 
and provided that because of his full obedience to the divine 
will and program, Jesus should be exalted above all other 
creatures (Jehovah alone excepted) and that he should be 
Head over the new ereation, which new creation should 
occupy the most exalted position amongst the creatures of 
Jehovah. This new creation is referred to by Jehovah under 
the title of "the seed of the woman." Satan is mentioned 
as "the serpent." At the time of Adam's condemnation Jehovah
 declared that in his own due time "the seed of the 
woman should bruise the serpent's head." In God's due time 
he will use that "seed" to undo all the wrong and wickedness 
resulting from Lucifer's disloyalty. It seems reasonable to 
conclude that Satan understood that God would develop this 
"seed", and that it is the purpose of Jehovah to bring to 
naught, through this "seed," all the schemes and efforts of 
Satan, that God intends to give to the "seed" the kingdom 
which Satan usurped. Hence Satan seeks to resist the development
 of the * ; secd" and, if possible, to destroy it. and 
to keep the homnn rnce under his control. 

The Prophet of the Lord (Zech. 3:1-10) gives us a brief 
picture of the staging and unfolding of the great Drama relating
 to the preparation and development of the new creation 


[6198] 


January 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(19-20) 


— the "seed", according to the promise — and the resistance 
to its development by its adversaries. In this picture we 
behold Jehovah as the great Designer and Architect of the 
plan; his only begotten and beloved Son the Executor of that 
plan; the members of the new creation being developed by 
the outworking of the plan; the selection of the members 
being made from the imperfect race of Adam; the world the 
stage; Satan as the villain, or opponent, with all the agencies 
he can bring to bear against the "seed." 

The new creation is referred to by the Prophet under 
the title "Joshua, the High Priest," He designates the 
ones called to become members of the Priesthood as those 
who are "clothed in filthy garments," thus picturing their 
own imperfection. The Prophet shows how the Lord provides
 a change of raiment, picturing the robe of Christ's 
righteousness furnished to each one who enters upon the way 
to become a member of the Priesthood. The "High Priest" 
is composed primarily of Christ Jesus, our Lord, but when 
completed will be composed of Jesus the Head and the church 
his body, all forming the "royal priesthood;" The picture 
furthermore shows that angel * of the Lord standing by to 
render aid to the new creation in the course of its development
. Other Scriptures confirm the thought of the Lord providing
 help through holy angels. "The angel of the Lord 
encampeth round about them that fear him and delivereth 
them." (Psa. 34:7) "Are they not all ministering spirits, 
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation
?"— Hebrews 1:14. 

SIN'S SMALL BEGINNING 
It seems quite evident that Lucifer, when starting upon his 
wrongful course, did not expect to go to such lengths of 
wickedness as he has gone. The Prophet pictures him as 
a beautiful creature, having authority and power over others. 
He became ambitious to have a kingdom of his own, like the 
most High God. 

Evidently Lucifer desired to have greater prominence than 
the Lord had given him, because he felt that his ability was 
not being properly recognized. He had observed that Jehovah 
hnd created Adam and Eve in his likeness, and as .Jehovah 
rules the universe he had given to Adam the dominion and 
rulership of the earth. Then said Lucifer, in substance, "Why 
did not Jehovah give me something according to my ability?" 
Then the Prophet represents him as saying in his heart, "I 
will be like the Most High" — "I will establish a kingdom 
of my own." His subsequent conduct shows a heart regardless
 of duty to others, fatally bent upon wrong-doing. He 
went to Eve and in substance said to her: "God is depriving 
you of these things that he is keeping secret from you. There 
is no danger of your dying. Eat the fruit, as I am doing. 
Exercise your own will power." We dare say that had he 
known to what great depths of sorrow his conduct would 
lead, he w«uld have long hesitated to take such a step, and 
probably would not have taken it. His purpose was to usurp 
or steal that which the Lord had not given to him. He witnessed 
the effect, namely, the fall of man and his degradation, and 
the sickness, decay and death that came upon all mankind. 

The Genesis account indicates that God permitted some 
of the angels of heaven to come to earth and attempt to 
uplift and bless mankind. The human race was therefore 
placed under the charge of the angels for a period of approximately
 1600 years, or until the great Deluge. (Hebrews
 2:5) Observing that Jehovah had placed the angels 
in charge of the human race, doubtless Satan again reasoned: 
"Why did not Jehovah let me take charge? I have more 
ability than they; he does not properly recognize my ability; 
he is doing me an injustice by keeping me out of what I 
am justly entitled to have and I will show him he cannot do 
it. I wrtl get control of the angels and through them I will 
control the human race." This unsatisfied desire for rulership 
led him on to envy, hatred and malice, until he deliberately 
set about to seduce, and did seduce, the angels from the 
right course, and led them into paths of wickedness. This 
is in harmony with his general course. The result was that 
these angels, misusing their power, dehauched the human race, 
except Noah and his family, and filled the whole earth with 
violence. "God spared not the angels that sinned, hut confined
 them in Tartarus with chains of thick darkness, delivering
 them into custody for judgment." (2 Pet. 2:4, 
DiagJott.) "Those angels which kept not their own principality
, hut left their own habitation, he has kept in perpetual
 chains under thick darkness for the judgment of 
the great day," — Jude 6, Diaglbtt. 

THE PRINCE OF DEMONS 
Satan therefore was the direct cause of the failure of the 
aiigels which resulted in their incarceration. Since the time 
of the Flood these imprisoned demons have been under the 


control of Satan as the prince of demons. (Eph. 2:2) In his 
speech to the Pharisees the great Master recognized that Satan 
is the prince of devils, having charge over the other demons, 
all of whom arc steeped in wickedness. {Matt. 12:24-29) 
Since the restraint of the demons Satan has attempted by 
various fradulent schemes and devices to control the human 
race, and at the same time thwart the purpose of Jehovah in 
the development of the new creation. 

At the baptism of Jesus in the Jordan, true to the picture
 shown by the Prophet, Satan stood by to resist, and has 
ever since resisted the development of The Christ. AntiChrist
 means that which is against Christ. Diverse and 
numerous movements and schemes has Satan instigated to 
overthrow the "seed." He has been the inspirer and instigator 
of every anti- Christ, or movement to retard the development of 
The Christ. He organized the Papacy, the symbolic "beast" 
of Revelation, which is a complete counterfeit of Messiah's 
kingdom arrangement. He has gained control of the Protestant
 systems, and has succeeded in forming the "image of 
the beast," now co-operating more or less with the "beast" 
and with the governments of earth. He is the author of 
Spiritism, Christian Science, New Thought, Theosophy, Hypnotism
, and many other fradulent schemes which he makes 
appear as being for the benefit of mankind, but the real 
purpose of which is to turn the minds of the people away from 
the merit of Christ's sacrifice and hinder the development 
of the "seed according to the promise." He has used every 
means his fertile mind could devise to destroy the new creation
, but he will not, as indeed he cannot, succeed. ( 'God*3 
Word shall not return unto him void, but shall accomplish 
that whereunto it was sent. " In due time the new creation 
will be completed, to the glory of the great Jehovah. — Isaiah 
55:8-11. 

BINDING OF SATAN 
Since the second presence of the Lord in 1874 the light 
of truth has been increasing in brightness. The tendency 
of this has been to restrain evil, and to that extent it has 
been binding Satan. Concerning the binding of Satan, Jesus 
said: "No man can enter into a strong man's house and 
spoil his goods except he first bind the strong man and then 
he will spoil his goods. " (Matt. 12:29; Mark 3:22-27; Luke 
11:22} "Thus we are taught that Satan must first be bound, 
restrained, and deposed, before Christ's reign of righteousness 
and peace can be established. This binding of Satan is accordingly
 shown to be the first work of the new dispensation." 
( A 68, 09 ) It has been suggested that as the binding of Satan 
progresses the other demons will be loosened or gain greater 
power. They could not be fully judged without first being 
released from prison. The disposition and evil bent of mind 
of these fallen angels or evil spirits must be taken into consideration
 in determining what course they will take, and the 
trouble they will cause when they are liberated from their 
incarceration. 

Russia has long been an autocratic government, practically 
an absolute monarchy. It has been a mixture of civil and 
ecclesiastical power exercised by one head — the Czslt. The 
arrangement is clearly the product of Satan. The Czar has 
been the head of the church and the absolute ruler of the 
people, and has held in restraint for a long time the subjects 
of that kingdom. Many of the subjects of Russia have long 
ago manifested an anarchistic spirit, and this is the class 
known as the "Bolsheviki." They have desired to disrupt the 
government, but have been restrained from so doing. As the 
Czar was deprived of his power gradually, so the "Bolsheviki" 
increased in power; and when the Czar was completely overthrown
, the "Bolsheviki" ran riot, and conditions in 'Russia 
are daily growing worse. 

In a measure this illustrates Satan'a realm. He has been 
an arbitrary ruler of the evil ones of whom he is the chief 
or prince. The evil spirits incarcerated in Tartarus have 
been measurably under the control of Satan. Thev have at all 
times manifested the disposition of anarchists or "Bolsheviki." 
An anarchist is one who defies all rule and rulers, and whose 
purpose is to destroy every form of government and everything
 in the form of order. We should therefore expect that 
when these evil spirits are loosed from their chains of restraint
 the great trouble will follow. Being anarchists, and 
having no disposition to be controlled hy any one, when they 
are released it would be expected that they would refuse to 
recognize any control. All their tendencies before incarceration
 were evil, and they filled the earth with violence, and 
hence we are not unaware of their disposition and not in 
darkness as to what course they will take. 

Realizing that their incarceration was due largely to 
Satan's leading them into the wrong course, without doubt 
envy, ill-will, malice, hatred and jealousy will fill their minds 


[6109] 


(21-22) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


and direct their actions. What might we expect them to 
attempt to do? We observe that Satan for many centuries 
has attempted to destroy the "seed of Abraham according 
to the promise." These fallen angels observe that he has not 
succeeded. We suggest that, move by envy, jealousy and rivalry, 
they may attempt to accomplish what Satan has failed to do, 
namely, to overthrow the Lord's people who constitute the 
"seed of Abraham," and who are yet this side the veil. 

"THE POTJB WINDS OF THE EABTH" 

St. John mentions them in the figure of "the four winds 
of the, earth," (Revelation 7:1.) Commenting upon this Scripture
 in The Watch Tower of June 1st, 1914, page 160, 
Brother Russell stated: 

"The winds of the earth referred to here are of course 
symbolic. The thought is that the winds from the four 
quarters — North, East, South and West — are being held back, 
and that when, the restraint is withdrawn they will rush 
together, and the result will be a whirlwind. Certain Scriptures
 tell of a whirlwind that will be raised from the coasts 
of the earth. See Jer. 23:19; 25:32, 33; 30:23, 24. We do 
not understand that this will be a physical whirlwind, but 
this symbolical expression is used to convey the thought of 
a severe strife of the powers of the air. 

"These 'powers of the air' or 'winds' are not powers of 
natural air, but are powers referred to by St. Paul when he 
speaks of Satan as the 'prince of the power of the air.' (Eph. 
2:2} These spirits who have been under the control of Satan 
— the fallen angels — were to be restrained in chains of darkness
 until the judgment of the great day. {2 Peter 2:4) 
The letting loose of the winds, or air powers, would seem to 
show that God has let go his hand of restraint; that he will 
have to do with the permission of the terrible trouble that 
will come upon the world as a: great cataclysm, which will 
result in the complete overthrow of the social order in anarchy. 
"These fallen angels have been under restraint for these 
many centuries, but they have exercised their influence to 
whatever extent they have had permission. If they had had 
unlimited power they would have wrecked the world long ago, 
but they have been restrained in darkness. 

"Apparently God will soon cease to restrain the fallen 
angels, and they will then proceed to vent their fury upon 
humanity, so that the whole earth will be full of violence, 
the same as inl the days of Noah. 'As it was in the days 
of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of Man.' — ■ 
Luke 17:28. 

"The power manifested by the demons when loosed will, 
we believe, be with a view to the injury of mankind. We 
do not know but that many of our readers will have a share 
in that injury. We have every reason to suppose that if these 
fallen angels get loose, they will vent their first anger upon 
the lord's people. We are not to fear this, however, but 
to take whatever the Lord's providence may permit to come, 
knowing that everything shall work for our good." 

Again commenting upon the same subject (Z '11, 359} 
Brother Russell said: 

"As soon as the power that is now controlling them shall 
be removed, we shall have a reign of evil all over the earth. 
The evil spirits will do all the evil that is in their power, 
and this will constitute the trial of all the fallen angels — 
the lifting of the restraints to see whether they will go 
contrary to the divine will. All who thus manifest their 
alliance with evil in any way will become subjects of the 
second death; while others who show their loyalty to God 
will mark themselves as worthy, presumably, of everlasting 
life. 

"It may be something in connection with the saints that 
will constitute the test of these angels." 

HOW WE MAT EXPECT THE ATTACK 
The true saints of God are the only ones on earth who 
have not the spirit of anarchy. Then we may expect the 
demons to try to put the spirit of anarchy into the mind of 
even the saintly class. Hence the importance of the warning
 of the Apostle to "arm yourselves likewise with the same 
mind." 

It is the new creature that the adversaries destroy. The 
new creature is composed of the new will and new mind, 
which has its habitation in an earthen vessel. We should 
expect, therefore, that the adversaries will assault the mind. 
The words of the text indicate this very clearly. There would 
be no occasion to arm ourselves with the same mind of Christ 
unless we expected to be attacked in the same way that he 
was attacked, by the adversaries. What was the mind of 
Christ? Humble submission to the Father's will, which meant 
gladly following the order marked out by the Father. It was 
to resist the adversaries with the Father's Word. 

The spirit of anarchy ia among all the inhabitants of 


the earth. Anarchy is prevalent in Satan's dominion. We 
should expect, therefore, that .the adversaries would seek to 
produce anarchy among the Lord's people; in other words, 
to put in the mind of such the thought that they should be 
subject to no order and no one, but that each one Bhould 
take his or her own course, pleasing only self; that to take 
any other course would be submission of the will to another 
person. While it is true that we are to submit our wills to 
no one except the will of God, yet we should remember that 
the will of God concerning his own is that they should be 
governed by his Word. "Order is heaven's first law," and 
all disorder tends to anarchy. "God hath set the members 
every one of them in the body as it hath pleased him." ( 1 Cor. 
12:18) Suppose 1 I think someone else is occupying a place 
that I should by right have, should I attempt to force myself 
into the position? Such a course would be prompted by the 
spirit of the evil one. Such is the course the adversary took. 
Rut suppose I am better qualified to fill the position than 
the one who holds it? Better leave it with the Lord. He 
knows all about it. 

So surely a3 there are "Bolsheviki" in Russia, just so 
surely we may expect the adversaries to attempt to put 
the spirit of "Bolshevism" or anarchy, into the minds of 
the Lord's people that, succeeding in this, they might overthrow
 some of his people and produce such a disruption 
of the work as to have seemingly triumphed in their purpose. 
But God will not permit anything to be done that will overthrow
 those who have the right spirit, the spirit of humility 
— the mind of Christ. Evidently Satan thought he had a 
great deal of ability (and he did have some) to become a 
king or ruler, but his ability could not be used of the Lord 
because of his lack of humility. Any creature's ability in the 
service of the Lord is measured by his true humility, and 
where humility is lacking, natural ability is nil, The same 
spirit actuated the fallen angels. The same spirit will work 
amongst some of God's people. Humility means a true and 
joyful submission to the will of God. If we find that the Lord 
has instituted a certain way to carry out his purposes then 
we should joyfully fall in line with that way and strive to 
perform what he gives us to do. Headiness, stubbornness, 
selfishness, leads to dissension and disruption — such ia not the 
mind of the Lord, but the mind of the adversaries. So surely 
as the Lord haa marked out a way and we seek to go contrary
 to that way, we remove ourselves from his special protection
 and open our mind to the assault of the adversaries, 
and, persisting in this course, we must finally fall. 
OUB SAFETY 
Wherein then lies the safety of the new creature? St. 
Peter says: "Arm yourselves with the mind of Christ." The 
Apostle Paul corroborates this in Ephesians 0:10-18, in plain 
language showing us that our warfare is not with our hands, 
not with carnal weapons, not with visible enemies, but with 
Satan and a host of evil spirits. He then shows us that 
our safety lies in putting on the whole armor of God and 
in keeping it on, and using it according to the Lord's will. 
It should be marked that this armor is not for a human 
being, but it is for the new creature, and therefore the figure 
of arming the mind is maintained with reference to the armor 
here. Mark what the Apostle says, "Take unto you the 
whole armor of God that ye may be able to withstand in the 
evil day, and having done all to stand. Stand, therefore, 
having your loins girt about with truth." The girdle around 
the loins indicates that the wearer is a servant, and when 
this girdle is tightly fastened it indicates that the servant 
is engaged in some strenuous work. This suggests, then, 
that the new creature must fill his mind with things pertaining
 to the Lord's work and see to it that he is a servant 
of the truth. How may he know whether or not he is a 
servant of the truth? We answer, by ascertaining whether 
or not he is using that which the Lord has provided for 
the church. The 14th chapter of Revelation, verses 13-16, 
clearly shows that the service of the church during the harvest 
is first the reaping of the saintly class; and the subsequent 
verses show that the saintly ones must participate in the 
reaping of the vine of the earth. It follows, then, that when 
the time arrives for this work to be done, each one who 
would be serving that message which the Lord had provided 
in his own due time must have the loins of his mind girded 
with the truth — engaging in the service according to opportunity
. If we have come to the end of the way, if we are 
nearing the very closing hours of the harvest, then we may 
know that the proclamation of the vengeance of the Lord 
against Babylon must be made. (Isa. 61:2) And to be thus 
engaged zealously in the Lord's service would mean to keep 
our mind upon such work, making ourselves the servants of 
his cause. 


[6200] 


January 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOW ER 


(22-36) 


LET US ABM 0T7ESELVES 

The Apostle then adds that we must have on the breastplate
 of righteousness. The breastplate fitted over the vita] 
organs. The heart is the most vital organ to the new creature
. The necessity for keeping the heart cannot be overstated. 
If, then, one finds bitterness arising in his heart, regardless of 
the cause he should take it at once as a warning that he ia 
not arming himself with the mind of Christ, and not properly 
using the armor. Failing to arm himself thus he would 
not be able to withstand the assaults of the adversaries. See 
1 Thess. 3:8. 

The Apostle then suggests that our feet should be shod 
with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. It is a noticeable
 fact in recent months that there has been much disturbance
 in the classes. These disturbances do not arise 
over doctrinal matters, but are more particularly concerning
 order or discipline or the manner of doing what should 
be done. In some places elders seek to lord it over the ecclesia, 
thinking their ability should be recognized. Other members 
insist on doing everything their own way. This is manifesting 
the spirit of the "Bolsheviki." It brings trouble instead of 
peace, which shows that such a one is not properly armed 
with the mind of Christ; that he has not on the armor in all 
its parts ; that instead of being shod with the message of peace 
his feet are shod with the hob-nails of anarchy. It is the 
duty of the elders to counsel peace and moderation amongst 
the brethren. 

Then, adds the Apostle, we should have the shield of faith 
with which we shall be able to resist the darts of the wicked 
ones. This means that we should be fully advised as to the 
manner of attack by the evil ones; that we obtain this advice 
from the Word of God, and relying Tipon it we properly fortify 
ourselves against all assaults. It means furthermore, that we 
know of the exceeding great and precious promises of the 
Lord which are sure to bring to the obedient ones an abundant 
entrance into the kingdom; and knowing these, that we rely 
upon them. 

Then, adds the Apostle, we must have the helmet of salvation
 and the sword of the spirit. The helmet is fitted over 
the head and therefore represents the intellectual part of 
the creature. This suggests that we must have an intellectual 
understanding and appreciation of what the Lord's Word is 
concerning us. This is the basis for the hope of our salvation
. The sword of the spirit is the Word of God. Then 
having the. helmet and the sword would mean that we both 
understand what the Word teaches and are striving to use 
it both as a defensive and an offensive weapon — as a defensive
 weapon against our adversaries, as an offensive weapon 
bv proclaiming the message of the Lord now due to be given. 
(G 466. Ezek. 21:15) Then, adds the Apostle, we should 
pray with all prayer and supplication for all saints, thus 
showing the necessity not only for keeping our heart and 


mind fixed on our welfare, but for having in mind the spiritual 
welfare of our brethren. 

OUR TEAK TEXT 

How appropriate, therefore, the text for the year — "The 
end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober and watch 
unto prayer. And above all things have fervent love among 
yourselves." That we are at the end of the Gospel age, we 
all agree. We are at the end of the harvest period of that 
age. The end of Satan's dominion is also here, and the beginning
 of the Millennial age. Important to us is the fact 
that we have come to the end of the development of the new 
creation, and soon the last member will be complete. Mark 
the conditions that prevail in the entire world today — discontent
, selfishness, passion, frenzy, hatred, malice and illwill
 are being manifested in a manner never before witnessed. 
After enjoying so many of the blessings of the first few years 
of the 20th century, the human race is now plunged into the 
most terrible war known, one which the Scriptures show to 
be followed by revolution and anarchy. The people are required
 to endure hardships such as they have never before 
known. The lack of food, the lack of comfort and ease, added 
to great burdens of taxation with no hope of relief therefrom, 
increase the spirit of discontent. Selfishness predominates 
everywhere. Millions of men, for years engaged in shedding 
human blo^od, now possess distorted minds, in fact, the entire 
human race is mentally upset. Added to all of these things, 
the world is drunken with the doctrines of Babylon. The 
''beast" is manifesting his power. The "image of the beast" 
is about to do likewise. The Revelator tells us that when 
these events take place that Babylon becomes the very habitation
 and hold of these evil spirits. If now we see so much 
wrongdoing in the world, what must we expect when the 
"powers of the air" shall be allowed to gain temporary liberty 
for the very purpose of manifesting the evil tendencies of 
the unregenerated heart? Surely, then, there never has been 
a time like the present when it is so necessary to be of 
sober mind and watch and pray. Never has it been so important
 for us to have overspreading love for all the brethren. 

That our enemies are increasing in power is manifest on 
every hand. That they may have more power shortly is to 
be expected. Let us not be at all discouraged, however. We 
have been many times warned of this; and to be forewarned 
is to be forearmed. Now as we are drawing nearer to the 
great crisis let us remember the admonition of the Lord, to 
have ourselves "armed with the same mind" that Christ had, 
having on the whole armor of God, and we shall be safe. 
And even though we may seemingly go down in defeat from 
the viewpoint of the world, yet such will mean the great triumph
 of the faithful and an abundant entrance into the 
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 
— - Psalm «:1; 2 Peter 1:11. 


ANNUAL MEETING 

Probably nothing that has occurred in recent months has 
called forth from the friends such earnest and fervent prayers 
as those offered in behalf of the convention that should assemble
 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and the annual election 
of officers of the Society for the ensuing year. With eagerness 
the brethren have been looking forward to the events that 
would transpire there, that the will of the Lord might be 
known. It is believed that their prayers were answered. 
The Lord very wonderfully manifested his presence and his 
spirit at the convention and at the annual meeting. 

On the morning of January 2nd the convention opened 
according to program, and closed Sunday evening, January 
0th, with a love feast. Approximately one thousand attended. 
The discourses of the pilgrim brethren were very timely and 
helpful. Particular emphasis was laid upon the fact that 
the kingdom of the Lord is near at hand and upon the great 
necessity for our preparation for the kingdom. Some bitter 
trials have been experienced during the year just past, and 
these seem to have whetted the appetites of the Lord's dear 
children to partake more fully of the spiritual food provided
 for them. A number of splendid prayer, praise and 
testimony meetings were a part of the program; and the 
testimony of the dear brethren at these meetings showed 
plainly their determination to do one thing, namely to press 
forward along the mark for the prize of the high calling of 
God in Christ Jesus. From every quarter of the country 
came encouraging messages concerning the Seventh Volume, 
and the many blessings the brethren have obtained by a careful
 study of it, and further blessings by its distribution. 
Many of the classes reported progress in this work, both in 
the widespreading of the message of truth and in their own 
personal spiritual development. 


OF SHAREHOLDERS 

AKXTTAI. MEETING 

Saturday, January 5th, was the day appointed for the 
holding of the annual meeting of the shareholders of the 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. In view of the 
events that have transpired during the Bix months ended, 
the dear friends frorn^ every part of the world were keenly 
interested in this annual meeting. Cablegrams from foreign 
countries expressed the keen interest the brethren there felt 
in the result, that they might see the manifestation of the 
Lord's will concerning the harvest work. 

The meeting convened at ten o'clock Saturday morning 
at Carnegie Hall, N, S. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, being opened 
with a song and with a prayer led by Brother Barber. Then 
followed an exhaustive report by the President concerning 
the work of the Society for the year just past. This was 
followed by a report from the Treasurer, the substance of 
which has heretofore been published in The Watch Toweb. 

It was the thought of some present that the recent misunderstanding
 with reference to the management of the Society
 should be discussed in detail; but it was manifestly 
the belief of the overwhelming majority of the shareholders 
present that full and complete publication had heretofore been 
made concerning such misunderstanding, and that further discussion
 or agitation of the same would do no good. It was 
pointed out by those who expressed themselves that the 
friends were fully advised as to the facts, and that further 
discussion of it was wholly undesirable; that having received 
the published statements of both sides and carefully considering
 them, the brethren had come there with their hearts lifted 
in prayer to the Lord to manifest his will; and that now was 
the time, not for talking, but for action. 


[6201] 


(24-24) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


BOAED OF DIBECTOBS ELECTED 

The. Charter requires that first a Board of Directors of 
seven members be elected, and that from the seven elected, 
the officers of the Society shall be chosen. The first thing in 
order, therefore, was the nomination and election of seven 
members who should compose the Board of Directors for the 
ensuing year. The order of business being announced, Brother 
Barber arose and stated that the friends throughout the 
country, on the 21st of November, had by referendum vote 
expressed their choice for directors and officers; and that 
he would take it therefore as the Lord's will that the brethren 
receiving the highest number of votes at that referendum 
should be nominated, and he therefore placed in nomination 
for directors the following named brethren, to-wit: 
Brother Rutherford Brother Macmillan 

Van Amburgh " Spill 

" Pierson «* Bohnet 

Brother Fisher 

Brother McGee, of Trenton, N. J., then placed in nomination
 for directors the following: 

Brother Menta Sturgeon Brother Isaac F. Hoskins 

A. I. Ritchie " R. H. Hirsh 

" H. C. Rockwell " J. D. Wright 

Brother P. S. L. Johnson 
Before the ballot was taken, however, Brother Johnson withdrew
 his name. 

Brother F. T. Horth, of Clinton, Iowa, Brother C. J. 
Woodworth, of Scranton, Pa., and Brother A. M. Zimmerman, 
of Lancaster, Pa., were appointed by the President as inspectors
 of election. After thev had taken and subscribed to 
the required oath to perform their duties as such judges and 
inspectors with fidelity, the ballot was taken. It required 
a considerable length of time to check up all the proxies and 
certificates and to count the vote; and although the ballots 
were cast in the forenoon the count was not completed until 
about 8:30 P. M. The result of the ballot was as follows: 
J. F. Rutherford 194,106 Menta Sturgeon 27,261 

A. H. Macmillan 161,871 R. H. Hirsh 23,198 

W. E. Van Amburgh 160,215 I. F. Hoskins 22,660 

W. E. Spill 118,259 A. I. Ritchie 22,631 

J. A. Bonnet 113,422 J. D. Wright 22,623 

C. H. Anderson 107,175 H. C. Rockwell 18,178 

G. H. Fisher 83,260 P. S. L. Johnson 6,469 

A. N. Pierson # 57,721 W. J. Hollister 3.931 

The seven receiving the highest number of votes cast were: 
J. F. Rutherford A. H. Macmillan 

C. H. Anderson W. E. Spill 

W. E. Van Amburgh J. A. Bohnet 

George H. Fisher 
and were thereupon declared by the judges of election as 
having been duly elected as members of the Board of Directors
 of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society for 
the ensuing year. 

ELECTION OF OFFICES S 

The next order of business was the election of officers 
who must be selected from amongst those duly chosen as 
members of the Board of Directors. Brother W. E. Page, of 
Des Moines, Iowa, placed in nomination for the office of 
President Brother J. F. Rutherford ; and a number of other 
brethren from different parts of the country seconded this 
nomination. Brother A. II. Macmillan placed in nomination 
for Vice President Brother Charles H. Anderson, of Baltimore, 
Md., whose nomination was seconded by several others. 
Brother W. E. Spill placed in nomination for the office of 
Secretary-Treasurer Brother W. E. Van Amburgh, whose 
nomination was also seconded by a number of the brethren. 
There being no one else nominated for either of these offices, 
the ballot was taken; and 1 the results showed that Brother 
J. E. Rutherford had received all of the ballots cast for the 
office of President, Brother Charles II. Anderson all the votes 
cast for Vice President, and Brother W. E. Van Amburgh 
all the votes cast for Secretary-Treasurer. Thereupon the 
judges of election declared that these brethren were duly 
elected to the respective offices named. 

PRESIDENT'S REMARKS 

Immediately upon announcement by the judges of election 
as to who were chosen as officers of the Society, Brother 
Rutherford spoke from the platform, calling attention to the 
fact that now, since the Lord had manifested his will and 
expressed it through his people at this election, he deemed 
it proper that he should make a statement relating to the 
recent misunderstanding with other brethren concerning the 
management of the Society. He further stated that his 
action in appointing four members of the Board of Directors 
in the month of July, 1917, was not done for the purpose 
of deposing any one, and did not depose any one as a member 
of the Board of Directors, but that he merely filled the 


vacancies in the Bo ird for the purposes stated in the Harvest 
Sittings heretofore published. He further stated that in taking
 this action personalties did not enter into the matter; 
that he had no personal feeling against the brethren who 
took issue with him at the time he made such appointments; 
that he had not had any feeling against them since, and did 
not now hold any ill-will toward them ; that his action was 
entirely official, because he believed it to be his duty as the 
President of the Society to take this action in behalf of the 
Society and the work that it is doing; that he deeply regretted
 that misunderstanding and trouble had followed; that 
he realized his imperfections and was aware that he made 
many mistakes, but that he still believed his action in filling 
the vacancies on the Board was entirely right and proper. 

Brother Rutherford then stated that he had no desire nor 
disposition to deprive any one of opportunities for service 
in 1 the harvest field, and that if these brethren who had been 
openly opposing the management of the Society for the past 
few months would cease their opposition and come forward and 
express their desire and purpose to preach the truth and 
to work in harmony with the Society, he would be glad to 
see that each of them was put actively into the service of 
the Society; that if they would do this he would be willing to 
forget the past, and hoped that the other brethren were likewise
 willing to forgot, and that all now who claimed to he 
fully consecrated to the Lord should join their hearts and 
hands in the common cause for righteousness and in spreading
 the glad tidings of the kingdom. All were invited to 
forget their differences, for, realizing that the church is a 
little band of consecrated followers of the Master, surrounded 
upon every side by enemies — the world, the flesh, the demons 
and the great adversary — the brethren above all peoples should 
stand firmly together and in love serve one another and 
serve tjie Lord. Nearly all of the members present manifested 
their hearty approval of the sentiments expressed, by repeated
 and prolonged applause. 

This concluding the business of the annual meeting, the 
same was adjourned amidst great rejoicing by the brethren 
present. Many were the expressions that the Lord had 
certainly been present and guided the deliberations of the 
meeting, and the result was joyfully taken as his expressed 
will. 

Brother Anderson was not formally placed in nomination 
for the position of a member of the Board of Directors. 
Nevertheless this did not preclude any one from properly 
voting for him, and his election was entirely in harmony with 
the laws of the land and the Charter of the Society. 

During the time occupied by the judges of election in 
examining the records and counting the votes the brethren 
present indulged in praise, prayer and testimonies, interspersed
 with discourses by several pilgrim brethren. The 
time, therefore, was very profitably spent. It was indeed a 
very blessed season together. 

THE CLOSE OF THE CONVENTION 

All the Sunday sessions of the convention were held in 
the Lyceum Theatre. Discourses were delivered in the forenoon
 by Brothers Perrin and Heard. In the afternoon Brother 
Rutherford addressed the public, there being approximately 
two thousand present, and splendid interest was manifested. 
This meeting was followed by a love feast, participated in 
by approximately one thousand brethren; and many were the 
expressions of love and joy that came from those who participated
. 

Just preceding the love feast a motion was made and duly 
seconded, requesting Brother R. H. Hirsh to resign as a 
member of the Editorial Committee of The Watch Tower. 
This motion was unanimously carried by the convention, not 
a dissenting vote being offered. In the evening, at the Lyceum 
Theatre, another gathering of the friends was addressed by 
Brothers Van Amburgh and Heard. 

Many were heard to say that this had been the most 
blessed convention they had ever attended and that never 
had they seen the spirit of the Lord so manifested by the 
many brethren. This is exactly what we should have expected
 to come from all those who realize that we are in 
the very end of the harvest, and that our work may soon 
he finished this side the veil. With sobriety of mind and 
calmness of heart and with the determination to continue 
steadfast, the dear friends are facing the concluding work 
of the harvest. 

REGARDING MILITARY EXEMPTION 

Quite a number of our brethren in different parts of the 
country have been denied military exemption. Some of them, 
because of their refusal to engage in military service, have 
been court-martialed and sentenced to long terms in prison, 
while others aro held in detention camps in different parts of 
the country. Those attending the convention felt it incumbent 


[6202] 


January 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(24-25) 


upon them to express their love and sympathy in support of 
these dear brethren who are so loyally standing for the 
principles represented by our Association ; and it was deemed 
proper to pass a resolution relating to the matter. A committee
 previously appointed for that purpose reported a 
resolution on Sunday mornings which was read before the 
convention and, upon motion, was seconded and unanimously 
adopted. The resolution follows: 

RESOLUTION 

"WHEREAS, under the terms of the Selective I>raft Act 
a number of our members and brethren have been called to 
military duty, and under the terms and provisions of said 
Selective Draft Act have made application to the proper 
authorities for discharge or exemption from military service, 
which right or privilege has been denied many of them, and 
they have been and are now forcibly restrained of their 
liberty in either military prisons or army detention camps; 

"AND WHEREAS, we believe our position as a religious 
organization, which has been organized and existing for manv 
years prior to the passage of said Act, is not fully understood 
by various officers and representatives of the United States 
Government, and that it is due and proper that we should 
make a statement as to the position of this religious organization
 that the attitude of our said members and brethren may 
be better understood; 

"NOW THEREFORE RESOLVED: By the members of 
the Lvternationai, Bible Students ASSOCIATION in annual 
convention assembled at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, composed 
of delegates representing our Association from all of the 
United States and Canada, that we make the following statement
 of our said Association or organization concerning our 
attitude and the attitude of our members toward the present 
great war: 

"FIRST. That we recognize in President Wilson a great 
man who is using his power and influence honestly and 
conscientiously and according to his best judgment in the 
interests of the peoples of the world and particularly of the 
United States, 

"SECOND. That we recognize the duty of every one living 
within the realms of the United States to be law-abiding; 
that the Congress of the United States, representing the people 
of the* nation, placed a provision in the Selective Act that 
no person should be compelled to engage in military service 
who is a member of a well-organized religious organization 
or association whose teachings or principles forbid its members
 to engage in war, or who are against war in any form; 
that in taking the position they do, our members are claiming 
only the protection the law provides against violation of 
conscience, 

"THIRD. That we are followers of the Great Master 
Christ Jesus our Redeemer, and have covenanted with the 
Lord to do his will; and that we are certain that it is not 
his will that we, as his followers, should participate in the 
great war now upon the earth. We recognize in the present 
great war one that is different from any other war ever before
 known, to wit: Thai it marks the end of the world — 
that is to say, the end of the present evil order of things — 
and is purging the nations and preparing the way for the 
kingdom of God for which followers of the Great Master, 
Christ Jesus, have prayed for many centuries; and that for 
forty years past this Association has held" and taught that 
the year 1914 would mark the beginning of this great international
 conflict which the prophets of the Lord foretold 
mus$ take place, immediately preceding the establishment of 
the everlasting kingdom of righteousness. 

"We agree with Ptesident Wilson that there can be no 
lasting peace while the present unrighteous systems exist. 

"FOURTH. We hold that the teachings of Jesus and 
the apostles forbid all his true followers to engage in mortal 
combat or war; that early in the Christian era this teaching 
was departed from by those claiming to be his followers and 
that for many centuries J>ast the clergy of both Catholic and 
Protestant church systems have departed from the teachings 
of Jesus and the Apostles, substituting therefor man-made 
doctrines, and have taught the divine right of kings to rule 
and that the kingdoms of this earth constitute the kingdom 
of the Lord, and have mixed the religion of Jesus Christ 
with the politics of the world, which has resulted in confusion
 amongst Christian peoples, and which the Lord denounces
 as Babylon and as an abomination in his sight; that 
the Lord through many of his holy prophets foretold that 
such an alliance would result between civil and ecclesiastical 
powers on earth which would bring upon both the indignation 
of God, causing wars, revolutions and anarchy, which would 


be overruled by him for the purging of the nations of the 
earth to the end that he might establish amongst the people 
a pure and righteous government. 

"FIFTH. With charity to all and malice toward none, we 
feel it our duty humbly to call attention to the fact that the 
nations are now passing through that great crisis foretold 
by the prophets of the Lord, and that God is expressing his 
displeasure toward the relationship existing between ecclesiastical
 and civil kingdoms of the earth, particularly as set 
forth in the following cited Scriptures, to wit: Revelation, 
chapters 17 and 18; Ezekiel, chapter 34. 

"SIXTH. That sincerely believing such to be true, a 
participation by our members in this war would be contrary 
to the Lord's will and- a violation of our own conscience which 
would put in jeopardy our eternal destiny and welfare. While 
we hold that it is the privilege of any and all persons to engage
 in war who desire to do so if they are not followers 
of Jesus Christ, yet we hold that they who do follow faithfully
 in hta footsteps cannot consistently participate in war 
in any form; and we have so held for more that thirty years. 

"SEVENTH. We, therefore, enter our solemn protest 
against the incarceration of our brethren and members in 
prison because of the refusal on their part to violate their 
conscience and to violate the law of God; that we respectfully
 call upon the officials of the Government of the United 
States to recognize that the members of our Association come 
clearly within the purvue and terms of the exemption clause 
of the Selective Draft Act because of the teachings and principles
 of this religious Association which principles and teachings
 have been held and taught by it and its members for 
more than a quarter of a century; and that we respectfully 
petition and ask that our said brethren and members, to wit: 

Herm. Abraham, Holyake, Mass. Joy Ferguson, Camp Upton 
Martin O. Bowin, Camp Upton Stanley Olson, Camp Grant 
Harold Bruber, Camp Dodge George Ruiz. Camp Upton 

A. W. Christy, Jr., Camp Upton Walford Marker, Seattle, Wash. 
Elmer Christy, Camp Upton Walter Mozee. Camp Upton 

Jerry Dc Cecca, Camp De-vens J. A. Mnrch, Cp. Zachary Taylor 
Stanley Dixon, Camp Bowie Carmelo Nicita, Camp Deven 

Frank DonogHo, Camp Dix S. Papageorges, Duluth, Minn. 

Charles Feldner, Camp Meade H. Pound, Camp Zachary Taylor 
Charles H. Walker, Camp Zachary Taylor 
and others, be fully granted the provisions of the exemption 
clause of the Selective Draft Act, as provided by Congress. 

"That a copy of this Pfesolution be furnished to the President
 of the United States, to the Secretary of the War Department
 and the Provost Marshal General Crowder ; and 
that the President of our Association appoint a committee of 
three to so present these resolutions/' 

PRESENTED TO PRESIDENT WILSOK 

Brother Rutherford as president thereupon appointed 
Brother Dr. Smith of Louisville, Ky v Brother E. D. Sexton
, of Los Angeles, California, and Brother E. W. Brenneisen
, of New York City, as a committee of three to bear 
these resolutions to Washington and there in person present 
them to President Wilson, Secretary Baker of the War Department
, and a copy to Provost Mjarshal General Crowder. 
The Committee proceeded to Washington for this purpose, and 
on Friday, January 11th, they were granted an audience with 
President Wilson. The Committee was very kindly and 
graciously received by the President who patiently listened 
to the reading of the resolution. The President expressed 
himself as fully sympathizing with our position. He suggested 
that some had exceeded their authority in dealing with our 
brethren and promised that these mistakes should be speedily 
rectified. Afterwards a copy of the resolution was presented 
to Secretary of War Baker and Provost Marshal Crowder. 

What effect this resolution may have we cannot of course 
know, but it is our hope that much good may result. While 
our brethren are refusing to render military service they 
are not doing so because of any desire to be against the 
Government but because they are conscientious and believe 
that for them to engage in this great war would be to forfeit 
their share in the kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ. Having made a consecration to be dead with Christ, 
all such count not the present life dear unto themselves. They 
desire above all things to be pleasing to the heavenly father 
and to do his will completely. 

For the encouragement of our de&r brethren in bonds we 
remind them of the great afflictions endured by the faithful 
ones of the past a* recorded by the Apostle Paul in Hebrews 
11. Those men proved their loyalty and faithfulness to God, 
and because thereof they will have a better resurrection than 
the world in general. Now some of his dear children are 


[6203] 


(25-30) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y 


having the privilege of proving their loyalty under somewhat constructing the world of mankind which is now engaged 
similar circumstances, and if faithful, will have the privilege, in the destruction of each other. What a blessed privilege 
together with the King of kings and Lord of lords, of re- that will be! 


FOUR KINDS OF GROUND 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "The Seed is the Word of God," published in issue of April 15, 1906, which 
please see.] 


THE GROWTH OF THE KINGDOM 

[The first nine and the last two paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Parables of the Kingdom
," published in issue of May 15, 1900. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "The Sowing and the Reaping," 
published in issue of May 1, 1900. Please see the articles named.] 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


SEEKING TO CAUSE DIVISION 
Dbab Bbethben: — 

I hardly know how to start this letter, but will say in 
passing that my motive is not to embitter any one but, if 
I know my own heart, to protect the Lord's people where 
possible from a similar experience. 

Wednesday evening at prayer, praise and testimony meeting
 I was very much surprised to see Brother Johnson walk 

in with Brother R . .... A motion was put and carried 

that Brother Johnson give us a discourse. He came forward 
and gave us one of the best discourses I have ever heard on 
"Christ having been rich, became poor for us, that we might 
be made rich — no reference being made to the trouble at 
Brooklyn or elsewhere. At the close of the meeting he was 
invited to address the class on Saturday night and Sunday 
afternoon. Saturday night he gave us a discourse on "Building
 up in Love," etc. Sunday morning his talk was along the 
lines of fiery trials. He started out, using Revelation the 
seventh chapter by stating that he accepted the Seventh 
Volume as the Seventh Volume, although he believed it contained
 some errors, but that the good in the book far exceeded
 the errors, and he believed it was being used of the 
Lord. But before he got through with his sledge-hammer 
blows the Seventh Volume got fixed up wrong, as you may 
be sure it would be. 

Sunday afternoon he gave a discourse along the line of 
the Parable of the Penny and of the Inkhorn. To make a 
long story short, he concluded by saying that Brother Russell 
shows that the chariot in Bymbol represents an organization; 
the Watch To web Bible and Tract Society is the chariot 
of the Elijah class; but that the legalities which you invoked 
are lurid legalities (the horses) ; that the separation is now 
taking place; and the lurid legalities are separating the two 
classes; that those who are putting out the Seventh Volume 
and the Babylon Tract are the great company; that they are 
smiting the Jordan the second time, as Elisha returning. He 
made the plain, unequivocal statement that Brother Rutherford 
would be of the great company, and that those adhering to 
the Societt and distributing the Seventh Volume, etc., would 
also be of that class 

I am trying to look for the Lord's' spirit continually. "If 
any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his." 
If these brethren really think they are of the little flock 
class, and we are doing the work of the great company class 
now, why do they take the trouble to hinder it? Why not let 
us do it and help them and us into the kingdom that much 
quicker? .... 

Our business is to do with our might what our hands 
find to do. I do not believe my sacrifice is complete. If it 
were I would not be here. If Brother Johnson and others of 
the opposition think their sacrifice is complete, and that 
they are merely waiting for their glorification, I trust they 
will be supremely happy; but I want to work while it is yet 
day, because I believe shortly no man can work 

We would be glad to have a few lines from you if you 
have any suggestions that you think would be helpful to us 
in our effort to serve and please the Lord in this work. 

With much Christian love for you, and believing that you 
are trying to do the Lord's will, however imperfectly, I am 

Your brother in Christ, G. M. K,— Va. 

OUE REPLY 
Dear Brotheb in Cubist: — 

It is with regret that we note the unhappy circumstances 
described in your letter, that a brother, once prominent and 
active in the service of the Society one who was held in 
the highest confidence by t the friends, would appear before 
the class and for a time apparently manifest the spirit of the 


Lord and then, taking advantage of the confidence of the 
friends, attempt to disrupt and hinder the work. — 2 Corinthians
 11:13-15. 

Having in mind what this unfortunate brother did in 
Great Britain and what he has attempted to do in this country, 
we feel duty-bound to warn the dear friends everywhere. 
If, as this Brother and his associates hold, those who are managing
 the Society's affairs are of the great company class, 
why have these brethren tried so strenuously for the past year 
to get control of the Society? Are they so desirous to be 
of the great company class? Wherein is their consistency? 
Of course, any one is entitled to hold any opinion he may 
desire, but if he is of the opinion that the Society and those 
working in conjunction with it constitute the great company 
class, and therefore it has become his duty to oppose the 
work of the harvest in which the Society is engaged, then 
it would be manifestly improper for the friends to receive 
him and extend to him the fellowship of a brother. 

The Society does not endorse his course at all; he is not 
sent out by the Society, and we feel impelled to call attention
 to the Apostle Paul's words as set forth in Romans 
16:17,18. We feel if we did not thus warn the flock, we 
would be negligent of our duty. If any brother docs not feel 
that he can work under the direction of the Society and in 
harmony with the Society, then those who are in harmony 
with the Society should avoid him. Any separation that may 
follow need not be in bitterness, nor in self-righteousne3s, but 
rather with a desire to be engaged consistently in the Lord's 
service. "Let every man be persuaded in his own mind," but 
let none seek to practice deception upon others, or to interfere
 with others who desire to serve the Lord. 

Our advice to you under the circumstances would be that 
all who desire to engage in the distribution of The Finished 
Mystery — Volume VII, and other literature which the Society
 publishes and sends forth— do so; and all others who 
do not feel disposed to engage should not interfere with 
those who want to work. If a brother is not in full harmony 
with the work of the Society, then he should not accept at 
the hands of the class appointment upon any committee that 
has to do with the distribution of the literature, The time 
is short in which to do the work, and it is evidently the 
Lord's will that it shall be done. Let us do with our might 
what our hands find to do and leave it to the Lord to determine
 whether we shall be of the little flock or great 
company class. The question that will determine to which 
class we belong will not be as to how much or how little 
literature we put out, or how many books we sell, but what 
is the real heart condition? If any are so situated that they 
cannot engage actively in the distribution of the message, 
this would in no wise preclude them from being of the kingdom
 class, provided they were of the proper heart condition. 
But if one is so situated that he could engage in the harvest 
work, but because of his heart condition refuses to do so, 
the result might be different. We leave the judgment entirely 
with the Lord. It is not for us to judge. Above all, let us 
do everything decently and in order, and dwell in peace, 
avoiding the spirit of rivalry and vain-glory. 

Let every one who desires to work in the harvest field 
enter quickly and work, and those who do not wish to work 
refrain from so doing, and at least refrain from interfering. 
Any one who seeks to disrupt the Lord's work surely has 
not the spirit of the Lord, and all such we are told to avoid. — 
1 Timothy 6:3-6; Proverbs 0:16, 19. 

to do aorrs will his chief desiee 
Bear Bbotheb Ruthebford: — 

I desire further to join my voice with those who have 
confessed to the wonderful blessings derived through the 


[6204] 


January IS, 1918 


T H E WA T C H T O W E R 


(30-31) 


reading of Volume VII, The Finished Mysteey. I am 
thankful indeed that the Lord has, by his grace, enabled me 
to "see the point" of the Sword; and it has led me to a renewal
 of my consecration to be faithful unto him and his 
truth even unto death, and to renewed energy and zeal in 
his service. 

Now, dear brother, my chief desire is to do the will of 
God in co-operation with the Society, which I firmly believe 
to be the angel of God having power (authority) over the 
coals of fire, and therefore I desire to plaqe my limited 
capabilities at the service and disposal of the Society to be 
used in whatever way the Society may deem wise. 

I wish to say, dear brother, that in reflecting over the 
past, I realize that your treatment of Sister Burgess and 
myself has been very kind and considerate, and I desire 
now to acknowledge it and to thank the Lord for all his 
undeserved favors, and yourself as an instrument in his 
hands to dispense them. 

T have boon greatly blessed and assisted to a right view 
of the present situation by the articles in The Watch Tower, 
"Concluding Work of the Harvest." Oct. 1st; "The Price of 
Exaltation, -'* Nov. 15th; and "The Light of the World," Dec. 
1st; and I praise the Lord for the grand food dispensed 
through The Watch Tower and for its continued spiritual, 
uplifting influence. 

May the blessing of the Lord be with you abundantly, 
dear brother, and with all those associated with you in this 
blessed work and labor of love, is my prayer. 

Your brother in his grace, A. E. Burgess. — N. Y. 

GOOD RESULTS OF VOLUNTEERING 
Dear Sirs: — 

Recently while riding on a street car a lady handed me a 
paper entitled The Bible Students Monthly in which I became
 very much interested, and would appreciate your sending
 me the issue treating "The Battle of Armageddon" and 
also a copy of "Where Are Thb Dead?" Please find enclosed
 $1.00 for which kindly send me The Bible Students 
Monthly for one year. I read in the paper the cost is only 
12c, which seems strange to me that a paper could be published
 at such a low cost. If so, keep the difference for 
papers to give out to otther strangers. 

Yours respectfully, C, A. B. — Ohio. 

EUPHRATES GRADUALLY BEING DRIED UP 

Gentlemen: — 

Your issue of The Bible Students Monthly, Vol. 9. 
No. 5, on "Why do the Nations War?" was placed at my 
door last Saturday. I read same to my wife and we both 
came to the conclusion that the truth you put forth fully 
coincides with our views in the matter. Please send me as 
many copies of this issue as you can conveniently spare, and 
any other issues which you may have. I will distribute 
them amongst my friends and co-workers that their eyes may 
be opened. There are upwards of 300 clerks in my department
. How I wish I could have them all read your "War 
Extra" ! It would wake them up, and remove the scales from 
their eyes. 

Correct you are: Priests and preachers have long since 
strayed away from Christ's teachings and are blinding his 
children with falsehoods for their own gain. Any priest or 
preacher — no matter of what denomination — who approves 
and agitates the killing of the innocent is far from the teachings
 of Christ and belongs to the devil. 

I want Pastor Russell's Studies in the Scriptures which 
you announce, and wish % to subscribe for your MbNTHLY. 
You will also hear from me again. God bless and prosper 
your good work. 

Yours very respectfully, R. D. Koerner. — III. 

WARRING AGAINST THE CREEDS 

Gentlemen: — 

I have just read your paper on "The Fall of Babylon" 
as treated by Pastor Russell. It agrees with my understanding
 of the truth. I am a scientific man — surgeon, chemist 
and astronomer — laboring in the fields of creation to the 
same ends that others are fighting the war on the creeds. 
I am with you in the great reconstruction where truth shall 
sweep the earth and the mind of man shall come into a full 
understanding of the divine wiU and do it completely. 

Faithfully yours, Edward Gates Davis. — Kan. 

CO-OPERATION ASSURED 
Dear Brethren : — 

RESOLVED, that we, the undersigned members of the 
York (Pa.) Ecclesia of Associated Bible Students, do hereby 
assure the faithful officers of the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society, and the Bethel Family, of our hearty cooperation
 and support in the remaining work of the Harvest, 
yet to be done. 

Be it further resolved that we will continue to pray for 
the general interests of the work, that it m.iy be carried out 
to its completion, to the honor and glory of our King. 

[Signed jiy forty-seven ukethre.v 1 
AS THE LORD HATH PROSPERED THEM 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

Enclosed please find money order, amounting 1o , our 

quarterly contribution to "Good Hopes," according as the Lord 
hath prospered us. It pleases us beyond expression that our 
contributions following the death of our beloved Pastor have 
been of increased amounts, so that you might be assured of 
our absolute confidence in those whom it pleases the Lord 
to place in charge of his great work, and that you might 
realize our desire to oc-ojx'rute heartily in that work. 

Our little class prays that our love for the Lord and the 
brethren may abound more and more. 
Yours in" the King's service, 

Ar.KXANDiu \ Ecclesia. — Pa. 
* 'GNAWING THEIR TONGUES TOR PAIN" 
Sirs: — 

I might call your attention to the sheet of paper called 
"The Fall of Babylon," which has been circulated around our 
city, much to the disgust of all denominations. As a Protestant
, 1 look upon it as one of the most narrow-minded, vile 
and decidedly untrue sheets printed for some time. I sincerely
 hope it will not come into the hands of our Catholic 
neighbors. 

Under the heading "Reformers vs. Antichrist" your jealousy
 of the pope and church is shown in its real* color. Has 
this circular been read before being distributed, by any responsible
 ( ?) sane person in your Association, of which 
there seems to be a scarcity? ¥ou quote St. Paul as saying: 
"That day shall not come except there come a falling away 
[Romish Apostasy] first, and that man of sin [Papacy]", etc. 
Why the words in brackets? Did you ever read or hear of 
anything so ridiculous? It is n pity that the world has to 
support such weaklings as your executives have shown themselves
 to be. Could you not use your time to better advantage 
by doing Red Cross work, or in fact anything but discussing 
"religion" of which you appear to be so ignorant? We shall 
certainly do our utmost to prevent any of the Sunday School 
classes reading or contaminating themselves with your publication
. I have given similar instructions to the Bible Class 
for men. , 

Trusting this will reach the hands of the publisher without
 delay, I am, Disgustedly, 
Sxjpt. ov Bible Class, "Church of England."— Montreal, Can. 

DISAPPOINTMENT TURNED INTO JOY 
Deab Brethren: — 

Greetings in the name of the dear Father. Mercy unto you ; 
grace, peace and love be multiplied unto you. 

I have been interested in present truth ever since I first 
heard dear Brother Russell in Lynn, Mass., about forty years 
ago, when he came to give his first six lectures there. T have 
followed the truth all these years; reading the volumes* as 
they came; finding The Tower very helpful; convinced from 
the beginning that it was the truth and Brother Russell was 
the special messenger, chosen by God for the last age of the 
church. 

At the time of his death, I recognized our great loss, but 
rejoiced that our dear brother had passed beyond into his 
reward, to the inheritance of the saints. I also felt disappointed
 because the long-Iooked-for Seventh Volume \vas not 
printed. But my disappointment was soon turned to joy when 
The Finished Mystery arrived. I have read it very carefully
. It is a wonderful arrangement of Brother Russell's 
words, "brought .together in one compact form. It is indeed powerful
. It surely -seems to be what the church needs in this 
trying time. 

We are rejoicing over Brother Rutherford's reelection. He 
was chosen by the Society last year, and again this year. Is 
not that the channel God had thus far used as his mouthpiece
? It seems the Lord's will was manifested at each election
. 

Enclosed please find check for Good Hopes. In conclusion, 
we pray that the dear Lord will give you needed strength to 
carry on the grand work still to be done. Assuring you of 
our loyalty to the cause, our fidelity to the truth, and our 
continued cooperation, I am, 

Your sister in Christ, Mrs. J. 0. Johnson, — Maine. 

CONTINUED APPRECIATIONS QT VOLUME SEVEN 
"The arrangement of Volume Seven, of chapter and verses 
with comments, is most satisfying. It makes the Sword of 


VII— 25 


[6205] 


(31-18) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


the Spirit shine brighter and renders its use more facile and 
effective. There is much in it to incite heart-searching as to 
faith, loyalty and love; much to arouse us to watchfulness, 
and to admonish, 'My soul, be on thy guard'; much to cause 
thanksgiving and praise. To all who in any measure had any 
share in compiling the Seventh Volume I simd my thanks and 
assure them of my prayers ascending to our heavenly Father 
in their behalf. Theirs has been a labor of love and of sacrifice
. It may bring them persecution and suffering. If so, 
let ours he the privilege of building around them a wall of 
prayer to help comfort and sustain them." I. M. F., — Fa. 

"The way Volume Seven came to me was a great surprise — 
withooit any notice of its being off the press! I assure you it 
brings us much rejoicing and blessing of heart, and this is only 
a beginning of what we will receive by our further studies of 
tins volume." E. L. M., — Tnd. 


VOLUME SEVEN QUESTION BOOKLETS 


The Questions to Volume Seven are now ready in booklet
 form, and orders thus far received are being filled. The 
Questions are in themselves an inspiration, and will, we are 
sure, greatly assist the friends in both personal and class 


study of The Finished Mystery. The booklet contains a 
qhart frontispiece which shows the chronological order of 
the Seven Churches, Messengers, Seals, Trumpets, Angels, 
Vials and Plagues. Price 10c each or 84c per dozen. 


CONTINUE THE DISTRIBUTION 


Some of the friends seem to have misunderstood our suggestion
 regarding the distribution of IS. S. M. Xo. 09 "Thk 
Fall of Babylon,'* assuming that the Society did not wish 
any copies given out after the date set for the general distribution
, viz., Dec. 30th last. This assumption is incorrect. 
If you did not receive your papers in time to distribute on 
that date, or if you were unable to cover your territory in 
one day, then we recommend that you continue to distribute 
them as rapidly and judiciously as possible. Many friends 
are now sending them out into the country districts, either 
by mail or by personal journeys, with excellent results, while 
others are having great blessings by distributing them in 


trains and street cars. If an additional supply of this issue 
is desired, please advise us and we will ship them promptly. 
Since the distribution of The Bible Students Monthly 
— 'The Fall or Bauylon' 1 — in greater New York, hundreds 
of letters have been received nt the office from strangers 
ordering The Finished Mystery. We wish to encourage the 
friends everywhere to greater activity in the distribution of 
this number of the Volunteer matter. Use this Bible Students
 Monthly at the public meetings for distribution. The 
public speakers will continue to use the subject "The Pall of 
J5abylon" for public addresses. The Lord is greatly blessing 
this work. 


ATTENTION AUSTRALIAN FRIENDS 


A large shipment of Volume Seven is on the way and 
should reach Melbourne about Feb. 1st. Australian Colporteurs
 will be promptly supplied by addressing our Melbourne 
Branch. 


Vol. XXXJX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., FEBRUARY 1, 1918 


No. 3 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

When asked what would be the evidence of the end of the 
world ( age ) , the great Master Teacher enumerated many 
things that would come to pass at that time, proving that we 
had reached the end of the world. He admonished his followers
 to watch the development of these evidences, telling 


them, "When these things begin to come to pass then look up, 
lift up your heads, for your deliverance draweth nigh." It 
seems fitting that we here, from time to time, make note of 
these events as they transpire, which were foretold by the 
Lord Jesus, that we might be strengthened in faith and hold 
fast that which Ave have received and be better prepared to 
enter into the kingdom. 

Through a number of the prophets God long aforetime 
called attention to events corroborating the testimony given 
by the Lord Jesus, events which are now being fulfilled before 
our eyes. The prophet Elijah, in the mountain, saw a great 
wind and then an earthquake, that was followed by a fire, 
and then heard the still, small voice. (I Kings 19*: 11, 12} 
Elijah in the mount, it seems, represented the church of God, 
who, on this side the vail, are privileged to see and to understand
 events due which are happening at this time. Thus 
seeing and understanding and appreciating their privilege, 
they are further blessed with the opportunity of binding the 
religio-political "kings" with chains of restraining truth; and 
the "nobles" with fetters of iron — the beginning of the 
restraints of the coming iron rule of the kingdom of God. 

As another evidence that the Lord used Pastor Russell ns 
liis messenger to the Laodicean period of the church's development
, we note that he wrote twenty years ago foretelling 
events now transpiring. He said: 

''The four exhibitions of the Lord given to Elijah represent
, we believe, four manifestations in which the Lord is 
a>bout to reveal himself to mankind, the fiTst three of which 
will prepare men for the final one in which will come the 
desired blessing to all the families of the earth. The first was 
the blowing of the -winds, which seem to be used in the 
Scriptures for wars. Second, an earthquake. Throughout 
the Scriptures an earthquake seems always to represent revolution
, and it is not unreasonable to expect that an era of 
general warfare would so arouse the lower classes of Europe 
and so discontent them with their lot (especially with the 
conditions which would follow such a war) that revolution 
would be the next thing in order. (Rev. 16:18) But severe 
though those revolutionary experiences will be to the world, 


they are not sufficient to prepare men to hear the voice of 
God. It will require fire from Heaven." The Watch Tower, 
July 1st, 1898, Page 208. 

Already we witness the nations passing to the second stage 
foretold by Elijah's experience, namely, revolution. Already 
revolution has its grip upon Russia and threatens all the 
other kingdoms. Revolutionists have control in Russia and a 
reign of tyranny and crime is the result. Famine adds to the 
terror, and many are robbed and maltreated. The press 
despatches, on January 7th, state: 

"The new masters of the situation are laborers, factory 
hands, shop men, waiters and domestic servants, while their 
former masters have to sing small and listen to their employes
. All relationships are reversed. Socialist decrees are 
rapidly issued for this purpose every day. 

"The food situation is critical, owing to the suspension of 
railway communication. Many trainloads of food for Petrograd
 have been looted by soldiers and peasants while on the 
way. Starvation seems to stare us in the face. We receive 
a small quantity — three quarters of a pound — of black bread 
per head for two days. The black, sometimes dark brown, 
bread, doled out by a card system, is sticky, gritty stuff, only 
half baked, composed of millers* refuse with mixed straw and 
of the consistency of putty. Meat is a rare luxury. Home 
flesh is in common use. 

"Petrograd is full of dirt, disorder and crime. There has 
been no cleaning since the beginning of the war. Burglary, 
robbery and murder in audacious forms prevail to an extent 
hitherto unknown. There are no police and no authority one 
van appeal to. Men and women are stripped of overcoats and 
shoes in the streets at night, and armed marauders, in military
 uniform, enter houses under a pretext of official searches. 
Thieves in stolen motor ears hold up persons driving sledges. 
Nobody knows where to put money and valuables safely, since 
even private safes and banks are subjected to revision by 
government agents." 

AFTER THE WIND THE EARTHQUAKE 

The Bolshevik i threaten to carry the revolution to every 
country on earth. A press despatch from London, dated January
 ]2th, reads as follows: 

'"The call of Ensign Krylenko, the Bolshevik Commanderin
-Chief, for volunteers for a Russian army, was issued in 
the form of an appeal to the soldiers and workmen and aB a 
reply to the German peace proposals. 


[6206] 


FEBRUARY 1, 1918 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


(35-36) 


"In the event of a separate peace between Germany and 
Russia, the call declares the Russian republic and its councils
 will be surrounded on all sides by enemies. Krylenko 
contin ues : 

" 'American and French financiers are lending money to 
provide war material for Kaledin. The German bourgeoisie 
are quite prepared to use them as allies for stifling the Russian
 revolution. 

" 'These are conditions which raise for the Russian 
peasants and workmen the whole question of the defense of 
the conquest achieved by the revolution and of the holy war 
against the bourgeoisie, not only of Russia, but of Germany, 
France and Great Britain. 

" 'Should the bourgeoisie be victorious they will take 
vengeance in the shape of the most cruel terror and torture, 
drenching the land with blood, and which would put in the 
shade the torments inflicted by the satellites of the Czar. 

" 'It may be that a holy war on the fronts as well aa 
behind the lines s-t nnds before us as a terrible and unavoidable
 fate.' 

'The appeal concludes by declaring that there will be no 
compulsion in recruiting." 

Nicholas Lenine, the Bolshevik Dictator and Prime Minister
 of Russia, answers: 

"What are the Bolsheviks, and what do they want? The 
Bolsheviks are a communistic party representing first the 
day laborers; secondly, all such workmen as are, as Russians 
say, 'Soznatelniye,' that is, such as have a full class and 
political consciousness; and finally, the landless or nearly 
landless peasants. 

"These classes stand for immediate Socialism. Their 
notion of Socialism is a republic ruled by the Councils of 
Work men* s, Soldiers' and Peasants* Deputies. They are 
against every form of monarchy and every form of political 
power except such as reposes in the hands of the Councils of 
Deputies. They are against all governments of the type of 
the governments of LvofT and Kerensky. They intend to prepare
 our two hundred million Russians for government by the 
Councils of Deputies." 

Others, too, see and dread the wind, earthquake and fire, 
not discerning behind it all the wonders of the kingdom of 
God. Blinded by the god of this world and by his angels 
(messengers — clergymen — 2 Corinthians 11:15) who have for 
centuries posed as messengers of light, they see the events but 
do not understand their significance. Prominent clergymen, 
with ears fairly itching to know what the people want to 
hear {2 Timothy 4:3), tell their deluded flocks that there is 
no trouble ahead, more than ordinary; tint if the people will 
only trust the (blind) guides they will all land in the 
Elysian fields of a better age, not realizing that they are on 
the very brink of anarohy. When the people wake up to the 
truth of the situation, they will have no pity on those 
trusted servants who lulled them to sleep on the verge of 
the precipice. — 2 Chronicles 36:14-19. 

MEK'S HBAETS FAILING THEM TOR TEAB 

There are some watchers who are not clericals who warn 
drowsy Christendom in vain. Winston Churchill, in the 
"New York Times" of December 2nd, 1917, says: 

"The more one sees of this war, the more one is inclined 
to the belief that its real significance lies behind the battle 
lines rather than on them. Like the great war that followed 
the French Revolution, it has two aspects, the military and 
the social, and of these the social is the more serious of the 
two, as far as the future of the world U concerned. A process 
of ferment betokening profound social changes had for some 
time been going on with more or less intensity in various 
countries before the war'ibegan; and, contrary to certain 
prophecies , the war tended to hasten rather than retard the 
process. 

"The keynote of what is likely to happen in other allied 
countries in case of a German victory, or of even a pronounced
 German success, has been struck in Russia, That 
ferment has been seething for a long time. Since 1905 Russia 
has been waiting to overthrow a bureaucracy upheld by a 
mystical and fanatical Czar; the peasants, the* army, from an 
outraged sense of betrayal, supported the revolution, whereupon
 the revolt at once took on the true evolutionary colors 
of the time. The inner significance of this war has to "do with 
the emancipation of labor, just as the inner significance of 
that of a hundred years ago had to do with the emancipation 
of the shopkeeper — who has since become a plutocrat! We 
not only have to reconcile ourselves to that idea, but we 
have the immediate task before us of guiding this evolutionary 
tendency by using all our intelligence on the problem, otherwise
 we shall have portions of the world given over to 


anarchy and chaos. [We would have healed Babylon. — 
Jeremiah 51:9, Eds.] 

"Russia has had her revolution. And it is safe to say that 
in all the nations of the Western World something like a 
revolution is due: call it if you like, a profound change in 
the social fabric that will probably take place peacefully in 
all countries save Germany, where* there is no constitutional 
outlet for the people's will. 

"So far as the Allies are concerned, the probability of a 
social turnover that would paralyze a nation for the proper 
prosecution of the war is not unlikely to happen in Italy, 
France, and even in Britain, provided the w^r continues to 
drag on and on and no more reverses are experienced. The 
peace propaganda is mostly among the working classes, but 
it must be remembered that the working classes have a potential
, an economic power today far beyond the political power 
represented by their votes. 'They have a leverage of which 
they are becoming more and more aware. A great many of 
them are syndicalists. Like the Junkers — and this is not said 
detrimentally, ^ but impartially — they deem their first loyalty 
to t>e to their class, they are not inclined to reorganize 
national boundaries; they argue that the more revolutions 
take place outside of Germany the more likelihood of a revolution
 inside of Germany; that the way to stop the war is 
by revolution — peaceful if possible. 

"This may or may not be true. The question for the 
responsible Governments of the nations concerned is whether 
it is worth while to take such a chance. Wouldn't it be better 
by military means to force Germany to have her revolution 
first? That is exactly what, with her cleverness, Junker 
Germany is trying to do Avith the allies; she is sowing peace 
propaganda among their armies and their populations — now 
that Russia can no longer be kept an absolute monarchy, 
■which would have suited her better. She has done a great 
deal of that sowing in Italy. 

"The -situation, then, regarded as judicially as possible, 
appears to be this: Can we of the Entente, including 
America, 'beat' Germany to the social upheaval? — to use a 
slang expression. Can we force her, by properly co-ordinated 
military operations and the realization of a common purpose, 
to have her revolution first? If we can do this, we shall be 
in a position to guide witn more wisdom and less haste the 
evolutionary changes that are coming in our own nations." 
RESTLESS LABOR 

Pastor Russell long ago foretold the failure of the trade 
union as a bulwark for labor and the breakdown of Socialism 
as a national cure for the ills of discontent. How it is 
working out is described editorially in a recent issue of the 
"Saturday Evening Post": 

"All observers bear witness to a deep undercurrent of dissatisfaction
 among industrial wage-earners in England. We 
get glimpses of the same thing in France, Italy and Germany. 
Conservative organs like the London Times talk darkly about 
'the ferment of revolution.' 

"Workers are experiencing an extensive application of 
state socialism. The plant is controlled by the state now, 
and operated not primarily for the profit of its private 
owners, but for state service. 

"And workers find this state control something much 
more formidable and intractable than the old private control 
was. Being the -state, it changes laws at will, and a vast 
body of public opinion is unquestionably at its command. 

"Formerly the worker depended upon his trade-union; but 
that reliance is pretty largely broken down. The overwhelming
 state demands an extensive dilution of skilled labor — 
meaning that a great number of unskilled workers shall be 
admitted to the shop and taught the trade, though they have 
little or no attachment to the union and are but slightly amenable
 to its discipline. 

"The right to strike is rather effectually suspended; for 
striking against the state comes close to treason. Even the 
worker's ancient right to better his condition by leaving one 
employer and going to another is restricted. In some cases 
he is the state's industrial conscript and must have the state's 
permission before he can leave. 

"Wages have advanced greatly; but so has the cost of 
living. The worker has less effectual voice in the industry 
than ever. The new <boss is far more powerful than the old. 
He is not only the law but he is pretty largely public opinion. 
There is no one to whom the worker can take an appeal from 
him. 

"He is more remote from the worker than the old boss 
was — a far, formiidaible, invulnerable thing, which lives 
nowhere and everywhere. 

"And when the worker does meet this mighty new boss 
face to face he finds that it is really the old boss." The state 


[6207] 


(37-34) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


controls,; but an abstraction cannot sign orders and write 
checks. It must have a personal representative. And for its 
personal representative it chooses, of course, the man whose 
experience qualifies him to manage the business. 

"Practical experience of state socialism makes labor 

7*fiStlfiSS " 

GIANT GRASPING POWER 

"There were giants in the earth in those days" (Genesis 
6:4), recites the historian concerning the evil period before 
"the [first] world [state of affairs] that then was, being 
overflowed with water, perished." (2 Peter 3:6) There are 
giants in the earth (human society) today, just before the 
present evil order of things is to be drowned in a flood of 
man-made trouble. 

TheTe are several families of these giants: business giants, 
known as trusts, corporations, syndicates and cartels; financial
 giants, such as magnates of great wealth, banks, trust 
companies and investment bankers; religious giants, great 
denominations, church trusts and federations, and religious 
organizations; giant political parties and organizations, and 
giant societies of every description. All of these giants agree 
in trying, with cynical disregard of innate truth and fair 
dealing, to grasp all possible power, no matter at whose 
expense, and with the ultimate subserviance or enslavement of 
the common people in view. 

Employers are concerned not a little at the rise to power 
of the labor giant s^ Says The Iron Age, the great journal of 
the iron, steel and machinery interests, in its issue for 
November 15, last: 

"Judging from the attitude of organized labor shown in 
various strike outbreaks and in reported utterances of union 
leaders, there is a labor element in the United States that 
could even view with indifference the conclusion of a disgraceful
 peace between the United States and Germany. 

"The counsel of some labor leaders to their followers 
sounds fair enough, but there is much that is disquieting in 
current labor developments, but in actual practice the attitude
 of many representatives of organized labor has been far 
from keeping faith. 

"The spirit of many leaders has been far from the wholehearted
 support of the pledges given the President. Witness 
this from the address of the president of the metal trades 
department of the American Federation of Labor, before the 
convention of the Boilermakers* Union at Kansas City: 

" 'In our country, we took advantage of the situation as 
we found it abroad, and before the waT was declared by the 
United States we saw to it that organized labor was going 
to get proper recognition. Nothing can take place, nothing 
can be done, unless we are consulted and practically give our 
consent to it.' 

"Such utterances and the tactics in line with them which 
have been all too large a factor in current labor news suggest
 a day of reckoning for men who are thinking of everything
 but' their country's welfare in the gravest crisis in its 
history. Or is there ahead a fearful reckoning for the whole 
country as the result of such disloyalty as exists in the ranks 
of organized labor?" 

I( THE EVIL ARROWS OT FAMINE" 

From the front pn^e of the New York American under date 
of January 10 we clip the following items: 

"A spirit of angry and violent unrest prevails all over 
Europe. It springs from food shortage and deferred peace. 
It manifests itself in strikes, rioting, brigandage and clamor. 

"Austria is chiefly malcontent over Germany's persistent 
annexation policy. Germany's main cause of unease is a 
continued state of semi^starvation. Kussia is overrun with 
hiiH'jQTTy and angry workmen and soldiers who have turned 
bandits. England is disturbed over diminishing food supplies 
and favoritism in their distribution." 

That much on European conditions. Another article gives 
us the following on the situation in America: 

"Dr. Garfield's statement [in part] follows: 'Industry is 
in an unbalanced condition. We lack many essentials — food, 
clothing, fuel. We have piled up enormous stores of things 


not essential to life, but very essential to war. We have piled 
up so high on our docks and in our storehouses that the ships 
available cannot carry them away as fast as they pile up. 
For lack of bunker coal, held back by traffic congestion, the 
number of ships in our harbors increases menacingly. 

" 'The food supply is threatened to an even greater degree 
than the fuel supply. This condition is in large part due to 
the congestion that at many points holds the loaded cars in 
its grip.' " 

HEAVENS ROLLING TOGETHER 

From "The Monitor," a Roman Catholic journal, we take 
the following brief extract of a rather extended article dealing
 with the co-labors of the Y. M. C. A. and the Knights of 
Columbus in army camps — particularly in Camp Dix, N. J. 

It will be borne in maud that the Young Men's Christian 
Association has worked among all denominations of men, but 
that it is a strictly Protestant organization, in that only 
Protestants can be elected to office in the organization. On 
the other hand, the Knights of Columbus has worked mostly 
among CathoMc men, and is a Catholic organization in which 
only Catholics can hold office. The frequent and rather pronounced
 attendance of Protestant soldiers at the mass is one 
of the subjects taken up in this article. We read: 

"Ten masses are said every Sunday in the Y. M. C. A. and 
K. of C. buildings (the Y. M. C. A. permit the use of their 
building.) The bunumgs are overfilled at each mass. The 
men kneel in the aisle, on the door-steeps, and even outside 
on the ground. Protestants marvel at this. They can't understand
 it." 

The 'Hudson Dispatch" (N. J.) ran the following twocolumn
 heading: 

"Rev. Rollins and Gowen will talk tonight to boom K. of 
0. Campaign. What the Catholics did in the Y. M. C. A. 
campaign' will be the topic of an address that will be made 
thd3 evening by Rev. R. H. Rollins, pastor of the First Baptist 
Church, Union Bill, at an open meeting of the K. of C. War 
Camp Oomimittee. Dr. Rollins was chairman of the recent 
Y. M. C. A. war work fund in North Budson, when Catholics 
worked side by side with non-Catholics to put North Budson 
well 'over the top/ helping to go far beyond the allotment in 
the national campaign. 

"Another non-Catholic speaker tonight will be Rev. I. W. 
Gowen, D. D., pastor of Grove Reformed Church." 

"THE FOOT STAIN DISHONORING GOD'S HOLT NAME" 

Should anyone be in doubt as to the propriety of still 
vindicating the divine name and character from the foul 
charges of eternal torment, which have made our God of 
Love into a demon of inexorable cruelty, we suggest consideration
 of the following letter, taken, not from a monastery 
of the middle ages but from a modern church paper which 
incorporates in its heading the name of Christ and which 
bears the date of January 1, 1918. 

A minister had been obliged to quit preaching and go to 
work in the log woods in the hope of dissolving some debts 
which had accumulated during his ministry. Be could not 
tell how long it would take "to raise the $200 above living 
expenses, but long enough to leave a number of good men 
and women out of the kingdom, no doubt." The correspondent 
then adds his own plea: 

"Brethren and sisters, will w r e wake up now, or will we 
wait till it is too late and wake up in hell? Think of it! A 
brother forced to quit the field because we do not give as we 
should. Would you deliberately send a soul into endless torment
? No. In effect you are doing that very thing when you 
shut up your -bowels of compassion." 

We must at least admire the consistency here shown; even 
if one is amazed at the ignorance of the Gospel and of the 
disposition of Jehovah and his faithful son, Jesus. We must 
bear in mind that it is not long since God was pleased to 
illumine our minds respecting his character and plan and that 
we therefore have nothing of which we can boast. "But now 
ye also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy." 
Blasphemy in the case of eternal torment preaching lies in 
ascribing to God what should be ascribed to the devil. 


FUEL HOLIDAYS OPPORTUNE FOR SERVICE 


Fuel Administrator Garfield's order constituting every 
Monday until April 1st a legal holiday for all industries 
east of the Mississippi River, for the conservation of the 
nation's coal supply, will £ive splendid opportunities to the 
friends in genoml to do effective harvest work on those days. 
Many have advised us that thev intend to use each Monday 
for volunteering and for distributing Volume VII, thereby 


having a share in reaping "the vine of the earth." It may 
be in the Lord's providence that thousands of additional 
"sharpshooters" may thus be put into the field for at least one 
day per week during the remainder of the winter and early 
spring. Surely "all things work together for good" to those 
who love the Lord. Let us labor while it is yet day for the 
"night" cometh quickly. 


[6208] 


JESUS BRINGING PEACE 

[The first two paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "A Legion of Demons," published in issue of 
July 1, 1912. Paragraphs 3 to 11 were reprinted from article entitled, "He Maketh the Storm a Calm," publishod in issue of 
February 15, 1904. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Clothed and In His Right Mind," published in issue 
of May 1, 1906. Please see the articles named.] 

JESUS RESTORING LIFE AND HEALTH 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "Christ the First to Rise From the Dead," published in issue of April 15, 1900, 
which please see.] 


A SONG OF TRIUMPH 


Standing at the portal of the opening year, 
Words of comfort meet us, hushing every fear; 
Tender, strong and faithful, making us rejoice, 
Spoken through the silence by our Father's voic 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the Day; 
For His Word shall never, never pass away. 


He will never fail us, He will not forsake; 
His eternal covenant He will never break; 
Renting on His promise, what have we to fear? 
God ir* all-PufficieHt for the coming year. 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the Day; 
For His Word shall never, never pass away. 


JESUS SENDING FORTH THE TWELVE 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "The Harvest Plenteous — The Laborers Few," published in issue of May 15, 
1900, which please see.] 


"GO YE ALSO INTO THE VINEYARD" 

[This article was a reprint of that published in issue of August 15, 1910, which please see,] 


SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


TWO KITOS OF LIFE AT ONCE? 

Question. — -Is it possible to have two kinds of life at the 
same time? 

Answer, — The word life may be used in different ways. No 
one but our Lord ever had a right to two kinds of life at 
once. He had a right to human life; for having been made 
flesh, he committed no sin and never violated or forfeited his 
ri^ht to life. He was always fully obedient to the divine law. 
His life was not taken from him; as he declared he laid it 
down of himself. (John 10:17, 18) The Father's reward gave 
to him a new life, on the divine plane. Hence he had the 
right also to the divine life. He therefore had a right to two 
lives. Our Lord is to give his human life to the world of mankind
, and the offer or gift of this life will he made during the 
thousand years of his reign on earth. If he were still a man, 
and should give that human life away, he would have no life 
for himself; for when he would apply his life for Adam, he 
would lose life altogether. 

But this right to life on two planes of being has never 
been ours, as disciples of Christ. We were born under sentence
 of death. We had no right to life on any plane. God 
never recognized us as having even earthly rights. The* Apostle
 Paul says, "The life that I now live I live by the faith of 
the Son of God." Before this, he was in a dyine condition, 
and the whole world is dead in trespasses and in sins. 

The only life-right the Lord's people have is spiritual, although
 actually they still have a measure of human life. Our 
work now is the laying down of the earthly life with Christ. 
Our human body is being sacrificed. It is reckoned dead, but 
is really dying daily. As new creatures we have life and right 
to life, as recognized by God. The apostle says, "The world 
knoweth us not. even as it knew him not." So, then, we are 
dual beings while in ibhe flesh, though we are not dual-minded. 
The world does not understand this. The world did not know 
that Christ Jesus was a dual being when here on earth, after 


his consecration and baptism in Jordan. They knew not that 
he had a right to two lives, and really had two lives — the one 
which he had not yet fully laid down and the one which he 
had not yet fully assumed. 

THE "HEAVENLY THINGS" THAT ARE PURGED 

Question. — The apostle says, "It was therefore necessary 
that the patterns of things in the heavens should he purged 
with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better 
sacrifices than these." (Hebrews 0:23} What are these "heavenly
 things*' thus purged? 

Answer. — The Apostle's thought evidently seems to be that 
under the Law Covenant there was a series of types which 
all co-operated. There were the animals, the Court, the Holy, 
the Most Holy, the sacrificing of the animals by the priest, 
etc. All these things were necessary, and the blood was necessary
, to the cleansing, the purifying, which was there typically
 accomplished. Now the apostle says that the heavenly 
things, that is, the higher things, the antitypes (the word 
"heavens" meaning high, or heaved up), are purged with better
 sacrifices than these. These "better sacrifices" we understand
 to be the sacrifice of Jesus and that of the church which 
is his body; and these sacrifices purge these higher, or antitypical
 things typified by the Court, the Holy, the Camp, 
etc. — making atonement for sin as respects the church and as 
respects the world, making full reconciliation for iniquity, 
providing for the bringing in of the everlasting condition 
which God has promised. The words "heavens" and "heavenly
," used here have no reference to spiritual things. It is 
not spiritual things that are purged, but natural things — human
 nature. 

The sacrifice of Jesus purges the church, and the sacrifice 
of the body members with their Head purges the world, the 
imputed merit of Jesus making possible the acceptance of the 
sacrifice of the members of the church which is his body. 


SEVENTH VOLUME IN GERMAN WATCH TOWER 


Our German-reading brethren will doubtless be pleased to 
know that the Seventh Volume of Scripture Studies is being 
translated into German and published in monthly installment's 
in the German Watch Tower. This does not interfere with 
the sixteen page regular Watch Tower, which is made up of 
articles previously appearing in the English edition. 

Subscribers to the German Watch Tower receive this 
supplemental matter ot> their regular subscription, but to 


other than subscribers this extra edition each month is sold 
for ten cents, singly, or five cents in lots of fifty or more. 
We are printing an extra supply for such orders. 

There are many elderly people of German extraction in 
this country who read little or no English and who might be 
reached in "this way with the message of the Seventh Volume. 
It is expected that' not less than 32 Watch Toweb pages will 
appear with each issue — over and above the regular 16 pages. 


VOLUME VII IN GREEK AND POLISH 


Greek and Polish-reading brethren are receiving the 
Seventh Volume piecemeal in their respective Watch Towers. 
If you have acquaintances or neighbors who read either of 

[6209] 


these languages in preference to English, we suggest such as 
a favorable means for conveying to them the message of 
"The Finished Mystery." 


(38-45) 


LETTERS FROM THE INTERESTED 


SPECIAL CLASSES FOB CHILDREN 
Dear Brethren; — 

One of the perplexing problems confronting many of the 
larger classes, for which a solution seems generally difficult, 
is what disposition to make of the children during certain 
periods of the Sunday services. 

Frequently the themes treated are too abstruse for the 
children to grasp, and they are seldom if ever permitted to 
ask even a question in the Berean studies. To my personal 
knowledge many children are anxious to inform themselves 
along the lines of the truth but are hindered and discouraged 
by arbitrary opposition by some of the elders. 

On my own part I cannot see any grounds for objecting 
to a special Berean First Volume study for children from 
eight to fifteen years of age, if properly eond noted by a qualified
 elder. Such an arrangement in my judgment would he 
muoh better and far more helpful than" the present practice 
by many classes of allowing the children to run loose or have 
a season of play during services. 

What helpful course of action could best be suggested 
under such conditions? Your servant in him, 

Wm. A. Baker, — Ore. 
OTJB REPLY 

Having in mind the period in which Ave are living, it would 
seem that to neglect the children of the consecrated at this 
time would not be wholly pleasing to the Lord. The prophet 
of the Lord says concerning this time: "Seek righteousness, 
seek meekness; it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the 
Lord's anger." (Zephaniah 2:3) Our thought is that it would 
be well for the classes to arrange for one meeting for the children
 from eight to fifteen years of age, and have this meeting 
led by a competent elder, or other brother who possesses the 
qualifications to teach, and that the children be taught concerning
 the present-day events and the cause, and particularly 
concerning the kingdom of the Lord that shall soon be established
; and generally an outline of the divine plan in so far 
as they can understand it. 

They should be specially instructed to lead a meek and 
quiet life and walk humbly before the Lord, avoiding all troubles
 and difficulties and seeking to deal justly with every one 
and to be obedient to those to whom they are subject. Nothing
, however, in these suggestions should be understood to minimize
 the responsibility of the parents. 

CLASS SINGING, PKAYING CUSTOMS, ETC. 
Dear Brethren; — 

I find various customs prevailing amongst the brethren in 
respect to worship. Some sit when they sing and stand when 
they pray; others seem to have no regular custom. Have you 
any suggestion ? 

Another matter: What i-i your thought respecting class 
meetings — how should the different members of the class be 
called upon by the leader? 

Very truly yours, J. A. B. 

OUB REPLY 

Kvery class has, of course, the right to regulate its own 
methods of worship, since the Bible does not give any particular
 direction on the subject. Unless the class votes to the contrary
, the Society recommends that all classes rise to sing, because
 thus the lungs can have better exercise and the singing is 
apt to be the better, and it would be a restful change from the 
sitting posture. We advise that at prayer all sit with bowed 
heads, this being a reverential attitude and one conducive to 
thought on the prayer. Where the meetings are very small 
and held in a private room, kneeling would be appropriate, or 
whore the prayer is the closing one in the nature of a benediction
 and after the friends have been sitting for a good while, 
it would be desirable to stand. 

In respect to the lending of classes: We feel that we cannot
 do better than to direct attention afresh to the very particular
 suggestion along this line provided for all in Volume 
Vf. of Studies ix the Scriptures. The class leader should 
not ask each question of each one present, but merely of one 
or two or three, if necessary, until a full, proper answer has 
been heard; and then throw the question open, paying: Does 
any one have a different thought on this question? Then 
briefly, the leader might give his own expression, buttressed 
with Scripture, if possible, and read a confirmation from the 
Volume of Studies. 

GLORIOUS VOLUNTEER WORK 
My I)k-\r Brethren" ix Christ: — 

Greetings in the name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ 
to all the dear ones at the Bethel Home, whom, though we 
do not know all personally, yet we love for their work's sake 
and because they are our brethren in Christ. 

T know that you are all busy; but allow me, please, to 

(46-47) [6210] 


take just a few minutes of your valuable time to assure you 

that Sr. M and myself aire still loyal to the \V. T. B. & T. 

Society — which we have every reason to believe is the Lord's 
instrument in the harvest work — and to the officers who by 
the Lord's providence have been elected to serve in the various 
capacities. 

We thank the Lord daily for >c t(hat servant," our dear 
Brother Russell, and for his faithful ministry and for the 
example he set before us, that he has been called to his reward
, and for the further provision of meat in due season he 
has made for us. We are rejoicing in the glorious truth. We 
also thank our heavenly Father for the many little privileges 
of spreading this glorious truth. Our part in the volunteer 
work is indeed a pleasure. We wish to relate a little experience
 we had this evening while putting out B. S. M., Vol 9, 
No. 5— "Why Do the Nations War?" 

A man to whom I had handed a paper while he was 
leisurely sitting on his porch stopped me on my way back, on 
the other side of the street. He said, "Where are you getting 
all these? Who is doing this?" I told him. He seemed to 
be very much worked up and angry about something. 

He then said, "You do not mean to tell me that God is responsible
 for this awful war and all these awful things that 
are going on now!" I told him he would have to admit that 
if God was all-powerful — as we all believe — he was in a way 
responsible in that he was permitting it to go on, and that he 
could stop it whenever he pleased. But the fact that he was 
permitting it showed that it must be for a wise and good purpose
. He replied, "Well, yes; I guess that is so. But what is 
your object in putting these out now?" I said, "Why not? 
We are trying to enlighten the people along these lines. No 
better time! These are Bible truths now due to be understood
." He said, "Well, T do not want to argue along this 
line. I will investigate the thing further." I told him that 
was what we wanted him to do. 

I think we are going to have some grand opportunities to 
witness for the truth. People are beginning to want to know 
just what we have to tell them, and some are very glad to 
have these little papers. One lady met me half way when 1 
was walking toward her house, and said, smiling, "It has been 
quite a while since we received one of these." Another lady 
told a brother that she was glad to get them, and that she wu*s 
saving all of them she could get, besides reading them. I 
want to do my part in putting the Seventh Volume into the 
hands of the people. 

Your brother in Christ, J. F. M. — Ind. 

HOW CAM THEY KEEP FROM SINGING! 
Dear Brother Rutherford: — 

Greetings in the name of him we love! Thanks for your 
loving letter. Have recently returned from another pilgrim 
tour. This time I visited one of the largest work-centres 
where about 110 of our brethren who are conscientious objectors
 to military service are confined. Though they are 
subjected to many indignities, experience much physical discomfort
, and their liberty is restrained, you will be glad to 
know that they, one and all, glory in the privilege of suffering 
for righteousness' sake. Their joy in the Lord is grand to see. 
They spend much of their leisure time in united study, and 
embrace every opportunity to present the truth to their companions
 in affliction who belong to other religious bodies. The 
Lord has blessed their efforts, and some have been brought to 
a knowledge of the truth there, while several are now reading
 the volumes. Their favorite hymn is 179 — "My life flows 
on in endless song," and it is indeed a great treat to hear 
their hearty singing. 

I wish specially to thank you for Harvest Siftings No. 
II. It clears up some matters which were difficult to understand
, and the spirit in which it is written should do much 
to comfort the brethren. The Glasgow church is loyal to you 
as their counsellor, and surely you have my own personal 
love. I greatly admire your devotion and self-sacrifice, as 
well as the gentleness, yet firmness, with whieh you set forth 
your position. It is my strong conviction that you have acted 
as the Lord would have you do. 

Your brother by his grace, Alex Tait, — Scotland. 

PRESIDENT'S REPLY 
My Dear Brother Tait: — 

Your very kind letter to hand. I am glad to hear also 
that you have visited our brethren who are incarcerated in 
prison. Surely these dear brethren are real martyrs. I am 
reminded of the experiences through which the dear ancient 
worthies passed, mentioned in the 11th chapter of Hebrews. 
They suffered all these indignities in order that they might 
have a better resurrection. Let us try to encourage the dear 
brethren, that, while they are suffering now, the Lord is 
permitting it, giving them a chance to witness by their lives 


February 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(47-51) 


to his great plan, and of their privilege to fill up that which 
is hehind of the sufferings of Christ. And soon, by his grace, 
they shall enter into their everlasting reward, far beyond 
any other creatures of the world or in heaven. Please continue
 to encourage the dear brethren all you can. If there 
is anything that we can do for them here, kindly let me 
know. 

With miucth love to yo7i and all the- dear ones in Glasgow, 
1 beg to remain, 

Your brother and servant by his grace, 

J. F. RUTHLRFOKl). 
AWAKENED BY VOLUME SEVEN 

Dkar Sirs: — 

Last week I purchased one of your books entitled "The 
Finished Mystery" — Series Vll of Studies in the Scriptures. 
I did 'not know what it was when I bought it, but I now 
thank God that it came into my possession. It is as a drink 
to one dying of thirst in a desert. 

For the past four years my heart has been full of unrest. 
I could not tell why, but I simply could not enjoy going to 
church. Try as I might, I could find no satisfaction and 
peace when I did go; finally I gave myself up as hopelessly 
lost and wondered why I had ever lived. 

But now I am awakened! I beg of you to tell me if there 
is time enough left for me to do anything in the service 
of our King whom I have always loved and longed to serve. 
I am sending for the other volumes of Studies in the Scriptures
 and for the booklet "About Hell" which you announce. 
I can distribute tracts if you have any and will send me some. 
I want to become one of you and work in the blaster's vineyard
. 

Yours in need of Christian counsel, 

Mes. T. C. Clark,— Okla. 
CHURCHES LIKE OPEEA HOUSES 
Dear Sirs: — 

Some friend has sent me a copy of Volume Seven of your 
series of Studies in tjie Scriptures. I don't know who did 
it; but I have been praying God to give me more light on 
the Bible, and when I received this book it was surely a godsend
. Our churches are getting like opera houses where 
people go just to have a good time. Six weeks ago I ceased 
going to church. I have quit ehurchianity. I told our minister
 that no church institution could serve two masters and 
spiritually prosper. 

Enclosed find Money Order for $4.60 for which please send 
me tlhe entire seven books by Pastor Russell and The Watch 
Tower for one year, as announced on the last page of this 
Seventh Volume. 

Respectfully, 1,. IT. Schulte, County Treas. — Iowa. 

WORDS INADEQUATE FOE EXPRESSION 
Dear Brethren in tiik Lord: — 

Words are totally inadequate to describe the feelings ol 
the brethren with regard to the Seventh Volume. We are 
unanimous in proclaiming it to be the work of those guided 
by God. It is really a wonderful book and, Like the Bible 


itself, there is nothing to be eliminated, nor can there be 
anything added; it is complete in itself. We join in praising
 the great Jehovah in giving us such a help through hie 
honored servants. 

Our prayer is that the heart of each one may be filled 
with a determination to continue faithful unto death. 

Your brother in Christ, A. Hunt, — Eng. 

VOLUME SEVEN JJJD HER TO CONSECRATION 
Dbar Brethren-: — 

I am truly grateful that our heavenly Father has placed 
the Seventh Volume in my hand. It has brought me out of 
darkness into the light. It has opened my eyes of understanding
 that 1 have been able to see more clearly God's wonderful
 plan. The first word of truth I received was in Octol
>or when one of our dear sisters in the colporteur work askt'd 
me to buy Volume Vll. Since then I have bought the other 
six volumes and I study every spare moment. I am now one 
of the fully consecrated children of God and I pray and trust 
that 1 may continue to be until death. I ask you to pray 
for me. Your sister by his grace, 

Caroline Sciilichenmaier, — Pa. 
WHAT THE "PENNY" SIGNIFIES 
Dbar Brethren: — 

Greetings! Please permit me to draw your attention to 
an article from our dear Brother Russell's pen, found in The 
Watch Tower of Aug. 15, 1910, page 264, entitled "Go Ye 
Also into the Vineyard" — especially that portion under the 
subhead, /'Agreed for a Penny a Day." This seems to be 
very timely just now in settling the question of the "Penny"; 
and will you not, dear brethren, prayerfully take the matter 
to the Lord, for it seems to me it is indeed "meat in due season
," and would be his will that the article be republished in 
The Tower at the present time? 

How we rejoice in our privileges of service! "The Lord 
bless thee and keep thee" is my prayer continually. With love 
and best wishes, as ever, 

Your brother in the Lord, W. M. Hersee, — Pilgrim. 

[The artiole above referred to is reprinted in this issue. | 

"The Lord has indeed multiplied my blessings this day 
by the safe and unexpected arrival of the Seventh Volume, 
My joy was so evident when the post woman delivered it 
that she had to know about it and was glad to get Volume 
One for herself. *My cup runneth over.' 

"At our Praise meeting tonight the testimonies were full 
of thanksgiving for this very precious completing volume. 
The immediate effect of the short time already given to Volume
 Seven is a heart full of gratitude to God and a reiteration 
of my consecration to hdm; also deep thankfulness to our 
Lord Jesus, who has girded himself during this harvest period
 and is serving us with so rich a feast culminating in 
Volume Seven, through that 'faithful servant,' our beloved 
Brother Russell (who seems very near to us though parted 
from us for a brief while). The preceding six volumes are 
made still more precious by the possession of the Seventh. 
Truly we are thoroughly furnished." F. H- W., — Scotland. 


Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. T., FEBRUARY 15, 191SNo
. 4 


TWO CLASSES IN THE CHURCH 

"Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, Jtaving this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one 

that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity. But in a great house there are not only vessels of 

gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honor f and some to 

less honor." — 2 Timothy 2:19, 20. 

The Scriptures clearly teach that when God's plan con- dom. {Matthew 13:43) Those who have sacrificed all things 

"to follow in the footsteps of the Master, because of their love 
for God and his beloved. Son, are anxious to awake in his 
likeness and be forever w'ith the Lord. — Psalm 27:4. 
BE HOT AT EASE (IDU5) IN ZION 
Some who for a long while have actively participated in 
the harvest work under the direction of the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society have recently assumed a position 
in opposition to its work, and their speech and conduct has 
tended to disturb some of the Lord's dear sheep. Reference 
is made to Thk W t atch Tower of January 15, 1918, page 30, 
wherein the brother who is really the leader of those who 
take this position in opposition is quoted as saying, in substance
, that those adhering to the Society or having anything
 to do with its present management, and all those who 
are participating in the distribution of The Bible Students 
Monthly, "The Fall of Babylon," and of "The Finished Mystery
'' are of the great company class. The purposes in making 
such a statement could be only to induce those actively engaged
 in the harvest work to cease their efforts and to discerning
 man is completed there will be four classes redeemed 
from among men; viz., (1) the little flock, who are to sit with 
Christ on his throne, reign with him in the regeneration of 
the human race, and who will forever be the recipients of 
God's favor through Christ Jesus; (2) the great company 
class, born on the spirit plane, who are to be the servants before
 the throne, like unto angels; (3) the ancient worthies, 
who will be princes or representatives of the. Christ in the 
earth; and (4) restored human beings, who shall inherit the 
earth forever. All of these classes, "when finally completed, 
will be perfectly happy in the position they gain. 

The little flock is mentioned in the Scriptures under many 
names, such as, the bride of Christ, the body of Christ, the 
royal priesthood, etc. To such the Jx>rd Jesus said, "I appoint 
unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me; 
that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and 
sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel." (Luke 22: 
29,30) These shall "bear the image of the heavenly" (1 Corinthians
 15:49) and shall "shine forth as the sun in the king- 


[6211] 


(52 53) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BaoOKtYir, N. Y. 


courage others, so that they would not enter the service, and 
to cause as many as possible to withdraw their support from 
the Society and thus hinder its work. 

To aid some of the weaker in faith to get their equilibrium
 and to encourage all the dear saints to press with vigor 
the good fight of faith while yet it is called day, we mention 
these matters here. We have no desire for a controversy and 
will not engage in one. It is not for ua to judge who is of 
the great company class and who is of the little flock. We 
desire to leave all judgment to him who judge th without mistake
 and who doeth all things well. It is proper, however, 
that each one of us apply the measuring line of the divine 
Word, that we may have the full assurance of faith, so essential
 to enable us to stand in the hour of peril. The question 
with each of the consecrated now is and should be, Shall we 
be wise virgins, or shall we be foolish virgins? We must answer
 these questions in the light of the Scriptures and according
 to, the Scriptural standard. 

A SAFE RULE 

Where a brother gives an interpretation of a Scripture 
which differs from that given by Brother Russell, and Brother 
Russell's interpretation seems reasonable and in harmony 
with the plan of God, then we believe it a safe rule to follow 
Brother Russell's interpretation, for the reason that he is the 
servant of the ehurch, so constituted by the Lord for the 
Laodicean period; and therefore we should expect the" Lord 
to teach us through him. Where there arises a doubt in the 
mind as to which interpretation is correct, then it is always 
safer to resolve that doubt in favor of Brother Russell's interpretation
. We believe such to be in harmony with the Lord's 
will. 

No one could be either of the little flock or of the great 
company class unless he is spirit- begotten. Both classes must 
be perfected in love ; for God will require perfect love of every 
creature to whom he grants life eternal on any plane. Addressing
 himself to the class who shall ultimately inherit the 
kingdom with him, the great Master said: "If any man will 
come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross 
and follow me." (Matthew 16:24) No one is called to membership
 in the great company class, but all are called "in one 
hope of our calling." What, then, is the distinction between 
the two? We believe that the whole matter may be summed 
up in a few words by saying that the little flock is zealously 
faithful to the covenant of sacrifice, even unto death, whereas 
those composing the great company class become indifferent 
and negligent. — 2 Peter 1:4-11. 

The Lord Jesus likens the one to the branches in the vine 
which go out to fruit-bearing, developing ripe and luscious 
fruit; while the others bring forth chiefly leaves, or tendrils
 — feeling after earthly honors and emoluments. (John 
15:2) Again, the Lord Jesus, referring to the great company 
class, said: "How can ye believe [effectively] which receive 
honor one of another and seek not the honor which cometh 
from God only?" (John 5:44) This would mean that the 
course whieh is pleasing to the Lord is that which leads one 
to give all glory and honor to him and to seek no honor, glory 
or recognition for self, The Apostle again refers to the great 
company class as being din obedient, because they fail to mortify
, or put to death, earthly and sinful tendencies. (Colossians
 3:5, G) Another picture is given of the great company 
class, as contrasted with the little ilock, in Joshua £i:25, -where 
the great company class is represented by Rahab, who was 
in the citadel of Jericho when it fell, representing those who 
are in Babylon at it^ fall; while the Christ class, pictured by 
Joshua, causes it to fall.— Z. '07-267. 

These two classes are pictured in the experiences of Gideon
's band. The 9,700 represented those of the larger company
 who buried their faces from the work by getting down 
and drinking , out of the brook; while the little flock is pictured
 by those dipping the water in their hands and drinking 
it, thus showing a class with their eyes out over the horizon, 
seeking to serve, to spend and be spent in the Master's service
, who are anxious not only to drink the truth, but, having 
it in their hand (using its power), to do with their might 
what their hands find to do. (Judges 7:2-8) Again, the apostle
 represents the great company class as being double-minded, 
having some idea of attaining heavenly things and some idea 
of getting all the earthly tl tings they can in the way of honor, 
emoluments, etc. — James 1:8. 

Furthermore, the great company class is likened unto 
those who, while they love the truth, fail to become active in 
its proclamation because of faint-heartedness and fear. {Numbers
 13:31; Z. '04-220) They are also represented by the 
prophet as saying, "The harvest [the time of special favor] is 
past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved." (Jeremiah 


8:20) They are also pictured as those who do not keep^ their 
garments unspotted from the world, but who must paas 
through the great tribulation with which the Gospel age is to 
end.— Revelation 7:9-16. 

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE OVERCOMES S 

The Psalmist seems clearly to mark out a characteristic 
of the little flock when he says: "I am become a stranger 
unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother's children. 
For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the 
reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me." 
(Psalm 69:8,3) The one who has fully consecrated himself 
to walk in the footsteps of Jesus realizes that he must forget 
his own people and his father's house and become a stranger 
and an alien to the things of the earth ; and he does so gladly. 
As he performs the terms of his covenant, he find's that the reproaches
 that fell upon the Lord Jesus now fall upon him. He 
esteems it a privilege to prove his devotion to the Lord by enduring
 hardness in his service as a good soldier. He expects 
to receive • taunts, reproaches and persecutions; and receiving 
these, he endures them patiently, while his heart grows in 
love for the Lord, for his brethren, and his pity love increases
 for even those who wickedly persecute him. 

The predominant characteristic, then, is a loving zeal for 
the Lord and his cause. The Psalmist shows that this zeal is 
peculiar to the house of the Lord; and it is such that it 
causes the sacrifices to be wholly consumed. The Lord Jesus 
manifested this peculiar zeal as the Head of the house, by 
faithfully fulfilling every -part of his covenant; and he did so 
with a joyful heart. Those who shall sit on the throne with 
him likewise manifest that zeal and loving devotion for him 
and his cause by gladly doing his will, willing and anxious to 
engage in any part of his service. 

THE LAST WOBK OF THE CHURCH 

God clearly outlined the commission given to the entire 
Christ class, as set forth in Isaiah 61:1-3. This commission 
plainly says that such are to preach the good tidings unto the 
teachable; to bind up the broken-hearted; to proclaim liberty
 to the captives; and amongst other things to proclaim 
the acceptable year of the Lord and "the day of vengeance of 
our God." Clearly, then, the Lord intended that at some 
time those who would compose the little flock, or kingdom 
class, would be the ones to declare the day of vengeance. Thig 
would mean to tell all those who would have the hearing ear 
what would be the natural results of not heeding the Lord's 
instruction. The Lord caused his holy prophets and apostles 
to mark out the course that should be followed by those who 
profess to be his and what would be the result to those not 
following this instruction. 

Through his prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and others
, God foretold what would constitute Babylon and foretold 
that some of the true saints would be found in Babylon. He 
caused these prophets to write all the evil that shall come 
upon Babylon. Surely the Lord purposed that those in Babylon
 should know something about this, and that some one 
should deliver the message concerning Babylon. IHd he design 
tllat the great company or the little flock should deliver this 
message? It is very clear from the Scriptures above cited 
concerning the day of God's vengeance that he intended the 
little flock to give this message. It must be conceded by all 
who are in harmony with the teachings of present truth that 
we are in the closing days of the harvest period; and before 
that harvest would entirely close it would become necessary 
for some one to declare the day of God's vengeance. Surely 
it would be only those who have the zeal peculiar to the Lord's 
house that would engage in joyfully declaring the message 
against Babylon. 

"The Finished Mystery," Volume Seven of Studies in the 
Scriptures, brings together all that the messenger of the 
Laodicean Church lias written concerning Babylon, and, in the 
light of what he has written, further explains other parts of 
Revelation and Kzekiel, thus putting in compact and pointed 
form the Word of the Lord, by the use of which the declaration 
against Babylon must be made. The Bible Students Monthly
 — "The Fall of Babylon" — is made up almost entirely of 
what has been written by "that servant," and is directed 
against Babylon in that it calls attention to what constitutes 
Babylon, why it shall fall, and what will be the result of its 
fall. And it seems to be clearly in harmony with the Scriptures
 above cited that the little flock, possessing the zeal peculiar
 to the Lord's house, would be the ones that will fearlessly 
declare this message. The thought that the great company 
class would have anything to do with the proclamation of this 
message is entirely out of harmony with the Scriptures which 
indicate the predominant characteristics of that class. — Hebrews
 2:15. 


[6212] 


February 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(53-54) 


JOHN THE BAPTIST A TYPE 

We have long recognized that John the Baptist was a type 
of the little flock class. In this connection the Lord's servant 
wrote: 

"It is altogether possible, indeed probable, we think, that 
John's course, which brought him into conflict with Herod, 
was in some degree typical of the course of the Gospel church 
in this present time and of the course of events that may he 
expected. If it be a type, Herod would represent the civil 
government and the unlawful wife would represent the nominal
 church, which throughout the symbolic Scriptures is represented
 as a woman — Jezebel, etc. Should it prove to be a 
type by its fulfilment in antitype, the fulfilment will probably 
be on something like the following lines: 

"(1) A partial reunion of church and state. (This is 
now practically an accomplished fact.) 

"(2) In such case it would become the duty of the true 
church, the forerunners and announcers of the Messianic kingdom
, to reprove the civil powers as well as the nominal church 
systems and to declare tneir union unlawful — contrary to the 
Word of God. 

"(3) The effect of this would pretty surely be to awaken 
the animosity of both civil and religious powers; but it 
would draw out especially the animosity and venom of the 
latter. 

u (4) The church nominal, in her false position, would be 
anxious to stifle the reproofs and to destroy the reprovers; 
and the effect would be that the civil powers would be induced 
to pas3 such legislation as would restrain the liberty of the 
faithful ones and hinder them from public utterances, as 
John was hindered by imprisonment. 

"(5) Herodias' daughter (united Protestantism) will become
 the tool for the destruction of the most loyal servants 
of God."— Z. 1898-95 

Instead of the great company class engaging in the work 
above mentioned, the Scriptures show that those who will be 
of that class are such as rebel against the words of God and 
disregard the counsel of the Most High, and are in fear of 
performing their covenant. — Psalm 107:9-16; Hebrews 2:15. 

A LOGICAL CONCIAJSIOH 

Again, commenting upon the spirit manifested by the little 
flock class in singing the song which none could learn except 
the little flock, "that servant" wrote: 

"Nothing is more manifest than that it is necessary to be 
somewhat of an overcomer of the world and its spirit, which 
pervades nominal Christendom, ere any one would have the 
courage to sing this song — to declare before men the lengths, 
breadths, heights and depths of the goodness of God's plan, 
of which Jesus and his sacrifice are the center. To all others 
the fear of man bringeth a snare and stoppeth their mouths 
from speaking forth the praise of him who called us out of 
darkness into his marvelous light. But the people that do 
know their God {his character and plan) shall be valiant and 
do exploits, and like the apostles of old vnll feel and say, 
'Whether it be right to obey God or men, judge ye; but we 
cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard/ " 
— Z. 1900-37. 

The Watch Toweb Bible and Tbact Society has been 
used of the Lord since its organization as a vehicle to convey 
the message of truth to all who would hear. It would hardly 
seem probable, therefore, that it would be pleasing to the Lord 
now to put aside this vehicle when it comes to declaring the 
day of vengeance of our God and carrying to the people the 
message concerning Babylon. If the great company class is 
in charge of the Society, then the conclusion must follow that 
all the harvest work is finished, and that there is nothing for 
the little flock to do but to stand and wait for their change. 
Such does not seem to be at all in harmony with the Scriptures
, nor with that which Brother Russell has heretofore 
written on the subject. The period of the harvest is not yet 
over; and the work of the harvest, as outlined in the Scriptures
 (Revelation 14:13-19), does not seem to have been completed
- Concerning that work and those who would do it, 
Brother Russell wrote in Volume Three, Studies in the 
Scbtpttjbes, page 231, as follows: 

"It will probably be in an effort at self-preservation on the 
part of Great Babylon — 'Christendom' — when she sees her 
work in politics, priestcraft and superstition waning, that the 
work of truth-spreading will be stopped as detrimental to her 
system. And probably at this juncture the Elijah class, persisting
 in declaring the truth to the last, will suffer violence, 
pass into glory and escape from the severest features of the 
great time of trouble coming — just in the crisis of affairs 
when men begin to feel that desperate measures must be resorted
 to, to sustain the tottering structure of Christendom. 


Although the exact time of the deliverance or 'change' of the 
last members of the body of Christ is not stated, the approximate
 time is nevertheless clearly manifest, as shortly after 
the 'door 5 is shut."— Matthew 25:10. 

It will be observed from the above quotation that Brother 
Russell plainly says that the Elijah class (the little flock) 
will persist in declaring the truth. It would be exactly in harmony
 with the tactics of the adversary to induce some of 
those who have engaged in the harvest work to desist now 
and to let their zeal and ardor cool, that they might not have 
part in this iinal witness of the Lord's great message. Surely 
it would not be the will of the Lord that one should sit down 
and idly fold his hands, waiting for his deliverance. 

"Ne'er think the victory won, 
Nor once at ease sit down ; 
Thine arduous work will not be done, 
Till thou hast gained thy crown." 

EXPERIENCES OF ELIJAH AND ELISHA TYPICAL 

Time and again the church has been told through the channel
 which the Lord chose as his mouthpiece during the church's 
last experience that Eli j all is a type of the overcoming church 
and that Elisha probably represents in a measure the great 
company class. It is a noticeable fact that Elisha walked 
with Elijah. There was never any disagreement between them ; 
they did not quarrel. There is no record that Elijah ever 
opposed anything that Elisha was doing. If those now claiming
 to be the Elijah class are correct in their view that only 
the Elisha class is doing the work of the Society, then the 
facts do not seem to fit the picture at all. Elisha did not 
smite the waters of the Jordan until after Elijah had been 
taken up in the fiery chariot. If the Elisha class is now 
smiting the Jordan, then it must be that all the Elijah class 
have gone up in the fiery chariot. Tims we see the ridiculous 
position in which we would place ourselves if we assumed such 
to be true. 

Again, if it is the Elisha class that is now smiting the Jordan
, then surely those who compose the Elijah class would not 
wish to interfere \ for Elisha did according to the Lord's will, 
and any one who has the Lord's spirit could not consistently 
interfere with the Elisha work. As we read: "If any man 
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his." (Romans 
8:9) We aTe not here saying who is oi one class and who of 
the other. That is not our province. We do not know. The 
Lord did not purpose for us to know; and we will not presume
 to judge that which the Lord has not given us to judge. 
Quoting Brother Russell upon this point: 

"We are to be careTul not to form a judgment as to who 
are to be of the great company. Some say to us, 'What do you 
think of such a brother?' We are not to judge one another. 
It is not for us to say that such a one belongs to the great 
company class. We are to consider all the friends as one 
people. Only the Lord knows who are his wholly faithful 
ones, and he is leaving the matter to be manifested. At the 
end of the earthly career of the little flock the Lord himself 
will do the dividing."— Z. 1S16-38. 

We call attention to these words of Brother Russell that 
the dear friends may not be discouraged by the statement of 
another who volunteers to teach them, that all who have anything
 to do with the Society and its present work are a part 
of the great company class. We do not believe it is proper for 
any one to say, "Brother A is of the great company and Brother
 B of the little flock." The Lord shows the characteristics 
that will be manifested by each class; and we may examine 
ourselves to enable us to determine whether or not we are 
coming up to the proper standard. But let us carefully refrain
 from passing judgment upon any one else. 

THE AKTITYPIOAL OHAEIOT 

Again referring to the letter in our issue of January 15, 
1918, the brother who leads the opposing thought is quoted as 
saying that "the Watch To-web Bible and Tbact Society is 
the chariot of the Elijah class; that the separation is now 
taking place; that the lurid legalities are separating the two 
classes; that those who are putting out the Seventh Volume 
and the Babylon tract are the great company." 

The chariot, being a vehicle, would very fitly represent the 
Society which the Lord has used as a vehicle to bear the message
 of truth. What makes it lurid, in our opinion, is the 
fiery message of Ezekiel and John, which message it is now 
conveying to others. There were no legal differences between 
Elijah and Elisha, and nothing in the picture would seem to 
indicate that the management of the Society could have been 
pictured by what occurred between Elijah and Elisha. They 
were on the very best of terms until the last moment, Elisha's 
last request being that he might receive a double portion of the 


[6213] 


( 54 -55) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


spirit of Elijah. The suggestion, therefore, that "lurid legalities
" were represented by the fiery horses does not seem at all 
to fit. According to that interpretation it is the Elisha class 
that is now in the chariot and the Elijah class is outside of it. 
And if that picture were true and were carried out to its 
finality, it would mean that the Elisha class would be taken 
up in the fiery chariot and the Elijah class left behind! Here 
seems to be a wide difference in interpretation by Brother Russell
 and these other brethren. And following the rule that we 
suggested above, we think it the safer course to heed the interpretation
 given us by the Lord's chosen servant. Note what 
Brother Russell says on this subject: 

ELIJAH, NOT ELISHA, USED THE CHARIOT 

"We recognize that the church of God is the antitype of 
Elijah, because she is, with her groat Head, the Christ of 
God. It is the Christ in the flesh that antitypes Elijah. His 
experiences during his career as God's prophet typify the experiences
 of the Christ class during all the more than eighteen 
hundred years of their earthly career. His closing experiences 
would parallel, Ave understand the Scriptures to teach, the 
closing experiences of the last members of the Christ body in 
the flesh. . . . 'The Lord knoweth them that are his.' 

"When the Lord's time comes for separating his little flock 
class, he will make no mistake. It will be the little flock 
that will go up in the chariot, and no others. Let us, therefore
, keep ourselves in the love of God. Never mind what any 
one else thinks. Of course we are to love and serve the brethren
 ; but even when we do our best, some of the brethren 
may misunderstand us. Do not decide about anybody else ; 
but let each of us watch for himself and see to it that he keeps 
his heart in the right attitude toward the Lord and the brethren
. We shall see the Elijah class taken away in the chariot; 
the others will not be taken. Then we- shall see the radical 
division. We shall know all about it then. The Lord will attend
 to it."— Z. 1916-38, 30. 

Since it is conceded that the Society is the chariot, then, 
according to Brother Russell's interpretation, it is the Elijah 
class that will take to the chariot; and "it will be the little 
flock that will go up in the chariot and no others. We shall 
see the Elijah class taken away in the chariot; the others will 
not be taken. " 

SIGNIFICATION OF ELIJAH'S MANTLE 
Referring to the picture, we note that Elijah and Elisha 
journeyed together until they reached the Jordan, and there 
they stood and talked awhile. Then Elijah took his mantle, 
wrapped it up and smote the waters of the Jordan. The waters
 represent the peoples ; and their separation would picture 
the separation of people from people. We are to keep in mind 
that Elijah had this mantle all during his journey, and that 
not until he reached the Jordan did he wrap up the mantle and 
use it to smite the waters (people). We are also reminded that 
the antitypical Elijah class has had the message of truth during
 their entire journey of the harvest of the Gospel age. 
Brother Russell pointed out that October, 1914, antityped 
Elijah and Elisha standing at the Jordan, talking the matter 
over; that this was the last point to which Elijah was directed
 to go, and that it represented the last definite date we 
had concerning the church. He then pointed out that something
 else must be done after that time, We quote Brother 
Russell : 

"Elijah and Elisha came to the river Jordan. They stopped
 there and stood talking. Something must be done before 
they could go further. So the Lord's people have been standing
 for a time since we came to October, 1914. Then Elijah 
took his mantle, wrapped it together and smote the waters 
of Jordan." 

Tn Ezekiel 21:14,15 we read, "Let the sword be doubled 
the third time," which to our mind would represent the message
 of truth contained in the first six volumes of Studies in 
the Scriptures. And then we read: "I have set the point 
of the sword against all their gates, that their heart may 
faint and their ruins be multiplied. Ah, it is made lightning 
brightness; it is wrapped up for the slaughter." We suggest 
that this represents the message of truth contained in the 
Seventh Volume, which is in truth and in fact a condensed 
statement of the entire message relating to Babylon and the 
true church and the relationship between the two, as set forth 
in the preceding six volumes. Therefore, it is properly designated
 "the point of the sword," and is wrapped up (put into 
compact form) for the purpose of doing the smiting, viz., the 
separation of people from people. In the eighth chapter of 
Revelation, verses 3 to 5, seemingly referring to the same message
, we read that it (the message) "is deliberately hurled into 
the earth;" that is to say, deliberately distributed broadcast 
amongst order-loving people. 


The message of truth contained in Volume Seven of Studies
 in the Scbhtubes, therefore, seems to be more fitly represented
 in Elijah's wrapped-up mantle than does anything 
else. If that is true, then it follows that it is the message of 
truth sent far and wide amongst the people that will cause the 
division or separation ; and it is manifest beyond the question 
of a doubt that it is the Elijah class that uses it, and not 
Elisha. It is easy to be seen now that the Elija class, persisting
 in the proclamation of the message against Babylon, would 
thus separate themselves from the Elisha class, who would be 
fearful or negligent of performing any part of this work; and 
that Elijah, continuing thus to use the point of the sword, 
would in due time be taken up in the fiery chariot by a whirlwind
 of anarchy. 

Again we quote from Brother Russell ( The Watch 
Tower, February 1, 1916, page 39) : 

"Are you expecting the fiery chariot any minute now, or do 
you think it some distance off — perhaps some months yet, or a 
year or more? will be asked. At least a year, or probably 
more, is my thought. [Just one year and five months later 
Volume Seven was issued. 1 Something else is coming first, 
dear friends. We do not as yet see clearly what it is. But this 
matter of Elijah's rolling his mantle together and smiting the 
waters of the Jordan seems to mean something, and also the 
crossing of the river. This picture is not given for nothing. 
What does it mean? you ask. Ah, we know that most prophecies
 are understood only after they are fulfilled. We might, 
however, have a suspicion. What would that be? Something 
like this: In Riole symbolic language water represents truth 
and also represents people. Both of these are given in Scripture
 as being symbolized by water. (Revelation 17:1, 15; 22: 
1,2: Jeremiah 51:12/13; Ezekiel 47:1-12; Ephesians 5:26) 
Furthermore, Jordan means testing or judging down. Now 
who or what would be judged in the antitype? 

"We answer, we believe that the peoples of the earth, the 
public in general, are to be judged by the truth. The peoples 
are represented by waters. It would seem that in some way 
the people are to be judged and tested; and that a division of 
public sentiment is to be caused in connection with the truth. 
Waters are to be separated from waters, people from people; 
the truth being received by some and rejected by others. Elijah
 wrapped his mantle together and smote the waters; and 
they were divided. Elijah's mantle was the outward indication 
or sign of God's power with him and represented God's 'power 
and blessing with the church. The mantle was in Elijah's 
hand when he smote the waters with it. So the church, it 
would seem, will use what is in their hand, the power and authority
 of the truth, the power of God, in smiting the waters 
— the peoples. Do you think that this has not vet taken 
place? may be a question in your mind. We think it has not 
as yet fully taken place. Do you think that the PhotoDrama
 of Cbeation has had a part in this ? It may be. Will 
there be something more? W T e do not know. We rather think 
there is something more." 

"CHARIOT," "FIRE," AND "WHIRLWIND" 
"Now, as to the meaning of the fire and the chariot: Eire 
always represents destruction, and a chariot of fire would 
seem to signify some very trying experience that will separate 
the Elijah Class from the Elisha class, and bring the deliverance
 of the Elijah class. 

"Brother Russell, are you not afraid of alarming us? some 
may ask. No! We are all very desirous of getting into the 
Lord's chariot, surely. It is the best thing in all the world. 
But it means trouble! Well, we desire trouble, if this trouble
 will be our chariot to take us home. We are waiting for 
it day by day. When Elijah's chariot came, it was in a 
whirlwind that he was carried into the heavens, into the atmosphere
, beyond earthly vision. What did the whirlwind 
signify as regards the church? Does it mean more trouble? 
you will ask. We think it does. Dear friends, we are waiting 
for that chariot and whirlwind. What will it be? Well, we 
know that the Lord pictures the great time of anarchy that is 
coming as a great whirlwind. He says, 'Behold, evil shall go 
forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall be 
raised up from the coasts of the earth. And the slain of the 
Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto 
the other end of the earth; they shall not be lamented, neither 
gathered nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground.' — 
Jeremiah 25:30-33; 30:23,24. 

"To our understanding the Elijah class will be amongst 
the first to be affected by the great whirlwind of anarchy. 
We believe it signifies that many of the Lord's people — all of 
the faithful at that time — will be taken from the present life 
in some anarchistic movement. We would not talk about 
these things to the public; for the public would not be interested
 in them. The Master said, 'Cast not your pearls 


[6214] 


February 15, 1&1& 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(55 6H 


before swine.' We are talking about it here because we think 
that all here are deeply interested, and are expecting to share 
in the chariot and whirlwind experiences. Here is the point, 
then: We think that our final experiences will be during 
some kind of anarchistic uprising. For some time we have 
been wondering just how all the church would be taken. 
If the change comes to each one by death in the usual way, 
it would seem very wonderful to see the consecrated all over 
the world die suddenly. Neither can they all die of old age; 
for this would mean that some would have to live a good 
many years yet." 

If Brother Russell's interpretation be correct — and we 
would prefer to take it to that of any one else— then it would 
seem that the Elijah class, with the power of truth in their 
hands, viz., the message of God's vengeance against Babylon, 
must use that power, or message; and their persisting in using 
it unto the end would produce the separation and ultimately 
result in the taking up of the Elijah class in a time of fiery 
trials and testings. 

"THE LORD KNOWETH THEM THAT ABE HIS*' 

Let us not be deceived, dear brethren, and become slack 
now in the performance of our covenant with the Lord. But, 
grasping the sword of the Spirit which the Lord has placed 
in the hands of his people, let every one who loves the Lord 
and his cause better than this life and all things else this 
life may bring, go forward in a united effort to perform the 
duty which the Lord has laid before U3. If one is fully consecrated
 to the Lord and actively striving to fulfil his covenant
 of sacrifice, let him not be disturbed by the expressed 
opinion of another that his activity in some part of the Lord's 
work will put him in the great company class. God is not 
unmindful of your labor of love; he is faithful and true to his 
promise. Those who are his will not be disturbed or discouraged
 by what others may say, but will be governed in 
their conclusions by the Lord's Word, "The Lord knoweth 
them that are his." It is not necessary for us to know just 
where our brother will be. It ia sufficient if we are diligent 
to make our own calling and election sure. In the Lord's 
house there are some occupying positions of honor and some of 
less honor. God setteth the members in the body as it pleaseth
 him; and this setting applies both to their position while 


in the flesh and beyond the vail. If we do our "best to fulfil 
our part of the covenant, he is faithful and just to fulfil his; 
and to each one who manifests a diligence (not negligence) to 
make his calling and election sure he will grant an abundant 
entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ. 

Let every one who would thus serve the Lord refrain from 
judging another. Let us put no one into this class or the 
other class. Let us leave the judgment with the Lord; and 
doing so, look well to ourselves. It is for the Lord to judge, 
not us. But in the language of John, the Beloved, let us 
"look to ourselves, that we lose not those things which we 
have wrought, but that we receive a full reward." — 2 John 8. 

In harmony with the thoughts above expressed, we call attention
 to the words of Revelation ID: 17: "And I saw an 
angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice, 
saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven. Come 
and gather yourselves together unto the supper of the great 
God." The angel here clearly is the Elijah class, standing 
in the resplendent light of the Gospel, now more brilliantly illuminated
 than ever before by reason of having the interpretations
 of the lurid prophecies of Ezekiel and John. And thug 
standing in the light, they are joyful, fearlessly and plainly 
declaring the message of truth, calling first to the eagle's 
(Matthew 24:28), their brethren in Christ, the far-sighted 
ones, to come and join in this glorious feast that the Lord has 
spread before us. And may he give every one of his little ones 
the courage and faith arid strength to stand at this time. 
Those who faithfully trust and follow our great Captain will 
ultimately be brought off more than conquerors, yea, most 
fervent overcomers. 

We emphasize the fact that the church— Elijah and Elisha
— were standing in 1914, talking together. When Brother 
Russell died in 1916 everything seemed to have come to a 
standstill. No one seemed to know exactly what should be 
done. Then suddenly something was delivered to the church. 
What was it? All remember how that on a certain day in 
July, 1917, the message of the truth wrapped up in compact 
form in "The Finished Mystery" was delivered into the hands 
of the church ; and then the antitypical Elijah had the message
 in such form that it could be used for the smiting of the 
antitypical Jordan; and the smiting began. 


JESUS MINISTERING TO THE MULTITUDE 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "He Giveth Food to the Hungry," published in issue of May 15, 1906, which 
please see.] 


JESUS OUR EXAMPLE IN SERVICE 

[This article was reprinted from article entitled, "He That Humbleth Himself Shall Be Exalteth," published in issue of 
December 1, 1897, which please see.] 


COMPENSATION 


"Hush! oh, hush! for the Father, whose ways are true and 
just, 
Knoweth and careth and loveth, and waits for thy perfect 
trust ; 
The cup he is slowly filling shall soon be full to the brim, 
And infinite compensations forever be found in him. 

"Hush! oh, hush! for the Father hath fulness of joy in store, 
Treasures of power and wisdom, and pleasures forevermore ; 


Blessing and honor and glory, endless, infinite blis*. 

Child of his love and his choice, oh, canst thou not wait for 
this?" 

"Hush! oh, hush! for the Father portioneth as he will 
To all his beloved children; and shall they not be still? 

Is not his will the wisest? Is not his choice the best? 
And in perfect acquiescence is there not perfect rest? 


JESUS SETS MEN FREE 

[This article was reprinted from article entitled, "Christ Brought Life and Immortality to Light Through the Gospel/ 3 
published in issue of March 15, 1904, which please see.] 


THE LAST PASSOVER OF CHRIST 

"Christy our Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep tJie feast, with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." — 

1 Corinthians 5:7, 8. 


During the past two thousand years the new moon nearest
 the spring equinox has been reckoned as the beginning of 
the Hebrew religious year. (/. '07-88; Z '15-78) The Passover 
comes on the following full moon. 

In 1918, the nearest new moon to the spring equinox (5.26 
a.m., March 21) appears at 2.52 p.m., Eastern time, on March 
twelfth. That moon reaches its full at 10.33 a.m. on March 
the twenty-seventh. The Hebrew day begins at sundown of 
the previous modern day, and our antitypical Passover memorial
 should be celebrated on the evening of March twentvsixth
, some time after sundown — say at 7:30 *p«xn. At this 


time the Lord's dear ones consecrated, set apart unto death, so 
far as their earthly lives are concerned, will doubtless be 
anxious to assemble for the celebration of this solemn spiritual
 feast. 

It is a matter of interest that, if the Passover date were 
reckoned as formerly indicated in Volume Six, page 470, it 
would have fallen on the same date as the date for the smiting 
of the city, or April twenty-sixth, 1918. 

Let us review the events of that tragic day when our 
Passover Lamb was slain. It was on Thursday evening 1,885 
vears ago in the upper chamber that the thirteen celebrated 


[6215] 


(62 63) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


their Passover, the last one for the Lord. The same evening 
Judas went out to clinch his evil bargain with the clergy of 
his day. The betrayer had left the little faithful company, 
and, as his last legacy, the Master gave them the most spiritual
 message of the Gospels, tne thirteenth to seventeenth 
chapters of the Gospel according to the beloved disciple, John. 
After he sang with his dear ones a hymn, and conversed with 
them, he knowing and they ignorant of the tragedy just before
 them, he led them to Gethsemane. 

JUDAS, GETHSEMANE, OALVABY 

It was on that Thursday evening that Judaa, with an expression
 of intimacy, fellowship and love, betrayed the Son 
of God into the hands of the crucifiers. That night the Light 
of the World was before the hostile forces of a benighted ecclesiasticism
 bound in unholy alliance with the secular powers. 
Secularism saw his innocence, but ecclesiasticism, blinded by 
envy and hatred, overcame the honorable scruples of the 
earthly rulers, and secured on a false and trumped up charge 
of treason, unjust conviction of the Son of Man. Forsaken 
and shunned by those who "had trusted that it had been he 
which should have redeemed Israel" (Luke 24:21), the Messiah
 faithfully kept the sacrifice on the altar, through ridicule 
and abuse of clergy, soldiers and public servants, through the 
Via DoZoro«<fr— the way of tears— and up the difficult path 
to Calvary and finished the offering of that bodv which God 
has prepared for him. 

Judas, who had not looked for such a dreadful outcome of 
his evil scheme, went and ended his iniquitous course by selfdestruction
. By nine o'clock Friday morning the Beloved 
was raised up, aa the brazen or copper serpent (perfect humanity
), as though made sin, even for those of the great 
worldly system of government, "which spiritually is called Sodom
 and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified" (Rev. 
11:8), and which continues to this day, -being now called Christendom
, where his feet members soon shall at last fill up completely
 the sufferings of Christ that are left behind. 

Under the heat of a semi-tropic sun, the great Lover of 
mankind, stripped by unholy hands to open view, was the 
object of revilings by the Hebrew clergy and laity, a spectacle 
and a wondrous lesson of divine love for men and for angels. 
There hung the Savior of humanity, forsaken by all save those 
who loved him most — Peter, the strong, and John whom he 
loved, and the women who would, if they might, have died in 
his stead. And "sitting down about him, the unbelievers 
watched him there." 

And from noon, "the sixth hour" of that dreadful day, there 
was both a literal darkness and an obliteration of light and 
of love over all the land, over all in the condition termed 
"Sodom and Egypt," for while they were covering themselves 
with the greatest weight of guilt ever known, filling up the 
chalice of their iniquity until it overran, they were in the 
darkness of night as to the real quality of their acts — "they 
knew not what they did." 

It was afternoon of Friday, Passover day, that the holy 
Sufferer said, "I thirst" — and they gave him to drink, not 
cold, refreshing water, but that which while somewhat stupifying
 was calculated to enhance the agonies of thirst in the 
most brutal and cruel death known to wicked and degenerate 
men. 

By this act the prince of this world sealed his death sentence
, for "by death the mighty one was beginning to destroy 
him that hath the power of death, that is to say, the devil." 
And bv their death the feet members of Christ will set in motion
 the forces which will utterly destroy them that destroy 
the earth — Great Babylon, the accursed system of organized 
and established iniquity* 

"IT IS FINISHED!" 

But pain of body was not sufficient for the fiery trial of 
him who was to be the first to suffer that he might reign 
with God. He must be finally and fully made a sin offering, 
and experience to the full the wages of sin, that he might save 
to the uttermost. And as in the extremity of mortal pain 
and weakness the realization came upon him that he was, as 
it were and as it seemed to him, utterly cast off by his 
Father, with the final despairing cry, "My God! My God! why 
hast thou forsaken me?" in pain of spirit that was too much 
to bear, the great heart broke, and there came forth his last 
exclamation, "IT IS FINISHED!" like unto the last loud 
cry of the Church in the flesh— "It is done." (Rev. 16:17) 
The Wonderful One 'bowed his majestic head and gave up the 
life he had covenanted to lay down; and the new life, the 
new creature, the spirit, became hid in God until the third 
day there should come the springing forth of the first-fruiU 
of the dead. 

This is the central event of all history which we celebrate 
on the approaching Passover — the death of the Savior of the 
world. We suggest that «ach participant read beforehand 
with reverence and prayer the Bible chapters on the Passover 
— the first Passover in Exodus 11 to 13; the story of the 
death of the antitypical lamb in Matthew 26 and 27, Mark 
14 and 15, Luke 22 and 23, John 12 to 10, and such other 
passages as 1 Corinthians 10:16-21, 11:20-34, etc., and the 
comments in Volume VI Scripture Studies, Chapter 11, on 
"The Passover of the New Creation." Let not the consecrated 
unto death fail of the injunction, "Assemble yourselves together
, and so much the more as ye see the day approaching." 
— Hebrews 10:25. 

Let the bride get herself thoroughly ready for whatever 
the wise and loving Father and the altogether lovely Bridegroom
 may have for her in the way of experience of preparation
, trial, change or exaltation. Let each one consecrated 
unto death examine himself, cast out every alien thought or 
affection from the heart, cast out every weight and the sin that 
doth so easily beset him. Especially let each see that he loves 
even his enemies, but that he loves supremely the beloved 
Father in heaven. Let us so increase and abound in divine 
love toward one another and toward all men, that whether 
it be near or far in time our change will find us "ready" to 
go in, ready to stand in the confidence of pure and singlehearted
 love before our Elder Brother and before our God 
and Father. 


LETTERS FROM THE INTERESTED 


GIVING LIFE TO THE IMAGE 
Deak Brethren*. — 

I am sending you some thoughts regarding the vitalizing of 
the "image of the beast" as it appears to me after a cursory 
examination of a book entitled "The Churches of Christ in 
Time of War," edited by Charles A. Macfarland, General 
Secretary of the "Federal Council of the Churches of Christ 
in^ America." It is manifestly official. It Bays, among other 
things, "There is now being witnessed the cooperation of politics
 and religion in the common service of the whole people 
as never before in the history of the human race." On the 
last page of the book is a letter from President Wilson to Dr. 
Macfarland, dated June 8, 1917, which says, "I need not say 
how much I appreciate the message from the Federal Council 
of Churches of Christ in America. It has helped to reassure 
me and keep me in heart." 

Briefly the United States, by alliance with Great Britain, 
naturally becomes identified with it <G214), and thus the 
"other beast with two horns like a lamb" vitalizes the "image 
of the beast" ("the Federal Council of the Churches of 
Christ") by the United States Government giving official recognition
 (the President's letter of June 8, 1917, to Secretary
 Macfarland is such) to the image which was patiently 
awaiting this vitalization, having previously (on May 8, 1917) 
declared "its endorsement and support of" the war aims and 
policies of the Government." "All this took place before the 
publication of the Seventh Volume — before the coming of the 

[621 


seventh plague. "The change of name of the 'image of the 
beast' to that of 'false prophet' in Rev. 16:13, between the 
sixth and seventh plagues, shows that the 'image' was vitalized
 prior to the publication of Volume VII." — Ot\\. The 
cooperation of the "beast" and the "false prophet" with the 
"dragon" is very manifest in army camps jn the way the 
Knights of Columbus and the V. M*. C. A. work under' military
 authorization . 

Permit me to now mention some correspondencies between 
the French Revolution and the present time of trouble which 
seem to be transpiring at this time. 

1. The decisive defeat of the Austrians and Prussians bv 
the French Revolutionists on the 20th of September, 1792, 
seems very clearly to indicate the importance of the eventa 
connected with the German Reichstag sessions of Sept., 1917. 

There can be no doubt that the Reichstag session of September
 27th was of far-reaching importance. It seems to have 
definitely proven that the majority of the Reichstag were opposed
 to the war aims of the Prussian military autocracy, and 
ina sense resulted in the downfall of Prussia — in the appointment
 of Count von Hertling, the Bavarian Premier, to 
the German chancellorship. The German chancellorship, 
created by Bismarck, has always been in Prussian or pro-Prussian
 hands. Bavaria is regarded as thoroughly unsympathetic
 to Prussian aims, and the new Chancellor may therefore
 prove to be a chancellor of peace. 
2. On December 11, 1792, King Louis XVI was placed on 

6] 


February 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(63-50) 


trial by the revolutionists; was convicted and condemned to 
the guillotine. The correspondency seems to be in the peace 
negotiations between Russia and Germany and we may expect
 a further defeat of the Prussian military autocracy. It 
is very remarkable that the peace negotiations opened on the 
very day (December IB, 1917) indicated by the beginning of 
the trial of Louis XVI. 

I have received a great blessing from the January 1st 
Watch To web. The first article is certainly timely. The 
statement, "He will give all of his people a share," is specially
 comforting to one situated as I am (in an army camp). 
I may be mistaken, but I hope and believe that we who are 
now restrained because of being drafted will be released in 
time to participate in the smiting of Babylon. Here we have 
some opportunities to present the truth, but there seems to be 
little appreciation of the message, although they seem to generally
 recognize that we are Bible Students. We have been 
having a Seventh Volume study. It started out as a class for 
the study of Revelation led by a Pentecostal preacher who 
bought the Seventh Volume since coming here. He used the 
Seventh Volume altogether and depended on the three members
 of the 1. B. S. A. for bringing out the correct thoughts. 
However he "taught" the class only a few evenings and then, 
seemingly realizing that he was not well enough acquainted 
with the subject, turned it over to us; so we have been privileged
 to present to a few, whom we could probably not have 
reached at all otherwise, the explanation of Revelation furnished
 in Volume Seven. We use the Seventh Volume; asking
 questions, reading the comments, and now and then emphasizing
 or explaining such features ag those not familiar 
with the truth might not be able to understand. 

I am greatly pleased with the way the election at Pittsburgh
 turned out. It surely is a complete vindication of the 
present management of the Society. Undoubtedly the Lord's 
hand was in the holding of the straw vote on November 21st. 
for had it not been held the claim would probably have been 
made that the election was purely a matter of voting shares 
and did not represent the voice of the ohurch. Now this 
leaves them absolutely without excuse for any agitation 
against the Society and its work. Undoubtedly the Lord still 
has a very important work for the Watch Toweb Bible and 
Tract Society and is himself directing all its interests. 

With much Christian love, your brother in Christ, 

James Allen Mukch. — Ky. 
THE LORD IS NIGH UNTO A CONTRITE HEART 
My Beab Bbotheb Rutiierfobd : — 

There is a matter which has been on my mind and heart 
for several months which I am constrained to present to you 
as the chief representative of all the brethren in the truth. 
In 1912 1 dissented in a measure from the common view of 
the brethren in regard to the impending events of 1914. The 
resentment of the friends, which I thought unjust, was returned
 with an emphasis whioh brought darkness to my mind. 
The adversary took advantage of it and caused a series of 
stumblings such as has not occurred in all my Ghristian experience
 of 47 years. 3 sought for and began to magnify every 
trivial mistake I could find and to publish it abroad, I not 
only censured my brethren but I repudiated my vow. Now 
the Lord in love and mercy is opening my eyes and I review 
the^past with amazement and sorrow. ^ The harvest is closing, 
and 1 realize that if I make my calling and election sure I 
must renew my obligation to my brethren and ray vow to the 
Lord. I do so today with an humble heart, praying that the 
Lord and the dear brethren will forgive me. I desire that you 
and the dear Bethel family may know of this determination 
and that I may have a special interest in your prayers. 
Praying God's rich blessing upon you, dear brother, and upon 
all those associated with you in the most significant work of 
all ages, I am, 

Your brother in best of bonds, Kdwin Bum)y- Ore. 


BLESSED EFFECT OF VOLUME SEVEN 
Dear Brethren; — 

At Montreal, Canada, we were much interested and pleased, 
recently, to fellowship with a brother and sister who received 
the truth only live weeks ago, through the reading of Volume 
Seven. The sister had formerly taken no interest at all in 
things religious. Now both husband and wife are fully consecrated
 and are showing wonderful progress. They have a 
clearer knowledge of the truth than many who have been 
"truth people" for several years. Jt was inspiring to note their 
zeal. With Christian love. 

Yours in joyful service, K V. Crist. -Pi!ttrit,i. 

PRESENT POSSIBILITIES BEING REALIZED 
Dear Brethren; — 

Enclosed find usual weekly report. The past week has been 
crowned with much personal blessings from the Lord. The 
work goes forward grandly and the sublime possibilities of the 
present are being more and more realized by the Lord's people
. They are undergoing a wonderful heart-and-mind shaping 
in preparation for the final conflict with the powers of darkness
. Many who had settled down to the thought that the 
work was (about) over are now rubbing their eyes and becoming
 conscious of the fact that the mightiest conlliet of the 
ages is upon us. 

(), how evident it is that everything should be swept aside 
that would hinder us in following our Captain 1 What is the 
value of time, energy, money, treasures of any kind to the 
consecrated NOW, except to forward ihw can* * to which our 
lives are dedicated and for which Jesus died? 

The Seventh Volume is being accepted, studied and pushed 
everywhere. It is my observation that those most interested 
in it are invariably happy and prosperous in the Lord, 
whereas the few who reject it are unhappy and developing 
bitterness. With much Christian love, I am, 

Your fellow servant, 0. L. iSkulivan. — Pilgrim. 

RESOLUTION FKOM FRENCH BBETHREH 
Dkar Brethren; — 

We hereby send you a resolution passed by the Paris 13 cclesia
 in reference to the management of the Society. We received
, much delayed, the facts in relation thereto, and now 
wish to send you direct the following resolution: 

"By unanimous vote of the Paris (France) Ecclesia, assembled
 on Sunday, December 23d, we hereby express: 

"1st. Our gratitude to the Lord for permitting the present 
Board of Directors of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society (Brother J. F. Rutherford being their President) to 
administer with wisdom and faithfulness the interests of -the 
harvest work during the past months; 

"2d. Our desire to see maintained in charge of the work 
during the year 1918 the same Board and President; 

"3d. Our fervent Christian love and moral support to said 
Board; also to their valiant colaborers near and far; and we 
daily present them all to the throne of heavenly grace in accordance
 with our Vow." 

The Ecclesia of Paris, — France. 

"We cannot tell you how grateful we are to have the Seventh
 Volume nor of the heart full of thankfulness and love to 
God and to you, as we read it. We surely realize that the 
Lord is using the same channel in dispensing meat in due season
. We assure you of our loyal support now and to the end 
and recognize that out dear Brother Rutherford was surely 
chosen of the Lord to lead the Church to the end of her 
journey." A. K. \Y. W.— O/mo. 

"I feel that my eup of joy overflows. I rejoice that it is 
due time for this solemn message, and I desire to use Volume 
Seven as a chariot that shall help me mount to the skies." 

Mrs. K. B.- -~M<lss. 


"LET PATIENCE HAVE 

As is quite generally known, the present traffic congestion 
due to shortage of cars, etc., is unprecedented in the history 
of the country. We hear of unparalleled delays in not only 
freight shipments, but also in express and mail. The Government
 is endeavoring to alleviate this congestion. Let us hear 
from you if you feel that sufficient time has elapsed for your 
order to have reached you under present circumstances, and we 
will do what we can to trace the shipment. In the meantime 


HER PERFECT WORK" 

we advise patience in respect to undelivered shipments and the 
importance of placing future orders as far in advance as possible
. Mail matter is usually delivered with reasonable 
promptness, although we have ' recently heard of instances 
where Watch To wee issues have been in transit three or four 
weeks before reaching subscribers. We mention this that the 
friends may not think us negligent when The Watch Tower 
fails to arrive on time. 


MARGOLIS BIBLE— A NEW HEBREW TRANSLATION 


We have recently added to our stock a Jewish Translation 
of the Old Testament which some claim to be superior to the 
Leaser version. This new translation is known as the Margolis
 Version, as Prof. Max L. Margolis was the Editor-inChief
 and Secretary of the Editorial Board; but the actual 


work of translation was accomplished by a Committee of over 
twenty-five eminent Jewish Rabbis and Hebrew scholars, whose 
work covered a period of twenty-four years. The volume is 
in good, clear type, cloth bound, $1.25 postpaid. 


[6217] 


Vol. XXXLX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., MARCH 1, 1918 


No. 


'This do 


in remembrance of me. 


IN MEMORY OF OUR KING 

For ax oft a* ye eat this bread, and drink this cwp t ye do show the Lord's death till he 
come" — 1 Corinthians 11:25,26. 


The truly consecrated Christian, walking in the light of 
present truth, looks forward with the keenest interest to the 
approaching Memorial celebration. This Passover season holds 
a peculiar interest, because it may mark the last for the 
church on earth and may mark the drinking of the wine anew 
with the Lord in glory. Sint:e Pentecost the followers of the 
Lord have been waiting with joyful expectancy for his return 
ns the King of glory. For many years the best-informed of his 
followers have known that he is present and that he will soon 
be fully revealed to all who are his. Soon ho will take unto 
himself his completed bride and reign in glory. It was his expressed
 desire that the bride class should have him in memory 
until he call for her. Whether the coming Memorial will be the 
last on earth, we do not. of course, know; but we do know that 
we are one year nearer the full consummation of our hopes. If 
it please the Lord to have us celebrate this Memorial other 
years, then we shall do so gladly. If it please him to take all 
the members of the church home this year, then our joy will be 
full and we shall have pleasures for evermore. His will, not 
ours, be done. Glad we are to assemble together again to remind 
each other of that wonderful event that transpired so many 
centuries past. 

When a man of the world has risen to fame, he desires to 
leave a monument, so that future generations may know of his 
greatness. Of course there is selfishness in this desire. Jesus 
of Nazareth, the greatest man that lived on earth, when he 
approached the time of his crucifixion, prepared a monument 
that will endure forever. Unselfishly ho acted in this regard, 
as he did in all others. He was about to perform the greatest 
work of the ages— to make himself an offering for sin on 
bnhaJf of the human rare. T9iis Memorial wa.s a means whereby 
his followers should remember him until they should see him 
again. He knew that the fully consecrated would appreciate 
this more than anything e se. He knew that the world would 
not appreciate it; and therefore his death would be sweetly 
kept in the memory of those who had received the benefit of 
his great ransom-sacrifice. None but the truly consecrated 
have ever appreciated the Lord's death and its meaning. The 
time is near at hand, however, when even the world will begin 
to understand why he suffered and why he died. The Lord 
Jesus knew that the time from Pentecost until his kingdom is 
established would lx> occupied in the selection of his bride 
and he desired that she should keep fresh in mind the importance
 of the great sin-ofTuring and likewise approbate 
tier privilege- of participating in his sufferings, in order 
that she might reign with him in glory, for the regeneration 
and reconstruction of the world. 

Many of the members of the bride class are already with 
the Lord. Those remaining this side are eager to be with, 
him, yet biding his own good time. It is reasonable, then, 
that as we approach each Memorial season, as we come nearer 
to the time of seeing our great King and Lord, our hearts are 
thrilled with the prospect that this is perhaps the last this 
side the vail and that soon we may see him face to face. 
"LOUD, IS IT I?" 

When Jesus was about to take leave of his disciples, his 
associates for three and a half years, he marked that they 
were troubled, and said: "Let not your heart be troubled. 
.... I go to prepare a place for you; and if I go and prepare
 a place for you. I will come again and receive you unto 
myself, that where I am, there ye may be also." And now 
the day draws near when this sweet promise from the Master's 
lips will have complete fulfilment. Is it any wonder, then, 
that the truly eon^e<T.ited are hx>king forward with great 
desire to the approaching Memorial and to that which may 
follow after! 

It was after Jesns and his disciples had eaten the Passover 
according to the Jewish Law, that he instituted the Memorial 
Supper as a reminder of his death. Judas was present at that 
time and was given a sop and went out from the others before
 the supper was ended, fully bent upon betraying the 
Master; and this he did. This incident may represent the 
fact that in the close of this age, and just before the bride is 
completed, the sop of truth will become so strong that it shall 
drive forth from the company and communion of the faithful 
all those who do not have a full and proper appreciation of 
the blood of Jesus, shed by the Lamb of God for the taking 
away of the sin of the world. It -'m not for anyone ihi« «hlr. tin* 
vail to judge who may be of that class. It is sufficient that 
each one carefully examine himself or herself, saying, "Is it 
I?" Truly this is a time for careful self-examination, for seeing
 to it that we are pure in heart toward all. 


That we may more fully appreciate the importance of 
that great event which transpired at Calvary, we do well to 
remind ourselves again of the events that took place just 
preceding that time. 

THE OBIGINAL PASSOVER 

The Hebrew year begins on the day of the first new moon 
nearest the Spring equinox. The Hebrew Passover marked a 
wonderful event in Jewish history and foreshadowed the death 
of the great Ransomer of humankind. St. Paul tells us that 
the things pertaining to the Law were shadows of greater 
things to come. (Colossians 2:17; Hebrews 10:1) Looking, 
then, from the type to the antitype, we find much food for 
thought. The Israelites had been held in bondage to the 
Egyptians for years. From time to time their tasks were increased
 and their burdens made grievous to be borne. God 
sent Moses to deliver them and sent Aaron with him as his 
mouthpiece. They appeared before Pharaoh and requested 
him to permit the children of Israel to leave Egypt. This 
Pharaoh denied. God sent punishment upon him for refusing 
to let them go. Time and time again he promised to let 
them depart from Egypt; time and time again he broke his 
promise. 

Nine times had the Lord sent plagues upon the Egyptians 
and as many times, at the instance of Moses, had relieved 
Pharaoh and his people therefrom. Then the tenth plague was 
sent — the death of the first-born. Pharaoh was devoted to his 
son, his first-born ; and the smiting of him would touch Pharaoh
's heart as nothing else could do. God informed Moses 
that at midnight of the fourteenth of Nisan the death messenger
 of the Lord would pass through Egypt and every firstborn
 of every family should die. He then directed Moses to 
make provision for the saving of the first-born of Israel. The 
arrangement was that each family or household should, on the 
tenth day of Nisan, take a lamb into the house ; that the lamb 
should be a male of the first year and without blemish; that \x> 
should be kept in the house" until the fourteenth day of the 
same month, when it should be killed and the blood sprinkled 
upon the door-posts and upon the lintel; that the lamb should 
then be roasted with fire ; that no bones of it should be broken ; 
that it should be eaten with unleavened bread and bitter herbs, 
and that those eating it should do so with their loins girded, 
their shoes on their feet and their staves in hand, and that 
they should eat with baste ; that when the messenger of the 
Lord should pass through Egypt the first-born of each household
 would be spared where the blood of the lamb appeared on 
the door. Moses carried out these instructions and the faithful 
Jews acted upon his advice. They killed the lamb, sprinkled 
its blood as directed and, in due season, ate it. At midnight 
of the fourteenth of Nisan, all the first-born of Egypt died, 
including Pharaoh's beloved son. Great consternation followed 
and Pharaoh immediately summoned Moses and Aaron. He 
now not only promised that they should go, but thrust them 
out, and Moses led the children of Israel to the Red Sea, across 
it and on to Mount Sinai. 

TYPE AND ANTITYPE 

In this picture the first-born represent the church of the 
first born whoso names are written in heaven. These are the 
heirs of the exceeding great and precious promises of Jehovah
. Like the first-born in Egypt, they are subject to the 
second death, but escape from it by complying with the Lord's 
fixed rules. All who during the Gospel age come under the 
protection of the blood of Jesus, and there remain, are safe 
from this great penalty. 

In this picture the lamb represented Jesus, slain for the 
cancellation of the Bin of mankind. (John 1:29) A door is 
a place of entrance. Hence the blood sprinkled upon the doorposts
 of the Israelitish homes signifies the fact that the way 
to safety and life is through faith in the blood of Jesus, who 
declared: "I am the door." The Passover night pictured the 
Gospel age when sin and darkness prevail, and during which 
time the bride of Christ is gathered out from mankind. And 
now we see this time of suffering drawing to an end and 
amidst a time of great confusion. Loth political and ecclesiastical
 ; and soon the sufferings of the Christ will end. 

No animal could more fitly represent the lowly Nazarene 
than could the lamb. It is noted for its defenselessness and 
its innocence. The antitypieal Lamb, tin- Man Jesus, true to 
the picture, was "holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from 
sinners." (Hebrews 7:^6) "A lamb without blemish and 
without spot, who verily was foreordained before the foundation
 of the ^vorld, but was manifested in the last times." "He 


(67-68) 


T6218] 


March 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(69 f>6} 


was brought as a lamb to the slaughter; and as a sheep before 
her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth." 

Born under the Law, Jesus must fulfil its terms; and since 
the Passover was a part of the Law arrangement, he must 
eat it at the appointed time; viz., the fourteenth of Nisan. 
As he was the great antitypieal Lamb* now to be slain, be must 
eat this Passover just preceding his death. It must be apparent
 to all that it would be inappropriate to celebrate the 
Lord's death more than once a year, and that the time of this 
celebration should, as nearly as possible, correspond with the 
date at which he instituted the Memorial. 

THE PURPOSE OF THE MEMORIAL 

After eating the Passover Supper, Jesus instituted the 
Memorial. This he did that his followers might remember 
him until he come again. "And as they were eating, Jesus 
took bread and blessed it and brake it, and gave it to his 
disciples and said, Take, eat; this is my body." That is to 
say, the bread represented his flesh, his humanity, which was 
broken on behalf of mankind. "And he took the cup and 
gave thanks and gave it to them, saying, All ye drink of it; 
for this is my blood of the new covenant which is shed for the 
remission of sins." The cup there represented the pouring out 
of his life blood as the great sacrifice on behalf of all who 
s-hall accept the benefits of the ransom. 

It was the will of God that the members of the bride of 
Christ should fill up that which is behind of the sufferings of 
Christ Jesus. Hence those who will compose the bride are 
privileged to suffer with him. The celebration of the Memorial
 once each year not only reminds the celebraters of the 
death of their great Master, but also brings vividly to mind 
that each member of the body has covenanted to be dead with 
him. Clearly the Apostle expresses this thought when he says: 
"The cup of blessing for which we bless God, is it not the 
participation of the blood of the Anointed One; the loaf which 
we break, is it not the participation of the body of the Anointed
 One; because there is one loaf, we the many are one 
body, for we all partake of the one loaf," — 1 Cor. 10:16, 17, 
Diaglott. 

Coming, then, to the celebration this year, let each one have 
in mind the privilege of suffering with Christ Jesus. Whatever 
may be our experiences, however joyful or however trying, all 
shall come to us by the Lord's permission and as a great favor. 
"For unto you it "is given in behalf of Christ not only to believe
 on him, but also to saifTer for his sake." (PHiilippians 
1:29) We know not what awaits us; but we do know that all 
who are abiding in the shadow of God's wing are safe and 
that no evil shall befall the new creature in Christ. Whatever 
anyone may do to us in the way of persecution, it is of the 
utmost importance to see to it that we ourselves do no persecuting
. It is vital to us that we keep a pure heart. We do 
well personally to examine self as we approach the hour of the 
celebration of the Memorial. Let us remember the words of 
Brother Paul, "Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the 
whole lump? Purge out, therefore, the old leaven, that ye 
may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ 
our Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the 
feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice 
and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity." 
Leaven is a symbol of sin and old leaven signifies sins of long 
standing. Malice means ill will, hatred and a wrong condition
 of heart. These should all be put away and each one, 
upon self-examination, see to it that he has clean hands and a 
pure heart. "Let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of 
the flesh and mind, perfecting holiness in the fear of the 
Lord." 

LET US EXAMINE OUBSELVES 

It was jealousy, ill will and malice that led Judas into his 
wrongful course in betraying the Lord to the ecclesiastics of 
that time. Judas knew that the ecclesiastics were anxious, to 
destroy Jesus; hence he betrayed the Master into their hands. 
The civil powers saw the innocence of the Lord, but permitted 
their scruples to be overruled by the clergy and thus falsely 
and without just cause or excuse convicted the Son of Man 


and sent him to an ignominious death. It is not at all improbable
 that the very closing scenes of the Gospel age shall 
witness something of a similar kind. He whose zeal and faithfulness
 and loyalty to the Master brings him to the point of 
persecution because of such faithfulness will be greatly favored
. No one should act foolishly nor put himself in a way 
to be persecuted, but with calmness of mind and sobriety of 
heart should diligently and faithfully represent the Lord, trusting
 him fully as to the results. 

If there be strife among any of the Lord's people (and 
such there is among some of the classes), this is the time 
above all times to cease such strife and to seek diligently to 
establish peace and harmony. It has been the rule that such 
strife is usually caused by the desire of a few to be more 
highly honored than others. And such it was in the Lord's 
time. ''And there' was also strife among them, which one of 
them should be counted the greatest. And he said unto them, 
The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and 
they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors ; 
but ye shall not be so. But he that is greatest among you let 
him be as the younger; and lie that is chief, as he that doth 
serve." If we find that injustice has been heaped upon us, 
that we have not been favored in the cede si a as much as we, 
in our judgment, should have been; if we feel that wo should 
have been more highly honored, let us remember the danger of 
insisting on what we believe are our rights and the great privilege
 of humbly submitting to the Lord's will. No trial could 
come without his permission, and the one which hurts us most 
has probably come to test the faith and love of those involved
. "By love serve one another.'* May we, then, be able 
to see through our trying experiences that all of these things 
are evidences that the Lord is still dealing with us, and may 
we appreciate the privilege of overcoming them and manifesting
 our unselfish love for the brethren and therefore for the 
Lord and his cause by serving in a humble and Moving manner 
in whatsoever place the Lord puts us. Our great desire is and 
should be to see the King of glory. Everything else should 
be made subservient to that. Let us have in mind that the 
eating of the Passover lamb was with bitter herbs and that 
this sharpened the appetite and created a greater desire for 
more of the flesh to remove that bitter taste. This fitly illustrates
 tthat the bitter experiences and trials that come to in. 
if we are properly exercised thereby, cause us to flee to the 
Master that we might partake of more of his merit and his 
loving-kindness. Feeding, then, upon our precious God-given 
promises and upon the prospects of soon seeing the King and 
being with him in glory, will make us forget the bitter trials 
and we shall rejoice with great joy, giving thanks that we 
are permitted to have such trials as make sweeter our joys. 

One may ask: "Shall I decline to partake of this Memorial
 because of some difficulty T have had with a brother?" 
Our answer would be, if possible try to bring about a reconciliation
 by talking over the differences in the spirit of love. 
Effect a reconciliation, if possible; but if not, examine your 
own heart and see to it that there is no bitterness there. If 
you have been wronged, then see that you freely forgive, even 
as the Lord forgives us; and then go and keep the feast. 
All who have made a full consecration to the Lord should 
partake. If some have made a consecration and have not 
symbolized this consecration by water immersion, such should 
be done, if possible, before* partaking. But the mere fact that 
one has not been baptized since making a consecration should 
not preclude him from partaking of the Memorial. 

Let us all have in mind that "the end of all things is 
at hand; be of sober mind and watch unto prayer." How 
glad should be our hearts that we have come to the end of 
this dark night and that soon the light of the Lord shall fill 
the earth! Having in mind our great desire to see our King, 
let us also remember the admonition of the Apostle, "Above 
all things have fervent love among yourselves." Having this 
love, we will cover each other's defects; and nothing enables 
us so much to have this love as looking with expectant joy 
to seeing the Lord and our beloved brethren who have gone 
before. 


DEMONS TO WRECK SOCIETY 


Psychic phenomena are attracting the attention of some of 
the greatest men of the land. These men claim that they are 
able to communicate with the dead. That they receive messages
 from some hidden source cannot be questioned. This 
psychic science is called Immortalism. In truth and fact it 
is deraonism. And these demons, exercising greater power 
over the human mind, will, as the Scriptures foreshow, soon 


wreck all society. It is of great importance that every person 
acquaint himself with the Scriptural teaching upon the subject
. We issue a little book, "What say the Scriptures About 
Spiritism V* that, throws a flood of light upon this occult science
. Everybody should read it. Postpaid, 10c. But if any 
one who desires to read it will send us a post card stating he 
is too poor to purchase, we will mail him a copy free. 


[6219] 


QUALIFICATIONS OF ELDERS 


Some of the ecclesias at recent elections have declined to 
elect anyone to the otfice of elder or deacon until such an 
one answered in the affirmative questions of the following import
: (1) Have you answered the V. D. M. questions and 
have you passed that examination! (2) Are you in harmony 
with the Watch Tower Bible attd Tkact Society and the 
work in which it is engaged? (3) Do you accept "The Finished
 Mystery" as the Seventh Volume of Studies in the 
Scriptures, and are you willing to teach the same? 

Some have raised objection to these questions, insisting 
that they require an additional qualification for one to be an 
elder or 'a deacon, and are therefore contrary to the Scriptures
. In our judgment such contention is without merit. The 
Apostle Paul set forth what are the qualifications of an elder. 
(1 Timothy 3:2-6; Titus 1:6-10) There is nothing in the 
above questions that is in any manner out of harmony with 
the requirements announced by the Apostle. On the contrary, 
they are exactly in harmony with the qualifications there 
named. 

The first question relates particularly to one's knowledge 
of the Truth, such knowledge as would modestly qualify one 
to teach. St. Paul says an elder must be "apt to teach." "In 
addition to the foregoing limitations,, it is required that an 
elder shall be apt to teach; that is to say, he must have ability 
as a teacher, explainer, expounder, of the divine plan, and 
thus be. able to assist the Lord's flock in word and in doctrine." 
(Studies in the Scriptures, Vol. Six, page 249) The V. D. 
M. questions relate to doctrinal matters and are intended to 
indicate the process of determining one's aptness to teach. One 
who is unable to answer them would demonstrate that he did 
not have a sufficiently accurate knowledge of the divine plan 
to teach a class. Any ecclesia must be the judge of who shall 
be its elders and it is clearly within the province of oa^b such 
ecclesia to require them to show that they are qualified and 
are apt to teach, before electing them to office. 

As to the second question: the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society has long been used of the Lord. Clearly it is 
the messenger mentioned in "Revelation 14:18. It has been the 
channel for the dispensing of the harvest message. The various
 ecclesias have long since adopted its publications as helps 
to study the Bible. Any one, therefore, out of harmony with 
the Society would hardly be a proper person to be a leader 
or teacher of an ecclesia which uses the publications of the 
Society as its helps to Bible study. The Apostle is emphatic 
in his statement as to what is the proper relationship between 
class and teacher, declaring that "if any man teach otherwise 
and consent not to sound words, the words of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness," 
such is not a proper teacher and from such the others should 
withdraw. {1 Timothy 6:8-5) A leader of a class who is 
openly opposed to the work in which the Society is engaged 
would tend to cause dissension and trouble, instead of peace 
and harmony. Hence it becomes the reasonable duty of the 
class to know the attitude of its teachers. 

As to the third question: the Society has published and is 
widely distributing "The Finished Mystery" — Volume Seven 
of Studies in tiie Scriptures. There is nothing in it out 
of harmony with the divine plan as revealed. The doctrines 
there taught are wholesome and clearly in harmony with that 
of the Lord Jesus Christ and the other six volumes of Studies 
in the Sckiptukes. It is a part of the work of the Society 
to give this volume a wide distribution, because it is believed 
the duo time has come for the message to be given against 
Babylon. A teacher that is opposed to the Seventh Volume, 


therefore, would be opposed to the Society's work, out of 
harmony with the Society; and, as a leader, such an one 
would breed discontent and trouble, rather than establish harmony
 and peace and development among those of the Lord's 
people who had already expressed themselves as being in harmony
 with such Seventh .Volume. Hence such an one should 
not stand for election to the position of elder. 

This does not mean that such persons who would not answer 
the foregoing questions in the affirmative should be disfellowshiped
. On the contrary, they should be encouraged to study 
the Lord's Word and grow in knowledge and the fruits and 
graces of the Spirit. 

We remember when the Vow was promulgated by Brother 
Russell through the Society, there was some decided opposition
 to it. Brother Russell then held that any one out of 
sympathy with the Vow and the work of the Society in general 
should not be elected as an elder of the class. Concerning this 
subject he said: 

"Question : Is it proper or wise for a Pilgrim en route 
to be entertained by those who are out of sympathy with the 
Vow and with the work of the Society in general, even though 
he be an elder of the classf" 

"Answer: Most decidedly not. Furthermore, the Pilgrim 
should make clear to the class that they had greatly erred in 
selecting such an one for an elder, and should help them to 
rectify the matter as quickly as possible. If the class likes 
the elder who is out of accord with the Society's work, it 
should not make a request for Pilgrim service. Some of the 
Lord's dear sheep are very stupid. Meekness and gentleness 
are commendable, but there are times when they would mourn 
disloyalty to God."— Z. '13-14. 

The above quotation from the pen of Brother Russell puts 
the matter in clear, terse language, about which there can 
be no doubt. It will be noticed especially that he said that 
one who is out of accord with the Society's work should not 
be elected an elder, and a class which would not follow that 
rule should not even request the Society to send Pilgrims. 
The purpose of Brother Russell and the Society clearly was 
and is not to lay burdens upon the brethren, but to point out 
the privilege of the various ecclesias in determining whether 
their elders possess the qualifications, and furthermore emphasizing
 the importance and necessity of working together in 
harmony. By way of illustration: Suppose the general of an 
army should give an order to be executed, the colonel should 
pass it on to his sub -officers and each one would decide to 
execute the order according to his own ideas. The result 
would be disorganization of the worst kind. We recognize the 
Lord Jesus as the great General and Director of the harvest 
work, and his people as workers together with him, some occupying
 one position and some another. Then all who have his 
spirit will desire to work in harmony with him and his approved
 way of putting forth the message. Any one, then, who 
would refuse to answer in the affirmative that he accepts "The 
Finished Mystery" and that he will teach it would thereby 
declare himself out of harmony and opposed to the Society's 
work, and any one opposed to the work of the Society would 
hardly be qualified to be a teacher of a class which by its 
request for Pilgrim visits, or otherwise, had indicated its desire
 to cooperate with the Society. We believe that wi.en the 
dear friends see the principle here involved they will readily 
agree that the questions that some of the ecclesias have adopted 
and required to be answered by those standing for election as 
elders and deacons are entirely right and proper and in full 
harmony with the Scriptures. 


WAIT ON THE LORD 

f Reprint of poem in issue of September, 1882, which please see.] 


JESUS REQUIRES CONFESSION AND LOYALTY 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "Good Confessions and Later Trials," published in issue of June 1, 1906, 
which please see.] 


JESUS TRANSFIGURED 

["The first paragraph of this article was reprinted from article <nfith-d, "V\*t Beheld the Glory ; n tiho Ho!v Mount." published
 in issue of April 1, 1898. The last two paragraphs were reprinted from an article entitled, "A Vision of Coming 
Glory," published in issue of July 1, 1900. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "A Vision of the Kingdom," 
published in issue of June 15, 1906. Please see the articles named. J 


JESUS REBUKES SELFISHNESS 

[The first throe and the last four paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Least and Greatest in 
the Kingdom, 3 ' published in issue of July 1, 1900. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Only the Humble Shall 
Share the Kingdom," published in issue of February 1, 1895. Please see the articles named.] 


(69-75) 


[6220] 


RELIGIOUS INTOLERANCE 


On February 12 the public press contained the following 
dispatch from Ottawa, Canada: "The Secretary of State, 
under the press censorship regulations, has issued warrants 
forbidding the possession in Canada of a number of publications
, amongst which is the book published by the International
 Bible Students Association, entitled 'Studies in the 
Scriptures — The Finasrhed Mystery/ generally known as the 
posthumous publication of Pastor Russell. 'The Bible Students
 Monthly/ also published by this Association at its office 
in Brooklyn, New York, is also prohibited circulation in Canada
. The possession of any prohibited books lays the possessor
 open to a fine not exceeding $5,000 and five years in 
prison." 

Winnipeg papers had previously announced that certain 
clergymen had denounced these publications from theiT pulpits 
and stated that the attention of the Attorney General had 
been called to the matter. Later, the Winnipeg Tribune, after 
mentioning the order issued by the public censor, said, "The 
banned publications are alleged to contain seditious and antiwar
 statements. Excerpts from one of the recent issues of 
'The Bible Students Monthly' were denounced from the pulpit 
a few weeks ago by Rev. Charles G. Patterson, Pastor of St. 
Stephen's Church. Afterward Attorney General Johnson sent 
to Rev. Patterson for a copy of the publication. The censor
's order is believed to bo the direct result." 

A large number of the copies of "The Finished Mystery" 
were confiscated; houses were searched and the books taken 
away from the people; and several of our brethren were arrested
. Some have been tried and fined all the way from one 
to five hundred dollars. The sale and distribution of the book 
in Canada has been stopped of course. One of the leading 
lawyers of Canada has delivered a written opinion on the case, 
from which we quote : "There is no doubt that the Secretary 
of State has the power to put any publication under the ban. 
Once he does this, the wisdom of his act and the nature of the 
publication cannot be reviewed in any court. On the contrary, 
the courts must hold that the publication is objectionable. 
This, of course, is exceedingly arbitrary, but it is nevertheless
 the state of the law. To illustrate how absurd it is, I 
mention that the Secretary -of State could put Webster's Dictionary
 or the Bible under the ban, and immediately any one 
found in possession of either would be subject to very severe 
penalties without any recourse to the courts. My suggestion 
to you, in view of the unsatisfactory condition of the law, is 
that a strong publicity campaign be started to secure the rescinding
 of the ban order. To this end petitions, similar to 
the one I drew up for you, should be vigorously circulated. 
Meetings should be held and suitable advertisements inserted 
in magazines having a wide distribution in Canada. This 
should, at a seasonable time, be followed up by an influential 
deputation waiting upon the Government and members of Parliament
 at Ottawa." 

Shortly thereafter, acting upon information from Canada, 
the Army Intelligence Bureau at New York began an investigation
 of the Brooklyn headquarters. The public press announced
 that the headquarters were raided, which is entirely 
untrue. Some one had misrepresented to the authorities that 
our Society is carrying on a German propaganda and retarding
 the draft, which, of course, is also untrue. 

On February 24, the President of the Society delivered 
a public lecture in the city of Los Angeles, California, to 
fully 3,500 people, as many more being turned away. The 
Los Angeles Tribune tihe morning following carried a full-page 
report. This very much aroused the indignation of the clergy 
there. The ministerial associations held a meeting on Monday 
morning and sent its president to the managers of the paper, 
demanding an explanation as to why they would publish so 
much about the lecture. On Thursday following the Army 
Intelligence Bureau of Los Angeles took possession of the 
Los Angeles headquarters, taking away many of the Society's 
publications. Since then, a number of these have been returned
. 

On Monday, March 4, several of our brethren at Scranton, 
Pennsylvania, including Brothers C. J. Woodworth and M. L. 
Herr, were arrested, charged with conspiracy and put under 
bond for their appearance for trial next May. Without a 
doubt, the prosecution of these brethren has been instigated by 
some nominal ecclesiastical adherents. The Bible's terrible 
arraignment of the Papacy, which Brother Woodworth has 
been instrumental in bringing to the attention of many, is 
quite probably the cause of this action against them. 

CONCERNING THE WIBELESS OUTFIT 

Following their wicked course of persecution, it was reported
 in the public press that Government agents had seized 
a wireless apparatus which was erected on the Bethel Home 
and ready for use. The facts are these: Some two or three 


years ago, a wireless outfit was presented to Brother Russell. 
It was erected on the roof to enable some of the younger 
brethren to see if they could learn to operate it. When this 
nation was about to be engaged in war, all wireless instruments 
were required to be dismantled. The one on the Bethel Home 
was taken down and the poles sawed up and used for other 
purposes; and the instrument was carefully packed away in 
the Art Room, where it has been ever since. The apparatus 
consisted of a receiver only, no transmitter, and has not been 
in use for more than two years. When two Army Intelligence 
men were in conversation with a member of the Home, the 
wireless was mentioned. They were taken to the roof and 
shown where it formerly was and then were shown the instrument
 itself, packed away; and by consent the instrument was 
taken away by these gentlemen because we have no use for it. 
There never was a sending instrument at Bethel, hence impossible
 to transmit a message anywhere. 

It seems that the objectionable language of Volume Seven 
is that on pages 248 to 253, inclusive, which is chiefly quoted 
from statements made by Rev. C. E. Jefferson and Rev. John 
Haynes (not Hayes) Holmes. All of this matter was written 
prior to the time that the United States entered the war. 

Upon notice being brought to us that the above mentioned 
pages were objectionable, the Society took immediate steps 
to stop the sale of "The Finished Mystery" until further information
 could be obtained. Our President then, at the instance
 of the Board, appointed a representative to visit the 
Government officials at Washington and ascertain, if possible, 
how the objection could be removed. The Seventh Volume 
— -"The Finished Mystery" — was submitted by Brother Robison
, the Society's representative, to the proper authorities at 
Washington; and he was advised that there was no disposition 
on the part of the Government in interfere with our work in 
general and that if pages 247 to 253, inclusive, were removed, 
there would be no known objection to the volume. 

We immediately sent out a letter to the colporteurs and 
class Secretaries, advising that the pages above mentioned be 
deleted and that the distribution of the volume be proceeded 
with. This was done in many instances, as we are advised, 
and the work went on. Later, on the 14th day of March, the 
Department of Justice at Washington, instructed the District 
Attorneys that a further distribution of "The Finished Mystery
" would be a violation of the Espionage Act. The Department
 of Justice, however, declined to state whether or not 
this violation related only to pages 247 to 253, or to something 
else, and according to the custom of that Department declined
 to render an opinion as to what part of the volume 
does trangress the law. We are having the entire book gone 
over carefully by able counsel in order to be fully advised before
 taking further action. We are convinced that there is 
nothing in the volume at all that in any wise violates the 
Espionage Act; but we believe that the action is inspired by 
other influence which desires to suppress the message with 
reference to the ecclesiastical systems. We are preparing a 
statement to present to the Department of Justice, that our 
side may be heard and hope to be able to advise the friends 
later. 

We suggest that the colporteurs proceed with the sale of 
the other six volumes of Studies in the Scriptures until further
 word from ua, and that every one who can give a public 
address do so ea,eh Sunday, or often er, if possible, using the 
subject, "The World Has Ended — Millions Now Living May 
Never Die." We have a quantity of Pastor Russell's Sermons
 and we advise the colporteurs to push the sale of these 
at this time. Daily the evidences grow stronger that the kingdom
 of heaven is at hand. Let us be faithful in announcing 
it. We are not at all responsible for what is in the Bible. 
There is no book that so strongly arraigns dishonesty, and 
especially with reference to those who claim to be the representatives
 of the Lord. We feel quite sure that no part of 
Volume VII has in any wise interfered with the Government's 
prosecution of the war; but the clergy have sought to make 
it thus appear, in order that they might protect themselves 
from being- exposed before the people. 

NOT AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT 

These clergymen who object to the teachings of the Bible 
concerning themselves being laid bare before the public have 
raised a great deal of dust, and cried loud and long thaft our 
Society is against the Government and that its work is retarding
 the progress of the war. Nothing is further from the 
truth. We are not against the war. We are not against the 
Government in any sense of the word. We recognize the Government
 of the United States as the best government on earth* 
We recognize that the governments, being political and economic
 institutions, have the power and authority, under the 
fundamental law, to declare war and to draft their citizens 


VII— 26 


[6221] 


(77-78) 


(78 79) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


into military service. We have not the slightest disposition to 
interfere with this, nor to speak against it so far as the governments
' power or authority is concerned. We recognize that 
it is the duty of every citizen to obey the laws of the land, 
and the duty of every citizen, who can conscientiously do so, 
to participate in the defense of the country. All should be 
respectful to officers of the law. (Acts 23:5) The law of 
the land recognizes that there are Christian people who cannot
 engage in military service without doing violence to their 
conscience. Hence the Congress of the United States, in 
passing the Selective Draft Act of May 18, 1917, inserted a 
clause providing that certain ones, under certain conditions, 
should not be compelled to engage in combatant military 
service. We hold that the members of our Society come 
within the purvue of this section of the law and are entitled 
to its protection. And none of our members, so far as we 
know, have done more than to claim the benefit of the provisions
 of this Act of Congress. 

For forty years the attention of the people has been called 
to the unrighteous practices of the ecclesiastical systems and 
how they have kept the people in ignorance. In that time the 
clergy- have been called upon repeatedly to explain to the 
people the Scriptures, and they have industriously avoided 
making either answer or explanation. The Lord long ago, 
through his prophet, foretold that this would be their course, 
and that, refusing themselves to answer the people, the clergy 
would attempt to shield themselves behind the civil powers 
and, if possible, induce the latter to prevent a free and uninterrupted
 proclamation of the message of the Lord. The 
Scriptures designate these ecclesiastical systems as Babylon. 


The Lord says: "The mighty men of Babylon [the clergy J 
have forborne to fight; they have remained in their holds 
[shielding themselves behind civil officers] ; their might hath 
failed; they became as women." — Jeremiah 51:30. 

Plainly and clearly, then, our position is: We would not 
do injury to any one, not even the clergy; and certainly not 
to the Government. Our mission is to preach the Gospel of 
Jesus Christ and his kingdom. Jesus taught that when the 
Gospel age ended, present institutions would go to pieces 
and that upon the ruins thereof his kingdom would be established
. He taught his followers to pray, "Thy kingdom come; 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven. 51 If, then, 
it is disloyal to call attention to the unrighteous ecclesiastical 
systems that have been blinding the peoples of earth for so 
long, it is disloyal to repeat the Lord's prayer. We are convinced
 that all difficulty which has arisen has been local, and 
instigated by those clergymen who could not answer the great 
truths set forth against them in the Bible and who have sought 
to stir up the civil authorities against others who are meekly 
and earnestly preaching the Gospel with malice toward none 
and with love toward all. 

As consecrated Christians, we must, in obedience to the 
Lord, call attention to the great truths he has recorded in the 
Bible and which he has commissioned us to tell others. (Isaiah 
61:1-3; Luke 4:18-21) It is the duty of every one to be 
obedient to the law. The fundamental law guarantees that 
every one shall worship God according to the dictates of his 
own conscience and speak the truth with freedom. There is 
no disposition on the part of any Christian to do violence to 
the laws of the land. 


A WARNING TO THE CHURCH 


What we are about to write is not written with pleasure, 
but from a sense of duty to the church. St. Paul prophetically
 wrote, "For I know this, that after my departing shall 
grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. 
Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse 
things, to draw away disciples after them. Therefore watch." 
(Acts 20:29-31} Tfiie words of St. Paul are now having their 
fulfilment. 

The Watch Towek of November 1, MHO, published an 
article from the pen of Brother Eussell, whose words likewise 
seem prophetic and are now having a fulfilment. He quotes 
the Apostle's words above mentioned and shows how they will 
specially apply in the closing days of the church's earthly 
journey. Amongst other thiugs, he said: 

"We have already alluded to the ambitious and selfish spirit 
in the world leading on to anarchy; and we have just pointed 
out how the same selfish, ambitious spirit is leading on to 
anarchy in the church. We foresee a time of trouble for the 
world upon this score, and a time of trouble also for the 
church. The world cannot purge itself of this class; for 
the leaders and the led have the worldly spirit, which is sure 
to wax worse and worse. But not so in the church of Christ. 
Ours is the spirit of the Master, the spirit of loyalty to truth, 
the spirit of the golden rule, the spirit of brotherly love, the 
spirit of liberty and helpfulness, the spirit of fidelity to what 
we believe to be the truth." 

ANABCHY IN THE OHUECH 

The persons hereinafter mentioned participated in the referendum
 vote relating to the Society and its management; 
they likewise participated in the shareholders' annual meeting
, and at each place diligently endeavored to carry the 
election their way. The result has been heretofore reported in 
The Watch Tower, showing the overwhelming expressions of 
opinion from the Lord's people. At the Pittsburgh annual 
meeting, amongst the shareholders represented, about 83 per 
cent was in favor of the present management, as against 12 
per cent opposed. Having participated in these elections, the 
spirit of loyalty and obedience to the Lord's arrangements 
would require all such to abide by the result until another 
similar election. Any other spirit is the spirit of anarchy 
described by Brother Russell in the preceding paragraph. 

It is with pain that we mention the names of some individuals
, but we do this in the interest of the church at large. 
The Apostle Paul gives us the precedent for this; and we feel 
fully justified in mentioning the matter, that the friends may 
not be further deceived. "This thou knowest. that all they 
which are in Asia be turned away from me: of whom are 
Phygellus and Hermogenes." (2 Timothy 1:15) "And their 
word will eat as doth a canker; of whom is Hymenseus and 
Philetus." (2 Timothy 2:17) "Alexander the coppersmith 
did me much evil; the Lord reward him according to his 
works."— 2 Timothy 4:14. 

A wolf in sheep's clothing pictures the disposition of one 


who appears as a friend and yet is ready to do injury. Several 
of tiie Iriends report the method that is being pursued by I\ 
S. L. Johnson and R. G. Jolly. The practise is along the following
 line: They appear at a class of the brethren and, by 
their words and conduct, make it appear as though they are in 
complete harmony with the Society and its work ; but after 
they have ingratiated themselves into the confidence of a 
number, seeds of doubt are sown. They stay in a community 
for several days or longer. They advise the friends to hold 
cottage meetings to be addressed by themselves. They then 
go about and call on all the consecrated. If any one suggests 
a break with the Society, they discourage this for a time 
until they finish their campaign and thoroughly sow their seeds 
of discord; and then they have a resolution offered by some 
one, withdrawing support from the Society and its work. 
We publish below a letter from one of the brethren of the 
Philadelphia Ecclesia, which discloses the method of operation
 : 

"Dear Brethren: 

"We are constrained to drop you a note at this time in 

order that, should you think wise, the Class might be 

warned. 

"Brother Jolly, an able assistant of the Johnson propaganda
., will go to for three weeks, lxvjuise of his su> - 

cess here in gaining so many over on the side of the opposition
 that he might try the same methods there. They are similar
 to those stated in The Watch Tower recently. 

"Kindly accept this as a warning. Things are said and 
done to make it appear as though the brother is in complete 
harmony with the Bible House; then, after he has. gained the 
confidence of a number, seeds of doubt are subtly sown. This 
is accomplished at little gatherings during the week. Attempts 
of an open break are discouraged and prevented, if possible, 
until the entire class is thoroughly saturated with seeds of disloyalty
; then an open break is forced. This method has 
proven very successful here. 

"Experience has taught me the necessity of an uncompromisingly
 strong stand against all such subtlety immediately 
when attempted, What would I not do if I could but spare 
any ecclesia the sad experience here encountered! But the 
lessons to be learned were helpful, and perhaps our experience 
may assist the friends elsewhere. We suggest that one rotten 
apple in a barrel will make all the apples in the barrel rotten 
if not removed. 

""Realizing that all the attempts of the adversary will 
come to naught and desiring to do our little part and trust in 
the Lord, we leave this matter with you, as we do not know 

who are loyal and who are not at ." 

"MARK THEM WHICH CAUSE DIVISION" 

Wo"~take this occasion to call attention of the brethren 
everywhere to the fact that P. 8. L. Johnson and R. G. Jolly 
do not represent the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 
in any manner whatsoever, and are wholly unauthorized to 


[6222] 


March 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(?<*- 84) 


represent it or the International Bible Students Association 
or the Peoples Pulpit Association. The evident purpose of 
the two named and those associated with them is to cause division
 amongst the brethren. "Now I beseech you, brethren, 
mark them which cause divisions and offences, contrary to the 
doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them. For they 
that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own 
belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts 
of the simple." (Romans 16:17, .18) "These six things doth 
the Lord hate; yea, seven are an abomination unto him: A 
proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent 
blood, an heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that 
be swift in running to mischief, a false witness that speaketh 
lies, and lie that so wet h discord among brethren." 

To avoid such does not mean to treat them unkindly, but 
it does mean to refuse to fellowship such in the spirit of the 
Lord. Leave their judgment entirely to him who judgeth all 


things righteously. Again Brother Russell's words in the 
article above mentioned are applicable: 

"If he has different views, do not persecute him — do not 
follow the style of the dark ages, but follow the proper 
course of letting him 'flock to himself/ or with as many as 
prefer to view matters as he views them. We have not given 
such strong advice heretofore; but we perceive that many of 
the dear sheep are being troubled, hindered of development, 
and imposed upon. Wo see that proportionately such elders 
and deacons are growing more bold, and hence the need is the 
greater that ail who have the right spirit, and who realize that 
under the Lord's guidance in our study of the 'Divine Plan 
of the Ages/ we have not been following 'cunningly devised 
fables/ should now take a positive stand for the good of 
themselves, far the good of the leaders who manifest a wrong 
spirit, and for the good of the public, who are inquiring for 
the way of the Lord as never before." 


Vol. XXXI X 


BROOKLYN, X. Y., MARCH 15, 1918 


No. (» 


THE GREAT SHAKING NOW IN PROGRESS 


"Whose voice then shook the earth; but now he Jtath promised, 
heaven. And this word, Yet once more, signifieth the 
things that are made, that those things which can 

Why should there be so many trying experiences in the 
church at this timet is a question often asked. A Scriptural 
consideration of the period in which we are living clearly answers
 this question. And we believe all who will thus prayerfully
 and carefully examine the matter will, instead of having 
their faith shaken by reason of the trials that are now upon 
the Lord's people, have it greatly strengthened. This is a 
time when all the consecrated should have confident assurance 
of their standing with the Lord. Since making a consecration
, our hope has been for an abundant entrance into the 
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Confident 
assurance of the establishment of Messiah's kingdom is that 
condition of mind resulting from believing the teachings of 
the Scriptures upon the subject. These teachings are clear, 
cogent and convincing; so that, thoroughly relying upon them, 
all doubt of an early establishment of the kingdom is removed
. 

Each one who will enter the kingdom must have his faith 
thoroughly tested. This test will demonstrate who is loyal 
and who is not. To be faithful means not only to know the 
truth and rely upon it, but to be loyal to the Lord — to Jehovah, 
to Christ Jesus, to the cause of truth and to the brethren. 
Loyalty to the very core will be required of those who enter in. 

In chapters eleven, twelve and thirteen of the epistle to 
the Hebrews the apostle presents the most convincing argument
 concerning the establishment of the kingdom and the 
conditions to prevail immediately preceding that event. In 
the eleventh chapter he defines faith, without which it is impossible
 even to be considered in the class that is running for 
the prize of the kingdom. He defines the elements of faith, 
which, when once acquired, lead to confident assurance and 
loyalty. Beginning witih Abel, the first martyr to shed his 
blood for the cause of righteousness, the apostle enumerates 
many of that array of strong characters, which reaches down 
to and includes John the Baptist, the last and greatest of the 
prophets. The crowning virtue of each of these approved 
ones, that which gained for him a good report before God, 
was his loyalty to the Lord and to righteousness. It would 
appear that the very purpose of the historical record in the 
eleventh chapter of Hebrews is to establish definitely in the 
mind of the Christian the fact that the fixed law of Jehovah 
approves only those who are fully loyal at heart; and the 
further fact that to prove himself loyal he must endure many 
trying experiences. He must fight against the foes of righteousness
, and he must fight loyally to the end. Applied to the 
fully consecrated Christian, these principles prove that only 
the truly loyal at heart will be able to stand the great shaking
 that precedes the establishment of the kingdom. 

The apostle waxes eloquent when he describes the virtues 
and achievements of the faithful ancient worthies. He tells 
us that time would fail him to tell of Gideon, Barak, Samson, 
Jephtha, David and other prophets, who by reason of their 
faith and loyalty subdued kingdoms; wrought righteousness; 
fought with wild beasts; quenched the violence of fire; turned 
armies to flight; endured mockings and seourgings, bonds and 
imprisonments; wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins, 
being destitute, afflicted, tormented ; were stoned, sawn asunder, 
and slain with the sword ; of whom the world was not worthy. 
All this they did that they might obtain a better resurrection. 
But they have not yet received the thing promised, God havaj
/iitg. Yet once more I shake not the earth onl;/, but ui.to 

removing of tJiose things that arc shaken, as of 

not be shaken may remitin" — Hebrew* 12:20, 27. 

ing preparei I a Letter thing for the Gospel church. But when 

the church is perfected, then these faithful ones of old shall 

come into their reward. 

WRITTEN AFORETIME FOR OUR ADMONITION 

Why did the Lord cause the apostle to record these events 
so much in detail? Because they are experiences typical of 
the experiences that should come to the members of the church. 
Those trying things demonstrated the loyalty of the men of 
old, and. prove that those who enter into the kingdom must 
possess a like loyalty. These faithful worthies were consecrated
, but they had no opportunity to obtain membership in 
the heavenly phase of the kingdom; for the ransom sacrifice 
was not yet given. 

The apostle's argument beginning with the twelfth chapter 
shows conclusively that the eleventh chapter was written for 
the very purpose of encouraging Christians in their trying 
experiences. There he says in substance: "Take into consideration
 the great trial through which the prophets and faithful
 worthies passed; and having in mind the promise of membership
 in the heavenly kingdom, let those experiences be a 
stimulus to you to endure cheerfully whatsoever the Lord is 
pleased to give you; having in mind also the Lord Jesus, who 
was the author and who will be the finisher of your faith, who 
rejoiced greatly in the prize set before him and endured all 
hardships and persecutions gladly. Take these into consideration
, therefore, lest you become wearied and faint in your 
minds. You have not yet resisted to the end; but you must 
thus resist in order to prove your loyalty to the Lord." 

What an encouragement to Christians at this time, who 
may be undergoing severe trials and tribulations! There is a 
disposition, when severely tested, to draw back and give up 
the fight. Not Infrequently one will say: "I wonder why 
the Lord permits me to have such severe trials. Why does the 
rhurch have to endure such trying experiences now?" To this 
the apostle answers in substance-: 'You have forgotten that 
the Lord disciplines his called ones, and that he "puts them 
through the necessary trials for that purpose. He does this 
because he loves his children/ It is added then that if we 
endure this discipline cheerfully, God deals with us as his 
sons. To emphasize the matter lie says that if we are without 
this discipline we should have cause te be alarmed, It would 
be an evidence that we were not sons. In other phrase, trying 
experiences are indispensable to all those who come into the 
kingdom. 

INAUGURATION OF MESSIAH'S KINGDOM AT HAND 

"But," one asks, "w*hy are these trials m&re severe just 
now?" The apostle answers that question, saying, "Ye 'are 
come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, 
the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of 
angels, to the general assembly and church of the first-born, 
which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and 
to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator
 of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling 
that speaketh better things than that of Abel .... whose 
voice tnen shook the earth; but now he hath promised, saying, 
Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven." 

In brief, we are told that when the feet members of the 
church approach the inauguration of the kingdom there will 
be a great shaking and testing. A picture or illustration of 


[6223] 


(.84-85) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


this was given at the institution of the Law Covenant at Mount 
Sinai. God directed the children of Israel through Moses, to 
purify themselves three days, saymg that on the morning of 
the third day he would make a covenant with them through 
Moses as their mediator. On the third day, amdist a great 
convulsion of the elements, the covenant was made. This circumstance
 foretold that Messiah's kingdom would be inaugurated
 in the morning of the third thousand-year day. Moses 
vividly describes the events accompanying the institution of 
the Law Covenant. There was a great fire in Mount Sinai. 
A blackness settled down over the mountain, darkness and 
tempest, the sounding of trumpets, the voice of words; and so 
terrible was the sight and the sound that the people of Israel 
entreated that such should not be repeated to them. Even 
Moses said: "I do exceedingly fear and quake." — Exodus 
19:1-19. 

We are now well into the morning of the third thousandyear
 day. There is great darkness and blackness over the 
nations and kingdoms of the earth* The shaking is in progress
. Kingdoms and governments are being shaken. The 
financial powers are shaken. The ecclesiastical elements are 
shaken. The temptations and trials that have come to the 
world of mankind must be met by those of the church yet in 
the flesh. The Lord has promised the faithful, however, that 
he will not suffer them to be tempted above their ability to 
endure; but that with each temptation or trial he will provide 
a way to escape, — 1 Corinthians 10:13. 

In the picture made at Mount Sinai, and mentioned by the 
apostle, only the things of earth were shaken; but now, he 
says that God will "shake not the earth only, but also heaven." 
This means that all things pertaining to the governmental institutions
 of the earth and all the ecclesiastical systems and 
those who are of the truly consecrated shall be shaken, "that 
those things which cannot be shaken [out] may remain." 
Clearly, the apostle states that the purpose of this shaking is 
not* merely to shake out the disapproved, but to make manifest
 who are approved of the Lord, who are accounted worthy. 
Absolutely certain it is that the kingdom class cannot be 
shaken out, for the reason that if they could be shaken they 
could not be of the kingdom. This time of testing is the 
same to which the Lord Jesus referred when he said that he 
would send forth his messengers to gather out of his kingdom 
all things that offend and them which do iniquity. (Matthew 
13:41) It is the time of final testing for the church; and 
this testing will make known wiho are faithful and loyal; all 
others will be shaken out. 

ADMONITION FOB PREPAREDNESS 

The evidence about us everywhere shows that the institutions
 of this world are going to pieces. Seeing, then, that this 
is "the end of all things," we should expect a shaking in the 
church; and if there should be no shaking, there might be 
reason for doubt as to the nearness of the Lord's kingdom. 
Instead of these trials bringing to us discouragement, let us 
look up and lift up our heads, because our deliverance draweth 
nigh. 

To be forewarned means to be forearmed. The apostle 
admonishes those who are to engage in this fight and who 
are looking for entrance into the kingdom to take heed, fully 
fortifying themselves against this time of great testing. 
Knowing that some will Income discouraged, faint hearted, 
hang down their hands and be weak in their knees, tho, apostle 
said: "Lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble 
knees; and make straight paths for your feet, lest that which 
is lame be turned out of the way; but let it rather be healed." 
The consecrated, being forewarned of the dangers besetting 
their pathway, are to take heed to the course they pursue and 
to be of good courage. 

WAB OR PEACE ONE OT THE TESTS 

All of Christendom so-called is at war. The ecclesiastical 
systems are involved. Based upon the apostle's reasoning 
that the ehurch must encounter similar trials, we should expect 
a disturbance of the peace in the ecclesia of the Lord, the purpose
 of such disturbance being to make manifest who are 
loyal to the Lord and his way of action; and to shake out all 
others. To this end the apostle says: "Follow peace with 
all, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord." 
In the ecclesias there are often some who are of a contentious 
spirit, who insist on having their way; and failing in this, 
seek to bring about strife and confusion. This often results 
in disruptions of the little classes, and many are surprised and 
astounded that those claiming consecration should take such a 
course. But we should not be surprised. "Beloved, think it 
not strange concerning the firo among you to try you, as 
though some strange thing had happened unto you/' (1 Peter 
4:12 — Diaglott) Plainly, those who provoke difficulties and 


indulge in strife will sooner or later be shaken out, unless they 
mend their course. 

Further we read: "Looking diligently, lest any man fail 
of the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up 
trouble you, and thereby many be defiled." In this time of 
shaking, the heart condition of every one is being thoroughly 
tested. If there is any root of bitterness in the heart against 
any one else, and particularly against any of the brethren, the 
shaking will make it manifest. And if that root of bitterness 
is cultivated, it will quickly cause the one having it to be 
shaken out and to go into outer darkness. The apostle makes 
it clear that in order to have a full assurance of faith and a 
knowledge of the mystery of God, the Father, and of Christ, 
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, 
it is necessary not only to put out bitterness but that the 
hearts of the approved must be united closely together in love. 
— Colossians 2:1-3. 

SOWERS 0? DISCORD AMONG BRETHREN 

"God hath set the members in the body as it pleaseth him." 
The Father, through the Son, is executing his great plan. 
The Master of the harvest is attending to his business, and 
he knows exactly what to do. Any attempt on our part, to 
assume a place that the Lord has 'not selected for us would 
necessarily result in his disapproval, would show a wrong condition
 of heart and would manifest a spirit of disloyalty, and 
subject such an one to such a severe shaking that might result 
in his being shaken out. Some who have been much favored 
of the Lord and given many opportunities of service, not being 
able to have their own will carried out with reference to the 
harvest work and the manner of conducting it, have deemed 
it their duty to go about the ecclesias and stir up strife and 
seek to draw away followers after themselves. We are not 
surprised that such a thing should take place. The Apostle 
Paul plainly warned against this. He first admonishes each 
elder to take heed to himself. He foretells that after his departure
 grievous wolves, would enter, not sparing the flock, 
and then pointedly adds: "Also of your own selves shall men 
arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after 
them." (Acts 20:28-30} Brother Russell, seemingly in prophetic
, language in approximately bis last message to the church, 
repeated this warning. (Z. '10, p. 327— "The Hour of Temptation
") We now observe its fulfilment; and instead of being 
surprised at it, we mark it as a part of the groat shaking 
mentioned in our text. 

With deep regret we hero mention that the practice of 
some is to go about the classes and at first, by soft and smooth 
speech, assure the dear sheep that they have deeply the interest 
of the Lord's work at heart; and then suddenly tlrey bring 
a tirade against the work as the Lord is conducting it through 
the channel that he has used for the past forty years. Some 
of the dear sheep become very much disturbed, and some are 
shaken out. This in another evidence of the great shaking 
now in progress. It would seem that any one who is loyal 
to the Lord and his cause and the brethren would not seek to 
disrupt his work; at least, if they could not see eye to eye 
with the manner in which it is being conducted, the proper 
spirit would prompt sucli to remain quiet or quietly to withdraw
. Any other spirit would not soem to be the spirit of the 
Master. 

What should be our attitude toward those who thus disturb
 the Lord's little ones? St, Paul answers: "Mark them 
which cause divisions and offences contrary to the doctrine 
which ye have learned; and avoid them." (Romans 16:17, 18) 
Should those who manifest a wrong spirit be the majoritv 
of an ecclesia. what, then^ should be the attitude of the minority
? To this the apostle answers: "From such withdraw 
thyself."— 1 Tim. 6:3-5. 

Let us see to it, dear brethren, that we do not indulge in 
strife. Whatsoever another may do ; let us follow the apostle's 
admonition to live in peace and pursue a course of holiness, 
without which we shall not be permitted to Fee the Lord. We 
should manifest our disapproval of those who show a wrong 
spirit by calmly and quietly withdrawing ourselves. Let us 
refrain from indulging in acrimonious debate or discussion. 
"I will keep my mouth with a bridle while the wicked is before
 me." (Psalm '39:1} Jt matter* little who i« in the majority
 here. The question with each one of us should be, Am 
I heeding the instructions of the Lord and his inspired apostles
? Let us keep uppermost in our mind at all times that we 
are now approaching the inauguration of the kingdom. We 
see that the prophetic words of the apostle are being, fulfilled ; 
and it behooves us to run patiently, to be of calm and sober 
mind, watchful and prayerful, permitting nothing to swerve 
us from the right course or to divert our ,-itt:mtion from the 
great prize of entering and participating in the kingdom. 

Our Lord, speaking of this time says: "The Son of Man 


[6224] 


March 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(85-86) 


will send forth his messengers, and they will gather out of 
his kingdom all the seducers and those working the lawlessness
/' i. e., those who are lawless. — Matthew 13:41, Diaglott. 
TESTS ALONG OTHER LINES 

A further admonition is: "Let brotherly love continue." 
Thus we are shown that this great shaking will severely test 
our love for the brethren. Love for the brethren means an 
unselfish desire to do good to the brethren and the putting of 
that desire into operation even at *£ sacrifice to ourselves, 
having in mind the building up of such an one in the most 
holy faith. Such desire, then, would preclude us from contending
 in the class for our own way; and, on the contrary, 
would lead us to be patient and kind with others; and should 
it become necessary for us out of good conscience to take a 
course contrary to others, then with calmness and sobriety 
we should state our position and leave it there, avoiding all 
controversy. 

Some of the Lord's dear children in this time of great 
stress may be disturbed about their prospects of supplying 
things needful for themselves and dependent ones. There may 
be a temptation here to turn aside from active participation 
in the service with a view of amassing a sum of money* Some 
might even be induced to think that it would be proper to let 
their minds be turned into the channel of money-making to the 
exclusion of spiritual interests, and that they would give any 
overplus to the work of the harvest. But a warning is apparently
 given against such a course. The literal rendering of 
Hebrews 13:5, 6 is: "Let not your turn of mind be toward 
money-making, but be content with such things as you have; 
for himself hath said, I will in no wise fail thee, neither will 
I in any wise forsake thee. So then with good courage we 
can say, The Lord is my helper; I will not fear/* 

The real vocation of the Christian is to prepare himself 
for entering the kingdom— to be made "meet for the inheritance
 of the saints in light." Let the sentiment of our hearts 
find expression in the words of Brother Paul: "This one 
thing I do." Let our purpose be a single one, resolving by 
God's grace to prove our loyalty and fidelity to him, come 
what may. 

THE GLORIES OF THE KINGDOM 

Since the mind is the battleground, we do well to keep 
before our mental vision the exceeding great and precious 
promises and the glories that await those who love the Lord 
supremely. Let us, then, at times take a mental view of that 
which we are approaching. "Ye are approaching Mount Zion, 
the city of the living God," which means the kingdom of our 
Lord. That the peoples of earth and the creatures of heaven 
may ever appreciate the importance of this great kingdom t 
God will manifest his power and justice to all, inaugurating 
his kingdom amid a great time of trouble — afterward the 
peoples of earth will learn to know his love. 

The faithful martyrs looked and hoped for the coming of 
this kingdom, but were not permitted to know the time or 
manner of its coming. The Psalmist sang of its coming, and 
those songs have gladdened the hearts of Christians throughout
 the Gospel age. Long has natural Israel hoped for its 
coming. Long has spiritual Israel prayed for its coming; 
and now with joy we can say, "The kingdom of heaven is at 
hand." In happy anticipation the members of the bride this 
side the vail await their change. We may reasonably expect 
the change and shaking. But this change will come in a moment
, in the twinkling of an eye. One moment the creature 
will be corruptible; the next, incorruptible. One moment, in 
weakness; the next, in power. One moment, amid the clouds 
of blackness and darkness; the next moment, ushered into the 
glorious light of the divine nature. In our minds now we 
havo gone beyond the vail and are about to behold the assembly
 of the glorious sons of God. For whom shall we first 
look? 

THE JOYOUS INTRODUCTION 

If a person who expected to be presented to an earthly 
king or potentate had a friend who was acquainted at that 
court, he would certainly desire first to consult his friend and 
receive some suggestions as to how he should appear before the 
court. Court functions are always attended with much formality
 and dignity. We are expecting: to be presented to the 
great King of Kings, before whom all things must be graced 
with dignity and formality. Have we a friend who knows 
something about that great King! Yes, indeed. We are assured
 that all along* our pilgrim journey we have been attended
 by our guardian angel. (Hebrews 1:14; Psalm 34:7) 
Speaking of the Lord's little ones, Jesus said: "In heaven 
their angels do always behold the face of my Father which 
is in heaven." (Matthew 18:10) In describing the general 
assembly of the church of the first-born, the Apostle mentions 
first an innumerable company of angels. Pur p. lovable, and 


beautiful in form and character must these be. They have 
kept a record of our journey and of our blessed assembling 
together. (Malachi 3:16) Anxious shall we be to become 
acquainted with these precious and beautiful creatures who 
have been our helpers along the way, May we cot want their 
help further to know just what to do that we may be presented
 properly to the great King, in harmony with the dignity
 of his court? Having loved and served us along our 
earthly journey, surely they will be glad to direct us when first 
we reach the kingdom and we shall be glad to make their 
acquaintance. It would not seem reasonable that one born 
on the spirit plane would immediately have all knowledge; 
but he would have to acquire knowledge after reaching that 
condition. Hence the angels could be of assistance. 

Next is mentioned the "church of the first-born/' of which 
Christ Jesus, the great King, is the Head. Certainly we shall 
be eager to see our wonderful Lord — the Lamb slain from the 
foundation of the world, who redeemed us to God with his 
precious blood, and who has made it possible, for us to aspire 
to membership in the kingdom and to enter the race-course. 
To us he is the dearest friend, our Advocate and our Deliverer. 
And now, entering the kingdom, the relationship of bride and 
bridegroom is about to be experienced in its completeness. 
How thrilling will be that time! Behold him I He is the 
fairest of ten thousand and altogether lovely. Prom the time, 
when by faith we first know the Lord, we have longed for the 
hour when we might see him face to face. Then shall we express
 to him our devotion and love as we desire. Then "we 
shall be like him and see him as he is." (1 John 3:2) "In 
thy pressure is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are 
pleasures forevermore." The joy of meeting the Lord cannot 
be approximated. 

We shall next desire to see the various members of the 
Royal Family. Among these will be especially the apostles, 
who so faithfully served the Lord and left food upon which 
we have fed. Then we shall look for those whom we have 
known and especially loved here, and whom the Lord used as a 
special blessing or help to us. Every member who has come 
to a knowledge of the truth during the harvest period of this 
age will be especially anxious to greet Brother Russell, that 
faithful messenger of Laodicea. To us he has been the den rest 
friend amongst men whom we have seen; for the Lord used 
him to bring to us the message of the divine plan. Without 
doubt he will occupy a very honorable position in that Royal 
Family. Others who will compose that heavenly assemblage 
we shall be anxious to see, for they have been specially near 
and dear to us; some with whom we have had special' opportunities
 of service, whose weaknesses and virtues, whose love 
and devotion to the Lord and his cause we have learned of. 
with whom we have passed through peculiarly fiery trials, 
which greatly blessed us. All the members of that family will 
be beautiful; for all will be like the Lord. But as star differeth
 from star, so shall the glory of one differ from that of 
another. What a glorious convention that will be! 

THE GREATEST ASSEMBLY OF THE CHTJRCH 
For some years during the harvest it has been the blessed 
privilege of many of the Lord's dear people to meet at conventions
; and the sweet experiences there enjoyed have been 
but foretastes of the general convention which is so near at 
hand. At our earthly conventions the difficulty has been in 
separating after coming together. At the general convention 
there will be no seperation. In due time we shall become acquainted
 with all of the 144,000 perfect, beautiful, glorious 
beings. There will be nothing there to mar the beauty and 
sweetness of the fellowship with each other throughout eternity. 
Next in order will be the presentation of the church before
 Jehovah, which will surely be attended with great ceremony
 and splendor. It is unthinkable that heaven is a place 
where every one is constantly beholding every one else. Surely 
Jesus and his bride will have a place prepared especially for 
them (John 14:2, 3) to which none other shall be admitted. 
Surely Jehovah inhabits a place of exclusion, where none other 
can gaze upon him except by his permission. 

The day approaches for the presentation of the bride before
 the throne of God, and the Apostle informs us that to 
Jesus is granted this honor. In vision we behold an innumerable
 company of angels assembled before the throne of the 
all-wise, all-loving, eternal Jehovah. The trumpets of the 
heavenly heralds announce the approach of the Bridegroom 
with his bride. Music of surpassing sweetness fills the heavenly
 courts. Behold the conquering Hero approaching with 
his^ bride upon his arm! All honor and praise is due to him. 
Every knee in heaven is bowing to him and every tongue is 
singing his praise. He presents before Jehovah his bride, 
whom ihe has redeemed and blest. She is gar lied in her rolms 
of glory and beauty; "her clothing is of inwrought gold. She 


[6225] 


(87 -M) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


shall be brought to the King in raiment of embroidered 
work." (Psalm 45:13, 14) Thus the prophet in symbol describes
 her immortality and inherent beauty. "Faultless before
 the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy," shall he 
present his bride. (Jude 24, 25) Then the union is made 
complete. 

"Oh, that will be a union such as earth has never known, 

When Bride and Bridegroom arc made one 

Before the great white throne!" 

The members of the church of the first-born, the bride of 
Christ, will be a special monument to the grace of God. She 
has been taken from an unrighteous race and exalted to the 
highest position in heaven. Of her the prophet says: "Thou 
shalt be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord and a royal 
diadem in the hand of thy God." (Isaiah 62:3) And "in the 
ages to come God will show forth the exceeding riches of his 
grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus," (Ephesians
 2:7) And thus she will ever be the recipient of Jehovah
's favor. Having in mind the blessedness, the glory and 
honor and the surpassing sweetness of being in that general 
assembly in heaven, who would not gladly undergo any and 
all kinds of shakings and testings that the Lord might see 
fit to give his people in order that they might have part in 
that kingdom! "Wherefore, we receiving a kingdom which 
cannot be moved, lot us have grace whereby we may .serve God 
acceptably with reverence and goodly fear!" 

In this time of the greatest crisis in the world's history, 
a time of the worst shaking yet known, a time of petty trials 
and fiery experiences, that have come upon the Lord's people, 
if we keep in mind the glories of the kingdom we shall be 
enabled to endure; and forgetting the things behind, and 
looking to that wonderful thing before, to press forward along 
the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ 
Jesus. Beloved, let us think it not strange concerning these 
fiery times through which the church is passing, but rather, 
receiving them as a strengthener to our faith, let us with 
calmness and sobriety meet them, keeping a pure heart toward 
all; and soon we shall be forever with the Lord. 


JESUS SETS NEW STANDARDS OF LIVING 

[This article was reprinted from article entitled, "The Narrow way to Life Eternal, 1 * published in issue of August 15, 1906, 
which please see.] 

JESUS FACES THE CROSS 

[This article was reprinted from article entitled, "Only the Humble Shall Be Exalted/' published in issue of May 1, 1904, 
which please see.] 

JESUS EXERCISING KINGLY AUTHORITY 

[Paragraphs 1-14 of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Barren Fig Tree — Temple Defiled, 5 ' published in issue
 of July 15, 1914* The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Coming in the Name of the Lord," published in 
issue of September 1, 1906. Please see the articles named. 1 


THY WILL BE DONE 


We see not, know not, all our way 
Is night, — with thee alone is day, 
From out the torrent's troubled drift, 
Above the storm our prayers we lift, 
Thy will be done! 

The flesh may fail, the heart may faint, 
But who are we to make complaint 
Or dare to plead, in times like these, 
The weakness of our love of ease t 
Thy will be done! 


We take with solemn thankfulness 
Our burden up, nor ask it less, 
And count it joy that even we 
May suffer, serve, or wait for thee, 
Thy will be done! 

And if, in our unworthiness, 
Thy sacrificial wine we press, 
If from thy ordeal's heated bars 
Our feet are seamed with crimson scars, 
Thy will be done! 


SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 


THE POWER OF THE TRUTH 
Dear Brethren: — 

A returned missionary called at our store yesterday with 
the object of denouncing what he called Russellism. He told 
me that he had spent many years in India, and that in the 
district next to him, many Methodist missionaries had labored 
hard for many years, and the fruit of their labor was that 
they established in all forty churches. At the time he was 
speaking of, the missionary society's funds became low, and 
they were forced to recall these missionaries. 

'Just after this, Brother Davy [I, B. S. A. representative 
in India] and another native brother visited that district; and 
in a few weeks, the missionary told me, they took over all 
the forty churches, thus undoing the missionaries' arduous 
work of "many years of trying to scare the poor natives into 
their belief of eternal torment and hell-fire! "What do you 
think of that for Russellism?" asked my informant; and 1 
had to admit that it was fine. I told him I was glad that 
the poor natives had the fear of hell-fire removed from them. 
Surely this is just another example of the great force of the 
truth ! 

We thank you for the allotment of further territory, Alaska 
and the Yukon. We will endeavor faithfully to colporteur 
as much of this district as we can, all of it if possible. 

With much Christian love, I am 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, J. E. — Can. 

READING WITH THE GREATEST INTEREST 

The Secretary 

The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. 
Dear Sir: — 

I am enclosing two Money Orders, amounting to $130.00, 
as a donation to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, 
with my best wishes for every success during 1918. 

[6 


This includes the payment for the long-looked-for 

Volume of the Studies in the Scriptures, by Pastor Russell, 
which was sent to me by mail last July, and winch I have 
just realized was not paid for. 1 am reading it with the 
greatest interest. Yours truly, O. H. M. -Can. 

RESOLUTION OF LOYALTY 

WHERKAS: Certain of the Philadelphia Ecclesia went out 
from us because they were not in harmony with the Lord's 
arrangements as represented in the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society and its present management, and 
WHEREAS: We understand they intend to publish a resolution
 condemning the present management of the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society, to which the loyal members did not 
subscribe, and 

WHEREAS: This might lead to an inference by tho^e unfamiliar
 with the circumstances that the Philadelphia Ecclesia 
is not in harmony with the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society and its present management, therefore 
BE JT RESOLVED: That the Philadelphia- Ecclesia to the 
number of about 200 unanimously loyal to the Lord and his 
arrangements for carrying on his work under the present 
management of -his channel, the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society, make known to all its unalterable fidelity to 
the Lord, its hearty co-operation with the dear feet members 
in spreading the message of the Seventh Volume and ali 
kindred work, and its appreciation of the zeal and love displayed
 bv our President and those associated with him. 
BE IT RESOLVED: That realizing that none are perfect, 
"no not one," we believe that any mistakes that may have 
been made are of the head and not of the heart, and that 
the Lord will overrule all to the advancement of his cause. 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED: That this resolution be sent 
tn the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society with the re- 

226] 


March 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(93-95) 


quest that it be given the widest possible publicity, and that 
our assurance bo sent to our dear Brother Rutherford and 
all the dear co-laborers everywhere that daily at the throne 
of Heavenly grace, we, who continue to keep our Vow unto 
the Lord, members of the most wonderful prayer circle that 
has ever existed, remember the general interests of the harvest
 work and particularly the share which we are permitted 
to enjoy in that work, and also the dear co-laborers at the 
Brooklyn Tahernacle and Bethel and everywhere. 

Philadelphia Ecclesia. — i*a. 

"BENDER THEREFORE TO ALL THEIR DUE" 

Dear Brother Rutherford: — 

I have wanted for some time to write you and to tell you 
of my great appreciation of the privileges afforded me in the 
Pilgrim service and the blessings received therefrom. 

It lias been my pleasure to attend no less than eight conventions
 since last fall, and the benefits 1 have received therefrom
, and the hopes inspired, are beyond computation. It is, 
indeed, refreshing to see the enthusiasm manifested by the 
friends everywhere, and the avidity with which they" have 
grasped the opportunities in connection with the Seventh 
Volume; and it is seldom that I meet any one now who is 
opposing himself in the work. 

The love and general good feeling manifested at the meetings
, especially at our little conventions, is distinctly noticeable
. ^ There is one matter, however, that I wish could be 
definitely impressed upon the minds of the friends everywhere
, especially at the conventions, and that is the necessity
 of punctuality and orderliness in our meetings. I do 
not like to be over-critical j but I notice that it is as a general
 thing that the same individuals are invariably late in 
coming in, and they never seem to realize what a disturbing 
factor this is, inconsiderate and impolite. I verily believe 
in this respect we are apt to be the most disorderly and lacking
 in reverence of all Christian people. I am sure if these 
dear friends realized how inconsiderate it appears to others, 
and what a lack of reverence is shown, they would surely 
try to correct this unseemly ha.bit of coming in after service 
is started, or leaving before it is finished. 

It we were given the privilege of an audience with an 
earthly king or ruler, we would be very punctilious as regards
 the time and manner of our arrival; and we would 
surely have respect enough to wait until the interview was 
closed, and not unceremoniously turn our back upon the king 
and leave his presence whilst he was yet speaking. Surely, 
if this is the case with any that hold high positions (here on 
earth, it ought to be more true when you hive been granted 
an audience with the Lord, and that he is communicating a 
message to us through his servant, whoever that may be. In 
plain, words, we should have respect enough and reverence 
enough for our Lord to come in time to our appointment and 
stay with him until the interview is ended from the opening 
hymn to the close of the Doxology. 

Of course, to every rule there are exceptions. In the case 
of illness or having to catch a train, there might be some 
allowance made, but wdiere brethren or sisters have any reason
 to 'believe that they must leave the meeting before it is 
ended, they should be careful and considerate enough to take 
their seats in the most inconspicuous place possible, so that 
their withdrawal would not cause any commotion. 

I am afraid, dear brother, that ins'tead of writing a letter, 
I got to sermonizing. However, if you will pardon the suggestion
, I do believe some short and pithy article in The 
Watch Tower might help us to overcome our slackness. 

With much love and earnest prayers for the Lord's blessings
 and guidance to be with you, I remain, 

Your brother in the Lord, " E. D. Sexton. — Pilgrim. 

FOB SUCH LOVE SHE WOULD MAKE RETUBN 

Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

Greetings in his dear name! I was so amazed at the wonderful
 love of the Father and Son, in a re-reading of the first 
article in The Watch Tower of July 15, 1916, that I cannot 
refrain from now expressing my gratitude that the dear heavenly
 Father used Brother Russell to make it m plain, that 
even my unworthiness can no longer cause me to doubt the 
love of these two Supreme Beings. Surely, "My cup runneth 
over I " 

As I read that article I thought, "Oh, for such love I would 
make some return!" and I am reminded that I can, if I be 
willing. I want to have my will completely immersed into 
the Lord's will. I still have daily, yea, hourly evidences that 
I am His child; and I am determined by the Lord's assisting 
grace to hold on until the end. 


The suggestion some time ago that we seek by prayer and 
study to develop more love has been pursued by me, and I am 
unable to express what a wonderful help I have derived therefrom
. The Lord surely has answered my prayers! With my 
heart filled with love even some very crucial tests have been 
only "light afflictions." 

In rereading my back Towers, I liave derived so much more 
good than at the former reading! I had not the capacity to 
assimilate them all at once. 

Yours in him, Farrell F. Gossin. 

MORE ENCOURAGEMENT FOB VOLUNTEERS 

Gentlemen: — 

Having read one of your pamphlets found in one of the 
railway depots I wi3h to state that it has never before been 
my pleasure to reach such a definite understanding with regard
 to a number of wonderfully important points heretofore 
a mystery. 

1 would like you to see to it that it will be made possible 
for me to receive regularly a copy of your Bible Students 
Monthly, as I am interested in the work coming from people
 who have not only been sincere and devout believers but 
also teachers and preachers of the gospel. 

Yours very truly, A. 0. Smith. — -Ind. 

WOULD CORRECT THE RUMORS 

Dear Brother: — 

Replying to your letter regarding rumors that have come 
to you about me and the questions respecting "that servant" 
in Matthew 24, and the "resurrection of the saints, " will state: 
because of misunderstandings, rumors have started on these 
and other subjects, which when passed from one to another, 
soon 'become distorted from the original facts. 

For your information, as well as for the information of 
any others, I desire to state: 

1st. I fully believe that the expression, "that servant," in 
Matthew 24 and Luke 12, applied to Pastor Russell, 

2nd. I do not deny the resurrection of the saints in 1878. 

3rd. I may add that neither I- nor any of my fellow directors
 in our present work are in any way opposing "the 
Society. 

Trusting these statements may stop these and other rumors 
from being further circulated, and clear up the present misunderstanding
, 1 remain, 

Yours in his service, L. W. Jones, M. I). — 111. 

HOT IK HARMONY 

Dear Brother:— 

I hereby withdraw as a shareholder of the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society, relinquishing any right to vote or 
be a member in the Society. 

I am not in harmony with nor do I approve of the Society 
nor its subsidiary corporations as now conducted subsequent 
to the death of Pastor Russell, 

Very truly years, F. H. MoGee. — N. J. 

[We commend the above as an honorable course for any 
who cannot conscientiously work in harmony with the Society
.— Ed. Com.] 

FALSE IMPRESSION DISSIPATED 

Recent publications in the press concerning the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society of Brooklyn, are of so exaggerated
, sensational and untruthful a character as to create 
a false impression in the minds of those ignorant of the facts. 
These publications made it appear that this great Society 
is rent by internal dissensions and that dissatisfaction has 
taken the place of harmony and that unity no longer exists. 

We are in a position to state here that no such condition 
of affairs exists. There may be a diversity of opinion upon 
certain subjects, but that is only natural in an organization 
of such an extensive membership. Beyond this there is nothing
 to justify the sensational stories referred to. The Society
 is as strong today, if not stronger, than ever before 
in its history. The death of Pastor Russell, its great founder, 
was of course severely felt, as he was the controlling spirit 
of its destinies, the man who made it the great and dominating
 influence for good it is. But a worthy successor has 
been found in Mr. Rutherford, who was the close friend, 
confidant and chief aid of Pastor Russell. With the great 
ability with which he is endowed, Mr. Rutherford is continuing
 the work along the lines laid down by his predecessor, 
and already, as the result of his earnestness, energy and welldirected
 efforts, has succeeded in increasing the efficiency and 
usefulness of the Society. 

This is the position of affairs today, no matter what any 


[6227] 


(94-82) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


newspaper may say to the contrary. Needless to say that we 
rejoice that such is the case, because we recognize in this 
Society a great force for good. Through its instrumentality 
the Bible today is read by more people and read more intelligently
, than ever before. It has made people think, it 


has caused them to moralize along the right lines, and has 
opened their eyes to the absurdity, and in some instances, 
the cruelty of certain old-fashioned dogmatic theologians. 

Prom Mercantile and Financial Times. — N. Y. 


From time to time we receive letters concerning the Mena 
Film Company; and some of the dear friends seem to misunderstand
 the attitude of the Society toward that organization
. We have heretofore published in The Watch Toweb 
the Society's position, but we now repeat that the Mena Film 
Company is a separate and distinct organization from the 
Watch Towee Bible and Tract Society. Our Society has 
nothing whatsoever to do with the work of the Mena Film 
Company. We have no money invested in it now, nor have 
we had anything to do with this work in the past. 

This does not mean that we are antagonistic to the Mena 
Film Company and would, therefore, want to do it injury. It 
is not our province to do injury to any one. We have no interest
 in the railroads of the land; yet we would not want 
to do injury to any railroad company. Investments in railroad
 securities are for purely selfish purposes. Investments 
which are for the purpose of teaching the Bible surely are 
much more commendable. 

The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society we believe 
was specially organized under the Lord's direction for the 
purpose of doing the harvest work of the gospel age, and nothing
 else. Thousands of Christian people, realizing this to be 
the mission of the Society, have gladly contributed their time 
and money and have joined with it in such work. We do not 
believe that any other organization in the world has been used 
or is now being used to do harvest work; hence all of our 
time, energy and money is spent in that 'behalf. We do not 
believe it to be pleasing to the Lord for us to engage in any 
other ,work except that supervised by the Society. 

More than a year ago certain consecrated brethren believed 


IN RE THE MENA FILM CO. 


that they saw a field opening to them for the teaching of the 
Bible through the medium of moving pictures. They organized 
the Mena Film Company for that purpose. Such was their 
privilege. They believe the Lord's blessing has been upon their 
undertaking. If so, then all Christians should rejoice with 
them. Anything that turns the people away from error and 
teaches them the truth is to be commended. The Mena Film 
Company has produced a picture different from any that is 
shown in any of the theatres throughout the world. The 
picture discloses the perfect man and woman in Eden, and the 
temptation of Mother Eve by Lucifer. Many episodes are 
then presented showing how Satan, from the time of Eden 
until now, has sought to thwart God's purposes and how, 
ultimately, Satan will be overthrown, and how restitution 
blessings will then come to mankind. Surely every true Christian
 rejoices to have the people receive the message of Truth 
relating to God's great plan. We cannot 'believe that Satan 
would wish this picture shown, 'because it exposes his nefarious 
methods and his ultimate downfall. We must conclude, then, 
that the Lord would be pleased to have it shown; because 
it shows the ultimate triumph of truth and righteousness. Just 
how much good will be acquired by the public who have no 
knowledge of the Bible, we do not know; but it may be that 
the Lord desires to use this for the purpose of turning the 
minds of the people back to the Bible, The clergy have turned 
their minds away from it and offer them no hope. The world 
i3 in great distress. If the Lord is pleased to bless the efforts 
of these brethren of the Mena Film Company, then we will 
rejoice with them. 


KINGDOM NEWS 


The evidences daily increase that the "dark night" is fast 
settling down. The new dispensation is coming in. It seems 
appropriate, therefore, to announce the kingdom, and to call 
the people's attention to the fact that millions now living on 
earth may never die, because the "times of restitution" will 
soon begin. The Society is issuing a statement which explains
 the opposition manifested against the message of the 
seventh volume, how it came to be suppressed, and the clergy's 
responsibility in connection therewith. A full explanation such 


as the friends and the public desire is given in clear terms. 
We are shipping the classes a supply of these papers for general
 circulation, in about the same quantity as wag ordered 
for the No. 99 B. S. M. distribution. These papers are released
 for distribution immediately you receive them, and we 
pray the Lord's blessing upon the united efforts of the friends 
in this proclamation of our present position. Shipments will 
begin to be made within a few days. 


Many recent letters from friends throughout the country 
tell of the special help and comfort the 1918 Year Text has 
given them at this time: "The end of all things is at hand: 
Be ye therefore sober and watch unto prayer; and above all 
things have fervent love among yourselves." (1 Peter 4:7, 8) 


YEAR'S MOTTO FULL OF MEANING 

We still have a small quantity of these mottoes, also postcards 
bearing this text, which the friends may have at half pnce 
while they last. The mottoes, 5c each; the postcards 10c per 
dozen, postpaid. 


Vol. XXX IX 


BROOKLYN, X. Y., APRIL 1, 1918 


No. 7 


OUR SAFE REFUGE 

"Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee; hide thyself as it were for a little moment 
until the indignation be overpast. For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his plaee to punish the inhabitants
 of the earth for their iniquity ; the earth also shall disclose her blood, and 
shall no more cover her slain." — .Isaiah 26:20, 21. 


While standing upon the watch tower and beholding the 
terrible storm that is raging, the sea and the waves roaring, 
lashing with fury the more stable places of society; while 
hearing the rumbling thunder of the near approaching earthquake
 and beholding in the distance occasional flashes of 
destructive fire, what a wonderful privilege to be numbered 
among the people of God and to know that we are absolutely 
secure from all harm ! Who can enjoy such a privilege as 
this? Jehovah, through his Word, answers, "My people." 

What does it mean to be of the people of God? What 
are the requirements? Ah, it means much more than many 
think it means — much more, both on man's part and on 
God's part. On the part of man it means not merely the 
naming of the name of Christ and being a member of some 
organization which claims to be Christian. It means on 
man's part that he must recognize himself to be born a sinner 
and in need of a savior; he must recognize that Jesus Christ, 
by the grace of God, died and rose again for the purpose of 


redeeming mankind. Believing this, it means that man must 
take the further step of a full surrender of his own will 
to do the will of God — a full and complete consecration to 
the Lord. It means, further, full heart obedience to the will 
of God by dail/ taking up his cross and following in the 
footsteps of Jesus, and thus continuing faithful, even unto 
death. As the Psalmist expresses it, the thought of "my 
people 3 ' includes only those who have made a covenant with 
God by sacrifice. (Psalm 50:5) It includes all such consecrated
 and faithful children of God, however young or old, 
weak or strong, they may be, who possess a pure heart, firmly 
and resolutely fixed, and loyally obedient unto the heavenly 
Father. 

WHO CONSTITUTE GOD'S PEOPLE 

On the part of God it means that he has accepted uh at 

consecration through the merit of his beloved Son, Jesus, and 

that he has begotten us anew to a hope of life, reserved in 

heaven for those who are kept by his power, through faith, 


IG2U] 


April 1, 1918 


THE IVA TCH TOWER 


(99-100> 


even unto the end; that he has given to such his exceeding 
great and precious promises, which promises guarantee the 
faithful one that she shall be a partaker of the first, or chief 
resurrection. It signifies that in this present life we have 
the fatherly love, care, counsel, discipline and protection of 
God. It means that such may claim the precious promises 
in his Word, which are given for their comfort in the hour 
of distress or tribulation. All such have the glorious hope 
set before them of being forever with the Lord. 

DIVINE' WBATH UPON FALSE SYSTEMS 

Thousands have been wrongly induced by the blind clergy 
to believe that they are God's people if they merely join 
themselves to some earthly organization and support the 
clergy, no matter what else they may do. These blindly 
follow the clergy, concerning whom Jesus said: "If the blind 
lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch-" in the great time 
of trouble that is now impending. (Matthew 15:14) Through 
all the age, God has permitted his people to be among these 
organizations, some being fed by good shepherds, while others 
were ministered unto by false shepherds. Until the harvest 
time the wheat class has been scattered among the tares, 
the true sheep among the wolves. In due time the harvest 
of the age came ; the gathering and separating has been taking 
place, and now is about accomplished. 

Throughout the age, "his people" have been in the midst 
of these great man-made organizations, the nominal Christian 
church, which God designates as Babylon (meaning confusion), 
but which men call Christendom (meaning Christ's kingdom
) . These systems have contained some true, loyal Christians
 and many who have been merely Christians in name. 
Toward these great systems which have appropriated the 
name of Christ and claimed to represent his teachings and 
his spirit, although possessing the spirit of the world, God 
is now manifesting his displeasure and soon will pour upon 
them his indignation. For some time he has been warning 
his people in these systems, saying, "Come out of her, my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye 
receive not of her plagues." — Revelation 18:4. 

In the text, Jehovah addresses himself to "his people." 
More than twenty centuries ago, God's prophet, Daniel, took 
his standpoint at the hour in which the church now finds 
herself, standing on this side the vail. God foreknew the 
condition now on the earth. He foresaw the great time of 
trouble that would come upon mankind because of the unfaithfulness
 of that class of men to which he had committed 
the privilege and obligation of proclaiming his coming kingdom
. Through other prophets also he spoke of this time of 
trouble, He indicated that wars would first come, to be followed
 by revolution and anarchy. The great Master himself 
referred to such a time, saying, "Upon the earth distress of 
nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; 
men's hearts failing them for fear and for looking after those 
things which are coming on the earth; for the powers of 
heaven shall be shaken," culminating, as he stated, in "great 
tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world 
to this time, no, nor ever shall be." — Luke 21:25, 26; Matthew
 24:21. 

God foresaw *that sin would reach its fulness; that selfishness
 would ripen and go to seed; that a time of ill-will 
and hatred would prevail — a time of religious intolerant 
and persecution upon the faithful ones following in the Master
's footsteps. In our text, the Prophet seems to express the 
thought that the Lord bides his time; and when his due 
time arrives, he says: "For, behold, the Lord cometh out of 
his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their 
iniquity; the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall 
no more cover her slain." 

GOD'S LOVING COUNSEL TO HIS PEOPLE 

The Lord likens his people unto sheep. Sheep are defenseless
 creatures. Again he likens them unto children. 
Children are guileless. But his description of the trouble 
is so terrible that even the strong and full-grown might 
well be expected to quake for fear. Amid all the storm 
and strife and turmoil, God -would have his children to rest 
in peace and quietness in his love. And so he causes his 
Prophet to say: "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose 
mind is stayed on thee ; because he trusteth in thee. Trust 
ye in the Lord forever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
 strength." (Isaiah 26:3, 4) When one becomes a 
child of God and follows in the footsteps of the blessed Master 
and Lord, those of the world cannot understand him. They 
look upon him as they did upon the Master — as despised 
ones. God foreknew that the time of great stress would come 
and that some of his people would be in the midst of it; 
and so he caused his Prophet to write the words of the text, 
which seem to apply so appropriately at the present hour. 


There is an affectionate tenderness and sweetness in his words. 
Like a loving, gentle father, he says: "Come, my people, enter 
thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee; hide 
thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation 
be overpast." How loving of our Father thus to provide a 
refuge, and sweetly to invite his people to enter in* 

Knowing the inability of his people to defend and protect 
themselves; knowing their desire for help and strength, he 
lovingly made provision by giving them numerous precious 
promises. Through another of his holy prophets, he put into 
our mouths the beautiful words of trust and confidence: 
"God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in 
trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though the earth [the 
present order of society] be removed, and though the mountains
 [governments] be carried into the midst of the sea 
[overthrown by the turbulent sea of world-wide anarchy] ; 
though the waters [peoples] thereof roar and be troubled, 
though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. . . . 
The Lord of hosts is with bs; the God of Jacob is our 
refuge." (Psalm 46:1-7) With fatherly love he beholds his 
children, and <f like as a father pitioth his children, so the 
Lord pitieth them that reverence him." (Psalm 103:13) 
Lovingly he counsels them to full confidence and faith and to 
quiet trustfulness in his loving power and provision, saying 
to them "In quietness and in confidence shall be your 
strength."— Isaiah 30:15. 

Poor, sin-sick world; groaning and travailing in pain, waiting
 and hoping for deliverance, but not knowing how it will 
come. God is not lacking in love for them. In the midst of 
the great tribulation, gladly would we call their attention to 
the loving provision that Jehovah has made. The great indignation
 of Jehovah now upon the earth is permitted for 
a good purpose. Vailed behind the clouds of his expressed 
indignation against the sins pf men, he strikes with wisdom 
these heavy blows which will humble their pride to the dust 
and shatter their idols. Then he will pour in the balm of 
Gilead and commence their everlasting healing. Sweetly the 
Master gave expression to his Father's will when, in beautiful 
phrase, he said: "God so loved the world that he gave his 
only begotten Son, that whosoever believe th in him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life.*' (John 3:16) Jehovah loved 
the world then, and his loving provision will soon be put into 
operation for them. Now he wields the rod for correction. 
Thus he shows his people his love for all mankind. While 
God's people, amid the storm, rejoice in the protection he 
has graciously provided for them, he would have them manifest
 his spirit toward the world. And while his blows of 
righteous indignation fall heavily upon the world, he would 
have his people point mankind to the cause of their calamities
 and to his, the only remedy. He would have them 
know that he is the mighty One who will rule the universe 
through his Christ, to bring blessings to the peoples and 
nations of earth. To them he says: "Be still, and know that 
I am God; I will be exalted among the nations; I will be 
exalted in the earth."-— Psalm 46010." 
OUE JOURNEY 
When first we knew the Lord and his gracious provision 
for the human race, our hearts responded with sincere joy. 
Born in sin, shapen in iniquity, having no right to life, 
children of wrath, without God and without hope, we wandered 
in the wilderness (of Babylon) in a solitary way and we 
found no place in any of her organizations in which we could 
dwell in peace and happiness. Hungry and thirsty, our 
souls fainted within us. and we cried unto the Lord in our 
trouble and he delivered us out of our distress. Then he led 
us forth by the right way, that we might go to the city 
(kingdom) of our everlasting abiding place. Feeling the 
warmth of his love, joy filled our t hearts, because the Lord 
had satisfied our longings and filled our hungry souls with 
goodness. Then we saw not only a hope for the consecrated 
of the Gospel age, buit a hope for all mankind in due time 
to turn away from the wrongful course and receive the\ blessings
 of restitution. Then was our mouth filled with laughter 
and our tongue with singing, and we said: "The Lord has 
made a wonderful provision for all, even the heathen." "The 
Lord hath done great things for U3, whereof we are glad." — 
Psalm 107:1-10; 126:1-3. 

Begotten of the holy Spirit, and having our minds illuminated
, we perceived that we had entered the blessed condition 
of 'the Holy" and found that our heart's desire was beginning
 to be realized. As we have rested here, the words of 
the Psalmist have been sweet to us: "One thing have I 
desired of the Lord, that will I seek after ; that I may dwell 
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold 
the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple." (Psalm 
27:4) Dwelling temporarily in the spirit-begotten condition, 


[6229] 


U01-102) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


we have looked forward to the spirit-torn state, when we 
may behold the Lord in all his glory, and worship him in 
the beauty of holiness. 

Gradually the knowledge was brought to us that some 
severe trials awaited us on the journey. "For even hereunto
 were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, 
leaving us an example that we should follow in his steps." 
(1 Peter 2:21) The sufferings of The Christ must precede 
the everlasting joy. Christ Jesus, the Head, was made perfect
 through the things which he suffered. Likewise must the 
members of the body pass through the fiery trials. In no 
other way could a loving, sympathetic high priest be developed
. The journey has been interspersed with some trials 
and some joys, the Lord granting to us just the experiences 
needful to develop his people. 

WARNED OF THE STOBM 

Graciously and lovingly our Father warned us of the storm 
coming upon the earth at the close of the age, to the end 
that we might be prepared for it, having our faith strong in 
him and in the power of his might. Wonderfully he has 
led us from time to time in greener pastures, and" lovingly 
fed us upon the precious promises, giving us a clearer vision 
thereof, that we might grow stronger in him. Through his 
chosen servant, he, time and again placed before us the meat 
in due season. We were told and expected that the Seventh 
Volume of Studies rx the Scriptures, the last of a series 
foretold in Revelation, would be given to us. and that it 
would bring greater trials and sufferings, because it would 
greatly anger Babylon. We were forewarned, that we might 
be fortified in faith and in the love of God. More than 
twenty years ago, the Lord of the harvest, through his servant, 
called our attention to the fact (Z. 1898-95) that King Ahab 
and his queen, Jezebel, typified the civil and ecclesiastical 
powers; that Elijah typed the church in her closing days; 
that likewise Herod and his unlawful wife, Herodias, typed 
the civil powers and the apostate church, long ago unlawfully
 united; that Salome, the daughter of Herodias, typified
 united Protestantism, and John the Baptist the last 
members of the church upon the earth. We were advised 
to expect a fulfillment of these types in antitype. 
Then it was that Brother Russell wrote: 

"It is altogether possible, indeed probable, we think, 
that John's course which brought him into conflict with 
Herod was in some degree typical of the course of the 
Gospel church in this present time; and of the course of 
events that may he expected. If it be a type, Herod would 
represent civil government, and the unlawful wife would 
represent the nominal church, which throughout the symbolic
 Scriptures is represented as a woman, Jezebel, etc. 
Should it prove to be a type by its fulfillment in antitype, 
the fulfillment will probably be on something like the following
 lines: 

"(1) A partial reunion of church and state. (This 
is now practically an accomplished fact.) 

"(2) In such case it would become the duty of the 
true church, the forerunners and announcers of the Messianic
 kingdom, to reprove the civil powers as well as 
the nominal church systems, and to declare their union 
unlawful — contrarv to the Word of God. 

"(3) The effect of this would pretty surely be to 
awaken the animosity of both civil and religious powers; 
but it would draw out especially the animosity and venom 
of the latter. 

"(4) The church nominal, in her false position, would 
be anxious to stifle the reproofs and to destroy the reprovers
, and the effect would be that the civil power 
would be induced to pass such legislation as would restrain
 the liberty of the faithful ones and hinder them 
from public utterances — as John was hindered by imprisonment
. 

( *(fi) Herodias* personal influence being insufficient, 
it may subsequently be augmented by the influence of her 
daughter (united Protestantism) who will be so fully in 
sympathy with her as to become her tool in the destruction
 of the most loyal servants of God." 

In due time we received the Seventh Volume, and it caused 
some fiery trials among the consecrated. Others joyfully 
grasped the pointed sword and used it. We behold the picture
 being fulfilled. Is it not now time for all who have been 
disturbed in their minds and in doubt as to what should be 
done to get their eyes opened to the real situation? Long 
have we knowTi of the grudge held by Herodias. We have 


beheld now the dancing of Salome, and Herod has said to 
the John class. "No longer may you wield the Sword— 'The 
Finished Mystery' — and press it against the gates of Babylon." 
A place typifies a condition. John whs put in prison, and 
this would suggest that the John class would be restrained 
from the proclamation of the message of the kingdom. The 
John class is now in this condition. While in prison, John 
was in doubt as to whether or not Jesus was the Messiah. 
So he sent and asked him. Some are now in doubt as to 
whether or not the Lord is really here ani that the end is 
here, and if the kingdom of Messiah is about to be made 
visible. Some are in doubt as to whether or not a mistake 
has been made with reference to the use of the sword. Jesus 
sent word to John that the blind were seeing, the halt and 
lame were being healed, and other miracles wrought. He did 
not say, "I am the Messiah"; but be gave the evidences that 
would prove he was. Now the Lord is saying to the John 
class, "Look up, lift up your heads, behctld the fulfillment of 
my great prophecy set forth in Matthew 24. This is evidence 
that your deliverance is nigh. The kingdom of heaven is 
at hand. Rejoice!" 

DOOB CLOSING—WINDS BLOWING 

The evidence seems to point strongly to the fact that the 
door is closing. We are also seeing evidences of the winds being 
somewhat loosened, and these we may expect to be fully loosed 
and the great storm or whirlwind soon to be upon the world. 
Many are asking, "What are we to do when we see the door 
closing?" The words of Brother Russell, written more than 
eleven years ago, seem fittingly appropriate here: 

"The shutting of the door mentioned in one of our 
Lord's parables seems to imply something quite in harmony 
with the loosing of the winds when the sealing in the 
forehead shall have been accomplished. We cannot surmise
 just how this trouble will be precipitated and the 
door for further fellowship and promulgation of the truth 
be closed. It would not surprise us, however, if in some 
manner it would be accomplished through some governmental
 department. We cannot think now of what plea 
or pretext could be used to iaterfere with our legal rights 
and privileges under the law, but we are to expect that 
politicians will be ready at that time Co obey the united 
voice of the people, not the voice of God, and that, 
however illegal or unjust the procedure, they would be 
prepared to put a stop to our work. When that time shall 
come we will consider it to be our duty to use all reasonable
 energy to maintain our legal rights and privileges 
and to keep the door open. When it shall close, in spite 
of our every endeavor, we will accept the result as being 
of divine providence and apply the Master's words, 'Thou 
couldst have no power at all over me except it were given 
thee from above/ (John* 19:11 )"— Z. 1907-148. 

All of us realize that we are living in a peculiar time, 
a time in which the public mind is peculiarly affected. Few, 
indeed, are those who can understand our motive in withdrawing
 from the world and its various organizations and 
the nominal Christian church, to walk alone with God. Many 
are the reproaches which the Lord's people must endure for 
his sake. Let us not be dismayed with these trying experiences
. Long ago the Lord warned that they would come, 
and now they are here. To us now he says: "Fear not, shut 
thy doors |"of faith] about thee [and heed not the reproaches] ; 
hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation
 be overpast," 

PLACE OF REFUGE 

The place of hiding is the secret place of the Most High, 
under the shadow of the Almighty. (Psalm 91:1-9) This 
secret place of the Most High, beloved, is the secret place of 
communion and intimate fellowship with God, through the 
blessed privilege of prayer and through faith in his precious 
Word and his promised providential" care. Beautifully the 
poet has expressed it: 

"When the storms of life are raging, 

Tempests wild on sea and land, 
I will seek a place of refuge 

In the shadow of God's hand. 
He will hide me, he will hide me, 

Where no harm can e'er betide me; 
He will hide mo, safely hide me. 

In the shadow of his hand." 

Oh, how precious is this hiding place! What rest and 
refreshment we find in the midst of the commotion that is 


[6230] 


April 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(102-103) 


now upon the whole world and especially upon Christendom. 
We pity the poor, groaning creation. We rejoice to know 
that ere long God will bring order out of chaos, and peace to 
the people. It can come only in his own good way. 

"PEAR NOT" 

The day of persecution is at hand. The same religious 
intolerance manifested in the dark ages is still abroad in the 
land and is being manifested in a marked degree. Recently 
some of the Lord's dear little ones have been roughly treated. 
Their homes have been searched, without even a search warrant
 being presented, and their books and Bibles taken away 
from them. In some instances houses were broken into by 
force, in clear violation of the law. Some have been arrested 
and thrown into foul jails. The clergy have incited this work. 
They have openly charged from their pulpits and continue 
to charge that the International Bible Students Association 
is a pro-German organization, distributing "Hun propaganda 
under the cloak of religion." They have denounced the 
Bible Students as traitors and urged that they be prosecuted 
for treason. Verily, the spirit of Inquisition is in their 
hearts. 

But, beloved, be not at all disturbed by these things. 
The same charge was laid against the Master by the same 
class of men. Evidently Jesus had in mind the present 
condition when he said: "If the world hate you, ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you. The servant is not 
greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they 
will also persecute you." — John 15:18, 20, 

The Constitution of the United States guarantees that 
every man shall be free from search and his property from 
seizure, except upon presentation of a warrant, duly issued 
and served according to law. No person, not even an officer, 
has the right to go into the house of another and search 
it and take away his property unless he is armed with a 
warrant properly issued. "But they disregard the law," you 
say. Yes, even so. The inflamed condition of the public mind 
at* this time is such that men go to- all kinds of excesses. 
Usually it is the clergy that are the worst agitators. They 
stir up the people. But be not afraid, having in mind always 
that we are in the Lord's hands. The LoTd speaks to his 
people that their faith might be strong. He desires that 
they shall have a childlike trust in him; and, that they 
may be encouraged, he bids them turn a deaf ear to the reproaches
 of men, saying, "Hearken unto me, ye that know 
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law : fear 
ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their 

revHings I, even I, am he that comforteth you; who 

art thou that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall 
die. and of the son of man which shall be made as grass; 
and forgettest the Lord thy maker, that hath stretched forth 
the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and hast 
feared continually every day because of the fury of the oppressor
, as if he were ready to destroy? .... I have put 
my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the 
shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens [establish 
the new visible ruling powers] and lay the foundations of 
the earth [the new order of society], and say unto Zion 
[those tried and proved by these afflictions], Thou art my 
people." — Isaiah 51:7-16. 

How marvelously the Almighty God has made provision 
for his little ones! He would not have one of his children 
whom Christ has made free to come again under the bondage 
of the fear of man, which bringeth a snare. He would have 
every one in Christ realize bis liberty from sin and superstition
, and his solemn accountability to God for all his 
thoughts and words and doings. 

The child of God who is strong in faith will claim the 
promises and say: "The Lord is my light and my salvation; 
whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of 
whom shall I be afraid? ♦ . . . Though a host should encamp
 against me, my heart shall not fear; though war should 
rise against me, in this will I be confident. ... In the time 
of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion ; in the secret place 
of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up upon 
a rock." "The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my 
deliverer; the God of my rock; in him will 1 trust; he is 
my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, 
and my refuge, my savior; thou savest me from violence." — 
Psalm 27:1-10; 2 Samuel 22:2-4. 

If we have come to the end of the harvest, if the dark 
night is here, then we may expect to be required to stand 
for a while. To such the "words of the Apostle come as a 
consolation: "Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of 
God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, 
having done all, to stand." (Ephesians 6:13-18) In this 


time of great stress it is especially' needful that the Lord's 
people consider the value of the whole armor of God and 
have it all on. "Above all, take the shield of faith, wherewith
 ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the 
wicked." The experiences through which the church is now 
passing are real tests of faith.' The heavenly Father now 
sweetly says: "Hide thyself as it were for a Httle moment, 
until the indignation be overpast." Some of the afflictions 
through which the Lord's people are now passing seem indeed 
grievous to be borne ; but let us remember the Apostle's words, 
that these are light afflictions, enduring but for a moment, 
and working out for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory. (2 Corinthians 4:17) Having always in 
mind the glories that are before us, we can rejoice inj the 
tribulation, knowing that we have a home, not made with 
hands eternal in the heavens, into which it will soon be our 
privilege to enter. And there, in the presence of the Lord, 
we shall have fulness of joy and pleasures for evermore. 
—Psalm 16:11. 

THE KINGDOM HEBE 

It will be the policy of the Internationl Bible Students 
Association to do legally all in their power to keep the door 
of opportunity open for the proclamation of the message of 
the Lord's kingdom ; but when conditions become such that 
this can no longer be done in a lawful manner, then we will 
take it to be the Lord's will that we do no more. We know 
that nothing can happen to the Lord's little ones, except by 
the Lord's permission. "No weapon that is formed against 
thee shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against, 
thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage 
of the servants of the I^ord and their righteousness is of 
me, saith the Lord," — Isaiah 54:17. 

We believe that the end of the harvest is here and that 
the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And if so, then shortly 
after the great time of trouble ends, restitution blessings will 
begin. Marvelous are the times in which we are living. 
Daily the evidence accumulates that the Lord is taking control
 of things. The public press announces that "by the 
close of the present month (March) Palestine, the ancient 
home of the Jews, will again, after a lapse of many centuries, 
be under JewifJi administration. The Jewish Commission sent 
out by the English Zionist Federation, with the authority of 
the King of England and the British Parliament, left London 
a few days ago to take full charge of the reconstruction of 
the Holy Land and to lay the foundation of a new Jewish 
State. This commission will act not later than March 27, 
the eve of the Passover, the festival commemorating Jewish 
emancipation from Egyptian bondage." Forty years after 
the withdrawal of God's favor from the Jews, Judea was subjugated
. Forty years from the beginning of the return of 
his favor to the Jews (1878), the Jews officially take possession
 of Jerusalem. They are returning to Jerusalem in 
unbelief. But soon the eyes of their understanding will be 
opened and they will recognize the Lord Jesus as the great 
long-looked-for Messiah. 

The great Master plainly Baid that for the elect's sake 
the time of trouble would be cut short and that some flesh 
will be saved, being brought through the fiery trouble. Therefore
, confidently we may say that some now living on earth 
will never die. * What a wonderful privilege to announce that 
to the world at this time! Let every child of God do so, 
according to his several ability. Surely this is good tidings 
of great joy to fhe sin-sick, torn and bleeding world. Surely 
it is a wonderful honor and privilege to announce the kingdom. 
<; How beautiful upon the mountains [ kingdoms 1 are the feet 
of him TThe Christl that bringeth good tidings, that published
 peace, that bringeth good tidings of good, that published
 salvation ; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth." 
(Isaiah 52:7) While the turmoil increases we can confidently
 announce the kingdom of the Lord and at the same 
time enjoy the blessed invitation of our Father: "Come, my 
people, enter thou into thy chambers and shut thy doors upon 
thee; hide thyself as it were for a little moment until the 
indignation be overpast." With full assurance of faith, then, 
we can say, "Lord, we will trust in the covert of thy wings." 

Glorious is the great Prince of Peace, taking unto himself 
his power to reign. Glorious his kingdom of peace and blessings
, whose walls signify salvation, protection and blessing 
to all who enter it; whose foundations, laid in justice, can 
never he moved; whose builder and designer is God. It is in 
the light which will shine forth from this glorious kingdom of 
God that the nations and peoples of earth will walk up the 
highway of holiness, up to perfection and full harmony with 
Jehovah. By the eye of faith beholding the blessings that 
await us, with confidence and joy will we, by the Lord's grace, 
endure for a little while, until we shall see him face to face. 


[6231] 


OUR STRONG INCENTIVE TO COURAGE AND CONFIDENCE 


"Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of 
grace to help in time of 
The Jewish priesthood was, as we all know typical of the 
royal priesthood, Head and body, which has been developed 
during the Gospel age. Israel's high priest was a type of 
our great High Priest, Jesus Christ. The Jewish high priest 
made a typical atonement for his sins every year. Did he 
not possess sympathy for sinners, he would probably be very 
loath to undergo the experiences in which he risked his life, 
as he passed under the vail into the Most Holy, to sprinkle 
the blood of the sacrifice upon and before the Mercy Seat. 
This was a crucial test to the high priest. If he had done 
all the work in the proper manner, he would pass beyond the 
vail successfully and make the atonement. But if he had 
failed in any particular, the passing under the vail would 
mean his death. Hence the high priest was undertaking 
something which was fraught with the gravest danger and 
the most serious possibilities for himself. 

The apostle points out to us that, while there may have 
been more or less sympathy in the high priests of Israel, 
yet our High Priest is the one who has special sympathy, 
special feeling for human weakness. He is not one of the 
hard, callous kind, who could not or would not appreciate the 
difficulties of those for whom his sacrifice was made, and 
especially for those who are seeking to be hi 3 followers, to 
walk as he walked. God's Word assures us that he is "touched 
with the feeling of our infirmities." He was "tempted in 
all points like as we [his disciples] are, yet without sin." 
This gives him special ability to sympathize with us. — 
Hebrews 4:15. 

Some may inquire in what way our Lord Jesus could be 
tempted as we are, seeing that he was "holy, harmless, undefiled
, and separate from sinners." We are to remember that 
this expression does not relate to the mere man Christ Jesus, 
but to our Lord after he had become our High Priest, after 
he had been begotten of God's holy spirit. He was not 
tempted in all points like as the unregenerate world are 
tempted; for he was not a fallen being, but was perfect, and 
was a new creature. Hence he was tempted, tried, as new 
creatures have ever since been tried. Jesus was never tempted 
to drunkenness, profligacy, debauchery, murder, theft, etc. 
Neither do his followers, as new creatures have any such 
temptations. If any of them are tempted along these lines, 
it is their perverted, fallen flesh that is tempted; it is because
 of a disordered and diseased condition df their mortal 
body resulting from a former life of sin or from inherited 
tendencies* These the new creatures must overcome by divine 
grace. 

NEW CREATURE'S PECULIAR TEMPTATIONS 

The temptations which are peculiar to the new creature, 
and to which our Lord was exposed are along the lines of 
loyalty to God, of trust in God, of persevering determination 
to obey him, however contrary to human inclination. They 
are temptations which would present themselves to any intelligent
 creature of God under like conditions. These were 
the lines of Jesus' temptations and testings. 

During the period of our Lord's temptation in the wilderness
 the adversary suggested to him that he should attract 
the public, to arouse their awe and admiration for him, that 
he might thus become their king — not according to God's 
will, but according to worldly policy. If he had leaped from 
the pinnacle of the temple he would have been tempting God, 
arid would have been guilty of presumptuous sin. God has 
never promised to protect any one who acts in violation of 
his will. Satan's quotation of Psalm 01:11, 12. presented 
to our Lord a temptation to misapply a Scriptural promise 
and to presume upon the Father's protection while seeking to 
gratify a desire for vain-glory, and to become a great king 
by a course contrary to God's purpose. 

And so Jesus promptly . said to the tempter, "Get thee 
behind me, Satan!" The Father, had mapped out a certain 
course for the Son to follow, a course that would bring 
suffering and death. But it was the only pathway to glory. 
He has mapped out the same course for those who have 
covenanted to walk in Jesus' footsteps; and we are to be 
loyal, as he was. If we are not thus loyal, we shall surely 
not reach our goal. As temptation to take any other plan or 
way than the one which God had purposed was one of the 
special lines of temptation that came to our great Head, 
so will it be* to each member of his body. 

Our temptations will be as strong as were those of Jesus; 
i.e., they will be as strong for us as his were for him. As 
he was" ft perfect man, he was much more able to reason 
into these things and to see his way through them than are 
we. Yet the same principle is involved. Jesus had perfect 
flesh, perfect mentality; but he also had larger ambitions. 


grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find 
need." — Hebrews 4:16. 

We have imperfect flesh, defective mentality, and have not 
the same degree of ambition. And so the Father has seemed 
to arrange that all his sons shall have practically the same 
amount of difficulty and testing. 

Jesus had all the vigor and energy of a perfect man, and 
naturally the greater dread of death. It is a comparatively 
small thing for a person who is weakened by disease and 
physical suffering, and who is drawing to the tomb, to say, 
"I am so tired, and would be so glad to die!" But for one 
who is enjoying perfection of life and vigor, to say, "Father, 
I yield up my life to thee," is a different matter. He would 
naturally desire to cling tenaciously to life, to shrink from 
letting ft slip from his grasp. 

THE TENDER SYMPATHY OF THE MASTER 
We are glad to know that the Master was "touched with 
a feeling of our infirmities." Although he was free from 
the weaknesses of the flesh which hamper his body members, 
yet be mangled with men for thirty-thee years; and he saw 
and realized their condition. Mloreover, "he took upon himself 
our weaknesses and sicknesses and bare our infirmities." In 
fulfilling the Father's will he gave out his vitality to the 
multitudes. "Virtue went out of him and healed them all." 
It is particularly recorded, in the case of the woman who had 
an issue of blood, that when she touched Jesus, he perceived 
that virtue [vitality, strength! had gone out of him. Thus 
was his own vitality depleted and some measure of their 
suffering transferred to his own person. 

When we recognize the loving, sympathetic character of 
the one who died for us, who afterward ascended up on high, 
and who tells us that he will apply of his sacrificial merit 
on our behalf to make good for all deficiencies and unintentional
 sins, we may well take courage and press on in 
the race set before ns, The realization of his tender love 
and care should enable us to lay hold with greater firmness 
upon the precious promises. Forgetting the things that are 
behind, and pressing forward to the glorious things just before 
us, let us run with patience and determination to win. Let 
us, as the apostle enjoins, "come boldly unto the throne of 
grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in 
time of need." 

The apostle's thought is not that we are to come with 
boldness, with )elf-assurance, but rather with holy courage, 
stimulated by the Lord's own invitation and promise. Let 
us come trustingly, pouring out our hearts freely unreservedly, 
to our Father, in the name of our beloved Advocate, our 
High Priest. Let us not be discouraged by our difficulties, 
by our trials and cares, We are to proceed onward in our 
heavenward way with confidence not in ourselves, but in the 
Lord. Although the Captain of our Salvation was without 
sin, vet because of is own experiences while he was a man, 
he knows all about our temptations, our struggles, our besetments
. Knowing this we can come to him with greater 
courage, and tell him all about our troubles, realizing his 
perfect sympathy. 

REASONS FOE COMING TO THE THRONE OF GRACE 
For two reasons we should come to the throne of grace: 
(11 That we may obtain mercy. There is not a son or 
daughter of Adam who has not done wrong. There is not 
a soul amongst the Lord's family who has not made many 
mistakes. The new creature does not meditate sin nor follow 
sin; but if any be overtaken in a fault, lot him come with 
courage to the'mercy seat, to the throne of favor, for mercy 
and pardon through our dear Redeemer. Let him remember 
that if his heart is still loyal and true, if he is grievpd 
because of his trespasses, the 'throne of prrace i3 open to him, 
for the Lord knows all about his difficulties. 

If he does not thus come, he will be under 1 a cloud, be 
cause of his wrong course and his failure to run quickly to his 
Father in heaven. He needs to have that earthborn cloud 
removed. But it will only grow more dense if he remains 
away from the mercy seat. The sin will remain; and thus 
another spot will appear upon his wedding robe, because of 
his lack of faith and obedience, in postponing the proper 
step of hastening to the Lord. The heavenly Father shows 
no mercy directly. All these applications of mercy and cleansing
 are made through the Son, our great Advocate and 
Head. We must come to the Father through the channel of 
his own arrangement, in order to obtain the promised mercy; 
for God himself has bidden us thus to come. In this way 
the cloud is entirely removed, and the erring one has full 
forgiveness of sins through the merit of our Savior. 

(2) Additionally, we need to come to the throne of grace 
to find help for future times of need. We need to keep close 
to the source of strength. Our mistakes should prove helpful 


(103-104) 


[6232] 


April J, 1918 


THE WA T CH TOWER 


(105-110) 


lessons to us, as we remember what a season of distress 
our previous error brought to us. Therefore when the child 
of God sees the temptation coming, he will flee to the place 
where he may find the needed supply of gra-ce. Fleeing there, 
he obtains the help in advance of the temptation, and is 
kept from falling. 

Whenever we find ourselves under temptations, however, 
we should lift our heart at once to our Father in heaven. 


Let us do this in full assurance of faith, realizing his love, 
his wisdom and his power to give us the needed assistance, 
and his willingness to make all things work together for our 
own good because we love him. Our appeal for help in such 
times of need will surely draw to us the ministry of the 
heavenly messengers; and we shall receive strength for righteousness
, for truth, for purity, for loyalty. Thus shall we 
be victorious in every battle, and be crowned a victor at last. 


JESUS SILENCES HIS ADVERSARIES 

[Paragraphs 1-13 of this article, aa it originally appeared in issue of April 1, 1918, were reprinted from article entitled, 
"Teaching With Authority," published in issue of September 1. 1906. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Not 
Far from the Kingdom," published in issue of September 15, 1906. Please see the articles named.] 


JESUS WARNS AND COMFORTS HIS FRIENDS 

["The first paragraph of this article was a. reprint of that entitled, "She hath Done What She Could," published in issue ot 
October 15, 1906. The remainder was .a reprint of article entitled, "Perfume Very Precious," published in issue of April 
1, 1905. Please see the articles named.] 


THE WICKED HUSBANDMEN 

[Tli is article was a reprint of that published in issue of April 1, 1895, which please see.] 


BROOKLYN CONVENTION AND MEMORIAL 


Upwards of I20O brethren, mostly from points in the near 
Eastern states, have just been enjoying the privileges of a 
four- day convention with us in Brooklyn, terminating with the 
celebration of the Passover Memorial on the evening of 
Tuesday, March 26th. 

Opportunities for fellowship between the meetings were 
pleasantly employed by all, so far as we have any knowledge, 
the recent manifestation on the part of churchianity of the 
disposition to persecute the International Bible Students in 
a more open and pronounced way has doubtless contributed 
much to a sharpening of appreciation and zeal on the part 
of the friends generally. 

For many years the Lord's people have wondered whether 
or not each convention might be the last. Each one has always 
proved to be the last for some of the dear friends; but 
abundant evidence, not only from the Lord's Word, but also 
from corroborative occurrences pressing in upon us from all 
sides, seems to lend more basis for the hope that this might 
be the la*st in this vicinity, before the great convention beyond
 the vail. 

The convention opened with an address of welcome by 
Brother J. F. Stephenson, the chairman. Probably not more 
than 700 were present at this meeting, on Saturday afternoon
 in the Tabernacle. Then followed a discourse by Brother 
T. H. Thornton, in which he compared our heavenly Father 
with a great and provident housekeeper. He contrasted 
God's method with that of man in the matter of establishing 
a household. He called, attention to the fact that when a 
young man determines to get married the first thing he thinks 
about is a bride ; the . second thing he thinks about is his 
bride; and the third thing he thinks of is his bride. After 
the marriage has taken place he begins to think about the 
details of the home, children, and servants. All of these 
things God has provided for in connection with the nuptials 
of his Son and the glorified church. 

In the evening a discourse was heard from Brother F. H. 
Robison on the subject of Gratitude. He reminded the friends 
how that all we have, whether on the natural plane or 
spiritual plane, comes from God, because he is the giver of 
every good and perfect gift. We are indebted to him for life, 
and "for food, raiment and shelter to sustain even the imperfect
' life which we now have until we shall have learned 
the lessons and developed the character which will make us 
meet for the inheritance of the saints in light. Additional 
causes for gratitude were found in provisions which God has 
made for the delighting of our senses. These rightly used 
and directed will enable us to appreciate their giver and be 
a genuine help in the narrow way. Many other occasions 
for thankfulness were cited, touching more especially the opportunity
 for sacrifice, God's providential instruction, etc. 

Sunday morning dawned bright and clear, bringing with 
it several hundred friends from surrounding cities and towns 
who could not find it possible to attend^ all the sessions. 

At ten o'clock Brother R. J. Martin met with about 200 
friends in the Bethel dining room, where also is located a 


baptistry, and reviewed for those present the Scripture teaching
 on the subject of baptism. Seventy- three were immersed 
at the close of this talk; 40 sisters and 33 brothers. While 
this meeting was going on at the Bethel Home, Brother Siewert
 delivered a discourse at the Tabernacle on the heavenly 
phases of the kingdom and its development. 

At eleven o'clock Brother Stephenson talked to the friends 
on St. Paul's words: "I have fought a good fight; I have 
kept the faith; I have finished my course; henceforth there 
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness which the Lord, 
the righteous Judge, will give me at that day." He dwelt 
on each phase of this text, showing that to keep the faith 
at all it is necessary to fight a good fight and that this fight 
itself is a fight of faith which, when properly waged, enables 
one to lay hold on eternal life. 

Sunday afternoon was a public session, held in the Brooklyn
 Academy of Music, and announced to a considerable extent
 through newspaper advertising and house to house distribution
 of special announcements. The topic was: "The 
World has Ended — Millions now Living will never Die." A 
two-column report of the lecture was given in one of the 
Brooklyn papers on Monday afternoon. Mlany prayers had 
gone up for the success of this meeting, all made, we trust, 
with entire submission to the Lord's will. The Academy 
Opera House seats about 2200 people, but close to 3000 were 
admitted, about 300 being seated on the stage back of the 
curtain and other hundreds standing in the rear of the main 
auditorium and balconies. Government officers were present 
to take stenographic report of all that was said. It is expected
 that this topic will be used quite extensively by 
brethren who have ability for speaking in public, so that a 
report of the discourse will not be necessary here. The 
great audience showed intense interest for two hours, and 
many points were received with distinct approval, as manifested
 by continued hand-clapping on several occasions. Our 
Lord's great prophecy, containing testimony by which we 
would be able to discern the end of the world, was taken as 
a basis for the discourse. Everything pointed to a deep interest
 on the part of the public — save ecclesiastics and ecclesiastical
 "hangers on" — in the general subject of religious 
tolerance as necessarily involved in a meeting of this kind. 

Sunday evening Brother R. H. Barber addressed the 
friends in the Music Hall of the Academy of Music. He 
traced the experiences of the "seed off the woman" and the 
"seed of the serpent," and pointed out how many attempts 
had been made, either overt or covert, on the part of Satan 
to make away with what he considered to be the promised 
"seed." Brother Barber's talk contained much encouragement
 to all in the na'rrow way at this present time. Considerable
 use was made of present day military terms and figures
, even as the Apostle Paul used such similes in his time. 
He showed that we had entered the fight against the world, the 
flesh and the devil, and that it would be a fight to the finish, 
the complexity of the enemy 'making the situation a peculiarly 
difficult one and requiring extreme faith and obedience. 


[6233] 


(110-111) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


On Monday morning a moat enjoyable Praise and Testimony
 meeting was held in the Academy of Music, followed 
by a discourse by Brother J, A, Bohnet on various items 
mentioned in the eleventh chapter of Revelation, but bearing 
especially on the "two witnesses." He showed that God had 
given these witnesses to the church for her benefit, that she 
might be developed in character sufficient to make her pleasing 
and acceptable in the sight of her Lord. He showed that while 
the Bible had heen suppressed in large measure for the greater 
portion of the Gospel age, still God had preserved it despite 
all the efforts of the clergy class to effect its destruction. 
Finally the time came for the exaltation of the Word, and 
the Bible sprang into great circulation — it was "lifted up to 
the heavens 3, — it was exalted in the ecclesiastical heavens and 
came to be looked upon as a source of real authority by the 
most active denominations. He showed that efforts nad been 
made in times past to destroy the Scriptures by the burning 
of Bibles or ordering their destruction. Some refused to 
burn their books, so that God's word was not destroyed, 
though the clergy had hoped for its extinction in the common
 languages. 

Brother Bohnet was followed on the morning program by 
Brother R, 0. Hartley, who spoke on the text. "Fight the 
good fight of faith; lay hold on eternal life." He dealt especially
 with the necessity of having on the armor of God in 
order to be able to fight effectually this great fight of faith. 
He showed the Scriptural significance of the various pieces 
which compose the armor, and indicated the value of each 
one, drawing also example from the Apostle Paul's own 
course of faithfulness a^ a "good soldier of Jesus Christ." 

First in the afternoon Brother 0. L. Sullivan spoke from 
the 40th Psalm: "God U our refuge and strength/' Among 
many other things peculiarly dear to the Lord's people he 
gave expression to the love and appreciation which he had 
for his country, the country in which he was born and which 
had accorded him so many advantages. He stated that one 
of his sons was in the navy and the other in the army. He 
pointed out also that, though he loved his country, still God 
loved it much more than he was able to, and that Jehovah 
purposed to establish* conditions which will guarantee that 
the high ideals of America will be far more than fulfilled 
when his glorious plans and blessings for the world are more 
fully inaugurated. He said that no claim should be considered
 superior to the claim of one's country — saving fidelity 
to God himself. 

Brother Rutherford next spoke to the friends from 1 
Peter 4:1: Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for 
us in the flesh, arm yoursejf likewise with the same mind." 
He suggested that the admonition "arm" implies combat with 
an enemy. This enemy was seen to be Satan and his minions 
of the air who seek to dominate in earth's affairs. Scripture 
testimony was adduced to show that the fallen angels would 
be released and bring about the great "whirlwind" which 
even now gives signs of approaching: further, that the hitter 
persecution which has broken out against the truth, and especially
 against the message contained in "The Finished Mystery
," is doubtless attributable to these fallen spirit beings. 
As before the great flood they had liberties with mankind 
and dominated public thought and action, so that it was possible
 to say, "The thoughts of men's hearts were evil and 
that continually," so now as they are allowed more and more 
liberty with mankind we may expect that many of the heretofore
 recognized standards of right and decency will he 
pushed aside, especially by those who seek to persecute the 
Lord's most earnest and active saints. 

Evidence pointed to the fact that the sealing of the servants
 of the Lord is about complete, and that thus the restraining
 influences hitherto e\creUed against the evil spirits 
would be withdrawn and that they would have to do with the 
great cataclysm upon the world. If permitted they would 
doubtless have wrecked the whole world long ago, but when 
now let loose the whole earth will be full of violence find 
there will be a saturnalia of crime and wickedness such as 
the earth has never known. But we should not be fearful 
under these conditions; for we have been forewarned and 
thus forearmed by the instructions of God's Word. We 
know that nothing can befall us except such as will constitute
 the proper test for our faith. Not only do these evil 
spirits seek to bring" outward persecution against the Lord's 
people, hut they attempt to bring dissension within the 
ranks. They suggest to one that he is not receiving proper 
honor in the church, not having enough recognition of his 
abilities and talents. This test comes chiefly upon those holding
 positions of responsibility and honor in the churches. 

Thus is will be seen that the mind of the saints becomes 
a battle ground for the fallen angels in conflict with the 
holy spirit. They can be most thoroughly repulsed if we 
"love one another," and "in honor prefer one another." The 
safe mind is the humble mind, filled with appreciation for the 
privilege of doing the JjQrd's will. Indeed, the usefulness 
of any is measured by humility rather than by natural ability. 

Just before the beginning of Brother Rutherford's discourse
 22 children were presented by their parents to receive 
the Lord's blessing. This was understood as indicating the 
hopes and intents of the parents, rather than in any way 
obligating the children, when they shall become responsible. 

Monday evening Brother Burgess addressed the friends in 
the Tabernacle chapel on the subject of "the hope which is 
an anchor to the soul." He dealt somewhat with the necessity
 of faith as a foundation for our hope. He Bhowed that 
without hope there would he absolutely nothing accomplished, 
because it constitutes the stimulating element of our Christian 
experiences. If there were no hope or relief from suffering 
then it would be folly to engage voluntarily in it. The figure 
of a ship and the relationship which the anchor bears to it* 
welfare was elaborated upon with profit. 

Tuesday morning. Memorial day, after an enjoyable Praise 
and Testimony meeting Brother W. K. Van Amburgh addressed 
the friends, using the Tabernacle Chart as a basis for hi* 
remarks. He referred . to the step* of consecration, the begetting
 and developing of the new mind, and to the fact that 
the flesh shrinks from the experiences suggested by the 
brazen altar in the court. But as the bodies of the beasts 
offered must be consumed, so all the powers and energies 
possessed by the Lord's consecrated people must be used up 
in ways that meet with God's distinct approval. He showed 
how that the greatest progress and keenest enjoyment is 
had in the Christian way if one does not look back at the 
altar, but keeps his face toward the holy of holies, as it is 
written of our Lord: "who, for the joy set before him, endured
 the cross, disregarding the shame, and is set down at 
the right hand of the majesty on high." 

Tuesday afternoon Brother A. IT. Macmillan delivered 
an enthusiastic address on the text, "The end of all things 
is at hand." He expressed it as a belief, and brought forth 
several Scriptures to lend strong color to his thought, that 
the gate of entrance into the narrow way is closing, and that 
the Jewish commission now taking possession in Palestine is 
further proof of the dispensational change. The glories and 
beauties of the heavenly state were dwelt upon; and all 
were encouraged to press forward with renewed zeal and 
vigor and be faithful unto death. 

In the evening 1184 of the Lord's consecrated people assembled
 in the Music Hall to celebrate the memorial of our 
Lord's antity pica 1 Passover. After singing Hymn No. 1 22 
prayer was "offered by Brother Van Amburgh. Then followed
 appropriate remarks by Brother Rutherford on the 
subject of the Passover in type and antitype. Song No. 98 
was sung and then appropriate remarks were offered by 
Brother Van Amburgh on the significance of the loaf, followed
 by prayer by Brother Barber, that our hearts might 
be in the right attitude and that we might fully appreciate 
the privilege of partaking of this emblem. The assembly of 
friends was quietly served with bread, after which Brother 
Barber offered brief remarks on the significance of the cup. 
Brother Rutherford asked the Lord's blessing on the wine 
and upon the hearts of all assembled, that they might enter 
into fullest appreciation of its symbolic significance. After 
serving those present with the wine, true to the picture which 
our Lord established, we sang a hymn, No. 2, and went out, 
each heart solemn with the thought that this might be our 
last Memorial this side the vail, yet each willing to remain 
as long as the Father's love and wisdom indicates our presence
 to be most useful on the earth. 


MUCH WORK TO DO 


In no wise should the friends be discouraged because of 
the persecution that ia being carried on against the promulgation
 of the Truth. In due time the right to circulate the 
Seventh Volume will be tested in the courts. In the meantime
, wo are asking all the Pilgrim brethren to have public 
meetings each Sunday in some well -located hall, each one 
using the subject, "The World Has Ended — -Millions Now 
Living Will Never Die." The meeting should be well ad- 

[6234] 


April 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(98-115) 


vertised; and to this end we are furnishing Kingdom News 
announcing that a free public lecture will he given in the 
vicinity soon on the above topic, and for the people to watch 
newspapers for place and date of the meeting. These should 
he widely distributed, that the people might have the truth 
concerning the unwarranted action taken with reference to the 
Seventh Volume and the persecution by the clergy. The 
Constitution guarantees that no one's property shall be taken 
without due process of law. Therefore, when officers demand 
possession of the Seventh Volume, they should produce a 


search warrant; otherwise the friends are under no obligation 
to deliver up the property. We advise the friends everywhere 
to store their supply of the Seventh Volume and not to distribute
 them until the question is adjudicated. 

lie of good courage! Let every one be active and zealous 
now in arranging for public meetings. The adversary is 
desperately striving to thwart the Lord's purpose, but he 
cannot succeed beyond the Lord's permission. Let us be faithful
 and true and loyal to the Lord and to his cause. 


Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, X. V., AI'RIL 


19.18 


No. S 


ISRAEL'S DOUBLE ACCOMPLISHED 


WONDERFUL PROPHECY FULFILLED — EVENT FORETOLD OVER EIGHTEEN CENTURIES AGO NOW TRANSPIRING- — ANOTHER 

CRISIS IN HUMAN HISTORY 


Dispatches from Europe state that a commission of prominent
 Jews left London last month for Jerusalem, expecting to 
arrive at the holy city on March 27th, the date of the 
Jewish 1'assover. To all students of history this is indeed 
interesting news; but it is doubtful whether many are aware 
of the fact that this event was foretold by three of the great 
prophets of Israel and that the very date of this return of 
the Jews to Palestine as representatives of a nation — the 
day of the Passover, 1918 — was indicated by their prophecies, 
when viewed with the sidelight of secular historic records. 
Surely we are living in momentous times; yet only a few 
realize that today the God of Israel is actually taking part 
in the affairs of men, particularly with reference" to his chosen 
people. 

It is a noteworthy fact that the Jewish prophets clearly 
foretold many of the experiences of the children of Israel, 
including even those of the present time and of the immediate
 future. Most Bible scholars have recognized that 
a large portion of the Old Testament was written particularly
 to the Jews and for the Jews, and that the world's 
history is more or less associated with this peculiar people. 
But all may not have noticed the exactness with which 
the Scriptures outline Jewish history. 

In Romans 21:25 St. Paul informs us that God caused 
blindness, or ''hardness," to happen to the children of Israel 
until he had completed a certain work among the Gentiles, 
and had gathered from the Gentiles a sufficient number to 
fill of a pre-ordained class; and, that at the completion of 
this selection from the nations his favor would return to 
the Jews, as mentioned in verses 26-28. 

Notice, particularly, the following Scriptures : "For thus 
saith Jehovah, Like as I have brought all this great evil 
upon this people, so will I bring upon them all the good 
that I have promised them." (Jeremiah 32:42) "Behold, I 
will bring them health and cure and I will cure them and 
reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth." (Jer. 
.33:6) "33ehold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will 
perform that good thing which I have promised unto the 
house of Israel and to the house of Judah." — Jer. 33:14. 

From Amos 3:2 we learn that God's dealings with earthly 
nations have been principally confined to the children of 
Israel, saying. "You only have I known< [recognized as my 
people] of all the families of the earth; therefore I will 
punish you for all your iniquities." In Exodus 19:5 and 
Deuteronomy 14:2 we read that God chose this nation "to 
be a peculiar people unto himself above all the nations that 
are upon the earth." From Deuteronomy 28:15-29 we are 
informed that God told the Israelites that if they would not 
obey his laws lie would east them out of his favor. Jewish 
history of the last twenty centuries attests to God's faithfulness
 in carrying out his purpose. 

By comparison of the statements of three of the most 
prominent of the Old Testament prophecies, we learn that 
the Passover of this very year, 1918, is clearly indicated as 
a time for some special favor to be shown to the Jews. 
God advises that he is carrying out a plan of his own 
(Ephesians 1:11) and that this plan was purposed from the 
beginning. (Ephesians 3:11; Acts 15:18) In Isaiah 46:10, 
11 we' read: "Declaring the end from the beginning, and 
from ancient times the things that are not yet accomplished, 
saying, My plan shall stand, and I will do all my good 
pleasure; .... I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; 
I have purposed it, I will also do it." 

ISRAEL'S PERIODS OF FAVOR AND DISFAVOR EQUAL 

Jeremiah 10:13-15 reads: "Therefore 1 will cast you 
out of this land [Palestine] into a land that ye know not, 


neither ye nor your fathers ; and there ye shall serve other 
gods [mighty ones, rulers] clay and night; where I will not 
show you favor. Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord, "that it shall no more be said, The Lord liveth, that 
brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; 
but, The Lord liveth that brought up the children of Israel 
from the land of the north [the lands north of Palestine], 
and from all the lands whither lie had driven them; and 1 
will bring them again into their land, that I gave unto their 
fathers." Notice particularly the 18th verse, which says: 
"And first [before 1 do this] 1 will recompense T requite them 
for] their iniquity and their sin double Ta repetition or 
counterpart in time] ; because they have defiled mine inheritance
 [my land]." This prophecy implies very strongly 
that God would grant Israel his special favor for a certain 
length of time, and that if they were not faithful he would 
then turn his face against them for an equal length of time, 
for "a double," or corresponding period. 

Zechariah 9:9 reads: ".Rejoice greatly, O daughter of 
Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem; behold, thy King 
eometh unto thee: he is just, and having salvation; lowly, 
and riding upon an ass, and upon a eolt the foal of an ass." 
In verse 12 we read: "Turn you to the stronghold, ye prisoners 
of hope; even today do I declare that I will render [literally, 
turn hack] a double unto you." 

A CRISIS IK JEWISH HISTORY 

Matthew 21 :4, 5 identifies the incident mentioned in 
Zechariah 9:9; and our Lord's words in Matthew 23:37-39 
identify Zechariah 9 : 12. Evidently, then, this is the beginning 
of the repetition count or double, the beginning of Israel's 
disfavor. Is it possible to locate the time when Israel's 
favor began? It is! The children of Israel were first recognized
 as the nation of Israel at the death of their father 
Jacob, as recorded in Genesis 49:28. The children of Israel 
were in favor with God from that event down to the time 
when they were cast off by Christ. 

Referring to Exodus 12*: 40, 41 we have the statement that 
the sojourning of the children of Israel was 430 years. In 
Galatiajis 3:16, 17 the same period is mentioned as the time 
intervening between the covenant given to Abraham when he 
was seventy-five years old (Genesis 12:3, 4, 7) and the time 
when the covenant was made with the children of Israel at 
Mount Sinai. Therefore, 

From the Abrahamic to the Law Covenant
 430 years 

Abraham was 75 years old when the 
covenant was made with him, and his son 
Isaac was born 25 years later. (Gen. 17:17) 25 years 

Isaac's son Jacob was born 00 years 
later, (Gen. 25:26) 00 " 

Jacob lived 147 years. (Genesis 47:28) ..147 " 

From the time of God's covenant with Abraham 
down to the death of Jacob would then be 232 years 

Since the entire time of the sojourning was 430 
years, and since Jacob died 232 years after the sojourning
 began, the time when the children of Israel 
were first recognized as a nation would be 198 years 

'ZX B IT : 0I R-i^qumK u^im $;:p£ sjaqtnnx SutradnioQ 

sitjaX: sex ( 5SS — 0£fr ) enpoxg ©tft eiojeq 

also Xumbers 13:3 and Joshua 14:7-10, we find the 
period of time from the Exodus to the division of 
the land of Canaan among the tribes of Israel was . . 46 " 

Acts 13:19, 20 gives the period of the Judges as 
450 years. (See footnote Wilson's Emphatic Diaglott) .450 " 


[6235] 


(116 117) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N\ Y. 


The twenty-one kings of Israel, from Saul to THE DESTRUCTION OF THE JEWISH POLITY 

Zedekiah reigned as follows: We quote as follows from Cornil's History of the People 

Saul (Acts 13:21) 40 years of Israel: "On the 15th of Nisan, i. e.,, of April, in the year 

David (1 Chronicles 29:26, 27) ."..'.'. .40 " 73 A. D., the first day of the Easter festival, the same day 

Solomon (2 Chronicles 9:30) 40 " on which, according to tradition, the God of Israel had led 

Rehoboam (2 Chronicles 12:13) 17 " 5" people out of Egyptian bondage into freedom, the last 

Abijah (2 Chronicles 13:1, 2) 3 " bulwark of Israel's liberty had fallen, and Israel was delivered 

Asa (2 Chronicles 16:13)' ...."'./..'.'.. 41 M into bondage." 

Jehosaphat (2 Chronicles 20:31) 25 " We quote again from the Jewish Encyclopedia: Masada 

Jehoram (2 Chronicles 21:1, 5) 8 " attained great importance in the war with the Romans 

Ahaziah (2 Chronicles 22:1, 2) 1 " . . . . With the fall of Masada the war came to an end, 

Athaliah (2 Chronicles 22:10-12)"..!'... 6 " on the 15th of Nisan, 73." Again from Morrison's Jews 

Jehoash (2 Chronicles 24:1} 40 " Under Roman Rule: "The capture of Masada, a Jewish 

Amaziah (2 Chronicles 25:1} 29 " fortress on the southwestern shore of the Dead Sea, put a 

Uzziah (2 Chronicles 26:3) 52 u termination to one of the fiercest struggles recorded in hisJotham
 (2 Chronicles 27:1) !.!!...!.. 16 " toiy." (73 A. D.) Graetz's History of the Jews, Vol. 2, 

Ahaz (2 Chronicles 28:1) 16 " says: "Judea was not entirely subjugated; for three strong 

Hezekiah, (2 Chronicles 29:1) 29 " fortresses were still in arms: Herodium, Machaerus, and 

Manasseh (2 Chronicles 33:1) 55 " Masada .... The heroes agreed to this proposal (of their 

Amon (2 Chronicles 33:21) 2 " leader Eleasar) even with enthusiasm, and on the first day 

Josiah (2 Chronicles 34:1) 31 i( of the great Feast of the Passover (A. D. 73), after slaying 

Jehoiakim (2 Chronicles 36:5) 11 " their own wives and children, they all perished on their own 

Zedekiah (2 Chronicles 36:11) 11 " swords." We quote further from Ewald's History of Israel, 

Vol. 7 (which is entitled "The Apostolic Age," and which 

Period of the kings 513 years Prof. Ewald makes to end with the year A. D. 73.) : "Eleasar 

The period of desolation, 70 years (Jeremiah accordingly persuaded all his people during that night to 

9«.n i . %q if i 5> PhrnWl^ ^fi-22 2<U ' 70 " kl11 their Wlves and children and then themselves, but to 

25:11; 29.10, 2 Chronicles 36.^2 23) .. .... . rU ^ burn all ^^ treasureg firgt ^ next day the Koman3 

Cyrus ascended the throne of Babylon, B. C. ...536 found onlv 960 dead bodies, whilst but two women and five 

From A. D. 1 to the crucifixion of Christ in the children hid themselves in caverns and were discovered. The 

spring of 33 A. D. — 32 full years 32 " Easter of the year 73, just seven years [note the great awaken - 

ing of interest among the Jews by Pastor Russell in 1910 

Total length of Jewish favor from the time of and 1911 through his message to them at the New York 

Israel's first recognition as a nation to the time Hippodrome, Oct. 9, 1910, and the wide distribution of 'Die 

when Christ cast off that nation from divine favor. 1845 " Stimme' in 1911, jusij seven years ago] from the beginning 

In Isaiah 40:2 the statement is made: M Speak ye com- f the great movement and forty years after Christ's crucifortably
 to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her warfare fixion, saw this end of the whole tragedy." Josephus also 

[marginal reading, appointed timel is accomplished [com- relates that Masada fell on the 15th of Nisan, April, A. D, 73. 

pleted, filled out], that her iniquity is pardoned; for she THE COMPLETION OF THE DOUBLE 

hath received of the Lord's hands double [a counterpart] The above quotations from standard authors show fully 

for all her sins." This statement assures Israel that the that the Jewish nationality came to an end just forty years 

time would come when her double, or time of disfavor, after their rejection of Christ and their being cast off as 

equivalent to former favor, would be accomplished, and that a nation, 

then he would turn his face towards her again. As the first sign of their rejection was the declaration 

If the foregoing be true, then just 1845 years after their f our Lord just before his crucifixion and was just 1845 

rejection by Christ (Matthew 23:37-39) we should expect years prior to the year 1878, would not their recognition 

some historic event indicating that divine favor was begin- at the Berlin Congress imply the first indication of God's 

ning to return to the Jews. 1845 years from the spring of returning favor to them again as a nation? If we are right 

33 A. D. would bring us to the spring of 1878. We should, in these conclusions, then just 1845 years after the spring 

therefore, expect to find gome occurrence in the early part of of A. D. 73 wq should expect some national recognition of 

the year 1878, as an indication of returning divine favor. the Jews as a nation. Does it not seem peculiar at least 

What do we find? that such a national recognition should occur this year exactly 

In June, 1878, the Berlin Congress assembled, Lord Bea- 1845 years to the month after their complete downfall? Does 

consfield (a Jew) was the chairman and the central figure, this not seem to imply to all reasoning students that divine 

the dominating mind that changed the treaty of San Stephano providence is now taking a hand in the affairs of the nations? 

between the Russians and the Turks, and so amended it that Would it be reasonable to account for all these exact correthe
 Turks; were to have suzerainty over Palestine and that spondencies as merely coincidence — especially since we find 

the Jews were to be permitted some measure of liberty. them so accurately stated in his Word? 

Tliis was the first act on the part of any of the nations of The Apostle Paul in the eleventh chapter of hi<* letter to 

Europe to recognize in any way the Jews as a nation. the Romans declares that the falling away of the Jews from 

A REMARKABLE PROPHECY LITERALLY FULFILLED divine favor meant the passing of that favor to the Gentiles. 

Note Zcchariah 8:23: "In those days it shall come to pass Recall the expression in Luke 21 :24: "And they shall /all 

that ten men shall take hold out of all [manner ofl languages by the edge of the sword and shall be led away captive into 

of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that all nations; and Jerusalem sha^l be trodden down of the 

is a Jew, saying We will go with you; for we have heard Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. Is it 

that God is with you." It is a remarkable historic fart not reasonable to suppose .that the returning oi favor to the 

that this conference was attended by representatives from the Jews means to some extent the withdrawing- of that favor from 

following eleven nations: Great Britain, Russia, France, Italy, the Gentiles?— Romans 11 : 15 

Turkey, Austria-Hungary, Germany, Greece, Roumania, Serbia Ezekiel 36:19-30 tells of the wanderings of the Jews and 

and Montenegro. Thus there were ten representatives in of the restoration of their land to its pristine holiness: 

attendance at that particular congress, in conference with "I scattered them among the heathen and they were dispersed 

the eleventh a Jew. (See Berlin 'Conference, International through the countries: according to their way and according 

Encyclopedia) to their d °i n gs I j ud ged them. And when they entered 

But did God have anything to do with the raising of a unto the heathen whither they went they profaned my holy 

Jew, Lord Beaconsfield, to the premiership of England, in name when they said to them, These are the people of the 

order that he might fulfill this very prophecy, and" in over- Lord and are gone forth out of his land; but 1 had pity on 

ruling that exactly ten other nations should be represented, mine holy name which the house of Israel had profaned 

and that the chairman should be the Jew? And did God among the heathen whither they went Therefore say unto 

have anything to do with the bringing about of that con- the house of Israel, saith the Lord God, I do not this fdr 

ference in the spring of 1878, exactly 1845 rears after he your sakes, house of Israel, but for my holy name's sake 

had cast the Jews into disfavor? It is surelv a remarkable which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither you 

coincidence, to say the least! The Lord's casting off of the went, for I will take you from among the heathen and gather 

Jewish people was in A. D. 33; but it was just 40 years you out of all countries and bring you into your own land, 

afterward that the nation was completely destroyed, and it and ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers, 

has not been recognized as a nation since that time until and ye shall be my people and I will be your God and 1 

our day, will aiso save vou ^ rom V(mr uncleanness and I will call 

[6236] 


April 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(117-118) 


for the corn and will increase it and lay no famine upon 
you, and I will multiply the fruit of the tree and the increase
 of the field, and ye shall receive no more reproach 
of famine among the heathen. And the desolate land shall 
be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that 
passed by and they shall say, This land that wag desolate 
is become like the garden of Eden, and the waste and desolate 
and ruined cities are become fenced and inhabited. Then shall 
the heathen [Gentiles] that are left round about you know 
that I the Lord built the ruined places and planted that 


that was desolate. I the Lord have spoken and I will do it/' 

Ezekiel 37:25: "And they shall dwell in the land that I 
have given unto Jacob, my servant, wherein your fathers 
have dwelt, and they sha 11 dwell therein , ev en they and 
their children and their children's children forever, and my 
servant David shall be their prince forever." 

Who shall say what great events may not soon follow the 
opening of this door for the Jews, and who can accurately appreciate
 all the blessing which is to come! — Jeremiah 3:17i 18. 


"ABOUT MIDNIGHT" 

"About midnight will J go out into the midst of Egypt." — Exodus 11:4. 


The children of Israel, in bondage to Egypt, were typical 
of the Lord's people of this Gospel age long in bondage to 
"Christendom." Egypt symbolizes that condition of middlecourse
, compromising worldliness which the word "Christendom
 5 ' represents, and which is identified by our blessed Lord 
as "the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom [typical 
of carnal union of church and state] and Egypt, where [in 
its ancient form of pagan Rome] also our Lord was crucified
" (Revelation 11:8) and where the crucifixion of the 
Lord's body members has steadily progressed. Historic precedent
 and Scriptural suggestions combine in warranting the 
expectation that this crucifixion, this crucial testing is about 
to reach its final climax in oppression and persecution by 
nominal church and clergy, acting underhandedly or openly 
through the civil powers and the mob. 

Several divinely arranged plagues came upon Egypt* because
 of the unwillingness of Pharaoh, the king, to release 
the Hebrews from bondage. Spiritual Israel has long sought 
to be released from the world, the flesh and the devil, and 
especially from doctrines of devils, which constitute the 
strength of antitypical Egypt's oppression. Pharaoh, king 
of Egypt, typified Satan, prince of this world, order of things, 
or civilization. Several times Pharaoh had promised to let 
the Hebrews go, but each time "the Lord hardened Pharaoh's 
heart, so that he would not let the people go." — Exodus 10:20. 

"And the Lord said unto Moses [Christ, Head and body], 
stretch out thine hand [instrumentality or applied power] 
toward heaven [the powers of spiritual control, the clergy 
and churches of Christendom] that there may be darkness 
[lack of knowledge, understanding, love] over the land of 
Egypt [Christendom], even darkness that may be felt. And 
Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven [the churches 
who claim to represent heaven] ; and there was a thick darkness
 in all the land of Egypt [all in the condition of worldliness
, including worldly-minded clergymen] three days." The 
great world war among those nations that call themselves 
Christians has upset all theories about "Christ" -endom being 
Christian. During the first three years of the war from 
August, 1914, to August, 1917, there was no understanding 
by the world of the true, the Scriptural, significance of the 
war; all were in darkness, and remained so for three years, 
until enlightenment eame to them through the Lord's divinely 
appointed channel, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society, in the shape of the message in Volume Seven of 
Studies in the Scriptures. — Eixodus 10:22. 

"They saw not one another [comprehended not what they 
really were in God's sight] neither rose any from his place 
for three days." In proof of the antitypical correspondency 
we quote Rev. Joseph H. Odell, D. D., in the February, 1918, 
"Atlantic Monthly" ; "The vastest of the world's tragedies 
came, and the church was not its interpreter. The majority 
of the clergy have not even sensed the unique strategy which 
the convulsed and confused world conditions have made possible
. There are ministers everywhere who are still busy 
building their denominational fences and feverishly staking 
their sectarian claims." Neither worldly clergyman nor layman
 "rose from his place for three years' 7 — from the old 
somnolent condition of dumb dogs (D.D.'s) and blind guides 
(B.G.'s). (Isaiah 56:10; Matthew 15 :H) The utmost darkness
, something keenly and anxiously felt, pervaded the houses 
— churches — of the worldly-minded. "But the children of 
Israel [the Lord's truly loyal and devoted people] had light in 
their dwellings [understood the significance of the world war 
and the things to come, in all their humble ecclesias.]" — 
Exodus 10:23. 

OUE, CONSECRATION MUST BE COMPLETE 

"And Pharaoh called unto Moses and said, Go, ye, serve 
the Lord; only let your flocks and herds be stayed; let your 
little ones also go with you," (Exodus 10:24) In sacrificial 
rites the animals used typified the offerers of those animals; 


and the offering of an animal by a person pictured that 
person's consecration. Ecclesiasticism (the product of Satan, 
antitype of Pharaoh) is willing enough for the Lord's people, 
old or young in Christ, to serve Jehovah, if only they will 
not offer themselves in complete consecration, in such a 
consecration as consumes their- very bodies on the altar of 
sacrifice. 

"And Moses said, Thou must give us also sacrifices and 
burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice unto Jehovah, our God. 
Out cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof 
be left behind; for thereof must we take to serve Jehovah 
our God ; and we know not with what we must serve Jehovah, 
until we come thither." — Exodus 10:25, 26. 

Those who start to serve the Lord cannot determine in 
advance just what or how much must be done ; yet the sincere 
ones purpose to hold nothing back, but to make a complete 
consecration of themselves and all that they have. 

"But Jehovah hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not 
let them go." (Exodus 10:27) No type can be taken to 
teach a doctrine; and we have no reason for supposing that 
Satan has intended to co-operate with God, but in the last 
analysis it must be admitted that he has done nothing which 
can successfully oppose the divine program. In this case it 
was really not God's purpose to have the people of Israel 
go until he had instituted the Passover type. Likewise, in 
recent years, it may be that Satan has been willing to make 
away with the Lord's people; but divine providence intervened
, because the hour was not yet come. But whether this 
part of the account was intended to be pictorial or not we 
do not know. At all events the people did not go. Several 
times during the harvest, during the progress of what seemed 
plagues to Christendom, the Lord has permitted his people 
to think that they were about to go. Brother Russell expected
 the church to £0 beyond the vail in 1878, 1881, 1&10 
and 1914 — just as with Elijah, who went with Elisha to 
four different places before he was actually taken. These 
seeming disappointments were divinely foreknown, "his appointments
." 

"And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed 
to thyself, see my face no more; for in the day thou seest 
my face thou shalt die." (Exodus 10:28) Satan, speaking 
through ecclesiasticism is peeved at the claims of the Lord's 
people, and manifesting his displeasure, begins to utter threats. 

"And Moses said, Thou has spoken well, I will see thy 
face again no more." (Exodus 10:29) The face iB a sign 
of either favor or disfavor. The time has passed when the 
Lord will any longer show any favor toward ecclesiasticism, 
or when ecclesiasticism will show favor or intentional benefit 
to the Lord's people, 

THE ANTITTPIOAL TENTH PLAGUE 
"And the Lord said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one 
plague more upon Pharaoh [ecclesiasticism] and upon Egypt 
[Christendom — it will be to them an unprecedented plague] : 
afterwards he will let you go hence [this suggests that- the 
church now expecting to go to her Lord will not be disappointed
 this time; she shall surely be delivered after the 
divinely appointed last plague] : when he shall let you go, 
he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether." The final 
visitation of God's displeasure, amounting to the utmost expression
 of his wrath against Christendom, will so disturb the 
antitypical Egyptians that they may not confine themselves 
to words of chastisement against the Lord's people, but they 
may feel impelled to visit upon them tangible persecution, 
possibly culminating in imprisonment — through those civil 
powers which are deceived as to the true nature and character 
of the persecutors — and in bloody persecution and death. 
< Exodus 11:1) Here again we must not let the type teach 
us something which is not plainly stated elsewhere. This 
is no time to think "panicky" thoughts or to pose as martyrs 
unduly. But our Lord suffered such things, so did several 


VII— 27 


[6237] 


(119-114) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


of the apostles, so have many of the most noble and faithful 
of this age. We, as servants, are not better than our Lord 
and we have no just claim for better treatment. The Lord's 
wiH be done. 

"Speak now in- the ears of the people, [proclaim the message
 of the seven Studies in the Scriptures to all Christendom
], and let every man borrow [ask] of his neighbor, and 
every woman of her neighbor [every truth ecclesia of the 
neighboring churches] jewels of silver and jewels of gold 
[the Lord's jewels in the great company and in the little 
flock]/'— Exodus 11:2. 

"And the Lord gave the people favor in the sight of the 
Egyptians. [In some respects, for their truly Christian character
 and lives the Lord's people are appreciated by the 
peoples of the world.] Moreover the man Moses [Christ, 
the Head] was very great [highly esteemed, theoretically] 
in the land of Egypt [throughout Christendom] in the sight 
of Pharaoh's servants [clergymen] and in the sight of the 
people" [the laity of Christendom], — Exodus ll:-3. 

"And Moses [Christ through the Studies 12* the Scbiptukes
] said [to ecclesiasticisml, Thus saith the Lord, About 
midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt." (Exodus 
11:4) If the year in which the remaining church is expected
 to begin, in a more pronounced degree, to go beyond 
the yail is the year beginning October, 1917, then midnight of 
that day (reckoning the days from sundown to sundown) 
would be about January, 1918. God, through some special 
word of indignation and wrath, may be looked for as going 
throughout the heart and center of Christendom about that 
time. 

"And all the firstborn [the firstborn of Egypt were set 
Aside to the deity and typified the clergy-ministers of Christendom
, set apart, in fact to the social service of Christendom] 
in Egypt, shall die [cease to be firstborns, or be divinely 
declared not to be what they claim and think themselves to 
be], from the firstborn [the leading ecclesiastic, the pope of 
Romel of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne [ Satan 
the god of priestcraft, is prince or ruler of this evil world], 
even unto the firstborn of the maidservant *that is behind 
the mill [down, to the lowliest minister of the smallest church 
grinding out its religious provender] and all the firstborn of 
beasts." — Exodus 11:5. 

"And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land 
of Egypt, such as there was none like it, nor shall be. like 
it any more." (Exodus 11:6) This suggests the final cry 
in Christendom. If this interpretation be correct, the next 
thing to look for is an unprecedented outcry on the part of 
Christendom's clergy and laity against the divine pronouncement
 which declares the end of Egypt's firstborn, the clergy, 
priestcraft, ecclesiasticism, churchianity- 

"But against any of the children of Israel shall not a 
dog move his tongue against man or beast; that ye may 
know that Jehovah doth put a difference between the Egyptians
 and Israel." (Exodus 11:7) How manifestly is God's 
favor with his own people who are dwelling in peace of heart 
amid a world in arms, and how markedly is his disfavor upon 
the people of Christendom torn with the sword and threatened 
with revolution, famine aAd pestilence! 

"And all these thy servants [the people of Christendom] 
shall come down unto me [Christ] and bow themselves down 
unto me [they will beseech the Lord's people to let their evil 
practices and institutions alonel, saying, Get thee out, and 
all the people that sit at thy feet [Afarginal reading. In 
this the day of the wrath of the Lamb, Christendom will 
want none of Christ or his members to trouble them any 
longer with their divinely authorized plagues] ; and after that 
I will go out. [Not till things have taken some such a 
turn will the feet members of Christ pass over to 'be ever 
with the Lord*]. And he went out from Pharaoh in a great 
anger." (Exodus 11:8) As the church turns her back forever
 in disfavor upon ecclesiasticism it is with a message 
containing all "the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God" 
(Revelation 19:15), in Volume Seven of Studies in the 

SCRrPTUBES. 

THE EFFECT OF THE PLAGUE UPON EGYPT 

"And Jehovah said unto Moses, Pharaoh will not hearkeji 
unto you; [ecclesiasticism will not heed the awful warnings 


of Ezekiel and Revelation, as shown forth in 'The Finished 
Mystery'] ; that my wonders may be multiplied in the land 
of Egypt." (Exodus 11:9) As a result of Christendom's 
failure to turn to God in a godly repentance, the words of 
God against her will be promptly and wonderfully fulfilled. 

"And it came to pass that at midnight [about January of 
the year 1918, through the enormous circulation of 'The 
Finished' Mystery' and the distribution of 10,000,000 'Fall of 
Babylon'] Jehovah [through his Word] smote all the firstborn 
in the land of Egypt [declared plainly and explicitly that the 
clergy, who insist on being first and foremost in everything, 
are really in his estimation dead, incapable of doing what 
they claim to do, because of iniquities which they committed 
in the dark ages and for which they are still unrepentant] 
from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the 
firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon [literally, 
'house of the pit,' church of eternal torment] ; and all the 
firstborn of cattle."— Exodus 12:29. 

"And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all M3 servants
, and all the Egyptians [if the suggestive interpretation
 set forth in these comments be right, then we may 
consistently look for an uprising of all worldly "Christians" 
because of and against the pronouncements of the wrath of 
God] ; and there was a great cry in Egypt [such a cry has 
begun to rise from the clergy, who are seeking to enlist the 
civil powers in a campaign of persecution of the Lord's people
] ; for there was not a house where there was not one 
dead." Not a church where there was not a clergyman against 
whom this divine denunciation had gone forth. 

"And he [ecclesiasticism] called for Moses and Aaron 
by night, [before the spring or summer of 1918] and said, 
Rise up ['rise to heights unknown,' to 'sit with Christ in 
the heavens'] and get you forth from among my people, 
both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve Jehovah, 
as ye have said." — Exodus 12; 31. 

"And take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said [the 
Lord's people are completely consecrated], and be gone [there 
will be nothing the antitypical Egyptians will wish so heartily 
as to see gone forever those in whom is the present word of 
God. The wish may be father to their thought to hasten the 
going of the spiritual Israelites] ; and bless me also." (Exodus 
12:32) When an antitypical Egyptian is in peril or fear, he 
seeks a blessing from somewhere. 

"And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that 
they might send them out of the land ih haste [aroused 
nominal churchianity may be inclined to find quick means?, 
to expedite the passage of the Lord's people beyond the vaill 
for they said, We be all dead, men." (Exodus 12:33) It wa* 
the atrociously false alarm, "If we don't kill them, they will 
kill us," that caused the weak king of France to sign the 
wicked order for the utter destruction of all Protestants on 
St. Bartholomew's Might. 

"And the people took their Sough before it was leavened 
[the Lord's people have the unadulterated truth, the divine 
Word, without any of the leaven, evil teachings, traditions and 
theories of the clergy], their dough [marginal reading] being 
hound up in their clothes upon their shoulders," (Exodus 
12:34) The pure word of truth is bound up with the robe of 
Christ's righteousness and with the promises, with which the 
Lord's people are invested. 

"And the children of Israel did according to the word 
of Moses [of Christ, as set forth in the Bible] ; and they 
borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver and jewels of 
gold, and raiment; and Jehovah gave the people favor in 
the sight of the Egyptians, so' that they lent unto them. 
And they spoiled the Egyptians." (Exodus 12:35, 30) When 
the Lord's people go forth from Christendom to be ever with 
their Lord, they will take with them every Christian having 
the Lord's spirit; not a single one of the Lord's jewels will 
be left in Christendom when the approaching exodus of 
the last members of the body of Christ is finished. 

"It is a night [the dark night even now settling down] 
to be much observed unto Jehovah [it will be memorable 
forever] for bringing them out of the land of Egypt [out 
of the bondage of Christendom] ; this is that night of Jehovah
 to be observed [remembered] of all the children of 
Israel in their generations." —Exodus 12:42. 


COLPORTEUR AND PASTORAL WORK 


The great amount of advertising the public press has given 
Pastor Russell's books recently, particularly "The Finished 
Mystery," has doubtless, created a demand for these books ; 
and while it is not proper at thi3 time to circulate "The 

[6238] 


Finished Mystery," we advise the friends to colporteur for 
the other six volumes, especially the fourth, and to carry on 
the pastoral work, bearing the good tidings to as many as 
desire to hear. 


JESUS FACES BETRAYAL AND DEATH 


[With the exception of the first paragraph (printed below) 
Memorials," published in issue of 
Nothing connected with the Gospel narrative appeals to 
human judgment more forcibly than does its simplicity. The 
fact that the weaknesses, failures and stumblings of the 
apostles themselves are faithfully narrated, without apologies 
or excuses or attempts to gloss over the defects, shows a 
sincerity, a truthfulness of intention, very rarely found in 
other writings. Nowhere is this characteristic more conspicuous
 than in today's lesson, which records the shameless 
perfidy of Judas and the weakness of the remaining eleven. 


this article was a reprint of that entitled, "Two Passover 

September 15, 1914, which please see.l 

In our Lord's darkest hour these all forsook him and fled, 
seeking personal safety; and one of them subsequently denied 
knowing him. Had the writers of the Gospels interjected 
excuses and explanations • for their course, they would have 
been excusable; but the narrative is really stronger as it 
stands, and we are perhaps: inclined to furnish excuses for 
them which we might have been loath to receive had they 
offered similar ones for themselvesJESUS
 ON THE CROSS 

[The last twelve paragraph? of this article were reprinted from article-entitled, "Smitten of God— Afflicted," published in 
issue of November 15, 1914, which please seel 
.Tune 16.— Mark 15:22-39. 

AN ILLEGAL AKRKST— AN INIQUITOUS TRIAL— OUR LORD TAKEN BEFORE THE ROMAN GOVERNOR— CONDEMNED BY NEITHER PILATE NOR 

JIKHOD THK ROMAN GOVERNOR'S ATTEMPTS TO FREE OUR LORD— LEADERS OF RELIGIOUS THOUGHT COMPEL PILATK TO ACT 

CONTRARY TO HIS DESIRES— WHY DEATH BY CRUCIFIXION WAS NECESSARY IN OUR LORD'S CASE. 

"Truly this man ivas the Son of God."— Verse 39. 
Following the institution of the Memorial Supper our Lord the garden and strengthened him, gave him the Father's 


and his disciples sang a hymn, and then went out of the 
city to the Mount of Olives, a distance of perhaps a mile. 
Apparently several important lessons were given to the disciples
 en route to Gethsemane. These are recorded in John 
15-17. 

After they had arrived at the garden of Gethsemane, the 
Master left eight of the apostles near the entrance, and went 
a little further into its shades with Peter, James and John. 
All were to watch, to be on guard against something which 
was to occur, something of which Jesus knew, but- which 
seemed most improbable to the apostles. It was midnight, 
and thev were accustomed to retire early. The strain of 
the evening, and the weighty lessons which the Master had 
imparted, reacted in drowsiness; and they slept, instead of 
watching and praying. This was true even of the three 
nearest the Master. 

Wishing to be alone in his communion with the heavenly 
Father, our Lord went a stone's throw farther into the 
shadows by himself. Time and again, in the agony which 
fell upon him, he came seeking human sympathy, only to find 
his dearest ones oblivious in sleep. Well had it been expressed
 by the prophet: "Of the people there was none with 
me." (Isaiah 63:3) He trod the winepress of grief alone. 

For three and a half years he had devoted his life to the 
doing of the divine will. Had he done that will completely 
and absolutely, in a spirit that had been pleasing to the 
heavenly Father? More than this, could he, would he, pass 
through the experiences of the next few hours with proper 
courage, proper faith, proper obedience? Or would he fail, 
and lose his all in death? 

STRENGTHENED FROM OK HIGH 

Had the Master failed, there was no one to make good 
for him. He had no advocate. His failure meant, not only 
death everlasting for himself, but the loss of the great privilege
 of uplifting humanity from sin and death conditions 
through the Messianic kingdom. The Master's personal eternal 
life was in the balance that night in Gethsemane, as also 
were all his prospects of glory, honor, immortality find hi^h 
exaltation at the right hand of the. Father, far above angels, 
principalities and powers. No wonder the Master, realizing 
all this, was overwhelmed with the thought! No wonder 
he wished that if the divine plan could be otherwise worked 
out, he might be spared from the special tribulations and 
horribly misrepresenting experiences just before him I 

Apparently the ignominy of being crucified as a malefactor
 and blasphemer, a terrible experience to one of his 
refinement and nobility of soul, was the thing which he prayed 
might pass away. He did not ask that he might not die; 
for he knew that for this very purpose he had come into the 
world, and that only by hia death could the penalty resting 
upon the human family be removed. He had not thought of 
escaping death, but he hoped that the Father might have 
some way of eliminating the special ignominy of that hour. 
Yet even in his greatest distress the Master prayed: "Nevertheless
, not my will, but thine, be done." 

St. Faul assures us that the Master's Gethsemane experiences
 were linked with the fear of remaining in the death 
condition, fear of not being accounted of the Father as worthy 
of that glorious resurrection which he had been promised. 
(Hebrews 5:7) He was saved out of death, however; and 
more than this, he was given the assurance by the Father 
that he would be saved out of death. This is the explanation 
of the statement that an angel of God appeared to him in 


assurance that he had been faithful up to that moment, and 
that the divine blessing would be with him during the hour 
of trial just at hand. From that moment onward, all the 
fear and agony were gone. If the Father's blessing and 
smile went with him, he could endure all things come what 
might. 

VIOLATION OP LAW AND OF JUST PRINCIPLES 

Our Lord was arrested, neither by Pilate's nor Herod's 
instructions, nor by their soldiers. His arrest was made 
at the instance of the Jewish high priest and his associates, 
who had concluded that his life and ministry were inimical 
to their plans and projects and to what they considered to be 
the best interests of Judaism. The murder of Jesus was 
plotted in advance. But the murderers sought some excuse 
for their conduct, as all murderers do; and being politicians, 
they also sought an outward form or semblance of justice, 
having regard for the opinions of others of more tender conscience
 than theirs. 

Under the charge of the priests were men who served as 
policemen in the Temple and its precincts. Armed with 
maces, swords and lanterns, these servants of the priests 
followed Judas, who* knew beforehand that on this particular 
night Jesus did not intend to go to Bethany as usual, but 
had purposed to rendezvous with his disciples in the Gethsemane
 olive orchardAfter
 they had apprehended our Lord, the Temple police 
brought him directly to the house of Annas, a superannuated 
high priest, whose son-in-law Caiaphas officiated in his stead. 
Annas attempted an examination of Jeaus, hut met with 
little success, and so turned him over to Caiaphas, whose 
house was in the same courtyard. There, at probably three 
o'clock in the morning, the Sanhedrin had assembled. 

The plot for Jesus' death was deeply laid. The hours 
between the time when Judas had left Jesus and the other 
apostles at the Passover supper and the hour of this trial 
were spent in gathering the members of the Sanhedrin from 
their various homes throughout the city. Conditions were 
considered desperate enough to justify all this arrangement 
for the murder of him who "spake as never man spake." 
This was because he taught the people, because his teachings 
were weakening the power of the Scribes and the Pharisees 
and of the traditions of the elders. — John 7:46; Matt. 26:55. 

The theory of erroneous religious teachings is that ignorance
 and superstition are necessary to the preservation of 
sacerdotal power. Thus always has error hated the truth. 
Thus always has darkness hated the light. Jesus' condemnation
 was merely another triumph of darkness over light. Yet 
it was a triumph only in appearance ; for the divine plan was 
thus being carried out. The great atonement for sin was 
thus being arranged for, the result of- which will be the ultimate
 overthrow of Satan, sin and death, and the world-wide 
establishment of righteousness and truth forever. 
THE CASE BROUGHT BEFORE PILATE 

As quickly as possible the high priest and representatives 
of the Sanhedrin hurried Jesus to the Preetorium, asking 
Pilate to condemn him. The Roman governor inquired as to 
what charge they had against Jesus. They evasively answered 
that of course he was a wicked man, worthy of death, or they 
would not be there accusing him. 

Pilate reminded them that under Roman usage they had 
great liberty in dealing with all disputes of a religious kind, 
that he was not posted in the tenets of Judaism, and that 


[6239] 


(120 122) 


(123-125) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


therefore they should deal with the case themselves. The 
priests responded that they knew this, but that they had no 
power to inflict the death penalty. Thus they revealed the 
depth of their wickedness. They had deliberately plotted 
to have Pilate inflict the death sentence upon an innocent 
person. 

Then they began to accuse Jesus, claiming that he was 
perverting the nation, turning it away from loyalty and 
obedience to the Roman government, that he wae telling the 
people not to pay taxes to Cseaar, and that he claimed to be 
the Jewish King. These were serious charges, and the Roman 
governor was in duty bound to consider them. We note that 
these were altogether different charges from those brought 
against Jesus at the trial before the Sanhedrin. Although 
the charges were false, our Lord made no defense. He knew 
that the time had come for him to die; and he would not 
attempt to turn aside that which he knew to be a part of 
the divine program for him. 

OTTO LORD ACCUSED OF TREASON 

The wicked shrewdness of the Sanhedrin is very manifest, 
in preferring the charge of blasphemy for its effect upon 
the people, before whom they desired to appear very zealous 
for the divine law, while they brought an entirely different, 
but equally false, set of charges against him before Pilate, 
who cared nothing for their religious opinions. The accusation
 made before Pilate involved the charge of treason, a 
charge most likely to arouse the indignation and wrath of 
the Roman rulers. The Jewish religionists accused our Lord 
of seditious agitation, of prohibiting the payment of tribute 
money and of assuming wie title of king of the Jews, and 
thus apparently of conspiring against the Koman government. 

While the second charge was entirely false (Matthew 
22:21), the other two had an- appearance of truth; and to 
these were added numerous petty individual charges. Rut 


to none of them did our Lord make reply, so that Pilate 
marvelled that he made no effort at self-defense in the midst 
of such danger. 

Pilate's several efforts to release his innocent prisoner 
who, he discovered, had been delivered to him because of 
envy, were unavailing before the boisterous mob. These, 
instigated by their rulers, loudly clamored for our Lord's 
death, and that by the most ignominious and cruel method, 
crucifixion, so that his memory should ever be covered with 
infamy. 

Then Pilate, who was influenced more by considerations 
of policy than by principle, delivered Jesus to be scourged. 
Yet at the same time he protested the innocncc of his 
prisoner, and washed his hands in token of his own innocence 
in thus* delivering up to them this just person. Not until he 
himself was pressed by the mob with the threat that he could 
be reported to Cresar as one hostile to the government and 
a traitor to his trust in encouraging sedition and conspiracy 
aganist the government did he relinquish his efforts to save 
Jesus. 

OUE LOED'S LAST EARTHLY JOURNEY 

The Master had been on a constant strain, without sleep, 
from the time he had sent his disciples to prepare the Passover
. This period had included the trying experiences connected
 with the Passover and the institution of the Memorial 
Supper, the journey to Gethsemane, the agony and physical 
weakness there, the trial by the Sanhedrin, the trials before 
Pilate and Herod, the scourging, etc. All this must have 
been an enervating strain on him. Now, condemned to crucifixion
 by those for whom he had sacrificed his heavenly 
home and the glory which he had with the Father before the 
world came into existence, he was additionally required to 
carry his own cross. He did so until his weakness under it3 
weight hindered, and a passing farmer was compelled to assist. 


PERSECUTION CRYSTALLIZES CHRISTIAN CHARACTER 


"All that will live godly in Christ Jesus 
When St. Paul wrote the words of this text he seemingly 
had in mind the very closing experiences of the church on 
earth. While it is true that the principle of persecution of 
those who live godly in Christ Jesus has applied throughout 
the entire age, yet in a marked degree was that to be expected 
in the end of the harvest period. We reach this conclusion 
bcause in the context the apostle saysi "This know also, 
that in the last days perilous times shall come; for men shall 
be lovers of their own selves, boasters, proud, blasphemers, 
disobedient, .... heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure 
more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but 
denying the power thereof." 

The best lexicographers define persecution as the act of 
doing injury to another; to beset with cruelty or malignity; 
to harass; especially to punish by loss, pain or death for 
adherence to a particular creed or mode of worship. Men 
with inflamed minds are apt to persecute any one who does 
not agree with them. Some have been persecuted by being 
put in prison; others by slander, libel, misrepresentation, 
which the Scriptures describe as bitter words shot out like 
arrows by the wicked. (Psalm 64:2-4) As civilization has 
advanced, methods of persecution have changed. In their 
turn, Lutherans, Baptists, Methodists, Presbyterians and 
others were persecuted ; and in course of time have themselves 
become persecutors. 

We are now living in a day when gross, vile persecution 
is not so popular as in olden times. The state of the public 
mind has much to do with determining the character of persecution
 inflicted, and which will be tolerated. At a time when 
the country is in stress, many take advantage of the situation 
to persecute those with whom they do not agree. They do this 
cunningly by misrepresentation. As an illustration, recently 
the clergy of the various denominations, Catholic and Protestant
, have represented that members of the International Bible 
Students Association are engaged in the spreading of "Hun 
propaganda/' and are in the employ of the German government
. Nothing would have a greater tendency to inflame 
the public mind than such a charge, If the charge were true, 
it would be a heinous crime. Therefore, if the charge be 
false, it is a great crime to make such an accusation. These 
misrepresentations, carried by the clergy and their emissaries
 to petty public officials and by these officials reported 
to officials in higher station, often result in action which 
amounts to persecution. For instance, Dr. Case, of the Divinity
 School of Chicago University, recently published a statement
 referring to the work of the International Bible Students 


shall suffer persecution."— 2 Timothy 3:12. 
Association, saying, "Two thousand dollars a week is being 
spent to spread their doctrine. Where the money comes 
from is unknown; but there is a strong suspicion that it 
emanates from German sources. In my belief, the fund would 
be a profitable field for government investigation." This, 
stimulated by similar charges from other nominal churchmen
, evidently had something to do with Army Intelligence 
officers seizing the books of the Treasurer of the Society. The 
authorities doubtless thought that they would find some evidence
 to substantiate the charge that our Society is working 
in the interest of the German government. Of course, the 
books disclose nothing of the kind. AH the money used by 
our Society is contributed by those who are interested in 
preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ and his kingdom, and 
nothing else. 

The wide publication by newspapers throughout the country 
of the fact that the Society's books have been seized had 
a tendency to excite suspicion in the minds of others. In 
many places, local officers have attempted to prohibit the 
holding of any kind of meetings, either public or private, 
for the preaching of the Gospel. Certain local officials have 
required every one to bring in their books and deliver them 
up. This, of course, is without legal authority, because the 
Constitution guarantees that no one shall be compelled to 
surrender his property except by due process of law. All 
of this persecution really emanates from a class of religionists 
who hold views antagonistic to the Scriptures and the Society
's teachings. 

Our information is that the Department of Justice has 
instructed the District Attorneys to prosecute any one who 
sells "The Finished Mystery" from and after the date the 
order was made (some time in March). There was nothing 
in the order authorizing local officers to interfere with Bible 
study, nor with public meetings which are held for the purpose
 of preaching the Gospel. It is in no wise a violation 
of law to meet together to study the Bible; and, acting under 
advice of legal counsel, we are advising all the Bible classes 
to meet in the usual manner and continue the Berean studies, 
including the study of Volume VII. We advise, however, 
that the objectionable pages (247 to 253, inclusive) be removed 
from all books, in order that there may be no semblance 
of violating the law. It is the duty of everyone to be lawabiding
; but frequently men who think they are enforcing 
the law ar« themselves violating it. No Bible class should 
teach, instruct, or otherwise do any act or thing that will 


[6240] 


April 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(125-126) 


interfere with the Government's prosecution of the war. Our 

business is to declare the message of the kingdom. 

The Scriptures and the facts both lead us to the conclusion
 that the persecutions will increase. Those who make 
themselves the persecutors are to be pitied. Jn a measure 
we can sympathize with them, because once our eyes were 
blinded. We should have patience with these and speak to 
them kindly, trusting in the Lord to give us opportunity to 
open their eyes to the true situation. 

In the text the Apostle declares that some form of persecution
 will attach to any one who lives a godly life. This 
infliction of injury may come directly upon an individual, 
or he may suffer indirectly by being associated with others 
who are persecuted. (Hebrews 10:32-34) Whatever injury 
is done to one of the Lord's little ones, all who are of that 
same class will likewise suffer. ^Whether one member suffer, 
all the members suffer with it." (1 Corinthians 12:26) With 
consolation we remember the words of the Master: "Tf ye were 
of the world, the world would love his own ; but because I 
have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth 

yon All these things will they do unto you for my 

nnme's sake, because they know not him that sent me." (John 
15 : 10-21 ) In a general way, every person who is in opposition
 to the Lord's consecrated may be said to be of the 
world. All who have not the spirit of Christ are of the 
world. The clergy, manifesting the spirit of the world, are 
of the world; and history, from the beginning of the Christian 
era, shows that they have been the chief persecutors. 

LIVING GODLY IN OHBIST JESUS 

It is those who live godly in Christ Jesus that suffer 
persecution. To live godly means to live after the manner 
which Cod would approve; that is to say, to live in opposition
 to sin and in harmony with righteousness. It 
means to live according to the divine law, practising the 
golden rule. In the world there are two classes: one marching
 under the banner of Satan; the other, under the banner 
of the Lord. The first class is in darkness, not out of choice, 
hut because they were born that way — all coming under the 
influence of the "prince of the power of the air." The other 
class have escaped from darkness only by reason of a full 
consecration to the Lord. Such have come into Christ. 

In some respects the world has attained a very good 
standard. As a general rule the laws are very just; but 
because of the imperfection of man it is impossible to rightly 
construe and enforce the law. Every Christian realizes this 
and deeply sympathizes with those who are striving to enforce
 the law. 

Our text applies to those who live godly in Christ Jesus, 
which means more than keeping the Ten Commandments. It 
means that such a one must he fully consecrated to the Lord, 
begotten of the holy Spirit being accepted by the Father in 
the Beloved One; and then that such a one should seek 
faithfully and consistently to carry out the vow of consecration
 even unto death. Such consecration vow requires 
the one making it to follow faithfully in the Master's footsteps
. His commission is to make proclamation of Cod's 
message concerning the establishment of his kingdom. It is 
hia present duty to announce that the kingdom is here. All 
who do this will be opposed by those who say, "The kingdom 
is not here; things are going on as they were from the beginning
." 

A true patriot is one who is willing to lay down his 
life in the interest of his fellow-men. The Christian who 
consecrates himself unto death is a real patriot, because he 
has agreed to be faithful to the Lord even unto death, in 
order that he might be associated with Christ Jesus in uplifting
 and blessing the human race. He, then, is the real 
friend of the people. Those who take a view opposite to his 
and who have not the mind of the Lord, readily become 
persecutors. Thzis we see that those who are in Christ Jesus 
and who live godly have a difficult and narrow path to travel. 
Those who faithfully follow in the Master's footsteps bring 
upon themselves persecution. All who are loyal to God and 


to his message of truth must thus suffer. They must expect 
persecution. 

A good soldier is one who patiently endures the hardships
 incident to the performance of his duty. The good 
soldier of Christ Jesus must learn to endure patiently all 
hardships and persecutions that come to him. (2 Timothy 
2:3) God in his perfect wisdom knows what is best for his 
children; hence the persecutions that come must be for the 
good of his children. 

WHY PERSECUTION IS PERMITTED 

The word "suffer" as used in the, text means to experience
. Therefore, he who will live godly in Christ Jesus is 
certain to experience persecutions as a part of his lot. The 
Lord Jesus and the apostles all suffered persecutions at the 
hands of those who did not understand them. Misunderstanding
 is generally the cause of persecution. Had the Jews 
known that Jesus was the great Messiah whom they were 
expecting, doubtless they never would have persecuted him, 
Did the world know the real purpose of Christians who are 
striving to follow in the Master's footsteps, doubtless the 
world would never persecute them. God's arrangement is 
such and the Scriptures everywhere tell us that those who 
belong to the royal priesthood will suffer persecution if they 
live godly, and that those amongst this class who do not 
experience such suffering may be sure they are not living 
according to God's will. 

It is clearly God's will that in the end; of the age his 
vengeance should be declared against the Babylonish systems. 
(Isaiah 61:1-3; Jeremiah 5*1:0) It is unpopular to take 
this course, but since it is the will of God, those in Christ 
must call attention to the manner of Babylon's deception. 
They must call attention to the fact that the Lord's kingdom 
is at hand, and that the great King is now present and will 
soon set up his kingdom. Any other course would be ungodly. 
Following the right course brings what the Apostle said it 
would — persecution. 

The conditions imposed upon the church are designed by 
the Lord to be crucial tests of loyalty to him and the principles 
of righteousness. Trials, difficulties and persecutions are useful
 in demonstrating whether or not our covenant of consecration
 is really from the heart. Those who have merely made 
a covenant with the Lord by words, and not in truth and in 
fact, in due time will be sifted out. The faithful and loyal ones 
God has promised shall be made joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
in his kingdom. It is for this reason that the church was 
called while evil still was permitted to reign in the earth arid 
while the majority of mankind were under the blinding influence
 of the adversary. Now it seems that the calling is 
ended and the final crucial test of patient endurance is upon 
the church. The truly consecrated would have been disappointed
 had not the events developed as they have. This fiery 
experience is absolutely necessary, that the dross may he burned 
away and that the true character might be made manifest. 
The end is here. The great crucial test is upon God's people. 
l^et every one, then, who has hope of^being of the kingdom 
class know that he must suffer persecution; and in doing this, 
remember the Apostle's words: "If we suffer, we shall also 
reign with him. If we deny him, he also will deny us." All 
things of the world, all of its hopes and prospects, we have left 
behind us. We have hurned every bridge connecting us with 
things earthly and the hope of earthly blessings. There is 
nothing to which we could turn back. All things are before 
us: life everlasting, with a perfect, glorious organism; jointheirship
 with Christ Jesus in his kingdom: the loving smile 
and approval of Jehovah. There is no inducement to relax. 
There is every inducement to firmly press on, enduring hardness
 as good soldiers of Jesus Christ — patiently and cheerfully 
bearing whatsoever experiences the Father permits us to have, 
having in mind that soon we shall see him face to face and 
be forever with our" Lord and King, Be patient, dear brethren. 
Look up and lift up your heads!* The evidence is conclusive 
that our deliverance draweth nigh. 


TWO KINDS OF LOVE 


Question : Would you kindly explain the distinction between 
the two Greek words "philia" and "agapee," as used in the 
New Testament? 

Answer: These are elusive words to translate into English
, but may be approximated by our terms love and friendship
. In languages older than our own, the distinction between
 the love that craves and the love that goes out uncravingly
 is indicated in equivalents of "love" and "friendship." 
Thus the Sanskrit — elder sister in our family of tongues— gives 

[6 


for "love" [lubh) "covetousness" or "greediness" ; and for 
"friendship" (pri) "unselfish love". The Greek has pkilia 
for that love which goes out "lovingly" after its object, "an 
inclination prompted by sense and emotion"; while in the 
Septuagint and the New Testament it has agapee, "a love 
without desire," The Latin correspondingly has amo as representing
 the love that turns to another in the spirit of agreement
 and of longing ; but, as an equivalent of agapao, it has 
diligo for the act of "a distinguishing love — without desire," 

241] 


(126 127) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y* 


a love that selects and rests on the one selected without asking 
any return. 

Failing to preserve clearly the distinction between a love 
that instinctively grows out of a relationship, or that is based 
upon a natural desire for possession, and a voluntary and 
distinguishing love that goes out unselfishly and admiringly 
toward its chosen object, New Testament critics and commentators
 generally have been confused in their minds, while 
seeking to account for the apparent difference 'between the 
two words — philia and agapee — employed in the sacred text 
for the designation of "love*'. 

It is admitted by practically all that philia was a word in 
common use in New Testament times, as expressive of the 
love between parents and children, and brothers and sisters, 
and also of craving love between the sexes. It is also admitted
 that the word agapee comes into new prominence in 
New Testament use, as applicable to man's love to God, and 
to love that is otherwise peculiarly pure and sacred. But 
these two words seem at times to be employed interchangeably
; and many an eminent scholar has confessed his inability 
to see the real difference between the words in their using, 
as accounting for the often indicated superiority of agapee, in 
spite of the greater warmth and intensity of philia, 

Cramer, in his "Biblico-Theological Lexicon of New Testament
 Greek," covers the simple facts in the case when he says : 
"We find agapee used to designate a love unknown to writers 
outside of the New Testament — love in its fullest conceivable
 form ; love as it is the distinguishing attribute in all humanity
, but, in the strictest sense, of divinity." Trench, in 
seeking to differentiate the meanings of the two words agapee 
and philia, says: "The first expresses a more resting attachment
, of choice and selection — diligere=deligere — from seeing 
in the object on which it is bestowed that which is worthy of 
regard; while the second, without being necessarily an unresting
 attachment, does yet oftentimes give less account of 
itself to itself; is more instinctive, has more of the feelings, 
implies more passion." Woolsey, after an exhaustive study 
of the histories of the two terms, says of Trench's definition: 
"We believe that this is a true statement of the difference between
 the two words and notions." And all this is in confirmation
 of the claim made here that philia represents a love 
that grows out of relationship or craving, while agapee represents
 a love that goes out voluntarily without any intermingling
 of selfishness — the one being ordinary love, and the other 
the higher form of friendship love. 

Men are said to love, or crave (philein) , "the chief place 
at feasts" (Matthew 23:6), and "salutations in the market 
places" (Luke 20:46) and to have this self -interested love 
(philein), as growing out of relationship, for "father or 
mother", or for "son or daughter". (Matthew 10:37) On the 


other hand, the Roman centurion is said by the Jews to have 
had an unselfish, friendship love ' {agapan) for their nation, 
as evidenced by his building for them a synagogue. (Luke 
7:5) God's children are commanded to have friendship love 
(agapan) for their "neighbors" (Matthew 5:43; Galatians 
5:14), and for their "enemies" (Matthew 5:44), because love 
does not go out in those directions instinctively, but must be 
given unselfishly, and of deliberate choice. 

The saints are enjoined to have a feeling of family love 
[philein) for their Lord (1 Corinthians 16:22} and for one 
another in the household of faith. (Titus 3:15) "The world" 
is said to give a selfish, interested love (philein) to "its own," 
because of the mutual relation between the two. (John 15:19) 
But Jesus is said to give a pure and unselfish friendship love 
[agapan) to Mary and Martha and their brother Lazarus, in 
the home so dear to him at Bethany. (John 11:5) God is 
said to be governed by unselfish, friendship love (agapan) 
toward the world, in the gift of his Son. (John 3:16) But 
Jesus says the Father loves as with a feeling of family love 
(philein) those who have come into his inner family circle 
through Tove for his Son. (John 16:27) And many another 
passage seems to recognize and accentuate these distinctions 
iir the force of the two words severally. 

A striking illustration of the significant uses of the two 
words in the same conversation is found in the narrative of 
the interview of Jesus with Peter, on the shore of the Sea of 
Galilee, after the resurrection. (John 21:15-19) Jesus asks 
Peter if he gives him friendship love (agapan) more truly 
than the other disciples, as Peter had asserted that he was 
ready to do. Peter, remembering his denial of his Lord, replies
 that Jesus knows that he gives him longing love (philein) . 
The second time Jesus asks Peter if he can claim to give him 
any measure of friendship love (agapan), apart from all comparison
 with others. Again, Peter affirms that the Lord Ipows 
that he gives him a longing love (philein) . Then Jesus changes 
his form of question, and asks Peter if he is sure that he gives 
him even a longing love (philein). At this Peter is "grieved", 
not because the question is repeated a third time, but because 
in its third putting it seems to imply a doubt whether Peter 
has any love for his Lord, even on the lower plane; and his 
earnest answer is: "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou 
knowest that I love thee" — with a longing love (philem) ; and 
Jesus quietly goes on to say that he would have Peter bear 
himself towards his dear ones just as he would if he were a 
devoted friend above all the other disciples. Tims the way is 
opened for Jesus to tell Peter plainly of what is in store for 
him in his faithful service. 

Only in the light of the distinction here pointed out isthe 
full force of divine love to be comprehended in the teachings 
of the New Testament. 


SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 


EUPHRATES BEING DBIED TTP 

Dear Brethren: — 

Just a few minutes of your valuable time to let you know 
of another joyful experience in the harvest field. On one 
of my regular visits to the Syrian class in Mt. Pleasant, Pa., 
one of the elders informed me that he had a Free Methodist 
friend to whom ho had often spoken about the truth, but 
could not make him see the true meaning of "hell," etc. 

We went together to the home of his friend, who was a 
Sunday School superintendent. After a few minutes we turned 
our conversation onto the real subject. He said he had bought 
the first three volumes several times and burned them at the 
instigation of the clergy, and that nothing under the sun 
rould convince him that there is no hell-fire and eternal toTment
. He said his church was the true church. Then I said: 
Dear Brother, if that is true, why is the Methodist church 
divided into 16 different sections! Ts Christ divided? 

FTc was -speechless with surprise. He, said he did not 
know that the Methodist church had 16 different divisions. 
Our conversation lasted about an hour and a half; his wife 
and four daughters and a few Syrian brethren were the 
audience. After wc finished he said: "Please send me that 
booklet on 'hell* because I want to read it." 

After he read the hell booklet it dispelled the eternal torment
 idea from his mind and he is rejoicing over it. Soon 
after he procured the first three volumes of Scripture 
Studiks. This month he knew that I was coming and arranged
 to attend the meeting, but he did not show up. Later 
we learned why. He said that the preacher and some of the 
church officials had come and hindered him by their presence 
at that hour. The preacher told him not to come to our 
meeting. He turned to the preacher and said: "Reverend, 
1 believed your misrepresentations in the past without proof, 


but now you cannot fool me any longer, because I have proved 
Pastor Russell's teachings to be the real truth by the Word." 
The preacher and those with him were greatly astonished. 
Again He said: "Now please take my name oft your church 
roll/' I just received a letter from him saying that he is 
reading the books and walking in the light as far as he sees it. 
Are there not many like him? 

Yours with best Christian love, Geo. E. Kafoory. — Pa. 
NOW VIEWS MATTERS DIFFERENTLY 
Dear Brethren in CnRtST: — 

You will doubtless have had my answer to your letter of 
October 23 last, returning the Vow slip unsigned. That was 
the true expression of my heart as to the Vow at that time. 
1 have been opposed to the Vow ever since I came to know 
present truth in 1910, yet not opposed to individual liberty 
in taking it; nor did I think that it contained anything 
wrong. But T objected to its being made a test for holding 
any office in the church. 

' That part of the Vow which speaks of the relationship of 
the sexes I used to think the most objectionable. I used 
to think that all who had put on Christ would not need any 
such help by vowing to abstain from all appearances of evil— 
as the Vow suggests. The w T ords of Brother Hollister come 
back to me now. When talking over this matter with me 
he said: "You do not seem to realize the great -stress that 
is upon mankind during this evil day and the powers of evil 
that are agrainst us for our downfall." 

Since that faithful servant has passed beyond the vail 
and the magnitude of his great office has become more apparent
, and the fact that the Lord is still using only the one 
channel to give us meat in due season, I come to the one 
conclusion that it muet be of the LoTd that such a safeguard 
is now set before us. I wish to do the will of God in ftll 


[6242] 


April 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(127 ir> 


things and I have rest about t]ie matter when 1 realize after 
careful thought and prayer that by subscribing to the Vow 
T am doing his holy will. I have always appreciated the 
Morning Resolve. If the V. D. M. questions were being answered
 by me now I believe I would give more care to the 
work, yet I think on the whole the answers were very close 
to the truth. I shall sign and date separate slip for attachment
 to Vow form, or you can return me the slip itself and I 
will sign it. 

I have deeply appreciated the article, "The Price of Exaltation
" in Nov. 15th Watch Tower. It is clear evidence to me 
the Lord is still at the helm. 

Your brother in hope of eternal life, 

J. R. Douglas. — Aus. 

APPRECIATES FREE PRESS AND SPEECH 

Dear Sirs: — 

My attention has been called through a news item to a 
book published by you called "The Finished Mystery/* which 
the Canadian press censor proscribed as pro-German. 


If there is no law in this country against your supplying 
the book, please let me Jcnowits price. Catalogue of other 
publications of yours would be appreciated. 

As I understand it, a free press is one of the fundamentals 
upon which this government is based. I like to see for myself
 why certain lx>oks and publications are so greatly feaTed 
by the ruling class. Thus far I have usually found that there 
is some unpleasant truth which they hope by these tyrannical 
and undemocratic methods to suppress. All autocrats hate 
to let the people do their thinking. I believe that nothing
 that could be done would do more to create dissatisfaction
 and unrest in a country supposedly free than to attempt 
autocratically to say what the people shall be allowed to read 
or not read. 

I am far from being a pro-German, but I pride myself on 
being a free and independent American, and nothing stirs 
me more than to see efforts made to suppress fTee-speeeh, freepress
 and free-assembly. 

Sincerely, F. H. S.— N. Y. 


Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., MAY 1, 1918 


No. 9 


ZION'S TRIUMPH NEAR 

"Cast not away therefore your confidence, which hath great recompense of reward. For ye have need of patience, that, after 
ye have done the will of Qod, ye might receive the prorrtise" — Hebrews 10:35, 36. 


With bated breath and joyful heart the watchera in Zion 
beihold the closing of the harvest. Next the dark night, followed
 shortly by the glorious sunburst of everlasting happiness
. Wonderful is the present privilege of the faithful watchers
. The graduating test is now upon the church. 

By the words of our text St, Paul clearly proves that 
patience (cheerful endurance) is the final test, and that this 
test must come after we have done the will of God. What, 
then, has been and is the will of God for the members of Zion 
in the closing days of the age? During the past forty years 
the harvest of the age has been in progress. That the harvest 
began in 1878, there is ample and convincing proof. The end 
of the harvest is due in the spring of 1918. During the period 
of the harvest the will of God concerning his people finds 
expression in the words of the Master: 'In the time of harvest
 I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the 
tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather 
the wheat into my barn." (Matthew 13:30} In that time, 
according to nia word, he has sent forth his messengers with 
a great sound of a trumpet, to gather his elect from one end 
of heaven to the other. (Matthew 24:31) Again God expressed
 his will concerning his people, saying, "Gather my 
saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant 
with me by sacrifice." (Psalm 50:5) Again Jesus expressed 
the will of out Father: "Thrust in thy eicfcle and reap; for 
the time is come for thee to reap ; for the harvest of the earth 
[order-loving people] is ripe." — Revelation 14:15. 

The sickle here mentioned is the message of truth; thrusting
 it in means to send out the truth to those who hunger for 
it. Again God expressed his will concerning the called ones 
when he commissioned them to preach the good tidings to the 
meek, to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to 
the captives, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord and 
the day of vengeance of our God (Isaiah 61:1-3); and that 
this vengeance should be declared against Babylon. (Jeremiah 
51:6) Jesus makes it clear that the latter part of the work 
of the harvest is the gathering of the vine of the earth. (Revelation
 14:18) If, then, we see these things fulfilled and we 
have joyfully participated in the work o«f their fulfillment, we 
have been doing the will of God; and it is after thus doing 
his will that we moist cheerfully endure "before receiving the 
promise. 

HOW FULFILLED 

It is doubtless true that every saint this side the vail who 
has a knowledge of present truth came to such knowledge 
of God's plan since 1878 — the opening of the harvest work. 
At that time the church nominal was composed of both wheat 
and tares, true and false Christians. During the time of the 
harvest these classes must be separated. In outward appearance
 the two are much alike. The great Master had personally 
instructed that there should be no attempt at separation until 
the harvest time. 

He himself has been present, directing the work of separating
 the two classes; and he has used various ■consecrated instruments
 as his messengers to do this work. The separating 
and gathering work has been accomplished with a sickle, 
which is the message of truth, and which necessarily must 
be understood by the consecrated. The thrusting in of that 


sickle of truth has had the effect of causing all denominations 
or religions systems to bind themselves together in bundles; 
thus uniting to oppose the message of truth. This binding together
 in bundles, according to the parable, must take place 
before the destruction of the tares. That these bundles have 
for some time been bound together cannot be gainsaid. The 
tacit union of the systems is complete, all together composing 
Babylon, mother and daughters. The doom of Babylon is 
sealed and has been announced. God has smitten her with 
plagues (Revelation 16:20, 21); and her destruction will follow
 shortly. 

SEALING OF THE SAINTS 

During the entire forty years of the harvest the sealing 
of the saints progressed. A knowledge and appreciation of 
God's plan has served as both a sealing and a separating 
agency. To those who hungered and thirsted for the truth, 
God gave the satisfying portion; and those who appreciated 
it have been prompt in doing his will concerning them by 
gladly engaging in the harvest work. These heard tae call, 
"Come out of Babylon," and joyfully obeyed, took up the 
trumpet and engaged in sounding forth the message of the 
kingdom. 

The great Master of the harvest, through St. John, shows 
that this sealing is in the forehead and must be accomplished 
-before the storm of destruction breaks, upon Babylon. This 
seems clearly to indicate that every one who will be of the 
kingdom claas must have a knowledge and appreciation of 
God's plan by the end of the harvest. If the harvest has 
ended, then the sealing is complete. The evidence strongly 
indicates that all the saints are sealed. This would mean 
that all the saint3 have been gathered into the "barn" — into 
the condition of separateness from the world. 

Concerning this point, the Laodicean messenger wrote: 

"When this night cometh, when the reapers must cease 
their labors, it will prove that this final work of the Gospel 
age is accomplished; that the elect number of the bride of 
Christ have al] been 'sealed/ and 'gathered' into a condition 
of separateness from the worldly — into the barn condition; 
for God will not permit anything to put an end to his work 
until it is finished. Then all the true and faithful servants 
of God will have been sealed in their foreheads; and, the 
work of the Gospel age being finished, no more can enter into 
that work or reap its rich reward." — C 211, 212. 

"The forehead sealing indicates that a mental comprehension
 of the truth will be the mark of seal which will separate
 and distinguish the servants of God from the servants 
and votaries of Babylon. And this agrees with Daniel's testimony
: 'The wise [of thy peoplel shall understand; but none 
of the wicked [unfaithful to their covenant] shall understand.' 
(Daniel 12:10) Thus the classes are to be marked and separated
 before the plagues come upon rejected, cast-off Babylon
."— C 165, 166. 

PLAQUE OF HAIL 

It has heretofore been shown (Z. 1918-119) that the firstborn
 of Egypt pictured or represented the clergy of Christendom
, claiming to be the first ones of importance in the systems
. The exposition of the prophecies of Ezekiel and Revelation
 in "The Finished Mystery" shows to the world that the 


[6243] 


(132-133) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


clergy are not what they have claimed and think themselves 
to be. The Bible Students Monthly which contains the 
article on "The Fall of Babylon" is likewise a pointed message 
directed against the same class. In the picture, the angel 
that smote the first-born of Egypt passed through the land 
about midnight; and, as heretofore suggested in The Watch 
Tower, "about midnight" in the antitype would apply to about 
January 1, 1918. On December 30 and 31, 1917, and 
January 1, 1918, approximately 10,000,000 copies of the above 
mentioned issue of The Bible Students Monthly — the message
 against Babylon, and particularly the clergy of Babylon 
— were placed in the homes of the people of the United States 
and Canada. This was like a great hailstorm, and brought 
to the attention of the people the fact that Babylon is not 
whet she claims to be, Kothing has so angeped Babylon as 
this. Twenty-seven years before that "hailstorm," the Laodicean
 messenger wrote: 

" After the truth, which Babylon now begins to regard as 
her enemy, and as calculated to accomplish her destruction, 
shall have become more generally known and widely circulated; 
after 'the hail' has to a considerable extent swept away the 
refuge of lies; and after the now smoldering and menacing 
hatred of the truth is thereby roused to an opposition so 
violent and so general as to effectually stop the further progress
 of the great work in which the saints are engaged," will 
be 'the approximate time of the deliverance or 'change' of 
the last members of the body of Christ."— C 231, 232. 

MANTLE OF ELIJAH 

After Elijah smote the Jordan with his mantle, he crossed 
over with ElisJia; and while the two walked together on the 
otlier side, Elijah was taken up by a whirlwind into heaven. 
Elisha then took up the mantle of Elijah, that had fallen 
from ihim, and went back over the Jordan. It -seems quite 
reasonable that the mantle represented -the message of truth 
which the Elijah class has possessed throughout its journey 
during the harvest period. (Psalm 91:4) Elijah had this 
mantle with Mm all the way from Gilgal to the Jordan. Elijah 
and Elisha stood at the Jordan, talking; then Elijah wrapped 
up his mantle and smote the waters. This seems to explain 
the waiting period from 1914 to 1917, when the smiting of 
the antitypical Jordan began by the message "wrapped up for 
the slaughter." (Ezekiel 21 ;15) "The Finished Mystery" 
contains the message of truth in brief, compact form, specially 
directed against Babylon. It was used particularly from the 
latter part of 1917 to the spring of 1918. 

About the middle of March, 1918, the distribution of "The 
Finished Mystery" was suddenly stopped. The suggestion 
does not seem unreasonable that, "The Finished Mystery" being
 the mantle, the quantity of these printed and not distributed
 will be used by the Elisha class for a second smiting 
of the waters (peoples). 

HAS THE HARVEST ENDED? 

The saints need not be disturbed by the suppression of the 
message against Babylon. This is not man's work, but the 
Lord's work. God nas permitted it to be interrupted for some 
good purpose and will overrule it to his own glory. "The 
Finished Mystery" has been suppressed on the theory that it 
interferes with the prosecution of the war. (Jeremiah, 38:4) 
Doubtless the clergy have represented to officials that it is 
interfering with the war. We cannot agree that the circulation
 of this book in any manner interferes with the war's 
prosecution. Those having to do with its distribution have 
had no intention whatsoever to interfere with the prosecution 
of the wa r. Something, however, must interfere with the 
harvest work. Excessive use of authority may be expected in 
this time of stress. In many places, petty officials of the law 
have arrested, without warrant, some of the faithful Colporteur
 brethren; have thrown them into jail and refused to 
give them opportunity to arrange for bail; and after several 
days have turned them loose with the warning that they 
should not sell any of the Studies in the Scriptures or any 
publications of the Society. Undoubtedly officials have thought 
it absolutely necessary to suppress this message. The Scriptures
 indicate that such a course would be taken. In 18ft 1, 
the faithful messenger of Laodicea, discussing this point 
said : 

"When repressive, restrictive and coercive measures are 
thought to be necessary, such measures will probably include 
not only labor organizations and the publications which advocate
 their rights and wrongs, but also such others as point 
out the plan of God, and the real cause and only remedy for 
the great distress of the nations. Yes, the time is probably not 
many years distant, when repressive measures may be brought 
to bear against every effort of the saints to spread the good 


news of the coming kingdom, all on the plea that the general 
interests and the public welfare demand such a course. 

"Thus would be fulfilled the predictions of the Second 
Psalm, and probably in the end with more 'bitterness than can 
now well be imagined, though it has been partially fulfilled 
upon the Head of the body. — Acts 4:25-20. 

"The same necessity for restricting liberty on political and 
social questions will probably be supposed to apply equally to 
freedom of expression on religious questions which really lies 
at the foundation of all liberty. It would not be surprising 
if a 'strong government* would some day replace this present 
great republic; and it is entirely probable that one common 
standard of religious belief will be deemed expedient and will 
be promulgated, to teach outside of which will be treated and 
punished as a political offense. Such a persecution would 
not only furnish, in the end or harvest of this age, another 
parallel to the harvest of the Jewish age, but would also give 
a wider and deeper significance to the words of the Apostlea 
Paul and John, and to the typical illustrations of the close of 
the earthly career of the true church, as represented in Elijah's 
whirlwind departure and John the Baptist's imprisonment 
and beheading."— B 263, 264. 

THE DOOR CLOSING 

The door which toy the way, our Lord calls a gato — represents
 the way of entrance into a certain condition or privilege
. (Luke 13:24, 25) In this instance it represents entrance
 into the race fox the prize of the heavenly calling to 
joint-beirship with Christ Jesus in his kingdom. That door 
opened at Pentecost. It must be closed some time. It must 
remain open until all the "wise virgins" have been sealed in 
their foreheads. While open, it means that those who enter 
have the blessed privilege of sacrificing and suffering with 
Christ Jesus, which, suffering is not ordinary suffering, but 
such suffering as results from faithfully walking in the footsteps
 of the Master in loving devotion to the cause of righteousness
, and in joyfully defending the truth, which is unpopular
, and in exposing errors which are popular. It means 
a zealous and energetic promulgation of the truth as we 
have opportunity, at all hazards. It means to be true, loyal 
and faithful to the Lord under all conditions, even unto death. 
Such privileges are the greatest ever afforded to any creature
. The ceasing of such privileges to any and all persons 
would seem to mark definitely the closing of the door. "The 
night cometh when no man can work." (John 9:4) That 
time will mark the closing of the door. Discussing this point, 
the last messenger to the church said : 

"There are three ways in which the closing of this door 
might be indicated: first, by a definite Bible statement of the 
exact date; second, by such a reversal of public sentiment with 
reference to the truth that fidelity and zeal in its service would 
no longer meet with opposition, and when suffering with Christ 
for the truth's sake, would be no longer possible; or third, 
by .such a condition of affairs obtaining in the world that all 
opportunity for such service would be effectually obstructed, 
thus leaving no opportunities for candidates to enter into 
the work and to develop and prove their love and faithfulness
 by their activity and endurance. . . . We have a clear 
intimation that the door will be shut in the manner last 
named; for, before the Millennial day breaks, we are forewarned
 of a dark night wherein no man can labor." — C 207, 
208. 

"The closing of the 'door/ in the parable of Matthew 25, 
marks the full end of all opportunity for any, even of the 
'called* ones, thereafter to attain the prize of the high calling. 
It marks the end of all opportunity to prove worthy of the 
prize by faithfulness in the service: all opportunity for 
service will there terminate in the 'night 3 wherein no man 
can work."— C 213. 

WHO IS EESPONSIBLE? 

" 'The morning cometh, and also the night.' The night 
cometh wlien no man can work.' When that is true, you may 
know that 'the door is shut/ that all the wise virgins have 
entered in, that all have been proved, and that all vacancies 
have been acceptably filled."-— C 225. 

"Ere long our work will be cut short — gradually at first, 
and then completely and finally, when 'the night cometh, when 
no man can work/ And the gloom of that 'night' will be 
dispelled only by the Millennial sunrise. When our work is 
done, and that night closes in around us, we may expect not 
only to see the storm-clouds grow much darker, but also to 
hear and to feel the rising 'winds' which will culminate in a 
wild hurricane of human passion — a whirlwind of trouble. 
Then, having finished our appointed work, it will be our part 
to 'stand/ patiently, until our Vshange' comes." — C 230. 

We record here some of the trying experiences through 


[6244] 


May 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(133-134) 


which our brethren are caused to pass because of their faithfulness
 to the Lord. About the 14th day of March, the Attorney
 General instructed the District Attorneys throughout 
the country to prevent the further sale and distribution of 
"The Finished Mystery/' but to arrest no one who had sold 
or distributed the book prior to that date without wrongful 
intent. Notwithstanding this order, local Government officials 
in different places have exceeded their authority. Some of 
the dear friends have been arrested and thrown into jail for 
distributing The Bible Students Monthly, others because 
they were selling the first six volumes of Studies in the 
Scriptures; others, 'because they sold the Scenario of the 
Photo-Drama of Creation. Two were arrested and brought 
into court because they had distributed the Kingdom News. 
After yieir incarceration, some one induced a woman to make 
a false affidavit against one of them. When the case was 
heard, the affidavit was proven to be false and both brethren 
were released. 

EEPOBTS FROM THE FRIENDS 

Following are a few extracts from letters such as have 
been received here every day during the past few weeks: 

» County Jail. In harmony with the Lord's will, 

I am having a quiet season of study and fellowship with him 
here." — Conn. 

« j a ii. We shall bo taken from here by an officer 

to the District Attorney's office for distributing Kingdom 
News."— X. Y. 

"Your telegram received yesterday in the Jail. They 

turned us loose yesterday, after keeping us four days and five 
nights, making us promise to quit selling any of the Studies 

i n County before they would release us. As the 

people are so stirred up there, we thought best to take up the 
work in the new territory in Illinois." — Ind. 

"Wo are experiencing considerable opposition. Thursday 
four sisters went to a neighboring town and distributed The 
Bible Students Monthly — 'Clergy Ordination Proved Fraudulent
.* Just as they got through with the distribution, the city 
marshal, with another, insisted that they go and gather the 
tracts up, and then they had a public burning." — 111. 

"Sheriff's Office. Last night I was placed in jail here for 
selling 'The Finished Mystery.' "— N. Dak, 

"Last Saturday I went to to attend the trial of 

two Colporteurs, and, while looking for them, was arrested. 
They could not prove that I had circulated any of the book3 
since the ruling was made." — Okla. 

"While busily engaged in cutting out the pages objected 
to [in "The Finished Mystery"], an officer of the federal government
 arrested us. My request to show me his warrant was 
completely ignored. We were conveyed to the police station 
and no one was allowed to communicate with us. From the 
press account, next morning, I learned that two of my friends 
came to bail me out, hut were not allowed to see us at all. 
After spending several nights in jail, we were released without
 any explanation whatsoever. Two people told me that the 
officer gave them several books, with instructions to burn them 
when they had finished reading them." — La. 

"We are undergoing great persecution while trying to do 
colporteur work. The officers are gathering up all the Seventh 
Volumes and the question booklets; also The Bible Students 
Monthly, 'The Fall of Babylon.' Wc have been working some 
with the other volumes and the Scenario and 'booklets; but 
hear threats of arrest every day." — Tex. 

" . County Jail. There are three brothers and myself
 in jail here for selling 'The Finished Mystery.' We are 
rejoicing that we have a share in drinking the Lord's cup." — 
Calif. 

"At my brother and I were stopped from selling 

the six volumes of Studies in the Screptubes by a secret 
service man. He told us if we tried to sell any more books 
we would be arrested. We were not selling any Seventh Volumes
." — Wash. 

In Texas two of the pilgrims have been arrested for preaching
 the Gospel, one of them being held in $10,000 bond for appearance
 'before the Grand Jury. Another of our traveling 
ministers was waited upon by the mayor and chief of police 
in a western town and warned not to preach. When he attempted
 to do so, a mob chased him out of town, but captured
 hi9 companion and tarred him. The governor co-operated 
to furnish protection. This mob violence indicates that the 
demons are loose and inhabiting the minds of men, inciting 
them to lawless deeds. 

DEMONS LOOSE 

St. John the Revelator wrote: "And I saw. another angel 
ascending from the east, having the seal of the living God; 
and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels to whom 
it was given to hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt 


not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have 
sealed the servants of our God in their foreneads." (Revelation
 7:2, 3) The conclusion to be drawn from this is that 
the demons will be loosed when the saints are sealed and the 
door is closed. The Scriptures clearly show that the demons 
will inhabit Babylon. (Revelation 18:2) It is reasonable to 
conclude that, after being loosed, some little time might be 
occupied by the demons in influencing the minds of the willing
 one3 in Babylon and in the formulation of plana for 
operation against the last members of the body of Christ, and 
that during that time the saints would .be concluding their 
work. These demons will inhabit the members of Babylon 
by taking control of the body and mind, as in the days of 
Noah. They will probably first vent their spleen or vengeance 
upon the members of the kingdom class. 

Conditions which have recently developed in Russia strongly
 indicate that the evil spirits are loose. It is well known 
that the czar of Russia consulted the demons through mediums
. The violent disposition recently manifested by the clergy 
toward some of our brethren indicates that the demons are 
occupying their minds. Wo may expect this violence to increase
 in the near future. Let U3 not be surprised if within a 
short time every avenue for the promulgation of the truth 
is closed. 

A BRIEF RESPITE 

We need not be at all disturbed because the opportunity to 
distribute "The Finished Mystery" has been taken from ua. 
The work is the Lord's. Our business, as nis ambassadors, 
is to deliver the message. In the days to come the clergy 
will not be heard to say that they did not have opportunity 
to know of this message. This message must he delivered to 
Babylon. Only the faithful will engage in delivering it. If you 
have had anv opportunity to do so, rejoice and give thanks to 
the Lord. Tne fiery chariot that took away Elijah represents 
the fiery experiences that would come to the faithful ones 
who persist in making proclamations of the message of the 
kingdom, and who are anxious to enter the fiery chariot and 
be taken home in the Lord's own due time. 

Some, when seeing these fiery experiences — the fiery chariot 
— appearing, have sought a place of safety by ceasing their 
labors in the harvest field and by refusing to speak anything 
concerning Babylon, declining even to mention it in class 
stud^. It seems^that this shows a lack of faith in the Lord. 
Let us have in mind the Apostle's woraa: "Now the just 
[the justified, having the robe of Christ's righteousness] shall 
live by his faith; but if any man draw back, my soul shall 
have no pleasure in him." (Hebrews 10:38) This is the 
time above all times to stand firm and trust in the Lord. 
Even though we see the persecution becoming more violent 
day by day, because of our faithfulness, let us keep in mind 
that he who is on our part is greater than all that can be 
against us. Let us not waver. Let us proceed in the declaration
 of the message of the kingdom as long as the Lord gives 
us any opportunities. "And probably at this juncture the 
Elijah class, persisting in declaring the truth to the last, will 
suffer violence, pass into glory and escape from the severest 
features of the great time of trouble." — C 231. 

The Lord has permitted some of his people to remain to 
this time in order to leave records concerning his kingdom 
that will be valuable to the undeveloped great company class 
and to the world in general. It therefore becomes the privilege
 of all the consecrated, as opportunity offers, to make 
proclamation of the message of the kingdom. The time is 
short. Let every one be active. Let every one who is able 
to give a public address, and who can find an opportunity, 
do so, using the subject, "The World Has Ended — Millions 
Now Living Will Never Die." It is a great privilege to announce
 this message of the kingdom to the poor world in this 
hour of distress. If we are privileged to be the very last 
ones on the earth, to do this, such will be a great honor. "To 
be among those who remain is no dishonor; and to be the 
very last one of those to be 'changed* will be no discredit. 
Several Scriptures show that there is a special work for the 
last members of the body to do on this side the vail, as important
 and as essentially a part of kingdom work as that 
of the glorified members on the other side," — C 235, 

SPECIAL WORK 

Seeing, then, that some avenues of service are closing, let 
us look quickly for some other avenue remaining open. Soon 
all will close. Gradually the work will close down, and then 
suddenly will stop completely. But let us remember that the 
feet members — the last members — have some work to do even 
yet. 

"The mission of the feet, whioh is no insignificant part of 
the kingdom work, will be accomplished. Though their message
 is popularly hated and discredited and they ar« despised 


[6245] 


(134 136) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn N. Y. 


by the world as fools (for Christ's sake) — as all his faithful 
servants have been throughout the Gospel age — yet, before they 
are all 'changed.' and joined to the glorified members beyond 
the vail, they, as agents of the kingdom, will have left euch 
records of that kingdom and its present and future work aa 
will be most valuable information to the world and to the 
undeveloped and over-charged children of God who, though 
consecrated to God, will have failed eo to- run as to obtain 
the prize of our high calling. 

"And let it not be forgotten that all who are of the 'feet' 
will be thus engaged in publi«hang these good tidings and in 
saying to Zion, *Thy God reigneth!' — the kingdom of Christ 
is begun! And all who are true watchmen can at this time 
see clearly, as one man, and can together harmoniously sing 
the song of Moses and the Lamb."—-C 237. 

Keeping always in mind the peat honor conferred upon us 
by being granted the opportunity to make proclamation of 
the kingdom, and rIbo by faith beholding the glories of the 
kingdom in full operation, our faith will he strong and we 
will keep our faces to the enemy and valiantly press on. 
Plainly we can -see the disintegration of the present order. 
Let us rejoice to proclaim to the peoples of earth the blessings
? of the great King, who has come to reign and bring 
righteousness in the earth. Long ago the prophet of the Lord, 
beholding the privilege now enjoyed by the last members of 
the body of Christ on earth, in ecstasy exclaimed: "How 
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringe
-th good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good 
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto 
Zion, Thy God reigneth!"— Isaiah 52:7. 

P AMENDE PERFECTING HBB WOEK 

Let no one slack his hand as long as any opportunity for 
proclaiming the truth is afforded. Remember the words of 
the Apostle: "Ye have need of patience [cheerful endurance], 
that after ye have done the will of God ye might rctive the 
prornise." 'The will of God is that we do all in our power 
to give testimony to his glorious character and coming kingdom
. Having done this, we must wait and behold the salvation
 of the Lord, patiently biding his time to call us home. 
The Apostle Paul, again speaking to the church, says: "Having
 done all, stand." (Ephesians 6:13) This clearly indicates
 that the last of the feet members must-stand a while 
after the door is closed, stand, letting patience perfect Iter 
work ; waiting until the Lord Jehovah shall deliver us. Some 
will be required to stand in enforced idleness for a time, despised
 and rejected of all men. deprived of opportunities to 
labor either for the production of the necessities of life or in 
testifying of the kingdom. Let us remember in thi3 connection
 the words of the Master: u He that shall endure unto 
the end, the same shall be saved." (Matthew 24:13) Nearly 
twenty years ago, the faithful Laodicean messenger wrote: 

"How lonar the Lord may be pleased to let his saints stand 
in enforced idleness so far as his work is concerned, we do 
not know, but probably only long enough to let faith and 
patience* have their perfect work. Here, these virtues will be 


most fully developed, tested and manifested. This test of 
patience will be the final trial of the church. Then 'God will 
help her, at the dawning of [her] morning.' (Psalm 46:6 — 
Leeser) — not the morning which is to dawn on the -world at 
the brightness of her rising with her Lord as the 
sun of righteousness, but at the dawning of her morning, 
in which she is to be changed to the nature and likeness of 
her Lord. Her morning is to precede the Millennia] morning
."— C 230, 23L 

TRIUMPHANT ZION 

Having made a consecration unto death, the child of God 
understands that he must die before he can gain the promised 
prize. "Ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes." 
(Psalm 82:7) The journey of the consecrated has not been 
one strewn with flowers. It has not been one of ease. God 
permitted it to be otherwise, in order that by trying experiences
 a strong, firm, crystalized character might be developed. 
The last of the feet members have come to a very trying time 
in the church's history. Poor, bruised and despised ones; 
misunderstood by all in the world, persecuted, ridiculed, the 
victims of scoffers, charged as violators of the law and denounced
 as the offscourgings of the earth. And yet they have 
pressed along and are still pressing along the naTrow way! 
No one appreciates them; indeed, none except the consecrated 
can appreciate them. But how beautiful they are and how 
wonderful their privilege! They are highly honored and esteemed
 by the Lord himself and greatly loved by him — not 
because of their own merit, but because of faithful, loving 
devotion to duty and to his cause. They are now performing 
their precious mission of proclaiming that the kingdom of 
heaven is at hand. A little while, and their journey will be 
ended, and their "change" shall suddenly come. And that 
"change" will bring them into fellowship and glory and 
power already possessed by those who have preceded them 
into glory. 

Of the last members, St. Paul says: "They shall be caught 
away to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall they ever be 
with the Lord." The term "caught away" is rendered "removed
 by force" by some translators. It seems that some 
of the Lord's dear saints may go down into the very anarchy, 
yet at all times protected by the Lord. When the true church's 
hour seems the darkest, then God will help her. She will 
emerge from the turmoil and distress of earth into glory and 
beauty, in the likeness of her Lord and Head. Triumphant 
Zion she then shall he. Thus will God help Zion in the dawning
 of her morning — in the morning of the eternal day of 
Christ's triumph. 

"Triumphant Zion, lift thy head 
Prom dust and darkness and the dead ! 
Though humbled long, awake at length, 
And gird thee with thy Savior's strength. 

"Yea, soon astonished men shall see 
The laurels of thy victory; 
And thou, with grace and glory crowned, 
May'st lavish blessings all around." 


JESUS TRIUMPHANT OVER DEATH 


June 23.— Mark 16:1-11. 

IMPORTANCE OF OUR LORD'S RESURRECTION — ERRORS OF DARK AGES LEAD TO CONFUSION IN MAN? MINDS — PROOFS OF THE RESURRECTION
 NUMEROUS AND WFJ/L SUBSTANTIATED — THE WITNESSES MOST RELIABLE — OUR LORD'S RESURRECTION CHANGESPURPOSE
 OF HIS VARIOUS APPEARANCES IN DIFFERENT BODIES OF FLESH— HIS EXALTATION "FAR ABOVE ANGELS, PRINCIPALITIES
 AND POWERS, AND EVERY NAME THAT IS NAMED" — HIS GREAT REWARD. 

"Now hath Christ been raised from the dead." — 1 Corinthians 15:20. 
Few seem to realize the importance of the doctrine of the of him as being alive during f Ixat time, and that it was merely 


resurrection of the dead, its bearing upon the entire Gospel 
message. The Apostle indicates how much d^epended upon our 
Lord's resurrection when he wrote: "If Christ be not risen, 
then is our preaching vain, and vout faith is also vain. . . , 
They also who are fallen asleep in Christ are perished." (1 
Corinthians 15:14, 18) The number of the Lord's professed 
followers, both clergy and laity, who fail to appreciate the 
resurrection, yea. who actually do not believe in it, is very 
large. The number of those who really believe in it is very 
small. 

Under the teachings which have come down to us from the 
dark ages, the majority of professed Christians fail entirely 
to realize that death means a cessation of life, ag the Scriptures
 clearly teach. On the contrary the masses of Christendom
 have come to believe that there is no death, that the 
dead are more alive than they were before they died. Applying 
this erroneous thought to our Lord, as well as to others, they 
do not appreciate the Scriptural declaration that "Christ died 
for our sins and rose again on the third day." They think 


his fleshly body that was inanimate in the tomb, and that the 
resurrection which occurred on the third day was not his resurrection
 to life, but merely the reanimation of his dead body. 
Confused thu3 by the errors of medieval times, which were 
also adopted by the reformers and which are engrafted upon 
the minds of the civilized world today, the great majority of 
Christian people cannot appreciate the Scriptural declarations 
in respect to the importance of the resurrection of our Lord^ 
Instead of believing the Apostle's assertion that our faith is 
vain, our preaching vain, if Jesus did not rise from the dead, 
the majority of Christendom would be inclined to say just 
the reverse of this. Hence only those who realize that the 
dead are dead, that until awakened from the sleep of death 
they can have no conscious existence — only these can really 
appreciate the importance of the resurrection. 


CONFUSION THE RESULT OF EBBOB 

Some one may ask: "What difference would it make to 
our beloved dead, what difference would it make toourpreacb- 

[*246] 


May 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(136-137) 


ing, what difference would it make to our faith, if Jesus had 
been left in the tomb?" We reply: If Jesus had not been 
raised from the dead we would have had no basis for the 
preaching of the Gospel; for the Gospel message is that by the 
grace of God the death of our Lord Jesus provided the ransom
-price for father Adam and his posterity, and that therefore
 in God's appointed time Adam and all his posterity will 
be released from the death sentence and be brought back to the 
original perfection of nature lost in Eden. Ohrist Jesu3 as 
the great King of earth is to establish the kingdom of God 
in the earth, and through it to lift from mankind the burden, 
the penalty of death. All that are in their graves shall hear 
the voice of the Son of God and come forth to the glorious 
opportunities of the Millennial kingdom, opportunities for 
reconciliation with God and for release from all the imperfections
 and weaknesses resulting from Adam's fall from perfection
. 

With the fact before us that Jesus had died, but without 
any proof of his resurrection, the preaching of any such gospel
 would be vain preaching, foolish preaching, deception of the 
people. To believe such a gospel under such circumstances 
would be to brand ^ourselves as simpletons; and to have any 
hope that our dead friends could ever be benefited by a dead 
Christ would be absurd. 

Seeing, then, that every feature of the Gospel is dependent 
upon the great fact of our Lord's resurrection, we understand 
why it was that the apostles based everything upon the fact 
that Jesus not only died for our sins a3 our ransom-price, 
but also arose from the dead for our justification, for our 
deliverance from the sentence, the guilt, the penalty, that is 
upon the human family — the death penalty. No wonder that 
our Heavenly Father arranged that we should have so explicit 
an account, so detailed a statement, of everything pertaining 
to our Lord's resurrection! No wonder that the Evangelists 
recorded matterB with such minuteness! No wonder that in 
all the preaching of the apostles this great fundamental truth, 
which was the basis of their own faith toward God, was set 
before the church as being all important! From this viewpoint 
the lesson for today must he of deep interest to all of the 
Lord's people for all time, until the outward manifestations 
of the kingdom shall attest the things which the household of 
faith must now accept by faith. 

PBOOFS OF THE EESUBEEOTIOK 

Summing up the proofs that our Lord arose from the dead 
on the third day we find that they are numerous and well 
substantiated, as follows: 

( 1 ) Our Lord's death could not have been a case of suspended
 animation. The spear-thrust made this fact evident, 
not only because it was a mortal wound, but because it furnished
 proof that our Lord was already dead, for water as 
well as coagulated blood issued from his side. 

(2) The centurion charged with the execution was convinced
 of his death, and so reported to Pilate, the Roman 
governor. 

(3) The request of the chief priests that the stone against 
the door of the sepulcher be sealed and a guard be placed 
around the tomb, so that no one could remove the body and 
then pretend that he had risen, was a further evidence that 
Jesus was dead. 

(4) His friends believed that he was dead, and wrapped 
him in spices for burial. Indeed, in their grief they seem to 
have forgotten his promise of a resurrection, so much so that 
even after he had arisen it was with difficulty that they were 
convinced of the fact. 

(5) The record that the guards dissembled and declared 
that the disciples stole Jesus' body while the soldiers slept, 
being bribed by the Jewish rulers, served at least to prove 
that the guard had been set and that everybody recognized 
that Jesus was dead. 

(6) The tomb in which Jesus was buried was a new one, 
in which no one had previously been buried, so there could be 
no doubt as to the identity of the one who arose. We are 
glad that there is such satisfactory evidence that Christ died, 
and that thus we have further foundation for the Scriptural 
assurance that he died as man's Redeemer. 

TWO VIEWS OP THE BEflURBEOTIOtf 
The view held by the majority of Christian people is that 
our Lord arose from the dead to exactly the same conditions 
that he had during his life upon earth — a man, subject to the 
same limitations that he had before he died. The other view 
is that he arose from the dead a spirit being; but that since 
spirit beings cannot be seen by the human eye without injury, 
our Lord clothed himself, as it were, with flesh and clothing 
in order to be seen by his followers, to demonstrate to them 
that he was no longer dead. The latter we find to be the 
Scriptural view. 


The majority of Christian people are greatly confused over 
the matter of the resurrection; for they believe the doctrines 
received from heathen philosophy during the dark ages, the 
very same doctrines which were communicated by the devil 
to all the heathen 3 namely, that the dead are more alive than 
they were during their life-time. Consequently people often 
wonder why the Scriptures lay such stress upon the resurrection
 and why there should be any necessity for a resurrection
. They properly enough reason that if, as they are usually
 told at the time of the funeral, their dead friend is now 
"free, no longer trammeled with his earthly body," why need 
he be trammeled with it in the future any more than in the 
present, and if some have gotten along for centuries without 
bodies, why should they need bodies thereafter any more than 
before ? 

All this confusion of thought is directly traceable to 
Satan's falsehood, "Ye shall not surely [really] die," and the 
rejection of God's statement, ( ln the day that thou eatest 
thereof, thou shalt surely die." (Genesis 3:4; 2:17) When 
we accept the teachings of the Word of God that the dead 
are really dead, then we perceive that there is no hope whatever
 for them to have any knowledge or consciousness except 
by a resurrection. Then we realize the truthfulness of the 
Scriptural statement that there is neither knowledge nor 
device nor wisdom in the grave, sheol, the death state, whither 
all go.— Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10; Job 14:21; Psalm 146:4. 

The cause of popular confusion on this subject is due to 
the error of supposing that the dead are not dead, and to the 
failure to see that our Lord was "put to death in the flesh, 
but quickened in the spirit," as the Apostle Peter explicitly 
tells us. (1 Peter 3:18) Thank God that with the morning 
light now shining upon the divine record these shadows, so 
confusing to heart and mind, are gradually fleeing away, disclosing
 to us new beauties in our heavenly Father's Word, 
consistencies, harmonies! When permitted to interpret themselves
, the Scriptures* are beautiful, reasonable, irrefutable. 
A COMMON BUT GROSS EEEOR 

The Apostle Peter informs us that Christ was "put to death 
in flesh, but quickened in spirit," as we have said. These 
words being true (we give a literal translation), those who 
declare that our Lord arose from the dead a fleshly being are 
grossly in error. Indeed, it is evident that they have misconceived
 the entire subject of the atonement; for if our 
Lord, a3 the man Christ Jesus, gave himself a ransom, he 
could not be restored to manhood in a resurrection without 
annulling the ransom — taking back the price he had provided 
for the sin of the world. The Scriptural thought i3 that as 
man had sinned and been sentenced to death, it was necessary
 that the Redeemer become a man and give his manhood 
as the ransom-price for Adam and his race. Moreover, the 
Scriptural declaration is not that this ransom-price was 
taken back, but that God raised our Lord from the dead a 
new creature of a new nature, not in flesh, not in human 
nature, but in spirit, a spirit being. 

St. Paul agrees with St. Peter's testimony, that Jesus 
was quickened in spirit, saying that Jesus was "declared to be 
the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, 
by the resurrection from the dead." (Romans 1:4) Again, 
he says in describing the first resurrection: "Thus, also is 
the resurrection of the dead: it is sown in corruption, it is 
raised in incorruption ; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in 
glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is 
sown a natural [animal] body, it 13 raised a spiritual body." 
(1 Corinthians 15:42-45) Elsewhere he declares, that the 
church's highest ambition is to be a partaker in this first 
resurrection, which he denominates "his resurrection," the 
Ghrist-resurrection, the resurrection to spirit conditions, nature
, which came first to our Lord and in which all of his 
body, the church, will have a share. — Philippians 3:10; Revelation
 20:6. 

OTJB LORD'S EESUBBECTION CHAKGE 

This being true, we know that the time when our Lord 
received his spirit body was at his resurrection and not subsequently
* Speaking of our Lord's humiliation and his subsequent
 exaltation at his resurrection, St. Paul assures us that 
Jesus left the glory which he had with the Father and humbled
 himself to become a man; and that in due time he humbled
 himself unto death, even the death of the cross. , "Wherefore
 God hath highly exalted him and given him a name above 
every name." The exaltation came to him in his resurrection 
change. It was true of him then, as in due time it will be 
true of all the members of his body, that he was sown in 
weakness, raised in power; sown a natural [animal, human 1 
body, raised a spirit body. 

This spiritual body- was just as glorious in the moment of 
onr Lord's resurrection as it was at any subsequent time. It 


[6247] 


(13M38) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


had all the powers properly granted to spirit beings in harmony
 with Jehovah God. He was not, as previously, the man 
Christ Jesus merely, but the Lord of glory. As such he was 
able to associate himself with his disciples, either visibly or 
invisibly, to appear as a gardener, as a traveler, as a stranger 
on Galilee's shore, or in any manner he might see fit. He 
was the same glorious being who subsequently appeared to 
Saul of Tarsus, shining as the lightning, imich as the angel 
appeared when the Roman guard was overcome. 

Some may inquire, 'Why did not our Lord appear to the 
women and the apostles in the same glorious manner, with 
shining features?' We answer that to have done so would 
have been to hinder the very object he had in view. How could 
his followers, who were not then begotten of the holy Spirit 
and who consequently were unable to understand spiritual 
things (1 Corinthians 2:14), have understood that a being 
shining like an angel was the Master whom three days before 
they had seen crucified? Even if they could have associated 
the two in some manner, what evidence would there have been 
for others who have lived since then? 

The removal of our Lord's remains from the tomb was an 
essential to the faith of the disciples of that day and of all 
who would believe on him since that time through their word. 
Manifestations of his being alive from the dead were also necessary
 to all these. The instructions which our Lord gave, 
his expositions of the prophecies and his application of these 
to himself, given at that particular time, were necessary as 
a firm foundation for faith. None of these objects could have 
been so well served in any other way than that which was 
adopted. 

THE VARIOUS ACCOUNTS HABMOKIZED 

To harmonize the various accounts of the resurrection we 
must suppose that the women charged with the work of embalming
 our Lord's body lived in different parts of Jerusalem, 
and did not all arrive at the same hour. Mary Magdalene 
arrived first, and finding the tomb empty hastened to tell 
some of the disciples. First she found Peter and afterward 
John, both of whom at once ran to the sepulchetr, while Mary 
probably returned more Blowly, arriving there after the two 
disciples and the other women had gone. It was at this second
 visit that our Lord revealed himself to her. She had been 
weeping, and had stooped down to look through the low doorway
 of the tomb, as if to reassure herself that it was empty. 
Then she saw for the first time two angels in white, who 
inquired respecting her sorrow. Doubtless the angels had 
been there when she was there before, but had not chosen 
to manifest themselves. 

Doubtless holy angels had in charge not only our Lord's 
body, but also the interests of his bereaved followers; and 
now and then some of these appeared as young men, though 
they were not flesh, but spirit beings, assuming fleshly bodies 
for a time, that they might render the service necessary. They 
are said to appeaT, because they could not be seen except as* 
they manifested themselves. In Luke 24:4 these same angels 
appearing as men are said to have been clothed in shining 
garments, so that they might not be understood to be men, 
but might at once be recognized as heavenly messengers. On 
the contrary, when our risen Lord as "a quickening spirit" 
similarly appeared in flesh in order to come closer to his followers
, he did not appear in shining garments, hut in ordinary 
apparel, assumed for the purpose, in order that he might 
have the 'better opportunity for giving the instructions which 
his followers needed. 

IMPORTANCE OF OTJB LORD'S RESURRECTION 

That our risen Lord is no longer flesh, but a spirit being 
with celestial glory, is clearly established by Paul's narrative 


of his own experiences. He explains that it was necessary 
that the twelve apostles should be able to bear witness to 
the fact that Jesu3 had risen from the dead. There could 
have been no Gospel message of hope of divine favor through 
a dead Savior. If Christ had not risen from the dead, who 
would there have been who could establish the Messianic 
kingdom? Who would there have been who could have given 
the church a share in the first resurrection and in the heavenly 
glory? Who would there be who could call forth from the 
tomb the sleeping thousands of millions of Adam's race, 
awakening them to the opportunities of life everlasting 
through obedience to the laws of the kingdom? 

All this the Apostle calls forcibly to our minds, saying, 
'Tf "Christ be not risen from the dead, your faith is vain; 
and all who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished." (1 
Corinthians 15:16-18) From this we see that St. Paul in no 
way shared the views of those who unscripturally claim that 
Jesus, while dead, was really alive, and that the resurrection 
of the dead is a mere formality, quite unnecessary to the 
carrying out of God's plan of salvation. On the contrary the 
divine teaching is that the dead know not anything, and that 
the resurrection of the dead 13 an absolute necessity to future 
life or blessing. 

The fact that Christ has risen from the dead is a guarantee 
of God's power to raise the dead. Additionally, it is a guarantee
 that Jesus accomplished the work which he came into 
the world to do. It proves to us that he must have kept the 
divine law perfectly; else he would not have been worthy of 
a resurrection from the dead. It also proves the value of his 
death, its efficacy as the offset of Adam's sin, and thus as the 
ransom-price for the sin of the world. 

POST-RESURBEOTIOH MANXFE STATIONS 

Our Lord's manifestations in the flesh during the forty 
days subsequent to his resurrection correspond exactly to 
those manifestations which he had made long before, one of 
which was to Abraham, The Logos ate and talked with Abraham
, but the Hebrew thought of him only as a man, because 
the- heavenly guest appeared in human form and ordinary 
clothing. He vanished from Abraham's sight just as he did 
from the apostles' sight and from the sight of Saul of Tarsus. 
When he appeared to Abraham, he was a spirit being, and he 
was a spirit being again after his resurrection, when he appeared
 to his apostles. But in the meantime, he had been 
made flesh for the very purpose of suffering for the unjust. 

Having accomplished the suffering, taere was no further 
reason why our Lord should remain flesh. The heavenly Lord 
of Glory is not flesh, not a man. If he were, he would still 
be "a little lower than the angels." But the Scriptures assure 
us that in his resurrection he ascended "far above angels." — 
Philippians 2:9-11; Hebrews 1:3, 4. 

It was just as easy for Jesus to appear in one form as in 
another, in one kind of clothing as in another. He appeared 
in various forms to impress the double lesson that he was not 
dead and that he was no longer a man. His second appearance
, with the wounds with which to convince St. Thomas, is 
especially noteworthy. Our Lord was ready to give any demonstration
 that was necessary to convince his disciples that he 
had actually risen from the dead; for unless they were so convinced
, they could neither do the work before them nor receive
 the holy Spirit at Pentecost. The holy Spirit was given 
only to those who believed in Jesus, those who accepted the 
fact of his death as the sacrifice for sin and who trusted in 
him as the Savior through whom would come the divine bless - 
ing.^ This impartation of the holy Spirit had the effect of begetting
 them to a new nature, and restoring them to fellowship
 with God as his children and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
their Lord. 


NOT ASHAMED OF THE GOSPEL 

June 30. — quarterly review. 

the reasonableness of st. paul's teachings — the false gospel of the dark ages a travesty on justice and love the 

true gospel, of which the great apostle was not ashamed cross and crown shame and glory— spiritual seed 

of abraham to bless all the eamilies of the earth — the millennial kingdom. 

"/ am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth." — Romans 1 :16 

Whoever has studied the masterly writings of the Apostle 
Paul, constituting so large a portion of the New Testament, 
must surely have been impressed with the reasonableness and 
logic of his mental positions as therein stated. While it is 
true that not many really understand tha Bible, yet even those 
who do not grasp the full import of the Apostle's teachings 
can see enough therein to convince them of the soundness of 
his logic; and the comparatively few, begotten of the holy 
Spirit, who really understand the depth of his writings 


unanimously give his epistles the first place among the books 
of the Bible as well as in general literature. 

Now we ask all who recognize St. Paul's ability and sterling
 honesty of expression: Is it possible to stippose that 
when the Apostle wrote the words which constitute our Golden 
Text he had in mind anything akin to the grosg travesty on 
justice and love which during the dark ages was branded the 
Gospel of Christ, and which has been handed down to us under 
that caption? Could we suppose that the great Apostle had 


[6248] 


May 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(139-140) 


in mind a race not only born in sin and shapen in iniquity, 
but condemned by its Creator to an eternity of torture since 
the time of Adam's disobedience? Gould we suppose that St. 
Paul had in mind for such a race a message that Christ had 
died and that the net result of the Savior's sacrifice for sin 
would affect only about one in ten thousand of earth's thousands
 of millions, to open the eyes of their understanding 
and to lead them from sin to righteousness, to obedience as 
saints with a reward of heavenly glory? 

Even in the Apostle's day he had noted the tendency of 
the adversary to bring false doctrines and to put "another 
gospel" instead of the true one. (Galatians 1:6-9) The 
faithful Paul was not only ashamed of this false gospel, but 
denounced it and forewarned the church to be on guard against 
the wiles of the devil, who would attempt to present himself 
as an angel of light in order to deceive the followers of Christ. 
(2 Corinthians 11:13-15) To what extent Satan has been 
successful as a theologian and teacher in the church let all 
the creeds of the dark ages bear witness! 

MANY ASHAMED OF THE PEEVEBTED GOSPEL 

For many years past, and especially since the beginning of 
the harvest of the Gospel age, thinking people have been perplexed
 and fretted in respect to the creeds of Christendom, 
Both heart and head told them that these creeds are wrong, 
that such a plan as therein outlined, so far from being a 
heavenly one, is earthly, sensual, devilish, far beneath the 
standard of moral honesty and decency among men — not to 
speak of love for our neighbor as for ourselves, which would 
do for others as we would that they should do for us. This 
false gospel contradicts entirely the Lord's statement that as 
the heavens are higher than the earth, so are his ways higher 
than man's ways. — Isaiah 55:8-11. 

Many of our fallen race, alas! are very mean, and are 
impelled 'by very wicked, malicious influences at times. But 
we have yet to find a man or a woman so wretchedly degraded, 
so unjust, so unsympathetic, so unloving, so fierce, so venomous
, so deficient, that he or she would purposely, knowingly, 
intentionally, bring into being a creature, human or brute, 
and then take continual pleasure, year after year, in torturing 
that creature, in witnessing its sufferings, its groans and its 
agonizing cries. Yet by following Satan's delusion foisted 
upon humanity during the dark ages, many Christian people 
have unwittingly ascribed to the God of wisdom, justice, love 
and power a plan which would make him more detestable 
than any other being in the universe. 

Alas, for such a slander of our heavenly Father, for such 
blasphemy of his holy name, we might well mourn in sackcloth
 and ashes for the remainder of our earthly life. But 
he is gracious to us, and does not impute our transgressions 
to us. He remembers that we are fallen dust, and that as a 
race we have come largely under the deceptive influence of 
our adversary, who has blinded mankind with ignorance and 
superstition. It is high time that all mankind awake, that 
they learn to use our God-given reasoning faculties upon religious
 matters, as well as upon the affairs of daily life. 
THE GOSPEL OF OHEIST 
How different from the false gospel of the dark ages is 
the Gospel of Christ! The Bible teaches that man was created 
in God's image and likeness, but that he fell into sin through 
disobedience of his Creator's commands, and so incurred the 
penalty of death, extinction. The Gospel of which the Apostle 
Paul was not ashamed declares that God in mercy provided 
Jesus as our Redeemer. It shows that no member of the 
fallen race could redeem it because each child of Adam was 
himself under the divine sentence of death. It explains that 
Christ's death was the offset to Adam's sentence, and that 
as the whole race suffered through Adam's disobedience and 
sentence so likewise God could with equal justice permdt the 
redemptive work of Jesus to apply not only to Adam but to 
all of his posterity. 

This Gospel of which St. Paul was not ashamed is clearly 
set forth in Romans 5:12-19. The Apostle does not say that 
the penalty upon Adam was eternal torment, but that it was 
death; nor does he say that the penalty upon mankind ia 
eternal torture. He does not say that Christ went to eternal 
torment to pay the penalty -upon man, but that "Christ died 
for our sins according to the Scriptures." (1 Corinthians 
15:3) He does not say that mankind is to be recovered from 
eternal torment, but rather brought back from the dead, that 
"there is to be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just 
and of the unjust." — Acts 24:15. 

Delineating still further the Gospel of which he was not 
ashamed, the Apostle explains that during this Gospel age 
God is gathering out of the world a special elect class to be 
the bride, the Lam'Vs wife, to suffer with him that they may 


be also glorified with him, to die with him that they may 
also live with him. (Romans 8:17) He declares that there 
has been a mystery connected with this subject which is designed
 of God to be understood only by the spirit-begotten 
ones, the faithful. He tells us that this mystery consists 
in the fact that the heavenly Father foreknew and predestinated
 that the great Messiah, the Seed of Abraham through 
whom all the families of the earth are to be blessed, would 
be composed not only of our Lord Jesus, but also of the elect 
church, which symbolically is the body of Christ. — Galatians 
3:8, lb, 29. 

The false doctrines of the dark ages, of which we are greatly
 ashamed, declare that after the elect church shall have 
been gathered, all the families of the earth shall forever be 
condemned and eternally tortured. But the Gospel of which 
the Apostle Paul was not ashamed declares to the contrary, 
teaching that after the elect church shall have been completed, 
its mission as the Seed of Abraham, as the glorified kingdom 
of Christ, the Millennial kingdom under the whole heavens, 
shall be to bless all the families of the earth, to convert 
them, to lift them up out of sin and death conditions, to give 
all the willing and obedient a full opportunity to return to 
divine favor as Adam at first enjoyed it and to an earthly 
Paradise restored. 

WHAT KINGDOM HONOBS WILL COST THE ELECT 
The Gospel of which the Apostle was not ashamed, and 
which he preached faithfully, invited those having hearing 
ears to consecrate their lives to God in order that they might 
be of the elect church. It gave assurance that the cross of 
uhe present time would, if faithfully carried to the end of the 
way, bring glory, honor and immortality, a share with our 
Lord Jesus in his Millennial kingdom and its glorious work 
of blessing all mankind. In view of this sure reward'believers 
were urged to present their bodies a living sacrifice, holy and 
acceptable to God through Christ, and then to suffer with him 
now, to be sharers in his ignominy, shame and death in order 
that in due time they might be sharers with him in his kingdom
 and its blessed work. 

In all of his teachings our Lord kept before the minds of 
the church the fact that the cross and the crown are inseparably
 united in the divine program. "If we suffer with him, 
we shall also reign with him." At the second advent of Christ 
his faithful followers were to receive a crown of glory which 
fadeth not away. (1 Peter 5:4) In their glorified condition 
they are to be the exalted Seed of Abraham with the glorious 
mission of blessing Israel after the flesh and ail the other 
families of the earth. (Romans 11:25-32) Even the casting 
away of the Jews from divine favor upon their rejection of 
Messiah, the Apostle assures us, will eventually be overruled, 
so that Natural Israel will receive mercy at the hands of 
Spiritual Israel. 

In his letter to the Ephesians the Apostle indicates that 
the glories of the church are not to be expected in the present 
time, which is a period of sacrifice and of suffering with 
Christ. The glory i3 to follow, and is to last not only during 
the thousand J-eare set apart for the world's blessing, but 
during the ages to come, throughout eternity. The elect 
church, proved and tested by present disciplines, will be forever
 blest with her Lord, and joint-heir with him in the riches 
of the grace of God. (Ephesians 2:7) 'Therefore the Apostle 
urges us not to cast away our confidence, our trust in the 
promises of God; for in due season we shall receive them if 
we faint not. 

In Hebrews 6:17-20 attention is called to the fact that 
during this trial time of suffering with Christ the oathbound 
promise made to Abraham is to be, to us who believe God's 
word and oath, an anchor to our souls sure and steadfast 
and entering into that* which is beyond the vail. There our 
forerunner is entered for us, even Jesus, who has already been 
glorified as the great an ti typical High Priest, who during the 
Millennial age shall exercise his priestly office for the blessing 
of the world. 

In line with this thought is the assurance that all of the 
faithful of the church of Christ, the "little flock," shall in 
due time be members of the Royal Priesthood, who as enthroned
 priests associated with their royal High Priest, Jesus, 
shall snare with him the blessed privilege of ruling, instructing
 and assisting the world of mankind. Who, we ask, needs 
to be ashamed of such a Gospel 1 This is not the Gospel of the 
dark ages, not bad tidings of great misery for nearly all people
, but the Gospel of tie Apostles, of our Lord Jesus, the 
Gospel which the angel announced to the awe-stricken shepherds
 when he said: "Behold, I bring you glad tidings of 
great joy which shall be to all people," not merely to the Jews, 
not merely to the "little flock/' but eventually to all the 
families of the earth. — Luke 2:10, 11 ; 12:32; Genesis 22:16-18. 


[6249] 


SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


chbist my LIFE; death my gain 

Question. — In the comment on Philippians 1:23, pages 970- 
673 of "The New Creation," the statement ia made that the 
Greek word anatiisai ia used in only one other place in the 
New Testament — in Luke 12:36 — whereas I find the same 
word used in Paul's second letter to Timothy, 4:6, "the time 
of my departure is at hand." Here the thought seems to be 
exactly opposite to that in Volume Six. Kindly explain. 

Answer. — It was Brother Russell's intention to alter the 
comment referred to, that it might conform more clearly to 
all the facts, but evidently failing strength and press of other 
matters interfered. We submit the following, first quoting a 
free translation of the passage involved: 

"For as to life, life to me is Christ. As to death, it is 
gain. Now if to continue to live means fruitful labor I have 
nothing to say as to my preference. I am strongly appealed 
to from both sides. But if I should consult my own real 
desire, it is for the final release and for the being with 
Christ, for that is by far the best thing. But, on the other 
hand, I am assured that, for your sake, it is more necessary 
that I should continue to live; and therefore I know that 1 
shall remain with you, that I may promote your advancement 
and your joy in your faith; so that, in Christ Jesus, your 
joy in me may abound through my being present with you 
again." 

TWO THINGS AND A THIED 

Only two things of importance are mentioned by the Apostle
 up to this point, which might call for an expression of 
preference on his part. The one is a continuance of his life 
as a messenger of Christ, which, as he says, involves considerable
 labor. The other is the rest from his irksome surroundings
 which the sleep of death would afford. He tells 
the brethren that he is really unable to determine which of 
these two is preferable; the former would have advantages 
for the believers and the latter would have an advantage to 
himself, for aside from his privileges of service he felt that 
there was small incentive to continue to live. But there was 
yet a third thing which he did desire, about which there was 
no uncertainty and. which he expressed as a thing much better 
than the undecided subject which he had just mentioned. 

Those who translated our King James version, and many 
others of equal ability, have felt justified in making the Apostle
 say that he had a desire "to depart and to be with Christ." 
There has seemed to them defense for such action in the fact 
that the Greek word rendered "depart" is 'the . same as that 
employed by the same Apostle in 2 Timothy 4:6, where he 
says: 'The time of my departure is at hand." As a matter 
of fact, neither of these passages is translated as accurately 
as could be desired. 

Literally, the Apostle says in Philippians 1:23: "Having 
a desire for the releasing." The Greek word here employed 
iff to (maliisai. Ana as a prefix is exactly correspondent to 
our English prefix re, and lusai is readily recognizable, even 
without the Greek lexicon, as related to our English words 
loose and lease. Analyze is the English cognate form of the 
Greek word analiisai. If a thing is analyzed it means that 
it is broken up into its constituent parts; the component particles
 or elements are released from one another, either in 
one's mind or in fact. But in the literary or general sense, 
the exact English equivalent is release. It will be noted that 
in this vord there is no indication whatever as to what 
course, if any, the released person or object would take after 
the release. The word in itself means neither depart nor return
, though either of these thoughts might attach to the 
word if the circumstances surrounding the release were well 
enough known. 

This word occurs only two other times in the New Testament
, namely, Luke 12-36 and 2 Timothy 4:6. In the Luke 
passage the Master says: "And ye yourselves I be] like unto 
men that wait for their Lord, when he lets loose [analiisee] 
from the nuptial feast." In other word3, 'when he disconnects
 or disengages himself from the social obligations which 
he took upon him when he went to the celebration.' Since 
he was not at home and the circumstance describes the Lord's 
servants as watching for him, it becomes a fair translation 
to use the word return, but it is confusing when compared 
with other usages of that word in the sacred writings. Our 
modern expressions, "when he breaks away/' or "when the 
party breaks up" have a similar thought at the bottom of 
them. 

The other instance in which the Apostle Paul uses this 
word manifestly refers to the time of his death. Here he 
says: "The time of my release [tees analiiseos, release or 
dissolution] is at hand." It would be merely captious defense
 to say that this word is a noun and the other two words 
are verbs, and that thus the significance might be altered, because
 the words are identical in root and meaning. No 
amount of argument could prove to anyone who understands 
the Lord's plan that the Apostle meant return in this instance
, for he had never been dead before. He evidently had 
reference to the time when he would be released from the 
labors and burdens which were his in the flesh and concerning 
which he wrote in another letter: "0 wretched man that I 
am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? (Romans 
7:24) Again, it carries with it the thought of his dissolution
, both socially and physically: the body would return to 
dust and the spirit of life into the care and keeping which 
God had provided, awaiting the day of ''His appearing," 
when the faithful Paul should be raised incorruptible and 
glorious in the first resurrection. 

Coming back to the expression of the 23rd verse of the 
first chapter of Philippians, the Apostle must have had reference
 neither to departing nor to returning directly, but 
simply to "the releasing;" that is, either to hi3 own final release
 from death at the time of the first resurrection, or to 
Christ's return, when loosed from the heavens, which were 
to retain him until that time (Acts 3:21), and probably ambiguously
 uttered as meaning both things, for the two are 
inseparably linked together. Of one thing we are certain: he 
did not in this instance have reference to his own demise, 
because that item is one of the two things concerning which 
he said he had no preference. Had the inspired Apostle desired
 to convey the idea of 'going away or departing elsewhere
' he would have continued to use the word porevomaK, 
as he does one hundred and fifty times in the New Testament. 

But the question might properly arise: 'Why did the 
Lord allow the Apostle to use the same word in 2 Timothy 
4:6 as he does in Philippians 1:23, in the former case referring
 to his death, and in the latter case having evident reference
 to his release from death at Christ's second presence?' 
In response to this we cite the words of our Lord Jesus when 
he quoted from the prophet of old: "By hearing ye shall 
hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see and 
shall not perceive." It will be readily discernible that no one 
not possessing a general knowledge of God's plans and purposes
 would be able to understand and fit into their proper 
places these apparently inconsistent expressions. Plenty cf 
opportunity is left for the wise ones of the earth to stumble, 
plenty of margin left for those Avho prefer to doubt. 

"FOB YOUR INIQUITIES »» 

Question. — 'Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your 
mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? Or which of 
my creditors is it to whom 1 have sold you? Behold, for 
your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions
 is your mother put away!" (Isaiah 50:1) What 
does this passage mean? 

Answer. — It was a custom among the Jews that if a wife 
proved to be undesirable to her husband, she might be given 
a bill of divorcement and put away. ( Deuteronomy 24 : 1 ; 
Matthew 19:6-8} Another part of their law provided that 
if any one got into debt- he and his family might be sold for 
the debt, sold into a measure of service; Unit is, they could 
be compelled to give a certain amount of their time to the 
creditor to make good the obligation, or debt. 

Now, the Lord is saying to these Jews, 'You are sold, but 
I have not sold you; it wa3 not that I was in need. A debtor 
could not claim you for debt, as my household. It is not 
that I became involved and therefore must turn you over, 
lose control over you. I have no creditors, nobody could <x>me 
upon me and take you away. 1 have not put away your 
mother, the Law Covenant: I still recognize the contract. 1 
still agree to all that 1 engaged to do under that Law Covenant
. Therefore, you are not put away illegally. 

'Then what is the trouble' I wish you to think about this, 
Why is it that you are cast off into a foreign land, into 
Babylon? What is the reason I am not showing you favor? 
It is not because I have violated my obligations. The Law 
Covenant has not been put away by me. It is still in force. 
I still recognize it. It is not that you have been sold into 
slavery because I had a debt* Look to the reason. The reason
, I tell you plainly is this: You are the violators of the 
Covenant, you have gone off into sin. I am merely chastening
 you that you may recover yourselves and return to me. 
The sooner you get this proper idea, and chasten yourselves 
and renew your covenant of faithfulness, the better it will 
be for you, and I will be ready to receive you/ 
THE THIEF IN PARADISE 

Question. — Does the Greek text of our Lord's words to 
the thief on the cross, "Verily I say unto thee this day, 'inou 
ahalt be with me in paradise," warrant the change of the 
comma from before "this day" to after it, as suggested in 
Volume Six of Studiks in the Scriptures. 


(140-141) 


[6250] 


May 1. 1918 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


(141-142) 


Answer. — Yes. Grammatically, whenever secmeron, "today
," comes after a verb it belongs to that verb, unless it is 
separated from it and thrown into the next clause by the 
presence of the particle hoti, "that." See e. g. Mark 14:30; 
Luke 4:21; 19:0; Matthew 26:34. In the first and last texts 
hoti is translated, hut in the Luke passages it is not, though 
in the Greek text. A Greek concordance will show how continually
 Hoti is used to divide the clauses. The Hebrew idiom 
of "today" attached to the preceding verb is very common to 
Moses. See Deuteronomy 4:26, 40; 6:6; 8:19; 9:3; 11:26, 
28; 30:15, 18, 19, and many others. A translation and an 
interpretation that makes our Lord himself contradict the 
Scriptures, cannot be correct; must of necessity be false. See 
further explanation in Volume Six, pages 667-670. 
THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB 

Question. — Wncn will the marriage of the Lamb take 
place? Who will perform the ceremony? 

Answer. — The marriage of the Lamb will come when "his 
wife hath made herself ready," in the end, the harvest, of 
this Gospel age. The bride is a multitudinous number and 
since this marriage began in 1878, its consummation will, 
we think, take place probably in 1918 — forty years from the 
time it began. We are not sure that we have the matter of 
the marriage fully correct. What we say about it is merely 
our opinion. If the Lord shall see fit to take us home this 
year we shall of course rejoice. When the last member of 
the body shall have gone beyond the vail, the door "will then 
be shut. After that time none will be recognized as of the 
bride class. 

Then another work will be under way, pertaining to those 
who are called "the virgins, her companions, that follow 
her." After having passed through great tribulations, these 
also will be received on the other side of the vail, but not 
with the same degree of honor as the bride class. It will 
be to great honor, though they are not worthy of the highest 
place. But they will be worthy of the place which they will 
receive. 

When thinking of the marriage ceremony, we are very 
apt to think of the marriage ceremonies of today, and to 
draw our conclusions from them. But this is a mistake. 
The marriage service among the Jews was very different from 
such as we have now. With the Jew?, the father or the 
brother of the bride would make the arrangements. The 
bride had nothing whatever to do with it. There was a 
covenant entered into by which she was engaged to the prospective
 bridegroom, and certain papers were drawn up, stating
 what dowry she should have and what provision her 
husband should make for her in life. Then these papers 
were sealed. 

That agreement constituted the engagement, the betrothal. 
Nothing more was to be done except that the would-be bridegroom
 must wait for a number of months, and then at the 
appropriate time, within a year, he would come to receive 
his bride to himself. During the interval he would be preparing
 the home for her. Should she in the meantime prove 
unfaithful, it would work a cancelation of the contract; for 
this covenant arrangement was official. When the time came 
for the bridegroom to receive the bride, he came to the home 
of the bride, who was immediately received by him and taken 
to her new home. There was nothing in the way of a ceremony
. The friends would then be ushered into that home for a 
feast, which would last for a week or so. The taking away 
of the bride was often in the evening, but not always so; 
it was sometimes in the morning. 


THE TIME OF BETROTHAL 

All this is the picture, we believe, that the Lord would 
give us respecting the church and her relationship with Christ. 
The members of the church do not come into relationship with 
Christ until the Father first draws them. The Lord said: 
"No man can come to mc, except the Father which hath sent 
mo draw him." (John 6:44) After the Father has drawn 
us, the contract is entered into— that we make our consecration
. Having done this we receive some token of the Father's 
favor — we receive the earnest, the holy Spirit. We become 
espoused to Christ. Then after we have proved faithful to 
him through the remainder of this life, the great One who 
is to be the Bridegroom comes to receive us to himself. Jesus, 
having gone to prepare a place for us, will come again that 
wo may be with him in the heavenly condition. — John 14:2, 3. 

-As for the marriage feast, it will delay awhile after the 
bride has entered in, waiting for the bridesmaids; for the 
Scriptures promise that they Bhall be present at the festival 
— the opportunity for expressing good wishes. — Fsa. 45:14. 

The a nti typical betrothal began in the Pentecostal outpouring
. There the church was betrothed to her Lord; and 
the betrothal will not be ended until the Lord has taken to 
himself the last member of the bride class. We do not regard
 the Jewish marriage as a type, but as a symbol, a figure 
of the marriage of the Lamb. 

The church class is not at first ready for the high position
 to which she is called. Indeed, the Scriptures represent 
that the Lord Jesus was made ready for his high position. 
(Heb. 2:10) But he was, to begin with, "holy, harmless, undefined
, separate from sinners." We, on the contrary, are 
imperfect. We need a good deal of preparation in order to 
make us ready for the glorious position to which we have 
been called. Among other things, we are to do a certain 
embroidery work, the pattern for which was given in our 
Lord's own character. 

THE WEDDING PEEPARATION 

This embroidery represents the fruits of the Spirit; and 
we are to copy our Lord's meekness, his gentleness, his 
brotherly kindness, his love. We are to copy his full consecration
 — to do the Father's will, in every sense of the word. 
We are to delight in him, we are to do his will, to regard him 
as our Head, and to order all the affairs of life with that 
thought in mind. 

The bride class must have not only a wedding garment, 
but an embroidered wedding garment. It must be also without
 spot or wrinkle. The bride class is a very special order; 
hence the particularity represented in this robe. Its members 
are to assist each other in the matter of preparing the wedding
 robe, and the class will have made itself fully ready 
for entering into the marriage when the lost member shall 
have passed under the vail. 

In the 45th Psalm the picture is given of the Bridegroom 
bringing his bride into the presence of the great King,^ Jehovah
. Later, the bridesmaids, the companions of the bride, 
follow her. It will be after the bride class is glorified that 
she will be presented to the Father — apparently very shortly 
after her glorious change. The great company, we think, 
will be presented very soon after; for the Scriptures tell us 
that they will be present, by invitation, at the marriage supper
 of the Lamb. This seems to indicate that the principal 
part of the joys and festivities attending this will be deferred 
until the great company will be there to participate in them. 
—Revelation 19:9. 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


THINKS THE LORD HIMSELF IS SPEAKCNa TO US! 

Beloved Brother Rutiierfobd: — 

You will be no doubt surprised to hear that the Seventh 
Volumes are still missing from South Africa. Our dear 
Brother Johnston received two copies, and Sister Reeson of 
Durban, brought one over from England recently. These 
three are the sum total of Volume Seven in this country. 

In the Lord's providence I was the first in the country 
to read Volume Seven. As you are aware, Brother Johnston 
was on a pilgrim tour. On her way to Durban Sister Reeson 
came to the Watch Toweb office here; and to my unbounded 
astonishment and pleasure she produced the volume. I could 
scarcely restrain my tears of joy on handling the pTecious 
"wages of the Lord/* The dear sister had only a few hours 
to spare; but I got through 175 pages as quickly as I could. 
I cannot describe my feelings to you as I read. I was not 
large enough to contain all the joy that the Lord was literally 
pouring into me. Who of the Lord's little ones can doubt 
for a moment the authenticity of this volume? It is the Lord 


himself speaking to us. Praise be to Jehovah's holy name 
and to his dear Son! 

When Sister Reeson left, I was wondering what would 
happen next. The following day Brother Johnston's copy 
turned up. When I went to the office, the volume was lying 
on the table out of its cover. As Brother Johnston was expected
 back in a day or two, I made the most of my opportunity
, and read until about four o'clock in the morning. 
The next day I had the volume finished. 

I have also read "Light after Darkness" and "Harvest 
Sittings No. 2." My thought ia that the great adversary is 
attempting to sidetrack you from smiting his evil forces, and 
he is failing miserably. Not one of the Lord's true sheep will 
doubt for a moment regarding the channel through whioh 
the "meat in due season" is coming. Each Watch Tower 
is a remarkable testimony to the fact. 

My heart burns with love to you and to all of "like precious 
faith.'' The goal is in sight. The vail is thin; and soon we 
shall see him who died for ua, and Bhall he presented to J& 


[62511 


(142-143) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


hovah himself, the very essence of love. The Lord bless you 
and keep jrou is my earnest prayer. 
In Christian love and service, 

Your brother in Christ. H. P. Williams.— S. Africa. 
KEPOKTS DISAFFECTION SLIGHT 
Dear Brethren": — 

Instances are brought to my attention where members of 
the opposing faction are endeavoring to confuse and mislead 
the Lord's saints into believing that there is a split in many 
of the classes, and that a considerable proportion of the class 
numbers are taking side with the opposers of the Society. 
As for instance, it is reported that at Pittsburgh 180 have 
deflected from the ecclesia and are now meeting with the 
opposition class ; whereas in my recent visit to Pittsburgh 
I learned there is no split, and that the dozen or so sympathizers
 with the opposers of the Society are still meeting 
regularly with the 450 or more members of the Pittsburgh 
congregation. 

Aj3 you know I have been regularly in th« pilgrim, service 
since the first of last November, and in all that time I have 
found only about four classes in which there are opponents 
of the Society or any antagonistic to the "Finished Mystery" 
— in fact very few who have any sympathy with the opposition
 movement; and yet as I move along from class to class, 
I am told that this or that class ahead of me is reported to 
be in trouble along this line. When I reach there I find nothing
 of the kind, and the class members manifest much surprise
 at having been so wrongly reported. In the few instances
 where I have found wavering ones I have experienced
 but little difficulty in setting them straight. By the 
Lord's grace, and by my knowledge of the facts, I have been 
enabled to show clearly why rfche Seventh Volume is really 
the posthumous work of Pastor Russell, and when the facts 
are set forth the hesitating ones usually grasp the situation 
and thank me for having made the matter plain. 

I notice, however, that the brethren who are decidedly in 
support of the opposers are amongst those who are absent 
from the meeting where I bring the Seventh Volume into my 
talk/ It seems to be the pleasure of the Lord to favor and 
encourage only those whose hearts are right. I would not 
presume to judge anyone, but experience teaches me that 
divine favor rests with the dear ones who are not grounded 
in the teachings of error and misrepresentation, but who adhere
 to the policy of the Society which all along has been 
the divine instruaneivt for comfort and blessing to the Lord's 
dear saints. I am heartily glad to find so vast a majority in 
full harmony, and to note the sweet spirit of Christ manifested
 by the ecclesias in general. 

Your brother in Christ, J. A. Bohwet. — Pilgrim. 

REJOICING IK THE TBUTH AT 68 
Dear Brethren: — 

I desire to express my joy and feeling to you for the 
unspeakable grace our heavenly Father has been pleased to 
bestow upon me. He pulled me out of that state of ignorance, 
darknesB 'and superstition, in which I had been unfortunately 
plunged, first by having spent the first twenty years of my 
life as a Roman Catholic, afterward as a member of the 
Presbyterian Church for some time, and finally as an unbeliever
 for a number of years. 

The blessedness I have experienced since I came to the 
knowledge of God's wonderful Present Truth is due absolutely 
to the efforts of that "faithful servant" of our Lord, the late 
Pastor Russell. Blessed be his memory; for the "Crown 
of Life" promised to every overcomer on this side the vail 
must have been his reward. 

By the grace of God, I have had the privilege and opportunity
 to read and study the first six volumes of Studies 
from his pen, ajid also The Watch Tower you have been 
kind enough to send me since November, 1910. Being willing 
to learn, I prayed the Almighty Father to help me, and, 
blessed be the Lord, the result was that I was brought down 
to the feet of our Master and Savior Jesus Christ. Brother 
Nettletcm, the elder of our Union Avenue Ecclesia, always 
stood by me, assisting me in all my wants most generously. 
T am an old man, 68 years of age, a widower without 
children. I am poor and afflicted with bodily pains and infirmities
 to such extent that, being unable to earn my living 
by ordinary work, I have been compelled, since a few years, 
to become an inmate of a benevolent institution. But although
 poor and afflicted in the flesh, I feel like singing God's 
praises constantly. Being a French-Canadian, I am thoroughly
 well educated in the French language, besides being 
familiar with the English and Italian languages. 

Dear Brethren of the Editorial Committee, my prayers 
go up to the throne of grace for you, and may our heavenly 
Father help us all to carry on to the end the good work of 


spreading the glorious Gospel truth, "while it is yet day light 
for the night will soon come when no one shall be able to 
work." 

Your brother in Christ. Joseph Daoust.— Can. 

"CONVICTION TO THE CONSECRATED" 
Dear Brethren: — 

Please accept my very best thanks for Volume Seven, 
Studies. I am enjoying my study of this work greatly, and 
think, the more I peruse it, that it is compiled in a masterly 
way. The interpretations carry conviction to the consecrated 
jnind as to their truth, all being in perfect harmony with the 
teachings we have received in the preceding six volumes. I 
have no doubt that we are now receiving the meat in due 
season through this Seventh Volume for which I desire to 
tnank our loving heavenly Father as the great Author of all 
the glorious plan. With much love in the Lord. 

Your loving brother, Morton Edgar. — Scotland. 

"TONGUE FILLED WITH SXNOING" 
Dear Brethren: — 

I have hesitated some time about writing you, realizing 
what an enormous daily mail you must receive. But I can 
remain silent no longer; I so much desire to be identified 
with you, 

I came out of the Baptist denomination in October last, 
took the Vow, made my consecration, symbolizing it at the 
Cleveland Convention, November 18. 

What a wonderful experience the coming out of Babylon 
was! I thought I was making an enormous sacrifice to leave 
the denomination and associations of a lifetime. And now, 
brethren, after being out of it for only six months and looking
 back at it with the searchlight of' God's truth, I can see 
what I really did leave — "a great pile of husks and junk." 
When I remember how I believed it, taught it, and enjoyed 
it, I stand amazed. What am I that he was mindful of me? 
It is wonderful to be brought out of darkness into his marvelous
 light. 

While I feel like the eleventh hour laborer, I am rejoicing 
in the hope of my calling, and striving daily to be worthy 
to see my dear Redeemer face to face. 

Like all of the friends, words cannot express my feelings 
of gratitude for our dear Brother Russell; so I will only 
say, Praise God for the Seventh Messenger. 
Yours in the service of our Lord and King. 

G. L. B.— Ohio. 
EXPRESSES LOVE AND CONFIDENCE 
Dear Brethren in the Anointed: — 

Grace, mercy and peace be multiplied to you with our love. 
It is our privilege at this time to express to you our love. 
We desire also to inform you of our confidence in you 
as the Lord's channel of blessing and to tell you of our sympathy
 with you in this your hour of trial, 

T*he Watch Tower is still full of sweet encouragement 
and refreshment and our hope is being strengthened by the 
prospect of early participation, while we are bestirring ourselves
 the more in order to the securing of the prize of the 
high calling of God in Christ Jesus; laboring the more diligently
 "if by any means we might attain unto the resurrection
 of the dead." 

Be assured, in conclusion, of our constant prayers on your 
behalf. 

Your brother in the Lord, 

The Brighton Ecclesia, — England. 
SATISFIED WITH THE POOD 
Dear Brethren: — 

I am attaching my check for $ for Good Hopes 

fund. I assure you that it is a genuine pleasure for me to 
forward this and sincerely regret that circumstances will not 
permit my sending a great deal more. 

It seems to me the March 15th issue of The Watch 
Tower was about the most inspiring we have had for a long 
time, particularly the first article; and as a brother expressed 
it last evening, I am thoroughly satisfied with the food the 
Lord is still dispensing through'TiiE Tower. Undoubtedly it 
continues to be the greatest journal published on earth, and 
I hope it is the Lord's will to permiit us to continue to receive
 it unto the end. 

Earnestly praying our heavenly Father's richest blessings 
on the work of the Society, and all engaged in it, particularly 
those in places of responsibility, I am, 

Your brother by his grace, P. IT. G. — Tenn. 

TAKE PEESH COUEAGB 
Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings in the Lord. Have just received our Watch 
Tower of Siarch 1st. After reading it very carefully, noting 
its contents, its ring and tone, we take fresh courage. 


[6262] 


May 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(130-147) 


Dear brethren, continue the good work. The Lord haa 
said: "No weapon formed against thee shall prosper; and 
every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou 
^halt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the 
Lord."— Isa. 54:17. 

We do hereby express by unanimous vote our confidence 
in the integrity of the present head and management of the 
So-ciety. 

Your brethren in the Lord, Houston Ecclesia. — Tex. 
IS BE SEVENTH VOLUME STUDY 

Section 22 of Title XI of the Espionage Act provides: 
"Whoever in aid. of any foreign government shall knowingly 
or wilfully have possession of or control over any property 
or paper designed or intended for use or which is used as 
the means of violating any penal statute or any of the rights 
or obligations of the United States under any treaty or the 
law of nations, shall be fined not more than $1,000", or imprisoned
 not more than two years, or both." 

United States District Attorneys and other local officers. 


we are informed, have compelled the brethren to surrender 
their personal copies of Volume VII of Studiks in the Scriptures
, and have broken up Bible classes. If such surrender 
is being compelled without search warrant, or such meetings 
broken up without proper complaint filed charging that such 
meetings are in violation of law, then such surrender and 
such breaking up of meetings are in violation of law. 

The Seventh Volume of Studies in the Scriptures is a 
commentary upon the Bible. We do not understand that the 
Government desires to interfere with such study at all, but 
some over-zealous local officials have interfered as above, 
which we believe is in violation of their instructions; and this 
matter is being called to the attention of the Department of 
Justice at Washington. We have no information that the Department
 of Justice has ruled that the possession by any 
member of our Association of a copy of Volume VII is in 
violation of the Espionage Act; and we do not believe that 
department has made such ruling. We make this statement 
upon advice of counsel. 


KINGDOM NEWS No. 3 


Kingdom News No. 3 is now on the press and will be ready 
for distribution within a few days. You will receive the same 
number of copies that were sent to you of the B. S. M. No. 99. 
Wo advise that the Volunteer Captains arrange the work and 
get these papers into the hands of the people as quickly as 
possible. We regard No. 3 as one of the most important issues
 of the Volunteer matter, especially at, this time. We 
have had each issue of Kingdom News carefully gone over by 
lawyers and other competent person© and are certain that 


these papers contain not one word that is in any way violative 
of the law of the land; and therefore there should be no difficulty
 in putting them out. Where local officers rai-se objection, 
ask them to read the paper carefully and then they will see 
that it is entirely proper, in the interest of the people and 
the nation, and contains a great deal of information which is 
particularly pertinent to the time in which we are living. Be 
diligent and get these issues out quickly. The "dark night" is 
near at hand, when no man can work. 


IN RE PUBLIC MEETINGS 


The persecution of the International Bible Students Association
 has aroused a great desire in the minds of many 
to know what we believe and teach. We strongly recommend 
to the friends the great importance of well located halls and 
properly advertised meetings. This door of opportunity should 


be quickly entered, that the people may have the truth concerning
 the Lord's kingdom, which is at hand. One public 
address should be given in each place on "The World Has 
Ended — Millions Now Living Will Nhver Die.". Let us 
be zealous in proclaiming the truth while we have opportunity. 


CHRONOLOGICAL CHART OF REVELATION 


We now have in stock Blue Print Oharts of Revelation 
similar to the one in the Question Booklet of Vol. VII, Size 


3 ft. x 6 ft. printed on linen. Price per chart $2 postpaid. 
These charts are very helpful in class study. 


Vol, XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., MAY 15, 1918 


No. 10 


FAULTLESS BEFORE HIS PRESENCE 

"But ye, beloved j building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit , keep yourselves in the love of 
God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life." — Jude 20, 21. 

HTTMHJTY OF FIRST IMPORTANCE 
The first essential to serving God in an acceptable manner 
is to have a proper appreciation of one's own self, and to have 
in mind always that Jehovah is the great first cause, with 
whom none can be compared. It is he who measures the waters 
of the deep in the hollow of his hand, and metes out the heavens
 with a span; who comprehends the dust of the earth and 
weighs the mountains in scales and the hills in the balance; 
with whom the nations of earth are counted as the small dust 
of the balance — he who is the author of the great plan of the 
ages that is working out in an orderly progressive manner, 
each attribute acting in its proper time and in exact harmony
 with the other attributes. His love was bo wonderfully 
manifested by Bending his only-Begotten Son to die, that man, 
the very worm of the dust of the earth, might have life and 
partake of the riches of glory. — Isaiah 40:12-17. 

Such contemplations enabled Brother Jude to have a 
proper appreciation of his position. He was a preacher of 
God's Word ; yet he applied to himself no high-sounding titles, 
such as Right Reverend, Doctor of Divinity, Bishop or Cardinal
, but delighted to designate himself a slave of Jesus Christ. 
To be the Lord's slave is much to be preferred to all the titles, 
honors and emoluments that can be conferred upon one man. 
From this example of humility manifested by Jude we learn a 
lesson of much value. As our knowledge of the character of 
our loving Master increases, the more we rejoice to be his 
slaves. That such an attitude of mind is pleasing to the 
Father, we are assured by St. Peter's words; * God resisteth the 
proud, and giveth grace to the humble." Pride and ambition
, the very opposite of humility, have been the cause of 
many falling away from the love of God. With confidence, 
then, we can say that humility is of first importance to keep 


While the storm against God's little ones increases in fury, 
those who are anxious to see the heavenly Father's face are setting
 the things of their house in order, that in due time they 
may be presented faultless before the presence of his glory. 
That will be the climax of all Christian experience. The child 
of God. loves to contemplate that blessed time. At the moment 
of awakening in the morning, the first thought is: "Dear 
Father, keep me this day so near to thee that, if this be my 
last on eartn, it may please thee to permit thy child to see thy 
glorious countenance." And when the day's tasks are done, 
when we have squared our accounts with the Lord and know 
that all is well, then, as we are folded in the embrace of sweet 
rest, our last thought is: "As for me, I will behold thy face 
in righteousness; I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy 
likeness." 

Seeing by *f aith this glorious prospect before us, ,what can 
we do to make sure of attaining that prize? The above Scripture
 answers :. "Keep yourselves in the love of God." The importance
 of being kept in the love of God cannot be overstated. 
St. Jude emphasizes this by pointing out certain stumbling 
stones or pitfalls that will take God's children out of hia love, 
and announces certain rules which, if followed, will keep one 
in the love of God. The writings of all the apostles are for the 
building up of the church on the foundation of holy faith. They 
wrote aforetime for the benefit of those upon whom the end of 
the age has come. Jude was not an apostle of the Lord, but 
one of his brethren, and his epistle contains a message of great 
value to the church. How like the loving Father to make provision
 for his dear children, that they might be sustained in 
the hour of greatest test upon them! With ea^er mind and 
thankful heart should each consecrated one avail himself of 
such provisions. 


VII— 28 


[6253] 


(148 I 49) 


T 11 E W A T C 11 TO W E R 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


ourselves in the love of God. The more wo realize our dependency
 upon the Lord, (he safer is our position. — 1 Peter 5:5. 

"Keep thou my way, O Lord ; 
Myself I cannot guide; 
Nor dare I truBt my falt'ring steps 
One moment from thy side." 

MERCY, PEACE AND LOVE 
Jude, the loving slave of Jesus Christ, addresses his words 
not to the world, nor to those who have merely named the name 
of Christ, but "to them that are sanctified by God the Father, 
and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called. Thus we are sure 
that the entire epistle applies to those who claim, at least, to 
be in the Lord. Sweetly to the brethren, he says, "Mercy unto 
you, and peace, and love, be .multiplied." Clearly, then, this 
shows that one who would be kept in the love of God must be 
merciful to his brethren, not magnifying the faults of his 
brother and holding him up to the ridicule of others ; but looking
 with loving compassion upon his brother's shortcomings 
and weaknesses, and having always a keen desire to render 
him aid as a new creature in Christ Jesus. "Blessed are the 
merciful ; for they shall obtain mercy." St. Jude makes it 
clear that mercy is one of the essential rules to observe, saying
, "Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy 
of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life/* 

The degree of one's consecration is often determined by the 
sincere effort made to keep the commandments of the Lord, 
The servant of God is enjoined that he shall not strive with 
his brethren. Strife indulged in would ultimately exclude one 
from entering the kingdom. (Galatians 5:21) Sad it is to 
note that some of those who profess full consecration to the 
Lord seem given to strife and contention. After having been 
long in the narrow way, after the brethren have traveled together
 in harmony for a long time, suddenly strife arises 
amongst them. This is one of the means the adversary seizes 
upon to keep the Lord's little ones away from him and to keep 
them out of God's love. St, Peter wrote: "Follow peace with 
all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the 
Lord." Would that the dear friends, who have desired to see 
the Lord, would keep this admonition ever before their minds! 

We offer the suggestion that whenever strife arises in the 
class those engaged in it at once meditate upon the question: 
Will this help me or prevent me from being presented faultless
 before the presence ol his glory with exceeding joy? "Let 
nothing be done through strife or Vainglory; but in lowliness 
of mind let each esteem other better than themselves." Following
 this rule, peace would prevail amongst the brethren. God 
has made it clear that he will grant life everlasting to none 
except those who grow in love. Those who will be granted the 
privilege of seeing his face must develop the highest degree of 
love — a love that leads one to sacrifice his own rights, privileges
 and comforts, yea, even life itself, that others may be 
blessed. Such is the kind of love manifested by Jesus, who 
died for us. To those who will be the members of his body 
and whom he will present faultless before the Father, he says: 
"A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another
 even as T have loved you," With these Scriptures before 
us it is easy to see why St. Jude says that mercy, peace and 
love should be multiplied unto those who are following in the 
Master's footsteps. 

FAITH OF THE SAINTS 

Only the faithful unto death will be present ed faultless before
 the presence of his glory with joy unspeakable. The positive
 promise is that such shall see the Lord In his beauty and 
glory. (Hosea 2:10, 20; "Revelation 2:10) Then the author 
of the epistle emphasizes the necessity of continuing faithful: 
"Beloved, when T gave all diligence to write unto you of the 
common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you 
and exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the faith 
which was once deliverrd unto the saints." 

The common salvation here mentioned is not an ordinary 
one, but is that salvation which is common to all the saints. 
"Ye are all called in one hope of your calling" to membership 
in the royal family of heaven. None is called to any other 
position. Our hope of attaining to that exalted place is based 
upon faith in God's arrangements, all of which radiate from 
the great ransom sacrifice. The faith once delivered to the 
paints thp Apostle Paul specifically mentions in 1 Corinthians 
ln:3-5. To contend for this faith does not mean that one 
should indulge in strife or manifest a bitterness of spirit; but 
it means steadfastly holding to the great doctines of ^truth 
which the Lord has graciously given to us. Every doctrine or 
theory offered can be measured and its truth or falsehood definitely
 determined by the ransom. If out of harmony with the 
philosophy of the ransom, then we may always know that it is 


false. Holding fast to these fundamental truths is absolutely 
vital to keeping ourselves in* the love of God. Abiding in him 
faithfully to the end will assure us of being presented faultless
 before the glory of his presence. 

ENEMIES OF THE TEUTH 
Satan has seized upon every means to destroy the seed of 
promise; and one of the methods he has employed has been to 
corrupt the faith once delivered to the saints. Jude mentions 
this in verse 4 of his epistle. First there came into the church, 
at tfre instance of Satan, heathen philosophers, who embraced
 the name of Christ for a purpose, but who denied the 
merit of his sacrifice. Such men substitute their own theories, 
acquired from Satan, for those of Christ Jesus and the apostles. 
Stealthily they caane in, until they acquired power; and then 
they boldly proclaimed their God-dishonoring doctrines before 
the world. Satan's original lie — the doctrine of inherent immortality
 of man — came prominently to the front; and then 
his kindred doctrines — the mass and the trinity — followed 
quickly after, these denying the wonderful and beautiful plan 
of God, and indirectly, if not directly, denying the value of the 
great sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

It has ever been the policy of Satan to thrust in amongst 
good men some ungodly men, against whom St. Jude in this 
epistle warns the church at all times. He describes them as 
"ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness
." Lasciviousness njeans looseness; and therefore the 
words mean a loose handling of the Word of God, or wresting 
the Scriptures for a selfish purpose. It seems that the Adversary
 has at all stages of the church succeeded in getting some 
such men amongst the true sheep. How may we know them 7 
"BY their fruits ye shall know them." (Matthew 7:16-20) 
Such manifest the fruit of the flesh and not the fruit of the 
spirit. (Galatians 5 : 19, 20) Only those who accept and 
serve the truth in the love of it and who continue in the faith 
unto the end are safe from this snare of the Adversary; and 
such only will ultimately receive the approval of the Lord. 
FOEEWAEKED OF PITFAKLS 
Jude then enumerates a number of things which will take 
the Christian out of the love of God and that will make it impossible
 for him ever to be presented faultless before the presence
 of his glory. Verses 5-16, inclusive, give examples of 
these things* Unfaithfulness and disloyalty lead certainly to 
disaster. The experiences of Israel foreshadowed such results
. The people of Israel in Egypt typed, or illustrated the 
church in the worid. The Christian is here reminded that after
 God had miraculously delivered the Israelites out of Egypt, 
he destroyed them because they believed not; that is to say, 
because they failed to continue faithful to the Lord. The child 
of God has been translated from the kingdom of darkness (of 
this world) to the kingdom of God's dear Son; he by faith 
dwells in the light of heavenly things. To fall into the pit of 
unfaithfulness means certain destruction. All the trying experiences
 through which the Christian passes are permitted to 
test his faith and loyalty. "This is the victory that overcometh
 the world, even your faith." 

DEMONS AS EXAMPLES 
"The angels which kept not their first estate, but left their 
own habitation, he 'hath reserved in everlasting chains, under 
darkness, unto the judgment of the great day.'* ' It seems clear 
that this fact concerning the demons is here recorded to teach 
a valuable lesson to the new creatures in Christ Jesus. These 
angels at one time were creatures of glory and beauty. The 
first estate of such was that of usefulness, in which Jehovah 
placed them. Having assumed human bodies, they yielded to 
the baneful influence of Satan, debauched the daughters of men 
and filled the earth with violence. So great was their wickedness
 that God imprisoned them in tariarus until their judgment
 time, at which time those continuing in wickedness will 
be forever destroyed. The Lord Jesus, through the Revel ator, 
foretold the loosing of these angels and intimated that such 
loosing would take place after the saints of the living God were 
sealed. It seems clear that the sealing is now completed and 
that the demons are loose. The evidence of this is daily increasing
. Without a doubt the judgment of these evil ones 
is now in progress. — 1 Corinthians 0:3. 

The first estate of the Christian is that of blessedness, as by 
faith he rests in the finished work of Christ Jesus and looks 
forward to the time when he may possess his glorious body and 
he faultless. From the time he is begotten and anointed 
he may be said to be a spirit being. "If any man be in 
Christ Jesu=< 4 he is a new creature; old things have passed 
away, all things have become new." "Ye are not in thp 
fiosh. but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God 
dwell in you," (Romans 8:9) Truly, then, he is a spirit 
creature, having his habitation in an earthly vessel. Should 


[6254] 


Mw 15, 191S 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(MO 1*50) 


such a new creature willingly return to the things of the world, 
lie may for a, time be kept in darkness concerning God's great 
plan. He may come to the point where he will even deny that 
there is such a thing as the second death. Satan and the fallen 
angels may induce him to believe that God will save every one 
and that, therefore, he is in no danger of destruction. He" may 
continue in this attitude and condition of darkness until his 
final judgment. Xhiis is explained how some, once rejoicing in 
the merit of Christ's sacrifice, become blind. The safety of the 
Christian from such a pitfall is to avoid all demon influence or 
fellowship with any one who is under the influence of demons, 
not even engaging such in conversation. "I will keep my 
mouth with a bridle while the wicked is before me." — Psalm 
30:1. 

Further illustrating pitfalls, the writer of the epistle refers 
to the people of Sodom and Gomorrah, who, "giving themselves 
over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set for 
an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." Fornication
 as applied to the new creature refers to illicit relationship 
w T ith things inimical to the new creature. Once enlightened 
with the truth and tasting of the heavenly things, any voluntary
 fellowship with evil spirits would lead such a one ultimately
 into destruction. Even the beginning of this for the 
satisfaction of curiosity is exceedingly dangerous. Our vow of 
faithfulness particularly emphasizes this point, and we call 
upon the Lord to enable us to resist everything akin to spiritism
 and occultism, knowing that such influence is from the Adversary
. 

SPEAKING EVIL AND DESPISING DOMINION 

"likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise 
dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Yet Michael the archangel
, when contending with the devil, he disputed about the 
body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation
, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. But these speak evil 
of those things which they know not; but what they know naturally
, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves
." Christ is the head of the church; God is the head of 
Christ. "God has set the members in the body as it pleased 
him." Any arrangement the Lord has made in the church is 
therefore a part of his dominion. The disposition to despise the 
Lord's arrangement, disorderly conduct, walking disorderly, all 
lead to the pitfalls here mentioned. 

A dignity, or dignitary, is one who stands high amongst 
the people. All the members of the body of Christ will ultimately
 be kings and priests unto God and unto Christ. Those 
this side the vail who are faithfully running for the prize are 
counted in as members of the body, being designated now as 
"the feet of him." Therefore all such are "dignitaries" within 
the meaning of this text. To speak evil, then, of such means 
to speak evil against the Lord. The Lord loves the members 
of his body, and Jehovah looks upon all of them as the apple 
of his eye (Zechariah 2:7, 8) j and thus we can understand 
how displeasing it is to tie Father and to the great Master 
for one claiming to be consecrated to speak evil of the brethren
. Discussing this same matter, the Apostle James says: 
"Speak not evil one of another, brethren. He that speaketh 
evil of his brother, and judgeth his brother, speaketh evil of 
the law, and judgeth the law; but if thou judge the law, thou 
art not a doer of the law, but a judge. There is one lawgiver, 
who is able to save and to destroy: who art thou that judgest 
another?" — James 4:11, 12. 

Law means a rule of action. God has provided his own 
law as a rule of action which governs and controls the members
 of the body of Christ. Therefore any one who speaks evil 
against God's children speaks against the law of God and sets 
himself un as a judge of God's law. And any one who takes 
this position cannot be fully obedient to the law; for it is 
contrary to God's law to indulge in evil-speaking. Thus the 
Apostle makes it plain that Jehovah is the lawgiver and he 
has the power to destroy, and that he is the judge, and that 
no member of the body is authorized to pronounce judgment 
against another. 

In verse 9 Jude says that Jesus in his prehuman existence 
as God's representative did not indulge in a railing accusation
 even against Satan, but merely said, "Jehovah rebuke 
thee." From this we gather the lesson that the new creature 
in Christ is never to indulge in bringing a railing accusation 
against any one. It is not our business to rebuke or pass sentence
 upon others. The province of the Christian is to proclaim
 the message of God's truth always manifesting the spirit 
of love, remembering that Jehovah is the judge. "Recompense 
to no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the sight of 
all men. If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably
 -with all men. Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves ; but 
rather give place unto wrath ; for it is written, Vengeance is 
mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." — Romans 12: 17-19. 


In verse 10, St. Jude proves that one who indulges in evilspeaking
 is using the natural mind, the mind of the flesh ; and 
that in thus doing he corrupts himself as a new creature in 
Christ. Basing a conclusion upon evil surmising and giving expression
 to that surmising by evil words shows an evil condition
 of heart. Without a pure heart it would be impossible to 
be kept in the love of God. Therefore wc are admonished, 
"Speak evil of no man." ''Keep thy heart with all diligence; 
for out of it are the issues of life." 

THREE CLASSES DESCRIBED 

In verses 11-13, inclusive, St. Jude gives a description of 
three classes that come in amongst the Lord's people, namely, 
Cain, Balaam and Core. Cain yielded to evil suggestions from 
the Adversary and permitted his heart to be poisoned against 
his own brother. Hatred was developed there, which led him 
on to murder his brother. The new creature in Christ who is 
once illuminated, and who afterwards harbors evil in his heart 
against another, may he led to the point of hatred. Of such St. 
John says, "Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer; and 
ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him."— 
1 John 3:15. 

Balaam was a teacher of falsehoods for profit. And thus 
is pictured a class who, even though enlightened and knowing 
better, willingly teach that which is false, that they might receive
 profits from men in the way of emoluments and honor, 
or position and preferment. Thus is the Christian warned 
against taking any course that is prompted by a motive other 
than that of a pure, loving desire to serve the Lord and his 
people. 

Core, or Korah, pictures a class that refuses to hold the 
head ; that is to say, who have not the proper respect or regard 
for Christ Jesus, the head of the church, but who walk after 
their own selfish desires and insist on their own selfish ways. 
These at one time had places amongst the elect in the church. 
The Adversary injects into the mind a thought leading to the 
desire to have one's own way; and where such a one manifests 
a selfish and stubborn disposition he is in danger of the pitfall
 described in Core's experience. 

How many of the Lord's people may be drawn into one of 
these classes is not known, but we hope very few. To enable 
his people to escape these pitfalls, the warning evidently was 
recorded in the Scriptures. It is always helpful for each one 
to examine himself or herself to see that none of these examples
 apply, that he is free from any such manifestations of the 
wrong spirit. "SPOTS IN YOXTB FEAST" 

If one finds himself disposed to go to the class for any selfish
 purpose, as for instance, for the purpose of asking catch 
questions, for criticism, or fault-finding, or for the purpose of entrapping
 or confusing any of the Lord's little ones, he should 
awaken to the fact at once that this is a pitfall into which the 
Adversary is leading him. St. Jude describes such as "spots 
in your feasts of love, when they feast with you, feeding themselves
 without reverence." Any assembly of God's people for 
the purpose of building one another up on their most holy faith 
is a feast of love; and any one who permits himself to mar 
such a feast by a wrongful course is here described as a spot 
upon such feast of love. Continuing in such a course would 
take him out of the love of God. The Apostle admonishes all 
of the Lord's little ones, saying, "By love serve one another." — 
Galatians 5:13. 

Again, these unruly ones are described as "clouds without 
water." Clouds are vessels bearing water, and are distributed 
over the earth that they might drop the refreshing rain upon 
the fields and flowers. In the hot, dry seasons, when refreshment
 is needed, a cloud without water is useless. Water is a 
symbol of truth. The Lord's people are vessels for bearing 
the truth one to another to refresh the thirsty souls. Concerning
 such, the Apostle says: "Be ye filled with the spirit," 
meaning that we should be full of the Lord's love and his message
 of truth and gladly give it out for the refreshing and 
bleasing of others. Thus the new creature grows and develops 
by serving others in love. 

The writer also pictures this class as "trees without fruit." 
If a tree fails to bring forth fruit the gardener digs it up by 
the roots and casts it into the fire for destruction. One of the 
Lord's little ones that fails, after much opportunity, to bring 
forth the fruits and graces of the spirit is useless, and therefore
 would be removed. "Herein is my Father glorified, that 
ye bear much fruit." (John 15:8) Those who have been once 
enlightened by the Holy Spirit and who afterward lose it are 
described in verse 13 as "raging waves, . . . foaming out their 
own shame." And thus are we warned against any development
 of spirit which leads in this direction ; and thus may we 
know how to avoid those who are manifesting the wrong spirit. 
One who repudiates the truth and turns against, the lord's II tr
6265l 


(150-151) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Baoo/aYK, N« Y. 


tie ones becomes far more violent and more severe in persecution
 than those who have never known the Lord. 
"MTOMUBEBS, COMPLAINERS" 
The three classes above mentioned are again referred to in 
verse 16 as "murmurers, complainers, walking after their awn 
desires; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having 
men's persons in admiration because of advantage/' Such prefer
 the approval of men rather than the approval of God. They 
murmur and complain when they have not the honor and approval
 of men. Verses 14-16 clearly show that this epistle has 
its special application in the close of the age. The Adversary 
has even sought to destroy The Christ; and it is reasonable to 
expect that he would make a last desperate effort to destroy 
the "feet" members. This is particularly borne out by the 
words of the Lord addressed to Satan, "Thou shalt bruise his 
heel." The "heel" members are the last of his body to pass beyond
 the vail into the kingdom. The lesson, then, which we 
gather from this warning of St. Jude is that we should avoid 
the spirit of murmuring or complaining; that we should not 
seek our selfish desires; and that we should not desire to 
please men, but rather to please God. 

Lovingly, then, Brother Jude reminds the church of the 
words of admonition and warning spoken aforetime hy the 
apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ; "How that they told you 
there should be mockers in the last time who should walk after 
their own ungodly lusts/' This describes a ciass once having 
a knowledge of the truth, who later repudiate the messenger 
and tMe message of the Lord sent to the church through him. 
Moved by a wrong spirit they, he stated, would manifest the 
cunning disposition of the wolf, not sparing the flock, but 
seeking with perverse talk to draw away diaciples after themselves
. "These be they who separate themselves, sensual, not 
having the spirit." Such forsake the truth in its beauty and 
simplicity. Such depart from its spirit and, exercising the 
fleshly mind, gratify the ambitions and tastes of the old nature
. Warning against such a disposition and showing that 
such a spirit would take one out of God's love, St. Jude adds : 
"But ye, my dearly beloved, building yourselves up on the 
basis of your most holy faith -and praying in the Holy Spirit, 
keep yourselves safe in the love of God, waiting for the mercy 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which will result in life everlasting." 
Then St. Jude clearly intimates that there will be Borne 
who will have a greater degree of wilfulness, and these will 
succeed in entrapping others to follow after them. He then 
advises that there is a clear distinction which we should observe
 in dealing with them. In proportion as we find the 
brethren to be copies of the Lord in heart, in motive, in intention
, in loving zeal for righteousness and truth, we should 
-manifest greater love and consideration for them. The Lord 
Jesus set us an example in this behalf. He thus shows us that 
he desires his followers to treat such as walk after the flesh 
in a different manner from that in which we treat those who 
manifest a greater degree of his spirit. Toward all we are 
to be tender-hearted, and even though their garments are much 
spotted, our efforts should be by word and precept to try 
to save them as brands plucked from the fire. "Above all, 
exercising fervent [overspreading] love, because such love covers
 a multitude of defects." (1 Peter 4:7, 8) With fear and 
trembling should we walk before the Lord, watching and praying
, being at all times of sober mind, avoiding the pitfalls 
and observing the rules that will keep us in the love of God. 
At times the journey becomes wearisome and we long for 
home. Our wise and loving Father knows just what things 
we have need of that we might be made meet for his use in 
glory. He is too wise to err and too loving to be unkind. The 
conditions imposed are exacting upon all who will ultimately 
occupy the favored position of joint-heirship with Christ Jesus 
in his kingdom. Snares and pitfalls are many along the way; 
yet a means i3 provided of escaping from them all. The rules 
for keeping ourselves in the love of God are made plain and 
explicit. Constant vigilance and diligent perseverance are required
 ; and these are accompanied by many fiery trials, under 
which conditions the child of God must serve. And yet, all 
is but a reasonable service. We must share the ignominy of 
our Lord and be faithful followers in his footsteps that we 
might share his dignity and majesty. 


Often we feel so weak, so inadequate to meet our enemies, 
because they are legion and very subtle. We know we must 
continue this warfare even unto death. We know we must 
suffer persecution. And yet, when we look at self, we often 
think, How could God perfect one like me to be meet for 
his use in glory? And then there comes to us great consolation
 in the words of St. Paul: "It is sown in corruption; it 
is raised in incorruption [immortality]. It is sown in dishonor
; it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness; it is raised 
in power. It is sown a natural [animal] body; it is raised a 
spiritual body." And then we know that if we hold fast the beginning
 of our confidence with rejoicing firm unto the end, such 
glory, and immortality will be our portion, through the merit 
of him who bought us and justified us before God. 

All who have fled for refuge to this glorious, hope set before
 us And great consolation in the promises upon which this 
hope is based. With abiding confidence we feel that our anchorage
 is sure within the vail, in Christ Jesus, our Lord and 
head. The character of each one in the body of Christ must be 
perfected by fiery experiences, that the dross might be destroyed
 and the gold made manifest. How beautiful, then, 
will these creatures be! God predestinated that it should be 
so. The beloved St. Paul strengthens and consoles us with 
the words, "He hath chosen us in him before the foundation 
of the world, that we should be [ultimately] holy and without
 blame before him, in love; having predestinated us unto 
the adoption of children by Je3us Christ to himself, according 
to the good pleasure of his will, . . . that in the dispensation 
of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all 
things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on 
earth ; even in him : in whom also we have obtained an inheritance
, being predestinated according to the purpose of him 
who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will ; that 
we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in 
Christ."— Ephesians 1:4-11. 

"BEAOTmrii ABE THE FEET OF HIM" 

Dear, loving, tired feet members of the body of Christ, despised
 and rejected as was the Head, hated of all nations for 
his name's sake; yet beautiful they are and how blessed their 
portion! Beautiful as they declare the message of Messiah's 
kingdom to the nations of earth now in travail. Beautiful as 
they bear the reproaches that fall upon them because of their 
faithfulness and loving devotion to the cause of their king! 
Beautiful as they bring good tidings of good, declaring the 
kingdom of heaven at hand ! Blessed is their portion, soon to 
be inherited. 

In the final conflict upon the members of Christ's body, 
are they able to stand alone? No, not in their own strength; 
but there is One who is able to make us stand and to keep 
us from falling. "The eternal God is thy refuge and underneath
 are the everlasting arms." ( Deuteronomy 33 : 27 ) Weak 
and imperfect now, yet by the eye of faith, behold the conditions
 of glory awaiting the faithful ones; and be of good courage
. Soon that kind, wise and loving Bridegroom will present
 all the members of his bride faultless before the presence 
of Jehovah with exceeding joy. Will there be no flaws then? 
No, not one. No fear? No sorrows? No disappointments? 
No, not even the thought of such things. Faultless then shall 
we be, because we shall be like him — he who is the fairest of 
ton thousand, the one altogether lovely — and be with him, Yea, 
"in thy presence is fulness of joy, and at thy right hand there 
are pleasures for evermore." 

Let us, then, forget the things that are behind. Be not 
dismayed with the trials that now abound; but with the eye 
of faith behold his beauty and glory and the unspeakable joy 
of being in his presence forever. 

"Oh, what wondrous visions wrapped me! 
Heaven's gates seemed opened wide, 
Even I stood clear and faultless 
By my dear Redeemer's side. 

"Faultless in his glory's presence! 
Faultless in that dazzling light! 
Christ's own love, majestic, tender, 
Made my crimson snowy white!" 


"THE DUST OF HIS FEET" 


In beautifully poetic language the Prophet Nahum describes
 Jehovah's part in the present distress of nations: "The 
lord hath his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the 
clouds are the dust of his feet." — Nahum 1:3. 

Certainly clouds, which have long since ceased to be the 
size of a man's hand, hang thick over human affairs. To the 


worldly these clouds are sources of uncertainty, apprehension
, dread; but to the watchful child of God these "clouds 
and darkness" are sure harbingers of the establishment of 
Messiah's reign. Like children at evening who watch for 
their father's return from the fields and know him from afar 
by the cloud of dust raised by his equipage, so the Lord's peo- 


[6256] 


May 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(152-153) 


pie now have keenest interest in all the happenings in the 
world, even though some of the dust is blowing into their 
eyes, ears, noses and throats. They recognize the Lord even 
through the clouds, first, because the time has come and, secondly
, because of the character of the work which is being 
performed. 

Our Master warned us and told us we need not expect to 
be spoken well of by all men, because the majority of men, 
being dominated by self interest and selfish institutions, lavish
 their approval upon "the false prophets." {Luke 6:26) 
Whatever the Lord's people do, they will not be understood 
by the world, because they have different standards of judgment
, as well as different aims in life. But while the world 
is losing more and more even that measure of good judgment 
which was formerly possessed by it, the Lord's people should 
strive more and more to keep steady heads and to order their 
conduct with sobriety — giving no reasonable occasion for offense
. 

Our attitude on the war, Red Cross, Liberty Bonds, etc, 
has been misunderstood by many people. Few persons do 
much thinking in war time and what little they do is mostly 
in line with their natural emotions. We cannot therefore expect
 much calm and dispassionate thinking now from the 
worldly. Therefore in our honest effort to render our proper 
dues to the Government under which we are privileged to live 
we should be doubly careful not to "speak evil of dignitaries" 
nor to do anything which would avoidably embarrass them in 
the solution of their weighty problems. See Matthew 17:25- 
27 j Luke 20:22-25; Romans 13:7; 1 Peter 2:13-17. 
OTJB STATEMENT TO THE PBESS 

Statements have been recently made to several newspapers 
which requested an expression from us. But the statements, if 
printed at all, have been so garbled as to be well nigh incoherent
. We therefore print below in full a statement prepared
 by the President of our Association for the Brooklyn 
Eagle at its request: 

"On my return to Brooklyn I learned of the unpleasant occurrence
 at the Brooklyn Tabernacle last Sunday, April 28th. 
Mr. W. T. Baker was in the pulpit and at the conclusion of his 
discourse a request was brought to the platform that the congregation
 hear a speech by some one on the Liberty Bonds. 
Mr. Baker put the matter to a vote and the majority voted in 
the negative. 

"I am sure this action was not intended as any reflection 
on the Government, nor to be taken as against the Liberty 
Loan. Those who worship at the Tabernacle believe in worshipping
 the Lord in spirit and in truth. To them a religious
 service is the most sacred; and while at religious service 
they always refrain from discussing temporal matters. This 
congregation at no time ever held a social tea, a grab-bag 
party, a bazaar, or anything of that kind in the church. The 
Tabernacle auditorium is used exclusively for religious matters
, especially on Sunday. No previous request had been 
made to use the Tabernacle by any one in the interest of the 
Liberty Loan campaign. The worshippers had just listened to 
a helpful spiritual lesson on the Bible. They desired to withdraw
 from the building with these Baered thoughts ia mind 
and therefore deemed it inappropriate to discuss any temporal 
matters whatsoever, or to hear them discussed by any one 
else. We are pleased to grant the use of the Tabernacle for a 
meeting in the interest of the public when the same does not 
interfere with our religious services. 

"The people of our Association are not against the Government
, nor against the Liberty Loan. Our thought is that the 
Liberty Loan is not a religious question, but purely one pertaining
 to the affairs of the Government; and that each person
 should be left to the free exercise of his individual conscience
 as to whether he will or will not purchase Liberty 
Bonds. Our views are very well expressed in a statement 
given to the public press some weeks ago, as follows: 

" 'The International Bible Students* Association is not 
against the Liberty Loan. Many of its members have bought 
and hold Liberty Bonds. Some have not money with which 
to buy. 


" 'The Liberty Loan is not a religious question. It has 
solely to do with the Government. Every person who mails a 
letter supports the Government to that extent by paying the 
additional postage on account of the war. 

" 'The International Bible Students' Association is composed
 of Christians. Every Christian gladly obeys the law. The 
United States has always stood for religious liberty and freedom
 of speech. Every Christian appreciates the privilege of 
living in such a country and gladly meets his obligations in 
the payment of taxes. When the Government asks to borrow 
his money and give3 its promise to pay in the nature of a bond, 
if he can do so he should buy the bond. 

" The Association has no power to direct members thereof 
with reference to buying Liberty Bonds. It certainly will not 
and has not advised any one to refuse to buy bonds. That is 
an individual matter which each person must determine for 
himself according to his ability. The Association believes in 
supporting the Government in every way it can and each one 
should do so according to his ability and his conscience.' 

"Some members of the Brooklyn Tabernacle congregation 
had previously purchased Liberty Bonds. Doubtless all had 
been personally solicited before that time. They are surrounded
 on all hands by opportunities to purchase, and to them it 
seemed inappropriate to transact business in the church on 
Sunday. There are six days in the week for the transaction 
of business and Sunday is regarded by them as a day for sacred
 worship of the Lord. 

"It is to be regretted that one representing the public press 
should so disgrace himself as publicly to encourage mob violence
 against inoffensive people. It seems that any one wearing
 the uniform of the United States Army would have more 
respect for that uniform and for law and order than to disturb
 the peace by loud and uncouth language and in encouraging
 mob violence. We cannot believe that any responsible 
person in the Government would approve of such action. 

"As to the members of the Bethel Home, it is well known 
that those who labor there receive merely their food and lodging
 and a small allowance for incidental expenses. This was 
thoroughly aired in the Brooklyn Eagle libel case, as the 
record shows. At that time the amount received was only 
$10.00 per month, which since, on account of increased cost of 
necessities, is now $15.00 per month. At the opening of the 
Third Liberty Loan campaign, a very elegant gentleman of 
the Borough of Brooklyn called on me with reference to soliciting
 the members of the Bethel Home to buy bonds. I invited
 him to see each one of them personally. He questioned 
me as to their ability to buy; and when I told him ctf the 
amount they received monthly he said, 'Then they cannot buy 
on that amount and it is useless for me to see them. I am 
sure you must be doing much good here in your own way when 
men and women sacrifice their time for such a small allowance
.' It is a well known fact that there are other institutions
 that are not asked or even expected to buy Liberty Bonds 
because of their financial inability, 

"Members of our Association who have some personal means 
have bought Liberty Bonds, including Tabernacle workers who 
are paying 25 per cent, of their monthly allowance to purchase
 a bond. We do not believe the Government would expect
 any one to purchase bonds who receives barely enough 
for his daily expenses. 

"The picketing of the Bethel Home on last Sunday morning 
and accosting every one who passed out and demanding that 
they buy Liberty Bonds seems to be a very uncalled-for and 
unusual thing, when any one authorized to solicit for bonds 
can have free access to the Bethel Home to interview any person
 there at any reasonable hour during the day or evening. 
As above stated, a gentleman had called for that purpose some 
days ago. The action of the men on Sunday morning aeetned 
not only wholly uncalled-for, but was taken designedly for the 
purpose of placing the members of the Bethel Home at a disadvantage
. We cannot believe that order-loving, law-abiding 
people of Brooklyn at all approve such action or conduct." 


BEGINNING THE CHRISTIAN LIFE 

July 7.— Acts 16:13-15, 25-34. 

the gospel call a limited one: — the river of wateb of life a symbol of restitution blessings what it means to be a 

christian — tests of discipleship — relative value of the sacrifice presented by the christian — consecration a 
definite, positive contract with god — blessing of world and church contrasted. 

"Be that will, let him take the water of Ufe freely J* — Revelation 22:17. 
We have already pointed out that according to the Scrip- kingdom established. Then the river of life will flow from the 
tures there is no river of the water of life flowing at the pres- throne, the Millennial kingdom power and authority estabent
 time, nor will there be until the church is glorified and the lished in the earth, and then it will be the glorified bride of 

[6257] 


(153-154) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Christ with the holy Spirit that will give the invitation to the 
world in general* We have also pointed out the Master's 
words to the effect that whoever now haa the water oi life receives
 it not from a fountain or river or pool, but from the 
Lord himself, "a well of water springing up into everlasting 
life." (John 4:14) Since there is no river of Water of life 
to which to invite any at the present time, our Golden Text 
must belong to the incoming Messianic age. 

In our day, when the public teachings of the ministry of 
nearly all denominations is so different from the teachings of 
the Bible, we believe that the degeneracy of faith and practice
 would be much more rapid than it is were it not that very 
many feel obligated to read a portion of the Scriptures daily, 
even though understanding little of their meaning. In such 
readings the lines of true discipleship are often so distinctly 
drawn that the mere nominal professor is made to shudder as 
he determines by the grace of God to seek so to conform his 
life that he may become more and more a copy of God's dear 
Son. 

The general thought of our day as* expressed in the pulpits, 
in private conversation and at funerals seems to be that in 
civilized lands everybody is a Christian and Bure to go to 
heaven eventually, except moral reprobates, such as are to be 
found in prisons and penitentiaries; and even for these the 
hope is entertained that ere they die they may express some 
regret for their misdeeds. Such regrets are seized upon by 
their friends as evidence that the erring ones became Christians
 and went to heaven. 

KATUEAL CONSEQUENCE OF FALSE DOCTBINE 

While condemning this view as wholly wrong, nevertheless 
we sympathize with those whose confusion of thought is manifest
. Their unscriptural views as to what constitutes a Christian
 are the result of two things : { 1 ) Teachings of the dark 
ages handed down through "the creeds of Christendom, creeds 
inspired by those who in bygone centuries persecuted one another
 to the death because of differences of opinion on doctrinal 
subjects, who tortured one another with rack, sword and 
fagot. (2) To this bad foundation of error there has come 
within recent years a larger spirit of enlightenment and generosity
, in which we rejoice. But the errors of the past and the 
generosity of the present make a very bad combination of doctrine
 for modern churchianity, a doctrine which seeks to be 
reasonable with itself, but which in so doing runs counter to a 
great many Scriptural teachings. 

It is only when we rid ourselves of the smoke, darkness 
and confusion resulting from the creeds of ^he dark ages, and 
return to the pure, unadulterated teachings of our Lord and 
the apostles, and by the grace of God have the eyes of our 
understanding somewhat opened, that we can see these matters
 in their true light. 

With all kindness toward those who are deceiving themselves
 and others, the truth compels us to acknowledge that 
the vast majority of those professing Christ are not Christians
 at all. Remarkably few members of any denomination 
know what they believe. We would not be misunderstood. We 
are not complaining that, there are not noble people connected 
with all the churches. On the contrary, we compliment them 
upon their education, their refinement, their wealth, their influence
, their humanitarian sympathies, as represented in 
hospitals, asylums and other benevolences. But all these 
things are shared by people who are not church members. Participation
 in good worlds is by no means a proof that one is 
a Christian. A Christian is a person who has entered into a 
very special relationship to God through Christ; and this 
relationship exists without respect to education, wealth, color 
or sex. 

ONLY THE TRUTH IS CONSISTENT 

In his discourses our Lord constantly reiterated the fact 
that he was seeking for some who should be accounted worthy 
to constitute his kingdom, to sit with him in his throne, to be 
his joint-heirs, to rule and to judge Israel and all other nations
. Not until we learn to differentiate between this kingdom
 class, otherwise styled his bride, the members of his body, 
his church, and the world that is to be ruled and judged by 
this class in due time, can we get a clear conception of the 
divine purposes progressing throughout this Gospel age. 

From this viewpoint we can most clearly see that no one 
ican be of this kingdom olass unless he reach a standard of 
faith and character development above and beyond that of the 
world in gerferal. We can see why this class should be called 
upon to bear the good fruits of character in a superlative degree
 and to walk the narrow way of self-denial and self-sacrifice
, in order to he fitted and prepared for the great work 
which the Lord has for them to do for the world during the incoming
 Millennial age. It seems peculiarly difficult for the 


majority of people long blinded by false doctrines to see the 
heavenly Father haa special times and seasons for the development
 of the various features of his plan of salvation. 

During the present time the world is getting a certain kind 
of experience which will be very valuable in the future, when 
God's due time shall have come for blessing all the families of 
the earth. Meantime, with those experiences come the disciplines
 of the laws of nature, under which poverty, sickness and 
mental and moral derangements follow excesses of evil doing 
even as pain follows contact with fire. And it is not unreasonable
 to hope that with the lessons of the present time before
 them, the world will act more wisely during the Millennial
 age than at present; that under the favorable conditions 
then prevailing many will not only rejoice in the great plan of 
salvation but will also avail themselves of it; for many are 
now careless in such matters because they can neither see nor 
walk by faith. 

SUEEENDEE SELF— SACRIFICE TO GOB 

According to the Bible no human being is fit for fellowship
 with God or fit for life eternal, for the reason that all 
mankind are sinners. The explanation for this condition is 
that father Adam sinned when he was perfect, in God's image, 
and so came under the death sentence; and that, cut off from 
God, Adam's posterity deteriorated as a race, imperfections 
of mind and body passing from parent to child. Imperfect 
beings would be altogether out of place among the perfeot; and 
as long as imperfection continues, sin will continue, and with 
it of necessity sorrow, pain and death; for these are the consequences
 of sin. — Romans 5:12, 19; 1 Corinthians 15:21. 

God declares his sympathy for the sinner, and has made 
provision through Jesus Christ for man's recovery from his 
present deplorable state. Not only so, but a time has been set 
for that recovery; and the Bible tells us that human uplift 
from sin and death conditions will be accomplished by Messiah
 during his Millennial kingdom. We pray: "Thy kingdom
 come; thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven," 
not with the thought that God will neglect his promise to establish
 that kingdom, but by way of acknowledging the fact 
that the Messianic kingdom is the hope of both world and 
church. 

The church's hope in the kingdom is that of becoming sharers
 with Christ in the glory, honor and immortality of that 
kingdom, for the blessing and uplifting of mankind out of sin 
and death. At the present time there is no attempt being 
made on God's part to convert the world. Few now hear the 
Gospel message, and still fewer believe it. Mankind are deluded
 by the adversary into thinking that for the past six 
thousand years God has been trying to convert the world, but 
has. made a miserable failure of it all along; and that if anything
 is done, man must do it for himself. Thus has unbelief 
been cultivated, and trust in God and in the teachings of the 
Bible thrust aside. 

For nearly nineteen centuries the Gospel message has gone 
hither and thither, quietly, unostentatiously. The world and 
the nominal church would say that it had accomplished nothing
, that everything worth while had been accomplished by 
them. But we prefer to stand by the Bible and to recognize 
that God's consecrated ones have indeed lifted up a light 
which the world has hated, and on account of which the lightbearers
 have frequently been put to death, have had their 
names cast out as evil or have been boycotted socially or otherwise
. If their hopes were merely in the present life, these 
light-bearers would be making a miserable failure of their opportunities
. But not so. They are waiting for their reward in 
the future, in the glorification of the church. 

HOW TO BECOME A CHRISTIAN 

Tlie question asked by the jailer of Philippi, "What shall I 
do to be saved?" is one which presents itself to earnest souls 
who are seeking for rest of heart and mind, who desire to draw 
near to God, if haply they can find him. St. Paul's reply is 
one which commends itself as the proper one. The one seeking 
salvation should believe on the Lord Jesus Christ as his Redeemer
, as the one who died on his behalf, through whose 
stripes he might be healed, saved, and through whose sacrifice 
he might rejoice in atonement with God. Having thus believed
 with all his heart, whether it required a moment or an 
hour to explain and to understand the simple first principled 
of the Gospel, the jailer's next step was to consecrate himself
, to be baptized into death with his Redeemer, and to symbolize
 that consecration into death by a water immersion. 
Moreover, he was encouraged to hope that his family might 
be sharers with him in his salvation, to become disciples of 
Christ. 

Let us learn from this brief statement of the Gospel made 
by the Apostle Paul the wisdom of simplicity and directness. 


L62581 


May IS, 1918 


T H E WA T CH TOWE R 


(154-155) 


lie might have preached a long discourse about the Jewish 
failure to keep the Mosaic Law. He might have discussed the 
various philosophies of the false religions of the Gentiles. 
But while these themes might be proper at the right time, 
evidently this was not the time suitable for them; and hence 
the Apostle confined his remarks to the general statement that 
Jesus was the Christ, the Messiah, that he had died for the 
world, that he must be laid hold upon by faith, and that to 
all who thus laid hold on him he became the power and the 
wisdom of God. 

To become a disciple of Christ is to become his follower, his 
pupil, to walk as he walked. The proposition is self-denial, 
self-effa cement. To become a Christian is to give one's self 
wholly to God. As the Apostle has said: "Present your bodies 
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, your reasonable service
.'* (Romans 12:1) No one needs to go far to make his 
consecration. Each, at his own bedside, can give his little all 
to God. 

COUNTING THE COST 

It should not require long to count how much more we 
shall receive than we give; for we have only a condemned and 
dying existence to give. We give mental, moral and physical 
imperfections ; and Jesug our Savior, by imputing the merit 
of his sacrifice, makes ours of value in the sight of God. But 
in exchange we receive riches of grace in the present life — 
peace, joy, blessing of heart which the world can neither give 
nor take away; and in the life to come we shall receive glory, 
honor and immortality, joint-heirship with our Savior in the 
heavenly kingdom which shall dominate the world for a thousand
 years, for the blessing and uplift of the Adaraic race. 

Really, after counting the cost, there is a danger that we 
would feel so ashamed of the littleness of our offering that we 
would fear to come to the Lord with it. We gain courage 
to present our bodies a living sacrifice only by a knowledge of 


the Word of God and by a realization of the mercy and favor 
which has prompted his kind invitation for an exchange of 
something of little value for great things of inestimable value. 
But unless we take this very step and definitely and positively 
enter into a contract with the Lord,, we have neither part nor 
lot with him. We are still a part of the world, however much 
we may try to pattern our lives after decent models and to 
avoid the grosser and the finer sins. The covenant /with the 
Lord is the beginning of the Christian life; and to each covenanter
 there comes "grace to help in every time of need." 

But says some one: "Surely this is not the only way of 
coming into God's family, of becoming a Christian!" Yea, we 
reply, it is the only way. "There is none other name under 
heaven given among men whereby we must be saved." (Acts 
4:12) Jesus is the only one who can save mankind from their 
condition of condemnation and bring them back into the family
 of God. The Master himself makes the distinctive terms 
that in order to have the privilege of disciple-ship we must become
 full disciples. 

The limitations and obligations of the Christian are clearly 
defined, in the Scriptures. With regret we must say that the 
facts have been hidden from the people by the clergy, who 
have sought to set aside the words of Jesus because these 
conflict with their theories. For this reason many who have 
been seeking the truth have been unable to find it in the nominal
 churches. Therefore we urge all to return to the Bible 
simplicity of a fully consecrated church of Christ. 

The blessing upon the world will be earthly restitution to 
perfect human nature, instead of a change to the divine nature, 
as promised to the church. All who refuse both the call of 
the present time and the opportunity of the future restitution 
will die the second death, which St. Peter declares is like 
that of the natural brute beast.— Acts 3:19-23; 2 Peter 2:12. 


READING GOD'S WORD 


July 14.— Acts 8:26-31, 35-39; PsA. 19:7-11. 

TFIK FREEDOM WHEREWITH CHRIST MAKES FREE — KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRUTH NOT INSTANTLY ACQUIRED THE TRANSFORMING 

POWER OF THE WORD OF GOD — DIVINE METHOD OF REVEALING THE TRUTH— THE MOST PROFITABLE WAY TO STUDY THE BIBLE 
— THIS METHOD ILLUSTRATED — HELPFUL SUGGESTIONS FOR TRUE STUDENTS. 

"Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." — John 8:32. 
God's approval should be the highest aim of every one who grace, which time and cultivation ripen to a glorious maprofesses
 to believe in him as the Creator, and especially of 
those who have begun the Christian life, who accept Jehovah 
God as their Father, and who claim to hold the precious relationship
 of children to him. HiB will should be their highest 
law j and it should be a part of their daily and hourly pleasure
, as it is their privilege, to seek to know his will and to do 
it. This implies study, consideration, not a mere formality of 
thoughtless reading or of perfunctory worship, but the diligent 
use of every available means to learn what is the will of our 
heavenly Father. 

Divine truth is found only in the divinely appointed channel
, the Word of God as set forth by our Lord, the apostles 
and the prophets. To continue in the doctrines set forth in 
the inspired writings we must study them, meditate upon 
them, trust implicitly in them and faithfully conform our 
character to them. This is what is meant by "continuing in 
the Word of God," and is entirely compatible with the heeding
 of all the helps which the Lord raises up from among our 
brethren in the body of Christ, (Ephesians 4:11-15; 1 Corinthians
 12:12-14) All through the Gospel age the Lord has 
raised up such helps for the edification of the body of Christ; 
but it is the duty of every member carefully to prove the 
teaching of these helps by the infallible Word of God. 

If we thus continue in the Word of the Lord as earnest, 
sincere disciples, we shall indeed "know the truth," be "established
 in the present truth" (the truth now due) and be 
rooted and grounded in the truth. (2 Peter 1:12) Thus we 
shall be firm in the faith, "able to give a reason for the hope 
that is in us," able "to contend earnestly for the faith once 
delivered to the saints," to war a good warfare, to witness a 
good confession," and firmly to "endure hardship as good soldiers
 of Jesus Christ" even unto the end of our conflict. — 1 
Peter 3:15; Jude 3; 1 Timothy 6:12, 13; 2 Timothy 2:3. 
HOW WE ATTAIN THE TBXTTH 

We do not come into the knowledge of .the truth at a single
 bound but gradually, step by step, are we led. Every 
step is one of sure and certain progress to a higher vantage 
ground for further attainments both in knowledge and in established
 character. The truth thus acquired, step by step, becomes
 a sanctifying power, bringing forth in our lives its 
blessed fruits of righteousness, peace, joy in the holy Spirit, 
love, meekness, faith, patience and every virtue and every 


turity. 

Not only shall the'true disciple thus know the truth and be 
sanctified by it, but as the Lord said, the truth shall make 
him free. Those who have received the truth of God's Word 
know by blessed experience something of its liberating power. 
As soon as any measure of the truth is received into a good and 
honest heart, it begins to strike off the fetters of sin, of ignorance
, superstition and fear. Its health-restoring beams begin
 to penetrate the darkest recesses of our hearts and minds, 
and thus invigorate the whole beiflg. It quickens our mortal 
bodies. 

It is good to meditate upon, to ponder, the Word of God ; 
for only in so doing can we receive the nourishment it is designed
 to give. A hasty reading of the Scriptures and a quick 
return of the mind to other thoughts and pursuits makes a 
spiritual dyspeptic, incapable of assimilating the spirit of the 
truth, and lacking the strength and power of mature, developed
 Christian character. 

GOD'S WORD AND ITS EFFECT 

Psalm 19:7-11 refers us to the superior glory of God's 
special written revelation of himself, given through his inspired
 human agents, the prophets and the apostles. This 
testimony not only declares the existence, power and wisdom 
of Jehovah, with a silent intimation of his goodness and 
grace, but with overwhelming force it bears to the thoughtful 
mind the convincing testimony df all his glorious attributes 
and of his love toward us in" Christ. 

Other influences may lead to temporary and partial 
changes of course and action; but nothing else equals God's 
revealed truth in producing a change of being, character, soul. 
It is because other converting agencies and powers are so often
 used that there are very many glossed-over, nominal Christians
, as compared with the few whose entire beings are 
turned and fully consecrated to the Lord. People may be 
converted from savagery to civilization by a general knowledge, 
or from intemperance to sobriety by a study of the advantages 
of the latter over the former, or from dishonesty to honesty by 
learning that "honesty is the best policy." But none of these 
are soul conversions. Only God's truth can produce soul conversion
, as also our Lord indicates in Ms prayer: "Sanctify 
them through thy truth; thy Word is truth."-^John 17:17. 

The testimony of God's Word is not doubtful, but clear 


[6259] 


(156-157) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


and positive, making wise the single-hearted who have no 
will or plan of their own which they wish the Lord to adopt, 
but who seek the Lord's will only. His statutes, M3 appointed 
plans, are right, rejoicing the heart. Yes, indeed! God's 
glorious plan of the ages rejoices the hearts of all who have 
come to a knowledge of that blessed arrangement. The precepts
 or teachings of the Lord are clear, showing Us the unmistakable
 course and end of righteousness and of unrighteousness
. The reverence of the Lord ia a pure and lofty sentiment 
based upon love and gratitude, not upon a servile recognition 
of tyranny and power; and this proper fear, or reverence, will 
endure forever. 

Once, when following the leadings of mistaken teachers and 
of catechisms, we thought of the judgments of the Lord, his 
"eternal decrees," only with horror, supposing that they provided
 for the salvation of but a mere handful of our race 
and for the everlasting' misery of the masses. But what a 
change of sentiment has come since our eyes of understanding 
have been opened to the truth! Now God's decrees are sweet 
to our taste; we appreciate them greatly; we see that he has 
decreed a great Savior and a great salvation, open to the acceptance
 of every child of Adam; and that he has provided 
that all shall be brought to a clear knowledge of the truth, that 
tbey may have the fullest opportunity for everlasting life 
upon the only condition that God can make, that of righteousness
. Moreover, the thoughtful servant of God who meditates 
on God's decrees, judgments, is warned thereby; and in remembering
 and obeying them there is great reward. 
GOD'S METHOD OF TEACHING 

In the story of Philip and the Ethiopian eunuch we have 
an illustration of the divine method of teaching the Word. 
Many believe and teach that God teaches by impressions 
made upon the mind rather than by the written 
Word, the Bible. Others hold that God teaches by impressions 
which illuminate the Bible to each individual student. But 
the lesson of the eunuch's experience agrees with all the tea'chings
 of Scripture on this subject, and sets forth God's usual 
method. He uses his inspired Word as the text, and sends especially
 qualified representatives to expound it as the due time 
for understanding it approaches. 

The hand of divine providence is here agrain manifested in 
the choice of the Scripture reading which the eunuch did not 
understand. Beginning at V at portion of Isaiah's prophecy, 
Philip showed him how Jesus' sacrifice was the propitiation for 
the sin of the whole world; how that in -the clawn and vigor 
of manhood our Lord was cut off from life without any posterity
 to perpetuate his name, and yet is to have a numerous 
posterity; for God raised him from "the dead, and in due time 
would make him the Everlasting Father of all mankind, who 
would be brought back from the dead under the uplifting conditions
 of the Messianic kingdom. 

Philip's teachings must have been very comprehensive. He 
had evidently progressed from the foundation doctrine of justification
 by faith in Christ as the Redeemer to the doctrines 
of the resurrection of the dead and the restitution of all 
things, and then to the special privilege of the fully consecrated
 during the Gospel age, that of becoming joint-heirs 
with Christ and in due time' sharing his crown if now they 
willingly bear his cross. This seems evident from the fact that 
the eunuch was anxious to be baptized at once ; His promptness
 in this respect was another evidence of his acquiescence 
in the will of God and of his desire to be in full accord and 
cooperation with the' Lord. 

The eunuch's meek, teachable spirit made it easy for him 


to receive the Gospel message in its simplicity and beauty. He 
was already a ibeliever to the extent that he knew the truth, 
He was already justified by his faith in the Redeemer promised
. Now that justification became actually his, as his mind 
and his heart grasped the thought that the Crucified One was 
the Son of God who bought us with his own precious blood. 
He was already devoted to the Lord as far as he knew the divine
 will. But now, with clear knowledge sent directly to 
him through Philip, his consecration was revived, renewed, 
enlarged, applied. 

It is not so much the amount of time given to Bible reading
 that counts, but the amount of study done and the information
 gained. We -..il know people who have spent days, 
weeks and years in reading the Scriptures, but who have 
learned little or nothiner about God's plan for human salvation
. It is a great mistake to think that Bible study is merely 
the time spent in handling a Bible and in reading so many 
chapters per day. 

ADVANTAGES OF TOPICAL STTJDT 

The Studies in the ^Scriptures are not merely comments 
upon the Bible, but are practically the Bible itself in an arranged
 form for topical study. Our thought is, therefore, 
that these Scripture Studies are a very valuable help in 
the understanding of the Word of God. These books will be of 
no practical value to us, however, unless we see in them loyalty 
to that Word and, as far as our judgment goes, see them to 
be in full harmony with the Scriptures. Therefore in reading 
them for the first time, and perhaps the second time, and before
 we accept their teachings as our own personal faith and 
conviction, we should prove every point by the Word or disprove
 it, as the case may be. We should be satisfied with 
nothing less than a thorough investigation of the Bible from 
their standpoint. 

This is not a putting of the Scriptube Studies as a substitute
 for the Bible; on the contrary, the Studies continually 
refer to the Bible. Whoever, therefore, is doubtful as to any 
reference, or has forgotten any point in any degree, should refresh
 his memory, and should make sure that his every thought 
is in harmony with the Bible, and not merely in accord with 
the Scripture Studtes, although we firmly believe them to 
be in full accord with the Word of God. 

Quite a considerable number of the friends make it a rule 
to read from eight to twelve pages of the Studies daily ; and 
we might say here that we do not know of one who has followed
 this course and made use of the various means of grace 
provided by the Lord — such as the different meetings, the Berean
 lessons, the Manna text, etc. — and who has gone out of 
the truth. 

Furthermore, we would suggest that merely reading a given 
number of pages of the Scripture Studies would not be 
studying in the proper sense of the word. A proper study 
would be to think of the meaning of every word and every 
sentence. The thought is not to see how much one can read, 
but to make 3ure that one goes no further than he understands
, whether that means one page or twenty pages. We 
would not consider it a Scripture study in any sense of the 
word unless our thought has grasped the matter from the 
standpoint of seeking* to know what the Scriptures teach on 
the subject under consideration. Whoever will faithfully do 
this will not be merely reading; but studying; and whoever 
reads a few pages of Scripture Studies daily, with the suggested
 texts connected with those pages, will do more Scripture 
studying in that time than he could by any other known 
method." 


CHRIST IS ALL 


Though all thy life seem full of care 
And trials seem too hard to bear, 

Upon thy Father call. 
He'll from his Word send message meet 
And grace sufficient, promise sweet; 

For Christ is all in all. 

If little tests thy walks harrass 
And troubles small thy way compass, 
In these thou must not fall. 


Thy Father lets thee have them, so 
Thy character may stronger grow 
And Christ be all in all. 

Tf for a while thy life be bright 
Nor foes assail nor storms affright 

Nor darkened hours appall, 
In heaven above still find thy joy. 
Earth's good is but a transient toy; 

Let Christ he all in all. 


"LET PATIENCE HAVE HER PERFECT WORK" 

"Tjet patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, ivanting nothing." — James 1:4. 
Patience is the fruitage of enduring trust. To many minds ignation. But patience is more positive; it is a trait which 
the thought behind the word would be better expressed by indicates strength and self-discipline. It cannot be predicated 
constancy, perseverance, or cheerful endurance. Patience is of inexperienced perso s. but only of characters which have 
often confused with long suffering. That word is suggestive of been subjected to trials or affliction, pain or loss; and it almeek
, uncomplaining endurance of suffering, with humble res- ways shines brightest when manifested under the glowing heat 

[6260] 


May 15, 1913 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(157-158) 


of severe affliction. This trait takes a very prominent place 
in the galaxy of Christian virtues; for without it the heart 
'would grow "faint, the head weary, and the steps would soon 
falter along the narrow way in which the Church is called 
to walk. 

li ln your patience possess ye your souls," said the Master, 
implying the danger of losing our souls, our existence, if we 
fail to cultivate this grace which is so very necessary to our 
continuance in well doing* 

The Apostle James does not overstate the matter when 
he intimates that the perfect work of patience will make its 
subjects perfect and entire, wanting nothing; for the Apostle 
Paul assures us that God, who has begun the good work of 
developing character in us, will continue to perform it until 
the crowning day — the day of Jesus Christ. (Philippiana 
1:6) All his children will be subjected to just such discipline 
as they need for the correction of faults, the implanting and 
developing of virtues, and for their training and establishment
 in righteousness, so that they cannot be moved. "If ye 
be without chastisement [discipline and correction], whereof 
all [true sons of God] arc partakers, then are ye bastards, 
and not sons; for whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and 
scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. If ye [patiently] endure
 chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what 
son is he whom the father chasteneth not?" — Hebrews 12:8, 
G, 7. 

DEVELOPMENT A SLOW PROCESS 

This great work of developing and training character is 
necessarily a slow and tedious one, and not infrequently it is 
a painful process ; and the patience that cheerfully submits to 
it is begotten of a high appreciation of the ends to be attained. 
Patience is begotten of a love of righteousness, truth 
and godliness, and is therefore most noble and praiseworthy. 

But how can we let patience have her perfect work? Just 
by meekly doing the best we can each day, and doing it cheerfully
 and well ; making the best of every thing and going forward
 daily with true Christian fortitude to act the noble part 
in every emergency of affliction, pain or loss. Today's trial 
may bo a light one, perhaps almost imperceptible; or today 
may be one of the sunny days in which God bids our hearts rejoice
 in his overflowing bounty. Tomorrow may bring its cares 
and its petty vexations that irritate and annoy. Another tomorrow
 may witness the clouds gather above our heads, and 
as the days follow each other the clouds may grow darker and 
darker until we are forcibly reminded of that strong figure of 
the Psalmist — "I walk through the valley of the shadow of 
death." Yet never will the valley grow so dark that the patient
, trusting one cannot triumphantly exclaim: "Though I 
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear 
no evil; for thou [my 'Lord] are with me: thy rod and thy 
staff, thev comfort me." Yes, there is comfort in the "rod" 
(of chastisement), as well as in the "staff" (of providential 
care) ; for both are designed for our ultimate profiting. 
TABULATION WOKKETH PATIENOE 

The Apostle Paul tells us plainly that tribulation is necessary
 for the development of patience. "Tribulation worketh 
patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope." 
(Romans 5:3, 4) Consider how your own experience has verified
 this, you who have been for some time under the Lord's 
special care and leading. How much richer you are for all 
the lessons of experience, and for the patience that experience 
has developed in you! Although, like the Apostle, you can 
say that "no chastening for the present seemeth to bo joyous, 
but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth the peaceable
 fruits of righteousness unto them which are exercised 
thereby." (Hebrews 12:11) In the exercise of patience the 
lessons of experience have made you stronger. They have increased
 your faith and drawn you into closer communion and 
fellowship with the Lord. They have made you to feel better
 acquainted with him, to realize more and more his personal
 interest in you and his care and love for you. And this 
in turn has awakened a deeper sense of gratitude and an increasing
 zeal to manifest that gratitude to him. Gratitude 
and zeal deepen the sense of fellowship with God, and give confidence
 to the hope of final and full acceptance with him as a 
son and heir, worthy through Christ. 

"Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down and 
[strengthen] the feeble knees" — "Let patience have her perfect 
work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing." 

The Apostle Jame3 urges that we take the prophets who 
have spoken in the name of the Lord for an example of suffering
 affliction and of patience. Then he cites the example 
of Job and the manifest end or purpose of the Lord in permitting
 him to. 'be so sorely tried: how the Lord was really 
very pitiful and of tender mercy, although the pity and mercy 
were not manifest except to the confiding faith that said, 
"Though he slay me, yet will I trust him'* — until the long 
and painful discipline had yielded the peaceable fruits and the 
subsequent rewards of righteousness. 

MORE THAN POLICY 

There is little virtue in the patience that endures merely 
from motives of worldly policy, though even that often has 
much advantage in it. Men in business dealings with fellowmen
 well know that an impetuous, turbulent disposition is 
greatly to their disadvantage, while patient con si deration » temperance
 in judgment, and good self-control are of immense 
value, even from a worldly, business standpoint. But the patience
 that is begotten of deep-rooted Christian principle is the 
kind that will endure all trials and shine the brighter for 
every affliction through which it may pass. 

Job, the servant of God, was accused of selfish policymotives
 for his remarkable patience and faithfulness; and it 
was boldly affirmed that if he were tried by adversity his 
mean motives would be manifest; that he would curse God 
to his face. But God knew better; and it was in Job's defense
 that he permitted him to be tried to the utmost that the 
loyalty of his heart might be manifest. Some of his poor 
comforters viewed Job's afflictions only in the light of chastisements
, failing utterly to comprehend the divine purpose, and 
this only added stings to his afflictions but through them all 
the Lord brought his servant and most fully vindicated him in 
the eyes of all the people. 

Thus will God ever do with all who patiently maintain their 
integrity and trust in him under affliction. If any man recognize
 affliction as a chastisement of the Lord for the correction
 of some evil way in him, let him be quick to learn 
the lesson and repent; or if it be refining discipline, let patience
 under the tedious process have its perfect work. 
PATIENT OKES Or OLD 

The Apostle Paul (Hebrews 11) calls up a long list of 
patient, faithful ones who endured cruel mockings and scourgings
, bonds and imprisonment, who were stoned, sawn asunder, 
were tempted, were slain with the sword, who wandered about 
in sheepskins aoid goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented
; of whom the world was not worthy; who wandered 
in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the 
earth. All this they endured patiently for righteousness 
sake, looking by faith to God for the reward of their patience 
and faithfulness in his own good time. Then a^ain, says the 
Apostle (Hebrews 12:3), "Consider him [Christ] that endured
 such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye 
be wearied and faint in your minds." , Yea, consider him, 
"who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered
, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that 
judgeth righteously." He left us an example that we should 
follow his stepsWhile
 we see the great necessity for pruning, cultivating 
and discipline in' the development of character, it is manifest 
that none will be able to endure it unto the desirable end of 
final establishment in righteousness who do not from the 
beginning diligently devote themselves to the exercise of patience
. "He that shall endure unto the end, the same shall 
be saved." "In your patience possess ye your souls." 


NON-COMBATANT SERVICE DEFINED 


Many have written asking us what constitutes non-combatant
 service within the meaning of the Selective Draft Law. 
We have recently procured a copy of President Wilson's order 
and take advantage of this first opportunity to publish the 
same for the benefit of any who desire to know. It is dated 
Washington, D. C, March 20, 1918, and reads as follows: 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 

1. By virtue of authority contained in Section 4 of the 
a-ct approved May 18, 1917, entitled, "An act to authorize the 
President to increase temporarily the military establishment 

[62 


of the United States/' .whereby it is provided — 

"And nothing in this Act contained shall be construed 
to require or compel any person to serve in any of the 
forces herein provided for who is found to be a member of 
any well- recognized religious sect or organization at present 
organized and existing and whose existing creed or principles
 forbid its members to participate in war in any form 
and whose religious convictions are against war or participation
 therein in accordance with the creed or principles 
of said religious organizations; but no person so exempted 


61] 


(158-159) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


shall be exempted from service in any capacity that the 
President shall declare to be non-combatant," 

I hereby declare that the following military service is 
noncombatant service: 

a. Service in the Medical Corps wherever performed. This 
includes service in the sanitary detachments attached to 
combatant units at the front; service in the divisional 
sanitary trains .composed of ambulance companies and field 
hospital companies, on the line of communications, at the 
base in France, and with the troops and at hospitals in the 
United States ; also the service of supply and repair in the 
Medical Department. 

b. Any service in the Quartermaster Corps, in the United 
States, may be treated as non-combatant. Also, in rear of 
zone of operations, service in the following: Stevedore 
companies, labor companies, remount depots, veterinary 
hospitals, supply depots, bakery companies, the subsistence 
service, the bathing seryice, the, laundry service, the salvage 
service, the transportation repair service, and motor-truck 
companies. 

c. Any engineer service in the United States may be treated 
as non-combatant service. Also, in rear of zone of operations
, service as follows : Railroad building, operation and 
repair j road building and repair; construction of rear-line 
fortifications, auxiliary defenses, etc.; construction of 
docks, wharves, store-houses and of such cantonments as 
may be built by the Corps of Engineers; topographical 
work; camouflage; map reproduction; supply depot service
; repair service; hydraulic service; and forestry service. 

2. Persons ordered to report for military service under 
the above Act who have (*a) been certified by their Local 
Boards to be members of a religious sect or organization as defined
 in Section 4 of said Act; or (b) who object to participating
 in war because of conscientious scruples but have failed 
to receive certificates as members of a religious sect or organization
, from their Local Board will be assigned to non-combatant 
military service as defined in paragraph 1 to the extent that 
such persons are able to accept service as aforesaid without 
violation of the religious or other conscientious scruples by 
them in good faith entertained. Upon the promulgation of this 
order it shall be the duty of each Division, Camp, or Post Commander
, through a tactful and considerate officer, to present to 
all such persons the provisions hereof with adequate explanation
 of the character of non-combatant service herein defined, 
and upon such explanations to secure acceptances of assignment
 to the several kinds of non-combatant service above enumerated
; and whenever any person is assigned to non-combatant 
service by reason of his religious or other conscientious scruples 
he shall be given a certificate stating the assignment and reason
 therefor, and such certificate shall thereafter be respected 
as preventing the transfer of such persons from such non-combatant
 to combatant service by any Division, Camp, Post, or 
other Commander under whom said person may thereafter be 
called to serve, but such certificate shall not prevent the assignment
 of such person to some other form of non-combatant service
 with his own consent. So far as may be found feasible by 
each Division, Camp, or Post Commander, future assignments 
of such persons to non-combatant military service will be restricted
 to the several detachments and units of the Medical 
Department in the absence of a request for assignment to some 
other branch of non-combatant service as defined in paragraph 
1 hereof. 

3. On the first day of April, and thereafter monthly, each 
Division, Camp * or Post Commander shall report to the Adjutant
 General of the Army, for the information of the Chief 
of Staff and the Secretary of War, the names of all persons 
under their respective commands who profess religious or other 
conscientious scruples as above described and who have been 


unwilling to accept, by reason of such scruples, assignment, 
to non-combatant military service as above defined, and as to 
each such person so reported a brief, comprehensive statement 
as to the nature of the objection to the acceptance of such noncombatant
 military service entertained. The Secretary of War 
will from time to* time classify the persons so reported and 
give further directions as to the disposition of them. Pending 
such directions from the Secretary of War, all such persons 
not accepting assignment to non-combatant service shall be 
segregated as far as practicable and placed under the /command
 of a specially qualified officer of tact and judgment, who 
will be instructed to impose no punitive hardships of any kind 
upon them, but not to allow their objections to be made the 
basis of any favor or consideration beyond exemption from 
actual military service which is not extended to any other 
soldier in the service of the United States. 

4. With a view to maintaining discipline, it is pointed out 
that the discretion of courts-martial, so far as any shall be 
ordered to deal with the cases of persons who fail or refuse to 
comply with lawful orders by reason of alleged religious or 
other conscientious scruples, should be exercised, if feasible, 
so as to secure uniformity of penalties in the imposition of 
sentences under Articles of War 64 and 65, for the wilful disobedience
 of a lawful order or command. It will be recognized
 that sentences imposed by such courts-martial, when not 
otherwise described by law, shall prescribe confinement in the 
United States Disciplinary Barracks or elsewhere as the Secretary
 of War or the reviewing authority may direct, but not 
in a penitentiary; but this shay not apply to the cases of men 
who desert either before reporting for duty to the military authorities
 or subsequently thereto. 

5. The Secretary of War will revise the sentences and 
finding of courts-martial heretofore held^of persons who come 
within any of the classes herein described, and i>ring to the 
attention of the President for remedy, if any be needed, 
sentences and judgments found at variance with the provisions 
hereof. 

[Signed] Woodbow Wilson. 

Local Boards composed of men of different temperaments 
have not ruled uniformly in cases where application has been 
made for deferred classification on account of religious belief. 
President Wilson, however, has provided for such contingency 
in tho aforementioned Executive Order, as follows: 

"Persons ordered to report for military service under 
the above Act . . . who object to participating in war 
because of conscientious scruples but have failed to receive 
certificates as members of a religious sect or organization 
from their Local Board, will ibe assigned to non-combatant 
military service as defined in paragraph 1 to the extent 
that such persons are able to accept service as aforesaid 
without violation of the religious, or other conscientious 
scruples by them in good faith entertained." 
It is not the province of The Watch T^web to tell any one 
what he should or should not do; but we can and do say that 
every Christian should be obedient to the law. The order of 
the President is a part of the Selective Draft Law. Where 
one in good faith has applied to the Local Board for classification
 and the Board has not issued to him a certificate granting 
non-combatant service, then when called he should readily respond
 to the call by going to the cantonment and presenting 
himself to the commanding officer, who, under the President's 
order, has the power and authority to issue to him a certificate 
assigning him to non-combatant service. 

The President further provides that it is the privilege of 
such conscientious objectors to request assignment to some 
branch of non-combatant service aside from the Medical Department
. 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


WRESTLING NOT WITH FLESH AND BLOOD 
Dear Brother; — 

Acting on advice I am writing to you of my experience with 
the fallen angels. 

For seven years my brain has been in a vise, my head 
feeling like a rock weighing thousands of pounds — a dull intense
, drawing sensation much worse than pain. My mind 
seems full of colors — green, yellow, blue, pink, and then suddenly
 the whole head will seem to turn blood-red, producing 
hysteria, intense fear, and my mind becomes flooded with 
thoughts vile beyond description, with a total absence of faith 
in God. On page 127 in Vol. 7 this same condition is described 
precisely. 

Will give you a brief synopsis of my life. At twelve I 
consecrated and joined the Methodist church, but becoming 


disgusted T backslid. Living in a lonely, desolate country town, 
nothing to think of besides eternal torment, very easily I fell 
prey to Spiritism. First it seemed a light frivolity, a mysterious
 truth, but I became deeper involved to the extent of 
developing into a clairaudient, clairvoyant, writing and trance 
medium, giving complete will to the good ( ?) spirits. In four 
years time I read extensively the Progressive ( ? ) Thinker , 
studied deeply "Occult Life of Jesus," — what a deadly insult 
to our dear Lord — and many books written by the "departed" ; 
at eighteen I found I was being made a dupe, because these 
people became weak, degenerate and immoral. My life was 
ahead of me. I dropped Spiritism like a hot cake but too late. 
An indefinite something began bothering me, affecting my 
mind. I next looked into Evolution, Reincarnation, New 
Thought, Palmistry, Phrenology, to drop them all as empty. 


[6262] 


May IS, 1913 


THE WATCH TOWER 


U5*-M6) 


Walking streets and fighting insanity, eventually in a public 
library I picked up "Science and Health." I read it — ah, 
here is the truth at last, I thought — was healed ( ?) almost 
instantly, laid off glasses and was transformed into another 
girl. I lived in the clouds for two years, joined the church 
and got along lovely with occasional trials which "Science" 
always met. Then I became wise to the fact that again I was 
duped. Two-thirds of these people made jackasses of themselves
, became silly, dishonest, and off their balance, and 
usually got some ailment, finally, which "Science" couldn't 
meet. Then one day suddenly my head went off. I fought 
desperately for thro* 1 years, was insane; tried thirtren different
 "Science" practitioners, all told me I waa "making something
 of it." Asking what "it" means, was told "it" was an 
illusion, a belief in another power opposed to God, principle. 
That left me in the dark, and I continued having violent raving
 spells. Next I tried medical doctors, chiropractors, etc., 
and finally went back to Christian Science but it was empty 
as a gourd and had a "missing link" which no one could explain
. Now I know this missing link to be found in Isaiah 
14th chapter, 12th to 14th verses, which clarifies the whole 
thing. 

After five years of thi3 misery and no solution anywhere, 
desperation followed and suicide was attempted different times. 
One Sunday at dinner table I suddenly felt myself taken hold 
of and pushed out. Like a flash I thought, "This is no illusion
, something having power and intelligence is possessing 
me"; but I knew not what it was and wont into a violent 
spell. But in that spell came a confession beginning with the 
words, "She has caught me. I have been here twenty years." 

Will not go into details. I had three spells in which this 
"thing" talked. It was vicious, evil-loving, sexless, nameless
, said it was thousands of years old and hated God; but 
"it" couldn't use me to do the worst of evils, which it cursed 
about. I was too high-minded. 

We all thought this was just delirium. A few weeks after 
a colporteur sister called with Volume I Scripture Studies. 
J was pacing the floor, putting down my hair, fighting this 
demon (as I now know). She pulled out the chart in front 
of "The Divine Plan of the Ages." Here was something I 
never looked into. I sat down, mother went out, and I fired 
questions at the sister, which she answered satisfactorily. She 
took up my case, read the volumes to me, and instructed me 
orally. Although the booklet on Spiritism was read, the 
friends did not credit the demon confession, but thought it 
was merely physical trouble. I again grew worse, felt abandoned
 and made a desperate effort at suicide, but failed. Then 
I said, "Lord, whoever thou art, I'll give myself to thee"; and 
I fully consecrated. A Seventh Volume, with page 127 marked 
was sent me through the mail. I was astounded at that page 
describing minutely my case. 

Some friends in this city who had experience with fallen 
angels heard of my case and tried to reach me to help. Events 
transpired that led me to come here to stay with them. I 
have been here five weeks studying, praying, making special 
study of Volume 7 and "Spiritism" booklet, but so far my 
"head" condition cannot be helped nor will the demon let me 
alone. It threatens, torments me and I have been thrown into 
several spells, which are less violent in the presence of God's 
people. Brother Bohnet was here and made my case a matter 
of special prayer. 

These demons seem in appearance to be beautiful, fascinating
, but their character is vile. They do not desire to return 
to their "first estate" and say they will do more and worse 
evils now, so many minds being open. Well, they are having 
their trial now, and if I must endure them foT a time what a 
help I may be, in the coming age, to the poor mental and moral 


wrecks that have been made by them! My prayer is for grace 
to endure if God doesn't see fit to remove this torture. It may 
be valuable some day, otherwise I would destroy myself. Please 
excuse mistakes. A presence at elbow, is being fought with to 
get this written — badly, I know, but will send it on. Too 
nervous to rewrite. 

May the dear Lord bless you and the dear Seventh Volume 
that is so misunderstood. I didn't accept it at first, but now 
it is the biggest comfort I ever had. 

Your sister in Christ, L. M. W. — Iowa. 

PEBSECUTED BY OEBMAN CLERGY 

Dear Brethren: 

You will be pleased, dear brethren, to know that the Lord's 
work is progressing here, notwithstanding the pressure of prevailing
 conditions. In Germany, however, the brethren report 
great difficulties, owing to the opposition of. the clergy, who are 
making their influence felt in a greater measure than ever 
before. But the truth is gaining headway nevertheless; the 
"atone" of Daniel's vision is rolling in upon and smashing one 
stronghold of the adversary after the other; and all who are 
truly the Lord's rejoice. 

Wishing you the Master's grace and continued blessing and 
praying that we may all be counted worthy of a share in the 
kingdom soon, I remain with much Christian love to you all, 

Your fellow servant in the Lord, 

C. C. Binkele, — Switzerland. 

STRENGTH FOB THE LAST STAND 

Dear Co-Laborers : 

I cannot refrain from asking a precious moment or two 
to express my appreciation of the recent Towers. 

After reading the greater portion of the last one (Apr. 
15th) aloud to Mother, whose eyes prevent her from reading 
much for herself, I exclaimed; "How can any one read that 
Tower and not read the spirit of Brother Russell and the 
spirit of Christ in every word of it? How can one help 
recognizing that God is using it to feed, strengthen, encourage, 
advise and sustain his little ones for their last, strong stand!" 

Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always by 
all means. The Lord be with you all. — 2 Thess. 3:16. 

Yours "hid with Christ in God," B. S. L.— N. Y. 

HOPES STILL BRIGHT IN FRANCE 
(Translation) 
Dear Brother Rutherford and Bethel Friends: 

Yesterday we, 21 brethren and sisters, had the blessed privilege
 of commemorating the death of our beloved Savior, our 
own participation in the experiences of his body and in the 
oup of suffering, while still waiting for the real participation 
in the kingdom. It is a sweet thing to think that under such 
circumstances as these we can remember the dear people of 
God scattered here and there over all the earth, and meditate 
upon the grand drama which has 'been in process of enaction 
for nineteen centuries. 

The friends at this place and in various other parts request
 me to advise you that we no longer receive the French 
Watch Tower, or other literature, from Geneva, on account 
of the restrictions on matter coming from Switzerland. Brother 
Freytagf informs us that he has taken the situation up with 
the military authorities, but we feel dubious about his success
. But we do thank the Lord for this much, that everything
 sent us from Brooklyn or from London has come to hand 
regularly. 

The Lord bless you and guard you and the other members
 of the Editorial Committee — such is our daily prayer. 

With much love, your brother in Christ, our Hope. 

Lequime Samuel. — France. 


WILFUL SINS OF THE WORLD 


Question: — Do you understand that the only sins which ttie 
sufferings of the great company will expiate on behalf of the 
world will be deliberate sins against the Lord's people? 

Answer: — Yes. 

Question: — Is it your opinion, then, that all other sins of 
the world will be ignored ; i. e., will be atoned for by the merit 
of Christ? 

Anstcer: — Yes; except that each man, as we have said, 
keeps an account in his own mind and his own body. Whoever 
violates the laws of nature brings the penalty upon himself, as 
a result of his course or his action. It ifl just as when one 
eats too much food at a meal, or eats what does not agree 
with him; he will have some distress, Borne impairment of 
health, whether he is a saint or a sinner. His discomfort will 


be the natural result of a lack of the exercise of proper judgment
 or of the necessary knowledge. It is a matter of judgment
 on God's part, an automatic penalty. 

We understand, however, that in the great time of trouble 
now coming upon the World, God is judging the nations as nations
; and, of course, this will mean much suffering to the 
individuals of the world. God's time has now come to supplant 
&\\ these earthly arrangements and institutions, based upon 
selfishness, and establish his own righteous government for the 
blessing of all mankind — the living and the dead. This procedure
 will be something unique, never before known. God will 
here judge down, judge to destruction, everything that is not 
in perfect harmony with his righteous laws. But it will be for 
man's good, even though involving much suffering and trouble, 


mm 


"BE INSTANT IN SEASON AND OUT OF SEASON* 


Recently the Society addressed a letter to all the classes 
suggesting that they put forth a special effort to advertise a 
large public meeting, on the topic "THE WORLD HAS ENDED
—MILLIONS NOW LIVING- WILL NEVER DIE." Some 
of the classes got the impression from the letter that we would 
send a Pilgrim to them for a Sunday appointment in the near 
future, and on the strength of this secured halls and wired us 
they were ready. The thought suggested in our letter, however, 
was that when a Pilgrim comes, whether on a Sunday or on a 
week day, each class should put forth a special effort for one 


public meeting on the above topic if possible. We find many 
people are anxious to hear this subject discussed. It was not 
our thought to send any special speakers Ipng distances to address
 merely Sunday meetings, but rather a special effort for 
public witness should be made in connection with all regular 
traveling and visiting Pilgrims' appointments, regardless of the 
day of the week on which their visits occur. lit us "preach 
the Word; be instant in season, out of season. " (2 Tim. 4:2) 
The time is short, the opportunities precious, the rewurd great 
and glorious! 


CANADIAN BRANCH OFFICE 


In a recent issue we announced the purpose of opening a 
braneh office in Canada. The office is now established. Please 
address all communications to Watch Toweb Bible and Tract 
Society, 143 Donald Street, Winnipeg, Manitoba. 

The duties of this branch office will be limited. Exchange 
is so excessive that we find it better to have an office in Canada
 to handle all financial matters pertaining to the work in 
that country. The Canadian branch will receive remittances 


for subscriptions to The Watch Tower, "Good Hopes*' and 
Tract Fund donations, orders for supplies, books, etc. Orders 
will be filled from there so far as possible. 

All Pilgrims will be routed from the Brooklyn office, a 
copy of the routing being furnished to the office in Canada. 
All requests for Pilgrims should be sent to the headquarters at 
Brooklyn. Arrangements for specially advertised public meetings
 will be made through the Canadian branch office. 


Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JUNE .1, 1918 


No. 11 


OUR PERFECT PATTERN 

"Consider him that endured suoh contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. 
not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin." — Hebrews 12:3,4. 


Ye have 


With increasing fury the storm is raging against the dear 
flock of God. Wild and wilder grows the gale; high and 
higher the waves are rising, beating against the walls of Zion. 
If God's children, weak, timid and inoffensive as they are, 
should look always at the storm, they would become faint in 
mind. Hence we do well, in this strenuous hour, to call to 
mind tluit Jesus is with his church in the storm. "Lo, I am 
with you, . . . even unto the end of the «age." "Fear not, 
little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you 
the kingdom." God in his perfect wisdom foreknew the experiences
 that would be the portion of those following Christ 
Jesus, and out of the abundance of his riches he made provision
 for their comfort and sustenance. Lest, then, we 
should become wearied in our minds from suffering superinduced
 by the storm or by the fiery chariot, let us come aside 
for a while and consider" him who led the way through which 
Christians must follow, Christians who will ultimately attain 
to the place of glory, honor and immortality. 

Because man violated God's fixed law, it was required of 
him that he should suffer the penalty. "The wages of sin is 
death." Man was perfect when he sinned. It was after the 
judgment upon him and after his imperfection begau that his 
children were brought forth. Hence all his offspring were 
"born in sin and shapen in iniquity." — Psalm 51:5; Genesis 
3:20. 

Satan was the moving cause of man's fall. Therefore we 
should expect Satan and the forces of darkness under his 
control to cause man to continue to suffer. It is also to be 
expected that every effort to relieve man from sin, sorrow, 
suffering and death would be opposed by this great archenemy
. When man was driven from Eden, God announced 
that there would be enmity between Satan and his seed and 
the seed of the woman. A subsequent part of God's Word 
discloses that the seed of the woman is to he the channel 
through which blessings will flow out to all mankind. The 
preparation of this seed according to the promise has been 
the great objective of God's plan for the past six thousand 
years. The importance of this seed, the position to be occupied
 and the work to be done, can be in pome measure approximated
 in our minds when we remember that Jehovah, 
the great Economist, has devoted so much time and treasure 
to the development of the seed of promise. 

WHO IS HE? 

That we might properly appreciate the one who suffered 
such a great contradiction of sinners, we call to mind that 
the first and only direct creation of Jehovah, was the Logos. 
By him all things were created that were thereafter made. 
It was to him that God offered the great honor of redeeming 
mankind, becoming the head of the creation*, and occupying 
the position of greatest honor in the universe, next to Jehovah. 
He was rich in heavenly glory and power, honor and dignity; 
but he left the courts of heaven and became a man and met 
all the requirements of the law and its penalty upon the 
sinner, in order that he might redeem man from death and 
ultimately bless him. 

Concerning the Logos the Apostle writes: "Though he 
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through 


his poverty might be rich/' (2 Corinthians 8:9) He took 
upon him the form and nature of man, being born of a woman, 
yet begotten by the power of Jehovah. He was made holy, 
harmless, without flaw or blemish. When he reached the age 
of thirty years, he was perfect as a man — perfect under the 
law, perfect in organism and mind. He came to this estate in 
order that he might carry out God's great plan for the redemption
 and blessing of humankind. Of him the Apostle 
says: "We see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the 
angels, for the suffering oi death, crowned with glory and 
hlonor; that he by the grace of God should taste death for 
every man. For it became him, for whom are all things and by 
whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to 
make the captain of their salvation perfect through Bufferings
." — Hebrews 2:9, 10. 

CONSECRATION BEINGS SUFFERING 

When Jesus reached the age of thirty years as a man, we 
find him at the Jordan consecrating himself to do his Father's 
will. Here he said: "Lo, I come (in the volume of the book 
it is written of me) to do thy will, God." (Hebrews 10:7) 
God's will was expressed in his law. It was the will of God 
that mankind should be redeemed by a perfect human life 
given as a ransom for the perfect human life of Adam, forfeited
 by disobedience. The ransomer must take the place 
of the sinner. He must suffer and die as a sinner. 

Satan had caused the suffering and death by his wrongful 
course. Immediately after the consecration of Jesus he went 
into. the wilderness, and there we find Satan tempting him. 
Jesus had come to do a good work, the best work for mankind; 
and Satan was there to resist him in that work. The sufferings
 of Jesus began at that time, and continued until upon 
the cross at Calvary he cried: "It is finished!" 

During the three and one-half years of his earthly ministry
 Jesu3 taught concerning his coming kingdom which would 
bring blessings to all that would accept it. Jesus did injury 
to no one. He did only good. He gave the most wonderful 
demonstration of love ever manifested before men or angels. 

The Jewish nation was under a covenant with God, who 
had provided amongst them a priestly class. Satan had 
overreached this class. They had become selfish and had 
formed themselves into a company separate and distinct from 
the common people. They were the clergy of that day. Satan 
used them to persecute our Lord. Instead of being used as 
instruments in God's hand to carry out his purposes, they 
became instruments of persecution, causing the sufferings of 
the Master. Jesus was born a Jew under the law. He came 
to his own people and they received him not. "He was despised
 and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted 
with grief.'* The leaders of the people, the Pharisaical elemenfr
—the clergy of tliat time — in substance said: "We do 
not want this man; we w T ill have nothing to do with him. 
His pious attitude is a stench in our nostrils." 

Jesus did not seek honor, at the hands of men; but, on 
the contrary, as it is written of him, "He made himself of no 
reputation." At the expense of his vitality he went about 
healing the sick, opening the eyes of the blind, teaching those 
who were teachable and doing good unto all as he had op- 


(163-164) 


[6264] 


Junk 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TO WER 


(164-165) 


portunity. Instead of being received and well-treated by the 
leaders of the people, he was denounced as a vile person, as 
a sinner, as a blasphemer of God's holy name. He was haled 
before the civil authorities and charged with sedition. False 
witnesses were produced against him, and he was unjustly 
convi-oted as a traitor. He died the most cruel and ignominious
 death, being hanged on a tree. From man's standpoint 
he was accursed Doth of God and of men. He died as a 

Slimen T77HY FEBSEOTTTED 

Why should leading men of the Jewish nation seek the 
life of Jesus? Why should they induce the rulers to put him 
to death, since he was guilty of no wrong? The Apostle Peter, 
after his mind was illuminated, answers: "I know, brethren, 
that it was in ignorance you did it, as was the case with your 
rulers also." (Acts 3:17) Jesus was teaching the people 
that life and blessings can come to mankind only through 
his kingdom. He had taught them, saying, "When ye pray, 
say, Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is 
done in heaven." The people did not understand him. They 
could not understand him. They regarded him as an enemy 
of the government and as a blasphemer of God's name. Hence 
they caused him to die. 

But why would God permit this? The Scriptures answer 
in substance that it was necessary for our Lord to suffer and 
die in order to become the Redeemer of mankind. It was 
necessary for him to pass through trying eircumistajices, fiery 
trials and sufferings, that he mignt be perfected as a new 
creature on the divine plane. He must have certain experiences
 in order to sympathize with the weaknesses of humankind
. "Wherefore, in all things it behooved him to be made 
like unto hi3 brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful
 high priest in things pertaining to God, to make satisfaction
 for the sins of the people j for in that he himself hath 
suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are 
tempted," — Hebrews 2:17, 18. 

From the time of Jesus* fasting in the wilderness immediately
 following his consecration, he knew that he must 
suffer and die. But the suffering and death did not deter 
him at all in his course; for he was carrying out his father's 
plan. He had the Father's promise that, if faithful to his consecration
 vow, he should ultimately possess the divine nature 
and be the head of the new creation; that he would be the 
Redeemer of mankind; that he would have with him his bride 
in due time; and that he would have the full satisfaction of 
carrying out the Father's will. All this was joy to him. 
Hence the Apostle said: "For the joy that was set before 
him, [he] endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set 
down at the right hand of, the throne of God." (Hebrews 
12:2) By willingly passing through the fiery trials aad 
sufferings, he showed a complete humility, a faith .sublime, 
and perfect love. As a reward for this, Jehovah has granted 
him the highest position in the universe, God excepted. 

HIS BODY MEMBERS 

Before the foundation of the world it was a part of Jehovah
's plan that the Lord Jesus should have associated 
with him 144,000 glorious creatures, and that these should 
be selected from amongst men, participating in the first resurrection
 and and sitting with Christ Jesus upon his throne, 
It follows, then, that the ones composing the members of his 
body should participate in his suffering. Concerning this, 
the Apostle says: "For even hereunto were ye called: because
 Christ also suffered for ug, leaving us an example, that 
ye should follow his steps." (1 Peter 2:21) Thus in him 
we have a perfect pattern, and it becomes our privilege to 
follow this pattern. 

At Pentecost the selection of the body members began ^ 
and it has progressed, according to the "perfect wisdom of 
Jehovah, through a period of more than eighteen centuries. 
In the Scriptures this elect class is designated under many 
titles, namely, the body of Christ, the bride, the royal priesthood
, the seed according to the promise, etc. As Satan resisted
 and persecuted Jesus, so he has resisted and persecuted, 
through his various instrumentalities, the members of the 
body of Christ. Often he has U9ed as his instruments misguided
 men who had good intentions, who thought they were 
doing God service. Amongst these was Saul of Tarsus, who 
stood by at the stoning of St. Stephen and approved his death. 
Here again we find the' various sects stirring up the people 
and bringing the charge of sedition and blasphemy against 
Steohen. They produced witnesses who were hired to swear 
against him, who testified that he spoke blasphemous words 
against the holy place and the law, saying, "This Jesus of 
Nazareth shall destroy this place, and. shall change the customs
 which Moses delivered to us." (Acts 6:9-14) St. 
Stephen was the first martyr to follow Jesus. 


SUFFERINGS OF ST. PAUL 

Subsequently Saul of Tarsus came to a knowledge of the 
truth and made a full consecration to do God's will. He saw 
that he had wrongfully persecuted other Christians. Before 
St. Paul was permitted to enter upon his ministry as a servant
 of the Lord, God -sent Ananias to minister unto him, and 
spoke concerning Paul, saying, "He is a chosen vessel unto 
me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the 
children of Israel \ for I will show him how great things he 
must suffer for my name's sake." — Acts 9:15, 16. 

Thus we see that the Lord has made it absolutely essential
 that all who are privileged to be with Christ Jesus 
in his kingdom of glory must suffer with him. The subsequent
 experiences of St, Paul show how fully helmet these requirements
. Speaking of his own sufferings, the Apostle 
says: "Oi the Jews five times received I forty stripes save 
one ; thrice was I beaten with rods ; once was I stoned ; 
thrice I suffered shipwreck; a night and a day 1 have been in 
the deep; in joumeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils 
of robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the 
heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in 
perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren; in weariness 
and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in 
fastings often, in cold and nakedness/"'— 2 Cor. 11:24-27. 

Following the U3uai course, the Apostle, because of his 
faithfulness in declaring the message of Messiah's kingdom, 
the resurrection of the dead and the blessings that will flow 
eo mankind during the reign of Christ, was called in question. 
Like the Lord and Master, his purpose was masunderstood. 
He was charged with sedition and with stirring up the people
; and the clergy element of the Jews sought to kill him 
and incited others to do likewise. But the Lord preserved 
him and made him a great witness to God's cause, and his 
testimony has lighted the world for centuries and has been 
a beacon light to guide Christians on to the full consummation
 of their hopes. 

Doubtless St. Paul often considered how Jesus, the perfect 
one, had patiently endured such contradiction of sinners 
against himself; and doubtless, considering, it had brought 
him great strength of faith and confidence, which sustained 
him in the hours of suffering. As a new creature, he appreciated
 that his treasure was in an earthen vessel, which 
mu&t perish before he eouJd receive the glorious body. In that 
earthen vessel he suffered; yet he rejoiced in his suffering. 
We hear him say; '*We are troubled on every side, yet not 
distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, 
but not forsaken ; cast down, but not destroyed ; always 
bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that 
the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. 
For we which live are always delivered unto death for Jesus' 
sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in 
our mortal flesh/* — 2 Corinthians 4:8-11. 

CHBISTIAK'S COURSE OEBTAIN 

The true Christian is one who follows in the footsteps 
of his Master. Every one, then, who has made a full consecration
 and appreciates it, realizes that his course in the present
 life is not one of ease and comfort to the flesh. It is not 
one that brings honors and plaudits of men. On the contrary, 
he is certain to receive the disapproval of men, particularly 
those in the ecclesiastical class who worship God in name only, 
and who possess the spirit of the world. Throughout the 
entire Gospel age there have been many who have claimed 
to follow Christ, yet who have been wolves in sheep's clothing, 
and who have preyed upon the members of the flock. 

The unalterable course of the Christian is marked out by 
Jehovah; and this course is not one of ease. All who enter 
the narrow way must understand that they leave behind their 
earthly hopes and prospects. Concerning this, Jehovah said*: 
"Hearken, daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; 
forget also thine own people, and thy father's h«~use; so shall 
the King greatly desire thy beauty ." (Psalm 45:10, 11) Thus 
clearly is shown that one cannot serve the Lord in faithfulness
 and declare the message of hi3 kingdom and at the same 
time receive the approval or plaudits of mankind. Jesus 
made this plain: "The disciple is not above his master, nor 
the servant above his lord. It is enough for the disciple that 
he be as his master, and the servant as hi3 lord. If they have 
called the master of the house Beelzebub, how mueh more 
shall they call them of his household? Behold, I send you 
forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise 
as serpents, and harmless as doves." — Matthew 10:10, 24, 25. 
THE "FEB¥» XEXBXSRS OP CHUBT 

It becomes the duty of every footstep follower of Jesus to 
declare the message of his kingdom. (Isaiah 61:1-3) A 
failure or refusal to make known this message of the kingdom 
would prove disloyalty to the Lord and unworthiness to be 


[6265] 


(166 167) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N, Y. 


called his disciples. The world in general cannot understand 
such a course of the Christian; for the* message of glad tidings
 concerning the kingdom is hid from them. The reason 
for it is -given by the Apostle, who says: "The god of this 
world [Satan] hath blinded the miinds of them which believe 
not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is 
the image of God, should shine unto them." (2 0orinthian3 
4:4) Again he says: "The natural man receiveth not the 
things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; 
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned
." — 1 Corinthians 2:14. 

Thus we see that the great adversary blinds the minds 
of men who understand not Che purposes of God, and leads 
them to believe that Christians are their enemies; and that 
any one who faithfully proclaims the message of Messiah's 
kingdom is a dangerous person. It has ever been thus; and 
Jehovah has availed himself of this condition to permit the 
followers of Jesus to suffer fiery experiences in order to develop
 the beautiful character which alone will be pleasing 
to him in his kingdom. All these fiery trials are trials of 
the faith of the Christian. The Apostle Peter likens this 
trial unto gold being refined by fire. Clay is not put in the 
crucible for the purpose of making jewels; but the heat of 
the crucible is used to refine the gold. Hence, "the trial of 
your faith, being much more precious than that of gold which 
perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto 
praise and honor and glory at the revelation of Jesus Christ." 
—1 Peter 1:7. 

The Christian whose faith is made strong by a knowledge 
of the precious promises of God's .Word and by a confident 
reliance upon them, can understand why he is misunderstood 
and persecuted by the world; and so understanding it he 
maintains a feeling of compassion and pity for his persecutors
. As Jesus says: "If the world hate you, ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, 
the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the 
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the 
world hateth you." — .John 15:18, 19. 

Jehovah made it clear that the seed of Satan would bruise 
the "heel" of the seed of promise. (Genesis 3:15) The Scriptures
 point out that the last members of the body of Christ 
on earth would be the feet members. Having in mind the 
figure of a human body entering the kingdom, we perceive 
that the heel would be the very last member passing over. 
Then we should have reason to expect some special persecution 
of Christians in the end of the age and some sufferings peculiar
 to that time. It would not be at all strange to find 
many of these accused of sedition, of stirring up the people 
and being against the government. If the adversary used 
this means to blind the people concerning Jesus and concerning
 St. Stephen and St. Paul, it is entirely reasonable to conclude
 that similar methods would be used against the last 
members of the body. 

CHRISTIAKS MISUNDERSTOOD 

The Harvest period of the Gospel age began particularly 
in 1878. Since then, the Lord's people have been gathered 
out from every denomination in the land and from the world 
and, fully consecrating themselves to follow in the Master's 
footsteps, have been striving thus to do. Calmly, yet boldly 
and fearlessly, they have declared the message of Messiah's 
kingdom. They have sincerely prayed the prayer that Jesus 
taught them: "Thy kingdom come; thy will be done on 
earth as it is done in heaven," Tt is manifest that with the 
coming of Messiah's kingdom the present order of thing3 
must pass away. Therefore those who declare this message 
;iro misunderstood. The Scriptures indicate that they would 
be considered as being against war, because of their faithfulness
 to the Lord. — Jeremiah 38:4. 

If the Lord was misunderstood, if . the apostles were misunderstood
, why should we not expect the last members on 
earth to he misunderstood? At a time when there is "distress 
of nations, men's hearts failing them for fear and for looking 
lifter the things coming upon the world," it would be expected 
that Christians would be misunderstood. And thus it is. 
Jesus was asked" what would be an evidence of the end of the 
world and of his presence and of the establishment of his 
kingdom. Amongst other answers, he said, "Nation shall rise 
in arms against nation, kingdom against kingdom; and there 
shall be famines and pestilences and earthquakes [literal and 
symbolic] in various places. At that time they will deliver 
you up to punishment and will put some of you to death; 
and you will be objects of hatrod of all the nations because 
you are called by my name. Then will many stumble and 
fall; and they will betray one another and hate one another. 
Many false preachers will rise np and lead multitudes astray; 
and because of the prevalent disregard of God's law, the love 


of the greaL majority will grow cold. But those who stand 
firm to the end shall be saved. And this good news of the 
kingdom [kingdom news] shall be proclaimed throughout the 
whole world to set an evidence before the Gentiles [the peoples 
of earth, all of which are representd in America] ; and then 
the end will come." 

There is no nation, no sect, no ecclesiastical organization 
on the earth today, that loves the faithful follower of Jesus. 
Hence we have a clear fulfillment of the Lord's prophecy. 
Satan's kingdom is falling. The demons are loose, and the 
forces of evil are arrayed in the final conflict against the last 
members of the Christ on earth. Jesus plainly stated that 
Babylon would become the habitation of demons and that 
from these agencies the persecution would come. 

"The kingdom of heaven is at hand." Never were these 
words so true before. Those who enter the kingdom henceforth
 must enter shortly. Shall we expect tribulation now? 
"We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of 
God." {Acts 14:22) Are you among those who have been 
experiencing special trials and tribulations in recent days? 
Have you witnessed the fulfillment of the prophetic statement
 of God* 3 Word relating to the closing of the age? What, 
then, should be our attitude? Jesus answered: "When these 
things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your 
heads; for your redemption [deliverance] draweth nigh." 
(Luke 21:28) Shall we fear what man can do unto us? 
Jesus answers: "Fear not them which kill the body, but are 
not able to kill the soul [the new creature]. . . . Are not 
two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not 
fall on the ground without your Father, But the very hairs 
of your heads are all numbered. Fear ye not tnerefore; ye 
are of more value than many sparrows. Whosoever therefore 
shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before 
my Father which is in heaven." — Matthew 10:26-33. 

The Psalmist in beautiful poetic phrase refers to the time 
of stress upon the Christians in the close of their earthly 
career. He describes them as praying unto God when they 
are about to be overflowed by the great floods of the peoples, 
and that by faith they can hear, wafted back from the angels 
of heaven, the sweet songs of deliverance. "For this shall 
every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou 
mayest be found; surely in the floods of great waters they 
shall not come nigh unto him. Thou art my hiding place; 
thou shalt preserve me from trouble; thou shalt compass me 
about with songs of deliverance." — Psalm 32:6, 7. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S ATTITUDE TOWARD THE WORLD 

What, then, should be the attitude of the Christian toward 
those who engage in persecuting him? Shall the Christian 
bo resentful? It is written concerning Jesus, "When he was 
reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened 
not; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously." 
(1 Peter 2:23) The servant must be like unto his Master. 
(Romans 8:29) The world is blind to God's purposes. The 
dark night is settling down. There is stress amongst the 
peoples. But, thanks be to God! ere long the Sun of Righteousness
 will arise with healing in its beams, dispelling this 
darkness; and then, gradually, the peoples will understand. 

Let us remember that the end of all things hath approached
, 'ihcrefore let us be of sober mind and watch and 
pray, looking to the time of our full deliverance into the 
glorious light of the kingdom of our God. If we are subjected
 to fiery trials and sufferings, what, then, should be 
our attitude? The Apostle answers: "Our light affliction, 
which is but a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things 
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for 
the things w T hich are seen are temporal, but the things w T hich 
jire not seen are eternal." — 2 Corinthians 4:17, 18. 
GLORIES ETERNAL 

The glories that await the faithful cannot be described by 
human tongue or pen. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 
neither hath entered into the heart of man the things which 
God hath prepared for them that love him." ( 1 Corinthians 
2:9) "It doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know 
that when he shall appear we shall be like him; for we shall 
see him as he is." (1 John 3:2) "God hath appointed him 
heir of all things." (Hebrews 1:2), and hath provided that 
the members of his body be heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Christ Jesus, "if so be that we* suffer with him, that we may 
be also glorified together. 'VKomans 8:17. 

By the eye of faith, then, we contemplate the glories of 
the kingdom; and this we can do in a measure only by comparison
. We ascend into the mountain top at the dawn of 
morning and gaze upon the broad expanse below. We mark 
the broad meadows, the green trees, the placid waters of the 
rivers, flowing on through their winding course to the great 


[6266] 


Ji-ns 1, 1913 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(167-lfiS) 


ocean. We mark the blooming flowers, sprinkled with dewdrops
 which lighted by the morning sun, sparkle like diamond* 
in the crown of a queen. We listen to the sweet song-birds, 
and all' nature seems to join in to praise the great Creator, 
And we exclaim, How glorious! How beautiful! And yet 
this does not begin to approximate the glory and beauty of 
the kingdom. 

Silently we meditate upon God's Word as we stand upon 
the brink of the mighty ocean. We see its waves tossing the 
ship like a cockleshell; and we marvel at the power thus 
manifested. And yet this does not begin to approximate the 
power of the Lord in his wonderful kingdom shortly to be 
established. 

At night we gaze into the starlit heaven above. We behold
 the innumerable planets moving silentlv through space; 
ami we exclaim, in the language of the Psalmist, "The heavens 
deelaTe the glory of God, and the firmament sboweth his 
handiwork \ i} We mark the diversified wisdom of Jehovah; 
and then we remember that his wisdom is here expressed in 
a small degree compared to what it will be when made manifest
 to member a of the kingdom. We have in mind that those 
thus glorified with the King shall dwell eternally in the 
house of the Lord to behold the beauty of Jehovah and to 
inquire in his temple. 

EXHORTATION TO HOLD FAST 

We remember some of the promises of God concerning the 
beauty of those who shall compose the kingdom class. We 
are told that these shall shine forth a3 the brightness of the 
sun in the firmament. For the encouragement of God's people
 while they are passing through the valley of the shadow 
of death, Jehovah holds before them the exceeding great and 
precious promises. Among these is recorded: "All nations 
shall see thy righteousness and all the kings thy glory; and 
men shall call thee by a new name which the mouth of the 
Lord shall pronounce. And thou shalt be a crown of ornament
 in the hand of the Lord and a royal diadem in the hand 


of thy God." (Isaiah G2:2, 3. — Leeser ) Now misunderstood, 
debpi^ed of all nations and looked upon with scorn; but when 
the kingdom of Messiah is established, all the peoples and 
nations of the earth will know that this one and that one 
was born in Zion. Thus has God promised when the record 
shall be written up. (Psalm 87:5) Now they are known 
by a name that is a by-word; then to be called by a new 
name which the mouth of God shall pronounce. 

The Christ, head and body members, when complete, will 
be the crowning feature of God's creation thus far made manifest
. The prophet describes them as a crown and a diadem 
in the hand of God. The crown represents authority; the 
diadem, to which the crown is fastened, pictures regal or 
kingly authority. Thus it is represented symbolically that 
the faithful ones shall be kings and priests unto God and 
unto Christ and reign with him; and that God will exhibit to 
all creatures in the ages to come this monument of his grace. 

Having in mind the glories and beauties of the kingdom, 
we can with the Apostle exclaim, "I rejoice to fill up that 
which is behind of the sufferings of Christ for his body's 
sake, which is the church." (Colossians 1:24) Be of good 
courage, then, dear brethren. Be not dismayed. May we not 
now truly say with the Apostle, "I have fought the good fight, 
I have kept the faith" ? And if so, if our work here is finished 
and. we have proven faithful, we may know that in a little 
while we shall see God face to face, behold his glory and 
beauty and rejoice with exultant joy, 

"Come all ye saints to Pisgah J s mountains, 

Come view our home beyond the tide; 
Millennial Canaan is before us, 

Soon we'll sing on the other side, 
Oh, there see the white throne of glory, 

And crowns which the saints then shall gain! 
And all who shall love Christ's appearing, 

Shall be bless'd by his glorious reign." 


RENDERING GOOD WITHOUT OFFENSE 

''Ye may he the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good; and 

sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust." — Matthew 5:45. 


It is one of the blessed privileges of the real children of 
God to be always free to do good. The children of the divine 
Father are led by the spirit of divine love. (Romans 8:14) 
They enjoy that liberty of the sons of God at present denied 
to a world lying in the evil one, but into which in due time — 
shortly we believe the whole world will be. inducted. As aa-ya 
the Word: "The earnest expectation [the good things earnestly
 desired] of creation [of all created beings] waiteth for 
the manifestation [in glory and in power to bless] of the sons 
of God [the divinely begotten children of the God of love] . 
Because creation itself also [as well as the children] shall be 
delivered from the bondage of corruption [of death and of 
evil conditions, ideas, thoughts and feelings] into the glorious 
liberty of the children of God." — Romans 8:19, 21. 

LIBERTY WHEREWITH C HEIST MAKES FREE 

Laws are for the restraint oi beings in bondage to hatred, 
en\y y covetousness, wrath, lasciviousness, selfish ambition and 
other fruitage of fallen flesh. (Galatians 5:19-21) . But if 
any 'be led by the spirit, they are not under the law,' and 
their character-fruitage will be "love, joy, peace long-suffering, 
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, self-control.'* Against 
the children of God, animated by such a spirit there is and 
can be no law. (Galatians 5:22, 23) "For he that in these 
things serveth Christ is acceptable to God, and approved of 
men." (Romans 14:18) If good men do not approve of Jehovah
's children it is because they do not understand them, 
or because they regard over- much the inevitable errors which 
may be sequels to the best of intentions — tr For that [evil] 
which I do I allow not; but what I hate, that do I. It i3 no 
more I that do it, but sin [imperfection — the fallen conditio*] 
that dwelleth in me. For in me (that is, in my flesh) dwelleth
 no good thing; for to will [to do perfectly] is present 
with me; but bow to perform that which is good, I find not. 
I delight in the law of God [the royal law of love] after the 
inner man [the new mind] ; but I see another law in my 
[imperfect fleshly] members, warring against the law of my 
[new] mind, and bringing me [who purpose and try to do the 
very best] into captivity to the law of sin which is in my 
members." (Romans 7:15-23) So when God's children, among 
whom was the great Apostle Paul, try their very best, they 
necessarily do and say many things in ways unpleasing to 
even the best of men, and not approved by them. 

Not only is the flesh fallen, but the brain and mind are 
imperfect. How poor are our memories! How faultily we 

[6267] 


grasp and understand things said and done! How deficient 
all are in so acting and speaking as fully to measure up to 
even customary conditions. Then when conditions change, 
how slow are our minds in seeing the change and in understanding
 its significance. But with conditions changing from 
day to day how important that all should know about the 
changes, so as to be prepared to think and act appropriately. 

As a rule, when good-minded people come to understand 
the real good intention and effort back of imperfect actions, 
they make the proper allowance, and approve those who are 
trying to do good. The new creature in Christ Jesus, being 
absolutely well-intentioned in everything, is subject to none 
of the laws directed at the ill-intentioned. Being full of the 
divine spirit of love he has a true Christian love for everyone 
and tries to lay down even his life for his fellow sons of God, 
and as, he can, for all men. "A3 we have opportunity, let us 
do good unto all, especially unto them who are of the household
 of faith." — Galatians 6:10. 

The true Christian has liberty to do anything that can be 
done in the spirit of Christian love. His compass ever points 
to the star of divine love. The loving Master said to his 
disciples: "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye 
love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one 
another." (John 13:34) So the "faithful Christian always 
tries to avoid doing evil, and to do only that which is good. 
However much his course may seem to alter in direction, 
divine love is and remains his lode-star. He may, under 
varying natural conditions, in matters not of principle, do 
one thing today and the direct opposite tomorrow. He may 
appear inconsistent in Ms acts, but to God his heart is always
 consistent. As to principle a Christian is faithful, 
but in the application of a principle to given cases, the resultant
 action may vary as widely as the conditions and circumstances
 of the cases, 

ESSENTIALS, UNITY—NON-ESSENTIALS, CHARITY 

There are certain principles, such as the "ransom for all/' 
which are forever vital, but certain subordinate principles 
may from time to time, with changed conditions, new information
, or a new viewpoint be clearly seen to be not necessarily
 vital. It was vital for a Hebrew to keep himself Levitically
 undefiled, but after Pentecost this was no longer a vital 
principle; it was vital that no one but a priest eat the "shewbread
" ; but "David when he was an hungered, entered into 
the house of the Lord and did eat the shewbread, which was 


(168-169) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


not lawful for him to eat, but only for the priests." (Matthew 
12:3, 4} It is vital, according to Paul, for brothers in Christ 
to "avoid contentions" (Titus 3:0); but "Paul thought not 
good to take him [John Mark] with them, who departed from 
them from Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work. 
And the contention was so sharp between them, that they 
[Barnabas and Paul, who had 'lived in all good conscience 
before God' — Acts 23:1] departed asunder one from the other." 
—Acts 15:38, 39. 

In apostolic times some Christians made it a matter of 
principle to "observe the days, months, times and years" 
(Galatians 4:10) of the Hebrew ritual; others did not. "One 
-believed that he might eat all things; another who was weak 
[in the faith] eateth herbs." (Romans 14:2) "And," says 
Paul, "he that doubteth is damned [judged] if he eat, because
 he eateth not of faith [with confidence that it is 
proper] ; for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin." (Romans 
14:23) In modern times one Christian can eat pork, another
 can not; one can observe Sunday, another Saturday, and 
still another can keep all days holy to God; one can engage 
in temperance work, another cannot; one can own an automobile
, another cannot. At one time a Christian feels unable 
to do certain things; later, with additional knowledge or 
thought, he can do them with a good conscience. 

A Christian might not have been able conscientiously to 
engage in the military activities of a country offering only 
combatant service; later, when the opportunity is enlarged. 
bo that he may choose some good work such as the hospital 
or amouiance service, he may with a free conscience take 
such service. A Christian to whom may have been presented 
the perverted viewpoint that the Red Gross work is only the 
aiding of that killing which is against his conscience, cannot 
help the Red Cross; then he gains the broader viewpoint that 


the Red Cross is the embodiment of helping the helpless, and 
he finds himself able and willing to help the Red Gross according
 to ability and opportunity. A Christian, unwiumg 
to kill, may have been conscientiously unable to buy government
 bonds ; later he considers what great blessings he has received
 under his government, and realizes tnat the nation is 
in trouble and facing dangers to its liberty, and he feels himself
 conscientiously able to lend some money to the country, 
just as he would lend to a friend in distress. 

The Christian with the broadest mrnd is the one who is 
best informed Scripturally. That Christian who is able to 
see from but one viewpoint is in danger of being what St. 
Paul calls "weak," in the sense that his inability to see all 
around a question limits his sphere of action. Narrowmindedness
 invites troubles and persecutions for causes not 
even indirectly connected with true Christianity. Such trouble 
may usually well be avoided, and should be avoided m order 
that such trials or persecutions which are our portion may 
come upon the clear-cut issue of faithfulness in the consecrated
 life and not for other causes. The true footstep follower
 of Christ will have enough to suffer as a Christian. 
He will do his best to study all sides of every question and 
remove from himself causes for offense, other than his truly 
Christian and religious beliefs and principles which are vital, 

"If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are 
ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you; on 
their part he [Christ in you] is evil spoken of, but on your 
part [in you as a new creature] he is glorified; but let none 
of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, 
or as a busybody in other men's affairs. Yet if any man suffer 
as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify 
God on this behalf."— 1 Peter 4:14-16. 


FAITH 

[This poem was a reprint of that which appeared in issue of June 15, 1917, which please see.] 


PRAYING TO GOD 

[Paragraphs 1, 2 and 23 of this article, as it originally appeared in issue of June 1, 1918, were reprinted from article entitled
, "Lord Teach Us to Pray," published in issue of July 1, 1906, which please sec] 

July 21.— Luke 11:1-13; Psa. 145:18, 19. 
who are privileged to pray how we may "pray without ceasing" — a model prayer, — its ascriptions of praise— expressions
 of confidence in god's promised kingdom — acknowledgment of oub dependence upon 3iim — confidence in 
his power to protect us and finally to deliver us — pbopkb attitude toward the expediences of liff — purpose 
of prayer — request for the holy spirit the essence of our petitions. 
"Let us therefore draw near with boldness unto the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and may 
find grace to help in time of need." — Hebrews 4:16. 
The advanced Christian should be so fully in accord with tions respecting times, seasons, dress, etc., to be observed by 


the Father, the Son and the divine program that his entire 
life will be a prayer and a song of praise. He will have in 
his mind primarily the thought, 'What is God's will in this 
matter?' The heart that is thus ever looking for divine direction
 in all of life's affairs is thus continuously in an attitude
 of prayer; and no other condition is proper to the 
Christian.— Prov. 3:6; Psalm 37:4. 

WHO IS PBIVTLEGED TO SAY, "OUB FATHER''' 

Only those who have become children of God by forsaking 
sin and laying hold upon Christ as their Savior are accorded 
the privilege of approaching the throne of grace to obtain 
mercy and to find grace sufficient for their time of need. Only 
those who are accepted in the Beloved are privileged to call 
Jehovah God by the endearing name, "Our Father who art in 
heaven." The attempt thus to approach God implies (1) 
faith in him; (2) realization of dependence upon him; (3) 
faith that a way of reconciliation with him has been effected 
through our Redeemer; (4) realization that God no longer 
condemns the suppliant, but accepts him as a son. Moreover, 
it implies that the suppliant recognizes the fact that there 
are other sons of God who, like himself, have fled from sin 
and been adopted into God's family; for tne petition begins, 
"our Father," not "my Father." 

Therefore whoever thus addresses God must have concern 
for all the interests of the family of God. Whatever selfishness
 he might formerly have had he must divest himself of 
when he comes to the" Father, and must realize himself as 
merely one of the favored class of sons thus privileged. It 
is in harmony with this thought that all of the Lord's consecrated
 people have special pleasure when permitted to approach
 the throne of grace together, whether but two or three 
or in laTger numbers. 

The more clearly we recognize that tiK privilege of prayer 
is an exclusive one, the more we shall be inclined to use it 
in a most reverent manner. The kings of earth make regulathose
 who wish to enter their presence; and all who have a 
proper appreciation of the majesty of the King Eternal, the 
only true God, will approach in a worshipful, reverent spirit, 
implied in the expression: <f Hallowed be thy name." Our 
holy God is to be revered. His sacred name stands for everything
 that i3 just, wise and loving. 

THE KINGDOM FOK WHICH WE PEAT 

In the older manuscripts the words, "Thy will be done, as 
in heaven so in earth," are not found in Luke's Gospel, but in 
Matthew's. They are therefore properly to be considered a 
part of the petition. Be it noted, however, that while this 
petition as it stands is appropriate enough as a prayer, it 
evidently was not our Lord's intention that "these words should 
continually be used as the only petition at the throne of grace, 
but rather he gave it as a sample. The various items of this 
prayer should therefore be to the Lord's people a suggestion 
of the general character of their petitions, and not understood 
as binding their terms, their expressions, their words. 

The thoughts of true disciples are directed to the fact 
that the present condition of sin and death is not to be everlasting
; that God has provided for a glorious kingdom through 
his Son and the church, his bride, under which all evil will be 
conquered and brought under complete subjugation to righteousness
. Those in proper heart relationship to the Lord 
must recognize thi3 fact, and be so separated from the spirit 
of this world that they will long for the installation of the 
reign of righteousness, even though they know T that this will 
imply the overthrow of the present order. Their hearts are 
so in accord with the Lord that they are out of accord with 
every form, institution and vine not of the Father's righthand
 planting. (Isaiah 60:21) Longing for the Kingdom 
that will bless the world, they also long for the promised 
privilege of being joint-heirs with their Redeemer as members
 of that kingdom class which shall bless the world and 
uplift mankind out of sin and death. 


[6268] 


Juws 1, 1918 


THE \VA TCH TO WER 


U70-17H 


PROVISION FOE ALL OUR NECESSITIES 

The next petition is for our needful bread. There is no 
attempt here to supplicate delicacies, but merely an expression
 of trust in the Lord and of confidence that he will provide
, in harmony with his promise that our bread and our 
water shall be sure. (Isaiah 33:1(5) Indeed, when we remember
 our Master's words, that the heathen have in mind 
what they shall eat, drink and wear, but that the heavenly 
Father knows what things we have need of (Matthew 6:31- 
33), we perceive that to the spirit-begotten and developed 
Christian these words respecting daily bread imply more 
particularly the spiritual food than the earthly food. Provision
 for all our necessities, both temporal and spiritual, according
 to divine wisdom, is briefly summed up in this petition
. 

To suppose that the Master is merely referring to the natural
 food w T ould imply that the petitioners were merely natural
 men; whereas we have seen that the prayer was taught 
only to those who were about to become new creatures in 
Christ by a covenant to walk in his steps in the narrow way. 
Therefore it must be understood that it is the new creature 
who is offering the .petition; ar.d this w T ill imply that it is the 
nourishment of the new creature winch is here chiefly under 
consideration, with whatever provision for temporal necessities
 the heavenly Father may see best. This is distinctly 
brought to our attention in Luke 11:13, wherein the heavenly 
Father is represented as dispensing the holy Spirit, the spiritual
 blessings and experiences which develop in his children 
his own spirit, the spirit of the truth, the spirit of the Lord. 
GOD'S MEEOT PROPORTIONATE TO OURS 
"Forgive us our sins; for we also forgive everyone that is 
indebted to us." The sins here referred to, or a-s in Matthew 
"debts," are in no way related to original sin, which we are 
not to pray to havo forgiven, but which the heavenly Father 
has already made provision to forgive unconditionally to 
those who accept Christ. Original sin is not forgivable, as 
that word is generally used. But God in his mercy provided 
w Redeemer; and so we read: "Christ died for our sins according
 to the Scriptures/' (1 Corinthians 15:3) He is the 
propitiation for our sins, the Just for the unjust, to bring us 
to God. This prayer relates not, therefore, to that sin the 
forgiveness of which permits us to approach God and by covenant
 through Jesus to call him our Father. The sins mentioned
 in this prayer, the "debts," are those which are. ours 
after we have become new creatures in Christ, children of the 
Highest. Because of the imperfections of our flesh we cannot
 do the things which we would, the things which we know 
to be the perfect will of our FatheT in heaven. 

In a certain sense these aTe our debts or obligations to 
the Father from the time when we start to walk in newness 
of life, not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Walking after 
the Spirit, we find that we cannot come up to it; hence the 
debts. It is for the forgiveness of these that we are privileged 
to petition — matters of omission and of commission not wilfully
 done, not intentionally omitted. — Romans 7:19-23. 

According to the divine arrangement the merit of Christ 
not only covered the sins that are past, but made provision 
for our weaknesses and blemishes en route for the kingdom. 
God could indeed apply the merit of Christ to these debts, excuse
 us from them and not require us to mention them at all; 
but for our advantage he has arranged otherwise, that we must 
make application for the covering of these debts, for exoneration
 in the* name of Jesus our Lord and Redeemer, 
WISDOM IN THE DIVINE ARRANGEMENT 
In making daily application for forgiveness of our unintentional
 shortcomings we learn, three important lessons: (1) 
to keep track of our blemishes ; (2) to keep in mind that we 
are always dependent upon the merit of our Savior, the merit 
of his precious blood; (3) to be merciful, compassionate and 
generous toward those who may be our debtors in matters 
great and small. Thus we are better assisted in warring a 
good warfare against the world, the flesh and the devil. 

How just and how wise is the divine arrangement which 
requires that in applying for mercy we pledge ourselves to 
the Lord to see to it that we are also merciful, forgiving, to 
others, that we do not attempt to exact justice from those 
with whom we have contact and who are 'under some obligation
 to us! This is a wise provision in that it will assist us 
in the right direction, will assist us in the development of 
character which the Lord will approve, and which will be 
meat for those who would be inheritors of the kingdom. It 
will assist us in our endeavors to be copies of God's dear Son, 
and like unto our Father in heaven in the sentiments of our 
hearts at least. It is just; for God has not arranged simply 
to show us favors above the remainder of mankind, except as 


we shall receive his mercies with proper appreciation and 
with a desire to attain the condition which would be pleasing 
to him and which he would be pleased to reward with the 
life everlasting and the kingdom glories. 

THE ARCH ENEMY OF THE CHURCH 

These words, "Deliver us from evil " are not in the original 
of St. Luke's account of this prayer; but they are found in 
St. Matthew's account, and hence" are properly a part of the 
petition. The Revised Version reads: "Bring us not into 
temptation, but deliver us from the evil one." {Matthew 
6:13) This statement is a little confusing; for elsewhere we 
have the assurance that "God tempteth no man." (James 
1:13) The thought then seems to be that there is an evil 
one ever ready to attack the Lord's people to the extent that 
God will grant the opportunity, as in the case of Job. 

We remember, too, that trials, testing3 and temptations 
are necessary for our development as new creatures; and 
since these are necessary and of divine arrangement or permission
, it would not be appropriate for us to pray that the 
Lord would spare us from all trials and temptations. (Hebrews
 12:8) Therefore we must paraphrase this petition in 
our thoughts and suppose it to mean: 'Bring us not into 
temptation that would be too severe for us/ or 'Abandon us 
not in temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.' 

This thought is in full accord with the entire testimony 
of the Word of God. The promise is: "He will not suffer 
us to be tempted above that we are able, but will with the 
temptation provide a way of escape." (1 Corinthians 10:13) 
The evil one would indeed utterly destroy the Lord's consecrated
 people, but he will not be permitted to do so. Thus 
far may he go, but no further. If God be for us, who or what 
power can prevail against us? Nothing shall by any means 
separate us from the love of God in Christ. — Romans 8:31-39. 
THE PURPOSE OF PRATER 

Although our Lord did not teach his disciples to pray until 
they had requested instruction, yet this was evidently not 
because he was unwilling to assist them, but because he wished 
them to desire further teaching. Some may argue that no 
one needs instruction as to how to pray, but this thought is 
not borne out by this lesson. Evidently there are proper and 
improper prayers. We might as well say that no one needs 
instruction in singing or in playing music. While singers 
and players are born with the talent, nevertheless the most 
talented musicians reach their proficiency through instruction
. 

So it is with prayer. We have already seen that great mistakes
 have been made as to who may pray and what may be 
prayed for; and we have already considered the Lord's outline 
respecting a proper form of prayer, beginning with ascriptions
 of praise and proceeding to expressions of confidence 
in God and in the promises of his kingdom, continuing with 
acknowledgments of our dependence upon his provisions day 
by day, and ending with expressions of confidence in his power 
and goodness to protect us and ultimately to deliver us. This 
is the general form which our Lord commends to us as proper. 

On the other hand, it is interesting to note that the Lord 
does not wait until we have become proficient in the iise of 
language and in the form of expressing our petitions to him, 
but that so broad and ao gracious are his arrangements that 
we may come in imperfection and with stammering tongues 
to tell him of our devotion, our appreciation, our confidence, 
etc., in any manner we please. The suggestion is, however, 
that in proportion as we appreciate the privilege of prayer, 
we shall desire to use the privilege in the manner most acceptable
 to the great One whom we thus approach. 

Why should the Lord wish us to ask before he gives his 
blessing? For a wise purpose we may be sure! He would 
have us feel our need; he would have us appreciate the privilege
; he would have us look for the response; and in all 
these experiences he would develop us as his sons of the new 
creation. Therefore we are to ask, seek and knock if we 
would find the riches of God's grace, and have opened to us 
more and more the wonderful privileges, mercies and blessings
 which he is so willing to give us^as we develop in character
 and in preparation for his mercies. 

The clear intimation of the remainder of the lesson is that 
the essence of our petitions to our heavenly Father should 
be a request for more of his holy Spirit; and that we should 
look to the experiences of life, its trials, disappointments, 
discouragements, oppositions, as being not really injurious 
to lis, not as stones, scorpions and serpents, but as blessings 
in disguise, if we but receive them in the proper spirit. Our 
God i3 able to make all things abound in the interest of his 
children, the new creatures in Christ Jesus. These know 
from experience that some of their severest trials and dis- 


\ J I— 39 


L6269] 


(171-173) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


"Brooklyn, N. Y. 


appointments of an earthly kind have worked out for them 
development of character, elements of the holy Spirit, -which 
fhey probably could not have so well received in any other 
manner. 

Hence, when we" pray to the Lord for Ma blessings, we are 
with patience to wait for them, and to seek and find them in 
the various circumstances of life which his providences will 


permit. Remembering that the holy Spirit is the spirit of 
meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness
, love, we may well ask ourselves how else could the Lord 
work out for us these elements of character which we desire 
did lie not permit to come upon us the trials necessary for 
our development. 


PROMINENT BRETHREN ARRESTED 


On the 7th day of May warrants were issued by the Federal 
Court of the Eastern District of New York for the arrest of 
brethren connected with the management of the Society or 
with the Editorial Committee of The Watch Tower, or identified
 with the preparation or circulation of "The Finished Mystery
." The brethren for whom warrants were issued were: 
Joseph F. Rutherford, William E. Van Amburgh, A. H. Macmillan
, Robert J. Martin, Clayton J. Woodworth, George H. 
Fisher, Robert H. Hirsh, Giovanni De Cecca, Fred H. Robison. 
On The 8th of May most of these warrants were served by 
United States Marshal Power. The charge given in the 
warrants was that these brethren were united in a conspiracy 
to obstruct or impede the war work of the United States. 

Shortly after their arrest the brethren were arraigned in 
the Federal Court, Judge Garvin presiding, and all eight were 
m*t with an indictment previously returned by the Grand 
Jury, charging 

{1, 3) The offense of unlawfully, feloniously and wilfully 
causing and attempting to cause insubordination, disloyalty 
and refusal of duty in the military and naval forces of the 
United States of America, in, through and by personal solicitations
, letters, public speeches, distribution and public circulation
 throughout the United States of America of a certain 
book called "Volume Seven — Scripture Studies— The Finished
 Mystery"; and distributing and publicly circulating 
throughout the United States certain articles presented in 
pamphlets called, "Bible Students Monthly," "The Watch 
Tower," "Kingdom News" and other pamphlets not named, 
et cetera; 

(2, 4) The offense of unlawfully, feloniously, and wilfully 
obstructing the recruiting and enlistment service of the United 
States when the United States was at war. 

The first four brethren named faced a second indictment 
of trading with the enemy. Urns was based upon a claim 
that the Society's officers sent $500 to the manager of the 
Swiss branch at Zurich, Switzerland. 

Each of the brethren arraigned was held over on bail of 
$2,500 for each of the indictments for appearance in court on 
May 15th— the group, bond aggregating $30,000. Some inconvenience
 and difficulty was experienced in getting bail, 


because most of the bonding companies had agreed not to 
give bail for us, but after the second day it was arranged. 

The eight brethren appeared in court on May 15th and 
were held over until June 3rd, at which time the trial may 
occur, though that point is not certain. The space in the 
court room is very limited and we suggest that it would be 
more advisable for the friends generally not to try to attend. 
Your prayers and interest, however, as already expressed in 
many communications, arc deeply appreciated. Needless to 
say,* the brethren pleaded "not guilty" to both indictments, 
as they consider themselves innocent of the charges made. 
They all affirm their motive in connection with the Seventh 
Volume, or associated matters, to be merely the desire to advance
 the interests of the Kingdom of Christ by announcing 
its near establishment. If anything has been said or written 
that is in any measure unwise or indiscreet it certainly was 
not with a view to interfering with the prosecution of the 
war, which war "was foretold in the columns of this journal 
as early as 1885. It was there pointed out that Jehovah saw 
the world war to be a necessity. It it not within our 
province to interfere with the Lord's affairs, and no true 
Christian could intentionally do so. Our business is to announce
 Christ's Kingdom and the blessings it will bring. 
In connection with such announcement it is necessary to 
point to the false position which Churchianity holds in relation
 to earth's affairs. But that is very different from interfering
 with the military operations of the United States. 

Many of the brethren in different parts of the country 
have been arrested on a like charge. We are certain that 
their arrest has followed as a result of their zeal for Christ 
and not as a result of any desire to interfere in any measure 
with the civil authorities. We counsel sobriety of mind 
under all circumstances and an attitude of prayerful, watchful
 waiting upon the Lord. His kingdom is "at hand; his 
will be done. The "Overman Bill" has now become a law 
and it makes wisdom and discretion in speech very appropriate
. The bill was not designed to interfere with the preaching
 of the Gospel, but many things can be misconstrued by 
enemies. "All who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution," but let none suffer needlessly. 


OBEYING GOD 

[The first six and the eighth paragraphs of this article, as it originally appeared in the June 1, 1918, Tower were reprinted 
from article entitled, "The Beginning of Jesus' Ministry," published in issue of January 1, 1898, which please see.] 

JULY 28.— Matt. 4:18-22; JoHtf 14:22-24; Jas, 1:22-27. 

THE THEME OF OUR LOBD'S PREACHING WHAT THE JEWS TJNDEBSTOOD THE KINGDOM TO 11 KAN— WHY THEY FAILED TO BECOME THE 

PROMISED SEED OF ABRAHAM— WHAT IT IS TO BE A DISCIPLE OF CHRIST— THE THREE COMMANDMENTS ENJOINED UPON THE 
PEOPLE OF GOD ONE OF THE SUREST SIGNS OF SPIRIT-BE GETTING THE CRUCIAL TEST UPON THE CHURCH— VARIOUS INJUNCTIONS
 FOR KEEPING OURSELVES UNSPOTTED FROM THE WORLD. 

"If ye love me, ye will keep my commemdments." — John 14 : 1 5. 
-THE GOOD NEWS 01 THE KINGDOM" thy God with all thy heart, mind, being and strength." The 

Andrew and Peter, James and John, fishermen, were in- second is: "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Every 


vited by the Master to be his followers, his associates in the 
great work of calling the "elect" and, if faithful, subsequently 
to sit with him in his throne as part of the glorified church. 
They left all to follow him. His terms were these: "If any 
man will be my disciple, let him deny himself and take up 
his cross and follow mc." The Lord does not open the door 
of opportunity to all of his disciples throughout this Gospel 
age to become prominent ministers of the truth after this 
manner. Yet he accepts none as his disciples except those who 
forsake all to follow him. In their hearts they must give up 
all else. They have the spirit of discipleship and self-sacrifice, 
and would gladly forsake all actually if the door of opportunity
 opened to them. 

OTJB LOED'S COMMANDMENTS TO HIS PEOPLE 

Every follower of the Master should realize that if he has 
entered the. service of the Lord he has pledged his very life 
to the service of truth and righteousness. Although he is not 
under the Mosaic law, nevertheless the will of God, which is 
the spirit of the Jewish law, is binding upon him in proportion
 as he knows it. Speaking of the spirit of that law, 
Jesus declared that it was briefly comprehended in two commandments
. The first of these is: "Thou shalt love the Lord 


Christian and every angel recognizes the divine law and feels 
a responsibility to it to the extent of his ability; but neither 
angels nor Christians are under the Law Covenant, That 
covenant was made with Israel only. 

How could any truly consecrated child of God 3o less than 
his very best to love and serve his heavenly Father with all 
his mind, being and strength? How could he decline the divine
 requirement to love his neighbor as himself — to be kind, 
generous, unselfish? True, the new creature may find difficulty 
in devoting all of his mind and strength to the Lord and in 
dealing with perfect fairness with all of his fellow creatures. 
But this is his desire and intention; and to accomplish this 
he must strive daily against the natural inherited weaknesses 
of his old nature, his flesh. In proportion to his lore for the 
Lord will be his zeal in this strife; and proportionate also 
will be the reward that will be given him in the end by the 
heavenly Father. 

"A NEW COMMANDMENT" 

At first it would appear that these two commandments 
itemized by our Lord Jesus would include everything that 
could be required by justice; and so they do. Justice requires, 
nothing more than what those two commandments include. 


[6270] 


June 1, 1918 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


(173-174) 


Hut we find that our Lord gave his disciples another command
, a third one, a new one, over and above anything that 
the divine law required, a commandment not applicable to 
any except those who become the disciple 3 of Jesus. 

"This new commandment the Father did not put upon the 
Son. Jesus voluntarily put this regulation upon himself and 
laid down his life sacrificially, something no law could justly 
demand. The heavenly Father did not require that Jesus do 
this in the sense of commanding our Lord to dp it. He did 
require it, however, in the sense that he promised glory, honor 
and immortality, the divine nature and the Messianic kingdom 
to the saintly one who would enter the covenant of sacrifice. 
— Psalm 50:5. 

In entering this covenant of sacrifice, therefore, our Lord 
Jmus did more than what the law given to Israel required. 
Consequently when pointing out to his disciples the terms 
upon which he would become thoir advocate and guarantee 
them a share with himself in the heavenly things he specified 
the importance of this third commandment: "A new commandment
 I give unto you. That ye love one another as I have 
loved you." (John 13 : 34-35 ;15 : 12) St. John points out that 
Christ loved us \o the extent of dying for us, and that ^ all 
the true followers of Jesus, possessed of his spirit, should likewise
 count it a joy to be permitted to lay down their lives 
in the service of* the brethren. — 1 John 3:14-16. 

Gradually our eyes of understanding have been opening 
wider and wider to see the breadths, lengths, depths and 
heights of the love of God. As a result we have been striving 
more and more to love and to serve our God with all our 
heart, mind, being and strength. More and more, also, have we 
learned to appreciate the necessity for dealing justly and 
kindly with the members of our families, with our neighbors, 
with all mankind — loving our neighbors as ourselves. We 
may have been congratulating ourselves on the progress we 
have been making, ^and surely we all need some encouragement
 while battling with the old nature. 

But now, behold the new commandment, requiring a still 
greater devotion to the will of our Father and to the leadership
 of our Redeemer! We are obligated to observe the rule 
of righteousness toward our heavenly Father and toward all 
our neighbors; but toward the brethren of the household of 
faith we are to do more than the right. We are to suffer, to 
sacrifice, on their behalf, in their interest. "We ought _ to 
lay down our lives for the brethren." Oh, what a searching 
proposition this covenant of sacrifice is! How strange it is 
that it should be on behalf of the brethren that we are expected
 to sacrifice, to lay down our lives! 

"HEREBY MAT WE KNOW" 

It seems remarkable that in pointing out one of the surest 
signs whereby t ho Lord's people may know positively that 
they have been begotten of the holy Spirit, the Apostle John 
•*ays: "Hereby we know that we have passed from death unto 
life, because we love the brethren." Long ago we pointed out 
that one of the final and most searching tests upon the church, 
and the one under which many will fall, will be love for the 
brethren. Seemingly many will fail at this point, and be 
therefore accounted \inworthy of nn abundance entrance into 
the kingdom of Christ. Like all other tests this will be most 
pointed and conspicuous during this time of special privilege 
and special trial in the last hours of the Gospel age. 

How strange that love of the brethren should be the crucial 
test, as we have already pointed out in the Stcmks in tttk 


Scriptures! As we may seriously fear, it will be more and 
more manifest as we come down toward the consummation of 
our hope. This is a personal matter. Each one who has 
named the name of Christ is under this testing. If not yet, 
then sooner or later this willingness to sacrifice in the interests
 of the brethren will prove each of us either as loyal, 
faithful to our covenant or else as disloyal, unfaithful to our 
obligations. Let us make this matter of love for the brethren 
and of laying down our lives for them one of personal study 
and of practical application to our own hearts, minds, thoughts, 
words, actions. Moreover, let us pray for one another, as well 
as exhort one another along these lines, striving to be filled 
with the spirit of the Master. 

"tmSFOTTED FROM THE WORLD" 

Addressing the Lord's people the Apostle James declares: 
"If any man among you seem to be religious and bridleth not 
his tongue, that man's religion is vain." Because the tongue 
is the index of the heart, because ''out of the abundance of 
the heart the mouth speak eth," therefore the unbridled tongue 
speaking selfishly, enviously, bitterly, boastfully, slanderously, 
proves that the heart from whose fullness these wrong sentiments
 overflow is un sanctified, unholy, grievously lacking in 
the spirit of Christ. Hence whatever religion such a man 
may have attained is thus far in vain; for that heart is not 
saved nor in a salvable condition. 

To avoid the development of any such wrong condition 
of heart the Apostle ur^es us to keep ourselves unspotted from 
the world. This implies that there is a possibility of our 
having our robe of Christ's righteousness spotted. This does 
not signify that anything we could do could destroy Christ's 
work or make of none effect his sacrifice for sin. The robe 
signifies th«t share of Christ's merit which has been freely 
imputed to us by him with the Father's consent. If through 
receiving the spirit of the world we blemish or sully this robe 
we shall be unfit to be of the bride class and shall be rejected
. 

Yet in our present imperfect condition and our many unfavorable
 surroundings and besetments it would be miraculous 
if we never came so closely in contact with evil as to spot 
our garment or wrinkle it. "(Jude 23; Revelation 3:4; 16:15) 
However, we find that God's gracious provision in Christ is not 
only that our Lord Jesus' sacrifice was sufficient for all our 
imperfections of the past, but that it is sufficient for any 
unintentional blemish or weakness or misstep resulting from 
our own imperfections or the weaknesses of others, after we 
become the Lord's children from the time of consecration. 

In other words we are provided not only with the robe 
covering all the past, but also (in the same sacrifice of 
Christ) with a spot-remover; and any who through weakness 
or temptation stumble by the way and soil their garments 
are to be restored by the brethren "'in the spirit of true meekness
, considering themselves, lest they also be tempted.' To 
restore another, means to help him to see the spot and by 
faith to apply the provided cleansing, through penitence and 
prayer. All who are in the right condition of heart, appreciating
 the purity of the robe, appreciating the Bridegroom
 and his favor, appreciating the great King and appreciating
 the honor of being called to the marriage, will be 
very careful indeed to keep themselves unspotted from the 
world, and very careful to remove as quickly as possible any 
spot that might appear thereon. Thus the bride of Christ 
makes herself ready for the marriage of the Lamb. 


MAY 30 FOR PRAYER AND SUPPLICATION 


In accordance with the resolution of Congress of April 
2nd, and with the proclamation of the President of the JJnited 
States of May 11, it is suggested that the Lord's people 
everywhere make May 30th a day of prayer and supplication. 
God was graciously pleased to cause this nation to be formed 
and to grow under the most favorable conditions in the world 
for the preservation of liberty, civil and religious. 

This is the land divinely "shadowed with wings" — overshadowed
 by the providential watchcare of God's ^ Word — 
where God has lifted up an ensign on the mountain (kingdom), 
and where he has blown the trumpet message of the truth. 
Here the love of truth has for three hundred years attracted 
from all quarters of the world people who love God, love the 
Bible and love religious liberty. Here, practically alone of 
all the nations, exists in the fundamental laws of the land 
the safeguard that so long as the Constitution stands no law 
may be made nor any governmental action taken prohibiting 
the' free exercise of religion, or abridging the freedom of speech 
or of the press. 

Countless blessings have flowed to devout people through 
the wise provisions of the laws of the United States, blessings
 whose influences have been felt to the remotest corners 
of the earth, wherever even a spark of love for God-given 
freedom might be fanned into a glow. Here, more perhaps 
than elsewhere, exists that "present" which shall be brought 
unto Jehovah (Isaiah 18:7), earth's oblation (Ezekiel 45:1) 
to God of that class who, when in the age to come the restitution
 host3 shall be numbered, shall be found to have been 
"born in Zion" (Psalm 87:5, 6), taken out of the world and 
given, in a figure, as humanity's present to their God, to be 
forever sons and servants of the Most High. 

This class love to "assemble themselves together, and so 
much the more as they see the day approaching" (Hebrews 
10:25), and they will be of all people the most ready to embrace
 an opportunity of gathering in an additional service of 
prayer and supplication. As says the spirit through the 
Apostle Paul: "I exhort, therefore, that first of all, supplications
, prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks, be made 
for all men; for kings, and for all that are in authority; that 
we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and 
honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God 
our Savior." (1 Timothy 2:1-3) Let there be praise and 


[6271] 


(174-175) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


thanksgiving to God for the promised glorious, outcome of 
the war, the breaking of the shackles of autocracy, the freeing
 of the- captives (Isaiah ,61 : 1 ) and the making of the 


world safe for the common people — blessings all assured by 
the Word of God to the people of this country and of the 
whole world of mankind. 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


LOVE AND CONFIDENCE 
Dear Brethren: — 

The ecclesia at this place at a recent meeting voted unanimously
 that all the dear brethren at Brooklyn be advised 
of our loving interest and sympathy in this hour of trial 
upon the church. The hand -of Herodias and her daughter 
is surely being made manifest, thanks to "that servant's'' 
warning to the church. And more and more we realize, as 
events transpire, how faithfully he labored for our instruction
 and edification in the truth, ceasing not to warn us 
night and day. 

In this connection, the ecclesia would like to express its 
fullest confidence in the Lord's chosen servant at this time 
to direct his great work. We rejoice that we have had so 
many evidences of his approval of the management, viz., by 
the wonderful distribution of literature and books, the great 
bulk of the Lord's people held together by the strong ties 
of Christian fellowship, the grand visits of The Watch Towkk 
semi-monthly, laden in eaeh issue with spiritual fatness, and 
we can say without exaggeration that it is better than ever 
before; but greatest of all these evidences is, we believe, that 
the clergy, seeing their opportunity to deal a deathblow to 
the truth under the cloak of "patriotism" are, so to speak, 
making hay while the sun shines. But we know their efforts, 
while designed to work evil to the Lord's people^ can only 
result in ultimate good through the loving oversight of our 
dear heavenly Father in all of the affairs of his people. 

We are pleased to notice that you counsel wisdom and 
extreme care on the part of the Lord's people, and avoidance 
of acts contrary to the law, thus putting the entire responsibility
 upon the clergy and those who support them. 

Our prayers continually ascend to our Father on behalf 
of all you dear ones at Brooklyn, and those in every place 
who have been deprived of their liberties in one way or another
, and as the great night settles down upon the earth we 
lay hold more securely than ever upon the wonderful promises 
which belong to God's children. 

With loving greetings in our dear Redeemer's name, I am 
very sincerely your brother, W. W. — Md. 

REJOICING BECAUSE DELIVERANCE IS NEAR 
Dear Brkthr^ in Christ: — 

Bnelosed please find money order, and receive it as my 
little share in the work. 

As I am sure the realization of our glorious hope is very 
near and T make ready to leave at any minute my beloved 
Master may call me, I want to thank you for all the grand 
spiritual blessings I have received through the Society during 
the many years I have enjoyed the wonderful truth, Oh, 
what would life have been if it were not for the truth, the 
light, the joy of the Lord ! \ am rejoicing because I see my 
deliverance draws near. I want to be faithful and strong 
in the Lord, no matter what shall be required of me. 

I am alone here and often miss the fellowship with others 
of the same precious faith. I therefore ask you to remember 
me before the Throne of Grace. 

Yours in his name, 0. S. C. — Al:i. 

ASSURANCE OF LOVE AND LOYALTY TO TRUTH 
Dear BiurriT rhn : — 

Please find our check enclosed, to be used in the Lord^s 
work as you may see fit to direct. 

We certainly feel that the Lord 13 using the Society to 
spread the message to his people, and we intend by the Lord's 
grace and help to stand by the Society in its trials and persecutions
 to the end. We have been rejoicing in this present 
truth for about three years, and would not part with it for 
all this world, although many times we wonder why the Lord 
was so good to any so unworthy as we are. 

Every day we pray for the Lord's guidance over 3*ou and 
all at Bethel, some of whom we arc personally acquainted 
with ; and we desire your prayers that we may meet before 
our Lord. With Christian love and best wishes, we are 

Your brother and sister in the Lord, 

K. J. and O. J. M.— 111. 
SUNSHINE, WIND AND RAIN NEEDED 
Di:ar Brethren: — 

Considering the end of the Gospel age harvest, numerous 
truth friends inquire respecting the taking away of all the 
saints reasonably soon, or during this year 1918. My thought 
is. that, the harvest is over onlv in so far as the cut tins' of 


the antitypical grain is concerned. There is no more wheat 
to cut, but there may be some more to bind into sheaves, 
and set up in the field to be cured — subjected to the elements
, sunshine, wind, and rain and other developing influences
 designed to make such fit for the garner. 

We, as the wheat of the Lord's harvest, may need some 
similarly trying experiences to harden and fit us for the ingathering
. In other words, we are waiting for the wagon to 
take us to the bam, 

The harvest storm's may upset us, but the good man of 
the farm picks us up, re&hocks us, and we are ready for the 
next testing of our strength to stand. 

Some of us may go home in a nice wagon, some of us 
in a ramshackle affair amid much jolting, but, if faithful, 
we shall all get there somehow, in due season. 

Does any of us feel that he is sufficiently developed and 
fit for the in-gathering? Or do we all realize the need of 
a little more hardening of character, a little more buffeting 
from the earthly elements to prepare us for the threshing 
floor? Shall we not patiently wait for the vehicle to haul us 
home? In Christian love. 

Your brother, J. A. Boiinet. — Pilgrim. 

READY TO DIE FOB CHRIST 
Dearly Belovkd Bbkturln in Christ: — 

Full of rejoicing because of having come to a knowledge 
of the marvelous light now shining from the presence of 
our Redeemer, who has showed me the unfathomable riches 
of our heavenly Father's character through his glorious Plan 
of the Ages, I am writing you these few lines to express my 
sincere appreciation of the work the Lord has placed in your 
hands. Continually do I pray that he will bless you richly, 
filling you more with hi3 holy Spirit, in order that you may 
continue in the precious way which he has shown" us and 
which, though strewn with difficulties and dangers of all kinds, 
is the most sublime way ever opened up, or ever to be opened. 

Perhaps we shall very soon be compelled to give our testimonies
 with our lives, or rather with those of our Lord; for 
wo have consecrated our lives unto death. How great will 
be the privilege of dying as loyal soldiers of the great Captain, 
not having rejected the teaching of the cross, but confessing 
before the blinded world the name of him who redeemed us 
from sin and death and whose we have been from birth! 
May the Lord give us grace and strength to die at the side 
of our Savior and our beloved brethren in the precious faith, 
so thai thus we shall see one another face to face beyond the 
vail, having gained the crown of life and being forever freed 
from the power of Satan, of the world and of our poor, weak, 
fallen nature! 

I cannot find words with which to express to the Lord 
my deep gratitude for the "meat in due season" which he 
gave me through the volumes of our well beloved brother. 
Pastor Russell, whose memory is a powerful influence on our 
way toward the heavenly Jerusalem. 

With Christian love, Your br oilier and servant in Christ. 

Abkl Orti-xja. — "Mexico. 

REFRESHING CONVENTION IN AUSTRALIA 
Dkar Brethren : — 

Greetings in the name of our Lord and Master. 

It is my privilege to furnish you with a brief report ol a 
two-day convention recently held here, the purpose of our 
gathering being the special recognition of the Lord's goodness
 in blessing our efforts in the extension field, and the 
linking up of those brethren, numbering some 50, who had 
responded to the truth message, and who expressed the desire
 to come under the general administration of the church, 
which arrangement is now working admirably. 

Notwithstanding the fact that traveling -facilities were 
limited on account of strike conditions, on the Sunday approximately
 150 assembled, while on Monday 70 to 80* were 
present. 

At the baptismal service four brothers and seven sisters 
symbolized their consecration. 

The occasion proved to bo most helpful and inspiring, and 
we believe the most happy season of fellowship ever enjoyed 
by the Lord's people in Sydney. The testimonies of the 
various brethren gave strong evidence of love for and determination
 to stand by the truth at all costs, and to hold 
fast the beginning of their confidence firm unto the end. We 
arr convinced that our little gathering was a real time of 


[6272] 


JunB 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TO WER 


(162-179) 


refreshing from the presence of the Lord, and will prove a 
stimulus to the faith of these privileged to attend. 

With Christian love, praying our heavenly Father's richest
 blessing on your efforts for his people. 

Yours in the Masters service, 

D. H., {Sydney Class) — Australia. 
STRUCK WITH THE TRTJTH 
Deab Friends: — 

I have signed the petition to the President and six of my 
best friends with me. Let me briefly state how I came into 
possession of "The Finished Mystery.'* 

It was on the night of March the sixth, about 11 o'clock; 
1 was walking down Third Avenue, thinking about practically 
nothing, and with a heavy thud I was struck on the shoulder 
by what I thought was a brick, but, alas, it was "The Finished
 Mystery." I brought it home and read it all, and then 
traded my old fiddle to a boy for the other six volumes — and 
have read them all. 

r find they all go straight forward, without making a turn. 
1 have since' learned that it was a preacher of- the M. K. 
Church who threw the book from his window in a rage of 
anger. I have nothing to say to the dishonor of that preacher, 
for he is at least one of Great Babylon's teachers that sends 
out the truth in volume, and by that one act of his I firmly 
believe that he converted more people to a living hope than 
by any other act of his life. 'Surely the wrath of man shall 
praise him,' and through this preacher's wrath we now praise 
(Jod. Yours in the Truth, \V. H. K.— W. Va. 


THE "BLINDING HAZE" DISPELLED 
Dear Bketheen: — 

I heard a little news I thought might cheer your hearts; it 
did mine, at least As you know, Brethren, some of the friends 
have thought the Lord had nothing much to do with the 
language used in Volume Seven and B. S. M. 99, especially 
concerning Methodism. But I am more convinced than ever 
that the Lord overruled it all. 

A young man who was studying to he a Methodist minister
 told me his experience. He said that the morning on 
which we put out the "Fall of Babylon" issue he was in a 
testimony meeting. Almost everyone talked about it, and said 
they had put the papers right into the stove. He thought: 
"Why are they so afraid of it? It cannot be that they are 
very well established in the Scriptures." So he hurried home 
and looked to see if he could find one; and he did. 

He sat down and read; and when he came to that part 
which says "a blinding haze came out of the bottomless pit," 
he said: "That describes it to a *T'; if those people can show 
me that the churches are wrong, I will withdraw tomorrow." 
I was notified, called at his house and talked with him about 
two hours, then asked him what he thought of Babylon. He 
said: "I don't see how I can ever go back again." And he 
never did. 

Last Sunday he helped us put out "Kingdom News," having
 made a consecration. This has given us positive evidence 
of the Lord's hand in writing the Seventh Volume. 

Your brother by His grace, J. R. G. — N. Y. 


"REVELATIOJST-SINAITIC READING 


We now have in stock a vest pocket edition of the Book 
of Revelation, according to the Sinai tic Manuscript. We 
believe the friends will be much pleased with this little volume
, in convenient form, and meeting quite fully the requirements
 of all who desire to know* the meaning of this wonderful
 portion of the divine Word. Not only is the accurate 
rendering of the ancient Sinaitic Manuscript given, with headings
 and subheadings in bold-face type for convenient location 
of passages, but explanatory notes and comments are included
, with many illustrations. The book contains 200 pages, 
same size as the Vest Pocket Manna. Full black leather, 
gold edges, 70c postpaid. Cloth, red edges, 35c. In lots of 
50 or more, 50c for the leather and 25c for the cloth edition, 
charges collect. We suggest that each of the brethren approximate
 how many copies he' can use for himself and 
friends, and then order them all at one time, and quickly, 
as the edition is limited and probably will not be reprinted. 


Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JUNE 15, 1918 


No. 12 


THE CHASTENING OF THE LORD 


lt My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord; neither be weary of his correction; for whom, the Lord loveth he correcteth, 

even as a father the son ih whom he delighteth." — Proverbs 3:11, 12. 
Many excellent people have the thought that special sorrows
, trials, difficulties, are marks of divine disfavor and that 


And a man's foes shall be they of his own household."- 
Matthew 10:34-36. 


the best way to avoid trouble is to become a Christian. But 
the Scriptures show that if one is not already in trouble and 
wishes to get into it and to stay in it for the rest of his natural 
life, his best course is to become a true follower of Christ. 

One of the first characters who received a special invitation 
to walk with the Lord was Father Abraham. We are told 
that, "By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a 
place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; 
and he went out, not knowing whither he went." (Hebrews 
11:8) At the time this call was extended to Abraham he was 
seventy-five years of age, rich according to all the standards 
of earthly riches of his time, and no doubt comfortable and 
happy among his friends and relatives in the pleasant and 
productive region of Mesopotamia where he had been born and 
iu which he grew to manhood. We can imagine that his relatives
 were very much displeased with the choice he made. 
They no doubt considered it a species of insanity that this 
man, happy, prosperous and well established in life should 
at his age leave the environment with which he was familiar, 
and travel hundreds of miles through the sands of the Arabian 
desert to a land which neither he nor his fathers had 
known. 

One of the first crosses that must be taken up and borne by 
one who would walk in fellowship with the I/>rd is the certainty
 that he will displease his earthly friends by so doing. 
Nevertheless, the Psalmist urges, "Hearken, daughter, and 
consider, and incline thine ear; forget thine own people and 
thy father's house; so shall the king greatly desire thy 
beauty." (Psalm 45:10, 11). Eight well did the Lord know 
that our act of becoming his foot-step followers would bring 
us into difficulty with our earthly loved ones, our relatives 
according to our "father's house, else would he never have 
«aid: "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: T 
came not to send pence, but a sword. For I am come toset 
a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against 
her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. 

[6273] 


"WATEBS OF A TOLL CUP" 

The experience of the Psalmist was that his efforts to live 
a godly life brought upon him the reproaches of those who 
could not understand his motives. David was a type of the 
Christ and said' of his opposers and of ours: "They set their 
mouth against the heavens, and their tongue* walketh through 
the earth. Therefore his people return hither: and waters of 
a full cup are wrung out to them." {Psalm 73:9, 10). David 
was in the wilderness and because he was in the wilderness 
was a target for slander and ridicule until his cup of sorrow 
was filled. 

If we would see how God has been pleased to deal with 
those who give themselves unreservedly to him during the time 
in which sacrifices are acceptable, we have only to consider the 
fact that after the Beautiful One had laid his perfect sacrifice 
at the Father's feet, he was immediately "led up of the spirit 
into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil." (Matthew 
4:1) And he has not held out to his followers any expectation
 that the result of their consecration to do the Father's 
will would differ from his own; rather, he has assured us: 
"The disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above 
his Lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his 
Master, and the servant as his Lord. If they have called the 
Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call 
them of his household ?"—- Matthew 10:24, 25. 

Lest, in the midst of our trials, we should be inclined to 
fear that these are evidences of divine disfavor, we are especially
 invited to "consider him that endured such contradiction
 of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in 
your minds." (Hebrews 12:3) And as we consider him we 
recall especially the last events which crowned his three and a 
half years of faithful doing of the heavenly Father's will. We 
remember that he allowed himself to be smitten, crowned with 
thorns, mocked as a royal impostor, spit upon, and his beard 
to be torn out. He allowed himself to be sentenced to a 


(180 181) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


felon's death. Under a cross which he had not the strength to 
bear he passed through the streets of the same Jerusalem 
over which he had wept — but five days previously lined with 
the crowds that then were shouting, "Blessed be the King that 
cometh in the name of the Lord" (Luke 19:38), but that now 
were eager for his death. In the midst of this throng for 
whom he was about to die, the just for the unjust, he permitted
 himself to be stripped of his clothing, nailed to the 
cross, and hanged between two thieves until the sacrifice was 
completely finished in death. 

WEARIED AND FAINT IN MIND 
The Apostle says we should consider this, 'lest we be 
wearied and faint in our minds.' The word 'wearied' here 
(Greek kamon) is the same word that is translated sick in the 
passage of James 5:15. Thus the Lord would tell us that 
the surest protection against soul-Biekness is to keep our sacrifice
 on the altar as Jesus did and to comfort ourselves with 
the assurance that in some degree the experiences which were 
permitted to come to him are permitted also to come to us. 

When that sincere and zealous man, Saul of Tarsus, had 
met the Lord on the way to Damascus, and in prompt obedience
 to the heavenly vision had said, "What shall I do, Lord?" 
(Acts 22:10) and had remained without sight and without 
food or drink for three days (Acts 9:9), the lord sent him a 
message of comfort by the hand of Ananias, one of his faithful
 servants. The message was: "He is a chosen vessel unto 
me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the 
children of Israel: for I will show him how great things he 
must suffer for my name's sake." (Acts 9:15, 16) The 
Apostle Paul never forgot this lesson. On his first missionary 
tour, after he had preached the gospel at Iconium, Lystra and 
Derbe, and after the Jews from Antioch and Iconium had persuaded
 the people of the latter city to stone him into insensibility
 so that they supposed he was dead, then it was that "as 
the disciples stood around about him, he rose up, and came 
into the city: and the next day he departed with Barnabas to 
Derbe. And when they had preached the gospel to that city, 
and had made many disciples, they returned again to Lystra, 
and to Iconium, and Antioch, confirming the souls^ of the 
disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith, and 
[telling them how] that we must through much tribulation 
enter into the kingdom of God."— Acts 14:20-22. 

The Revelator shows that the experiences of the Lord Jesus 
and the Apostle Paul constitute a picture of the experiences of 
those members of the Lord's body who come in contact with 
the earth — "his feet were like unto fine brass as if they burned 
in a furnace." (Revelation 1:35) No doubt in a very special 
sense too, this picture is true of the last members, the feet 
members, of that glorious body. 

NONE WITHOUT CHASTBNINGS 

We have the Father's Word for it that "if we be without 
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are we spurious, 
and not sons." (Hebrews 12:8) It does not follow that all 
will be partakers in the same degree, nor in the same manner. 
For some a look is sufficient, for others a word, still others 
require scourgings, and some repeatedly, but the chastisements, 
whatever they may be, serve the* grand purpose of giving us 
opportunities for overcoming, for proving our fidelity, for developing
 self-control, sympathy, forgiveness, gentleness and 
patience. 

The children of Israel were to eat their passover lamb 
"with bitter herbs'* (Exodus 12:8), so that they might be 
able to partake of it more freely. Christ is our passover; and 
the effect of every bitter experience, on one who belongs to the 
Lord, is to drive him closer to the Lamb of God that he may 
feed more and more upon that Lamb. 

In the typical ceremonies of Israel one of 'the duties of the 
lngh priest was to dress the laimps which burned in the Holy, 
(Exodus 30:7^ Those who live in country districts understand
 very well what this moans. If one would have good 
light,, not only must a lamp be kept filled with oil and the 
burner and globe be kept clean, but the burned portion of the 
wick must he cut off from time to time. This represents the 
trimming off of the dross of the old nature — the wick through 
which the holy Spirit operates. If the wick could speak it 
would protest that it was being injured or wronged by the 
sharp shears which cut it in two. but the one who trims the 
wick is thinking not of the wick but of the beautiful light 
which later shall give .joy to all who are in the house. "Let 
your light so shine before men that they may see your good 
works and glorify your Father which is in heaven."- — Matthew 
5:16. 

The heavenly Father is developing and training the royal 
priesthood so that they may be merciful and faithful priests 
of the poor world when it shall be given its opportunity of 
reconciliation. They <could not become merciful and faithful 


priests without experiences such as their fellowmen have had; 
for even of Christ Jesus himself it is written: "Wherefore in 
all things it behooves him to be made like unto his brethren, 
that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest." 

NEED OF PEESEVEEANCE 

There would be scanty satisfaction in receiving chastisements
 if we could not see the end to be gained; but, since we 
can see, "we glory in tribulations also; knowing that tribulation
 worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience
, hope: and hope maketh not ashamed.*' (Romans 5:3-5) 
Those who are inspired by the hopes which animate God's sons 
experience no sense of shame under the discipline and trials 
they must endure, but glory in tribulations and rejoice to be 
counted worthy even to suffer shame for his name's sake. The 
apostle tells us: "Ye have need of patience, that, after ye 
have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise." 
(Hebrews 10:36) The tribulation which brings that patience 
is seen in its true light as a friend, and not as an enemy. 

How could we ever expect to be made strong enough, as 
new creatures, for the great future work to which we are 
called, unless, while still in this tabernacle and by the means 
which God provides, we are "strengthened with all might, 
according to his glorious power, unto all patience and longsuffering
 with joyfulness?" — Col. 1:11. 

We are hoping to be earth's future kings and priests 
(Revelation 5:10; 20:6) ; but we shall not be fitted for that 
relationship unless, as a result of the Lord's disciplines, we 
have first learned to rule our own Bpirits, for "he that is slow 
to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his 
spirit than he that taketh a city." (Proverbs 16:32) To take 
a city one must have the skill and equipment necessary for so 
great an undertaking. Small wonder then that the Lord is 
giving us experiences of a kind that the world cannot at all 
understand. 

Now that we are seeing the good results which are already 
coming to us and which will forever continue to come as a 
result of the trials which the Lord permits, let us reflect on 
what our attitude should be toward these trials. The Apostle 
tells us: "My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into 
divers temptations." (James 1:2) It may take* us a little 
time before we arc able always to "count" it just this way; 
but after a time we shall reach the point where, like the 
Apostle, we can "reckon that the sufferings of this present 
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which Bhall 
be revealed in us. 5 ' — Romans 8:18. 

EVEN GOLD IS TEIED 

Most men and women at the present time think that gold 
is a very precious thing, but we who know of the new order 
of things know that its value will diminish when it will be 
easy to have all that we require. We know something which 
the world does not know; find we are able to rejoice in the 
conviction "that the trial of our faith, being much more 
precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with 
fire, might be found unto praise and honor and glory at the 
revelation of Jesus Christ." ( 1 Peter 1:7) Here and now, 
"many shall be purified, and made white, and tried" (Daniel 
12:10); and here and now our Lord urges us: "1 counsel 
thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may est be 
rich."— Revelation 3:18. 

It seems a very strange thing to the world that any who 
profess to be true Christians should have special trials above 
those which come to other men, but we are, specially forewarned
 to 'think it not strange concerning the fiery trial 
which is to try us, as though some strange thing happened 
unto us: hut rejoice, inasmuch as we are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings.' (1 Peter 4:12, 13) Some time Aye shall he glad 
when we see how these experiences have proven to the Lord 
cur love and loyalty, how they have strengthened our characters
 and caused* the principles of truth and righteousness to 
take deep root in our hearts. 

God does not purpose that our sufferings shall continue 
beyond this life; and even here it is not his design that they 
should be incessant They are to be only for "a while." Most 
of us had many years of childhood in which our sufferings 
were very slight. And if we have some during the time that 
yet remains to us here, it is all intended to fit us for the 
eternal glory to which we are invited: "The God of all grace, 
who hath called us unto his eternal glory by Chridt Jesus, 
after that ye have suffered awhile, make you perfect, establish, 
strengthen, settle you." — 1 Peter 5:10. 

How else would the Lord know to a certainty who are his 
truly loyal people except by the trials of faith and love which 
he permits to come upon them? By these, "the Lord your God 
proveth you. to know whether ye love the Lord your God with 
all your heart and with all your soul." — Deuteronomy 13:3, 


[6274] 


Junk 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(isi-is:?) 


God's people are different from other people in that they 
alone find real comfort in the heavenly Father's rod of 
discipline. — Psnlm 23:4. 

"By this we may our calling prove. 
When Father 'plies the rod; 
We kis3 the chastening hand of love, 
Beloved sons of God." 

HEAVEN-SENT MESSENGERS 

When we get to the end of the way we shall find that the 
sorrows, "o'er which we grieved with lashes wet," were heavensent
 messengers to preserve for our everlasting enjoyment the 
exceeding great and precious inheritance for which we are in 
training. "Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now 
have I kept thy Word," said the chastened singer of Israel. 
( Psalm 119:67) How can we look with disfavor upon anything 
which prevents us from going, astray and keeps us safe in 
harmony with the Father's Word in the evil day? 

Observing now, aa we have studied the matter, that trials, 
yes, even fiery trials, are the inevitable accompaniments of a 
close walk with God, what should be our attitude when we 
enter some one of those many new and strange miscarriages 
of justice with which the history of God's sons abounds? The 
Psalmist has laid before us the method which he pursued 
under similar circumstances: "I will take heed to my ways 
that I sin not with my tongue : I will keep my mouth with 
a bridle while the wicked [who tempts and tries the righteous] 
is before me. I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even 
from good [from doing or saying what seemed good in my own 
sight] and my sorrow was stirred. My heart was hot within 
me; while I was musing the fire burned [the fiery trial continued
] : then spake I with my tongue, Lord, make me to know 
mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; that I 
might know how frail I am," Thus realizing that present 
vexations and sorrow will soon be over I shall be better able 
to control my tongue. 

David was the one who also said: "Thou art my hiding 
place; thou shalt preserve me from trouble; thou shalt compass
 me about with songs of deliverance." (Psalm 32:7) 
David could figuratively hear the heavenly messengers singing 
songs over his deliverance, even while he was in the midst of 
his chastisements. 

What should be our attitude toward the instruments the 
Lord may allow to be used in bringing sorrows upon us? A 
great principle is set forth by the Apostle when, in writing to 
the Corinthian brethren concerning a brother who had brought 


suit against another in a worldly court for rectification of an 
injustice, he said that, rather than permit hard feelings in the 
church with the possible defilement of some, he would better 
have meekly accepted the injustice. His word-; are: "Why do 
ye not rather take wrong? Why do ye not rather sutfor yourselves
 to he defrauded?" — 1 Corinthians 6:7. 

NEITHER MTOMUBINa NOB REPINING 

The attitude of the true ^Christian toward his sufferings is 
not to repine because of them but rather to rejoice been use of 
them, as did the noble Apostle Paul, who could say of himself
: "I rejoice in my sufferings for you. and fill up that 
which ia behind of the afflictions "of Christ in my flesh for hibody
's sake, which is the church." — Colossians 1:24. 

His spirit beareth witness with our spirit that we are the 
children of God and .shall be his heirs. Hut there is a condition
 attached to that inheritance and the condition is that we 
joyfully suffer with Christ as did the Apostle Paul. "And if 
[we be] children, then heirs; heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Christ; if so be that we suffer with him." (Romans 8:17) ''if 
we suffer, we shall also reign with him," but not otherwise. — 
2 Timothy 2:12. 

There will be no crowns for those unwilling to endure with 
patience whatever the Father may have seen t>est to pour into 
their cup. But, on the other hand, "Blessed is the man that 
endureth temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the 
crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love 
him."— James 1:12, 

We have it in our power even after starting upon the 
heavenward way to draw back by endeavoring to avoid the 
sacrifice which we have covenanted to make, or through fear 
that the Lord has forgotten us in our trials or through unwillingness
 to submit longer to the polishing. At first this 
drawing back may consist in only looking back with a sigh, 
then in a little disposition to compromise truth in favor of 
the cravings of the fallen nature, and finally in complete surrender
. "But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition
, but of them that believe to the saving of the soul." — 
Hebrews 10:39. 

We are not therefore to consider the trials and difficulties 
of our Christian pathway as marks of divine disfavor, and we 
are to be sorry for those who have not made a careful study 
of this question and have not seen the precious comfort contained
 in the words of our text: "My son, despise not the 
chastening of the Lord, neither be weary of his correction: for 
whom the Lord loveth he correcteth; even as a father the son 
in whom he deHghteth." — Proverbs 3:11, 12. 


SUNSHINE OR SHADOW? 

"Be anxious for nothing" — Philippians 4:G. 


Our lives may be bathed in sunshine or steeped in somber est 
gloom, according as we are close by or far removed from the 
fountainhead of light. The patches of light and shadow 
which alternate upon the landscape do not determine the seasons
 and temperature of that locality; nor do petty anxieties 
or passing pleasures make us altogether warm or gloomy 
Christians. It is the long night of the Arctic region or the 
long day of the tropic clime which makes the one a barren 
waste and the other a fruitful land. Life and light go hand in 
hand; the "Father of Lights" is also the Father of Life: 
whereas death is the region of gloom, night. 

The King James version renders our text: "Be careful for 
nothing." The thought is the same as, "Be anxious for 
nothing," if we remember that careful is not here used with 
its present signification. A few definitions of words which 
naturally arise in a consideration of this subject may not be 
out of place. 

Anxiety is uneasiness or distress of mind respecting some 
uncertain event which may involve danger or misfortune. 
Anxiety produces a morbid condition of restlessness and 
mental agitation with a distressful feeling of tightness and 
oppression in the region of the heart. Anxiety is, according to 
its derivation, a choking disquiet, akin to anguish. 

Anguish is in respect to the known: anxiety in respect to 
the unknown. Anguish is because of w r hat has happened; 
anxiety because of what may happen. Anxiety refers to some 
future event, but is a little milder yet than apprehension, 
fear, dread, foreboding, terror, all of which suggest despair. 
In matters within our reach anxiety always stirs up the 
question as to whether something can be done. But with the 
Christian it is often difficult to ascertain just what is within 
our reach. When joined w r ith such perplexity, anxiety produces
 foreboding, dread, and dread commonly incapacitates one 
for helpful thought or endeavor. 

Worry is a more petty restlessness and manifest anxiety. 


Anxiety may be quiet and silent; worry is communicated to all 
around. Solicitude is a milder anxiety. Fretting, or fretfulness
, is a weak complaining without thought of accomplishing 
or changing anything, but merely as a relief to one's own 
disquiet. 

Care concerns what we possess; anxiety often what we do 
not. Caution has a sense of possible harm and risk only to 
be escaped, if at all, by careful deliberation and observation. 
Care inclines to the positive; caution to the negative. 

Anxieties, like barnacles on a ship's hull, hinder progress 
and, if they be not removed, will surely keep the Christian 
from reaching his haven of peace. They will weigh him down 
until, out of sheer inability to resist, he will seek relief by 
letting himself sink into the elements of the world. 

Entrance into the body of Christ does not change our outward
 environs. The world is still worldly; it is still filled 
with imperfection and unbalance. The same impressions seek 
to gain our attention through the avenues of sense. There are 
just as many occasions for anxiety as before, or rather as 
many occasions out of which anxieties naturally arise. But 
not only is a state of over ^solicitude opposed to the divine 
will for us, but it is also directly injurious to mind and body. 
It contracts and stiffens the walls of the blood-vessels and thus 
cuts off the refreshing supply to the brain ; we cannot think as 
well as we should. The muscles, too, become inert; for their 
waste products are not well carried away. A slow poison 
ensues. 

The cares, the anxious feelings, will come again and again: 
what then is to be done? Ah! The beloved Peter says the 
w T ord: "Casting all your care upon him; for he oareth for 
you." It is not, then, that we are miraculously made immune 
to care, but that we are furnished with a recipe for ridding 
ourselves of it. We are not immune to" dirt; it will collect of 
its own accord. But we can bathe, if we have the needed 
equipment. 


[6275] 


(I8J-I84) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


TChookt.vn, N. Y. 


ANXIETIES CONOERNINa PEE SENT AND FUTtT*E 
The anxieties which naturally rise in our lives pertain 
either to the immediate future or to the future life in another 

state. 

We may feel anxious about the body, in respect to food, 
raiment, shelter. But does not the Apostle tell us a few 
verses further on in this same chapter: *'M£r God shall supply 
all your need, according to his riches in glory" ? And does not 
our Master, knowing how these- things would tend to worry 
us, tell us gently but plainly: 

"Do not accumulate for yourselves treasures upon the earth, 
where moth and rust consume, and where thieves break through 
and steal; but deposit for yourselves treasures in heaven, 
where neither moth nor rust can consume, and where thieves 
break not through nor steal. For where thy treasure is, there 
thy heart will also be. The lamp of the body is thine eye ; if, 
therefore, thine eye be clear, thy whole body will be enlightened
; but if thine eye be dim, thy whole body will be darkened
. If, then, that light which i% in thee be darkness, how 
great is that darkness! No man can serve two masters: for 
either he will hate one. and love the other; or, at least, he 
will attend to one, and neglect the other. Ye cannot serve 
God and Mammon [Syriae for riches]. Therefore I charge 
you, be not anxious about your life, what ye shall eat, or 
what ye shall drijik; nor about your body, what ye shall 
wear. Is not the life of more value than food, and the body 
than raiment? Observe the birds of heaven; they sow not, 
nor reap, nor gather into storehouses; but your heavenly 
Father feeds them. Are not ye of greater value than they? 
Besides, which of you, by being anxious, can prolong his life 
one momenta And why are ye anxious about raiment? Mark 
the lilies of the field. How they grow! They neither labor 
nor spin; yet I tell you, that not even Solomon, in all his 
splendor, was arrayed like one of these. If, then, God so 
decorate the herb of the field (which flourishes today, and 
tomorrow is used for fuel) how muoh more you, O ye distrustful
 ones!" 

But some good brother may say: "Yes, but you've got to 
get out and hustle for it." But if by "hustling for it" we 
mean to wrest the responsibility from God's own hand and to 
choke our spiritual enjoyment by fear of loss or failure, it is 
wrong, very wrong, and an insult to the Almighty by implying 
that he is not able to fulfil his promises, or is too fickle to be 
relied upon. But if we are diligent in duty, leaving the 
results with the Lord, we have already a blessing, because we 
are "workers together with God." 

But read on: 

"Therefore be not anxious, saying, What shall we eat? or, 
What shall we drink? or, With what shall we be clothed? for 
all the nations seek after these things; and your heavenly 
Father knows that ye have need of them. But seek ye first 
his righteousness and kingdom; and all these things shall be 
added to you. Be not anxious, then, about the morrow; for 
the morrow will be anxious for itself. Sufficient for each 
day is its own trouble." 

Hard though each day's trouble be, it is only intolerable 
when we imagine an endless vista of just such days. But we 
do not know that all the days will be just like this one; or, 
if they be like it, who knows but what other outward or 
inward experiences may be ours, which will completely alter 
the aspect of things whieh now seem so heavy? Unquestionably
 our weightiest burdens are the ones we make for ourselves
. 

The Apostle Paul says concerning our sometimes frantic 
efforts to gain more than our daily bread : "Piety with a sufficiency
 is great gain. For we brought nothing into this 
world, and it is evident that we are not able to carry anything 
out; and having supplies of food and clothing, with those let 
us be content. But those wishing to be rich fall into a temptation
, and a snare, and into many foolish and injurious desires, 
which sink men into destruction and utter ruin; for a root of 
all kinds of evil is the love of money; which some, longing 
after, wandered from the faith, and pierced themselves around 
with divers sorrows. But thou, man of God, flee from these 
things, and pursue righteousness, faith, patience, love, meekness
/'— 1 Timothy 6:6-11. 

And again : "Charge those rich in the things of the present 
age not to be high-minded, nor to confide in wealth so uncertain
, but in that God who imparts to us all things richly for 
enjoyment — to do good, to be rich in good works, to be liberal, 
willing to bestow; treasuring up for themselves a good foundation
 for the future, that they may lay hold of that which is 
really life."— 1 Timothy G: 17-1 a. 

We might toil early and late, work ourselves gaunt and 
gray-headed, and still not have more than those who trust in 
the Lord and who enjoy "his fellowship all the while. Remember
 the story the Master gave us about the man who toiled 
after riches and who put off the higher life until he should 
have enough. When he had what he thought was enough he 
purposed to enjoy it but, to his surprise and chagrin, was met 
with the rebuff: 'Why, man, you have worked yourself to 
death; your bank account is fat enough, but your heart is lean 
and scrawny.' 

The worldly at our very elbow, father, brother, sister, 
friend, may prosper greatly; but if we walk close to God it is 
likely he will keep us poor, for few have ballast enough of 
character or experience to "know how to abound." — Philip - 
pians 4:12. 

THE HXnrOER OF THE BOND 
But all our anxieties do not arise from wondering what we 
shall eat or with what we ehall be clothed. The mind ha^ 
needs, both real and fancied. Eve's oversolicitude about supplies
 for the mind was a powerful influence contributing to 
her downfall. We may be anxious about the Lord's providence 
for us and think: 'Yes, it looks as though the Lord were 
leading me into this place, but shall I have the proper stimulus
 to my mind?' How absurd! Why talk of our minds as 
though they were a museum of geology, some precious, fossil 
fragment of which might be lost! Are our minds nothing 
more than rows of shelves and cases into which are stored 
items of information chanced upon? 

No position is too humble to be entirely without opportunity
 of ministering to others in a mental way. The precious 
knowledge we have of God and his beneficent designs makes us 
able to give a word in season; and how good it is! We need 
not worry about our precious minds, as long as we use them; 
for "he that watereth, shall himself also be watered." 

Are we feeling the need of wisdom? No need to be distracted
 on that score; for the discretion whieh comes dowm 
from above is at our disposal. We have the Apostle James' 
word for it that the call of faith is all that is needed to open 
the boundless storehouse of Jehovah's wisdom. If we have not 
sufficient wisdom to decide the questions which confront us, 
and that with conscientiousness, let us ask for more wisdom. 
Sometimes the wisest way is simply to wait on the Lord for 
further indication of his will. Our greatest and worst mistakes
 have been made by taking some trying situation rashly 
into our own hands and deciding it at once. The Devil delights 
to get us into a dilemma and, mocking, to tease ua into 
choosing one of the two ways he points out, when the Lord's 
way is possibly still a third and far better one. 

No mind culture which the world has to offer can give us 
an appreciation of the deep things of God. As Paul, the truly 
wise one, said: "And when I came to you, brethren, I came 
not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, declaring to you 
the testimony of God ; for I determined to make known nothing 
among you, except Jesus Christ and him crucified. And I, in 
weakness and in fear, and in much trembling was with you. 
And my discourse and my proclamation were not in persuasive 
words of wisdom, but with a demonstration of spirit and of 
power; so that your faith might not be by the wisdom of 
men, but by the power of God. Wisdom, however, we speak 
among the developed; but wisdom, not of this age, nor of 
those rulers of this age who are coming to an end;* but we 
speak the wisdom of God which was hidden in a mystery, and 
which God previously designed, before the ages, for our glory: 
which no one of the rulers of this age knew; for if they had 
known they would not have crucified the Lord of glory ; but it 
has been written: Things which eye hath not seen, and ear 
.never heard, and to which the heart of man has not aspired — 
things which God hath prepared for those who love him' — 
God has revealed even to us through the spirit." 

We need not worry even if we do not have alt the opportunities
 for "mind-culture" which some of the world possess. It 
is even more likely to hinder than, of itself, to help us in the 
discerning of spiritual truths. When the confident Peter 
boldly declared our Lord to be "the Christ, the son of the 
living God" he was answered with half commendation, half 
rebuke (or shall we rather say, warning?) : ''Blessed art 
thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath not revealed 
this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven" — i. e. t *Thou 
art blest with a clear recognition of this great fact, which 
most people are so slow to perceive; but do not think that it 
is due to extraordinary brilliance on thy part, but rather is it 
because my Father has been pleased to honor the spirit of 
devotion and love for truth which thou hast displayed.' 

THE HUNGER OF THE HEABT 

The hunger of the heart will be laughed at and tabooed 
only by the novice in life. Loneliness, the heart's hunger, is 
but a covert acknowledgment of the fact that no one is selfsufficient
, that "no man liveth to himself or dieth to himself." 
Our most complicated anxieties and distractions arise from 


[6276] 


Jitns 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(184-185> 


this field and, like an evening damp, tend to choke our newbom
 hopes of a better life and to estrange us from the source 
of light and joy. 

But has Jehovah erred? Are there no compensating magnets
 to keep the compass of our hearts true to the pole? Has 
he invited us upon this perilous voyage and abandoned us 
without chart or rudder? Why, even man is wiser than that, 
and more provident. The great ships which plow the sea have 
their great master compass. In theory the needle of that 
compass points true to the magnetic pole. But that pole is 
leagues removed ; and every piece of iron in the ship's hull, in 
her engines, in passing vessels, in deposits in the bottom of 
the sea, influences that needle, too. So, very carefully made 
smaller magnets are so placed as to counteract the influence 
of things close by, that the subtle influence of the North may 
still lead the ship true. It is not wrong that the great compass
 should feel or be moved by the local forces; but if, and 
to the extent that it is so moved, it ceases to be a reliable 
compass and will cause confusion, dismay, perhaps even shipwreck
. If it could speak it would say: * But I want it; I 
need it; and see, it wants rae, too." 

These local magnetic fields do not harm the ship if they but 
pull in the same direction as the North Pole. And, if the 
influence we exert on one another is the influence of the 
spirit of unselfish love, of the image of Christ in us, we shall 
draw one another toward that image, we shall build one 
another up in the most holy faith and not tear down. When 
the heart's yearning seems more than we can bear, when it 
dumbly grasps for the strong arm of support or the tiny arms 
of human joy, shall Ave say the thing is wrong? The God of 
Nature made us so. 

But we have undertaken a voyage; and we must not blindly 
answer every call without listing to the compensating maspiets 
— the example of holy conquerors before us, or the words of 
the Apostles, such as, "Center your minds on things above 
.... that when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, ye also 
might appear with him in glory." Surely we would not wish 
to sell our glorious birthright for a mess of pottage, be it ever 
so fine. 

But this is all passive. We are not merely inert needles 
waiting to be acted upon by worldly or heavenly power. The 
hunger of the heart is best satisfied not by receiving but by 
giving. The chief of givers gave his best, his only son; our 
Savior gave himself. But we may say: 'The people with 
whom I meet are so crude and ungenteel, I don't know how to 
give them anything.' But can they be more crude and coarse 
than the best of mankind was to our Lord? When he fed the 
four thousand he had very little to give; yet, under Jehovah's 
blessing, it accomplished wonders, feeding not only himself and 
his close associates, but the multitude as well! Is it not 
more blessed to give than receive? How commonplace it 
would have been had someone driven up with a cartload of 
bread that he might merely receive it! He gave what he had ; 
it was enough. It is seldom that our etorehouse of blessings is 
so scant that we cannot give even a smile. And who knows 
how much warmth it starts? 

Besides all this we have a love, a fellowship, nearer, dearer, 
truer than all the best there is on earth. "The Father himself 
loveth you," and "truly, our fellowship is with the Father and 
with his son Jesus Christ." Can anything surpass that for 
honor? Can even the dearest human tie come so close or 
know our needs so well? Adam, with more spleen than spine, 
when driven to the choice, took the human companionship 
without God — and lost them both. But better than the touch 
of the tenderest hand is the consciousness of his nearness and 
interest who said, "I will never leave thee nor forsake thee." 

Tf we keep our hearts ever sensitive to the drawing of that 
far away, yet mighty magnet, though beset with blizzard, 
cloud and mist we shall pass, safely into port and "meet our 
pilot, face to face." 

To be over-anxious about our heart's supplies means to 
invite self-pity, that insidious poison which, like the vapors of 
the Flanders field, seeps into the trenches of our nobly gained 
redoubt and kills the guardians of our better self. We cannot 
expect to have the world kowtow to us if we are 'following 
the Lamb whithersoever he goeth'; for the world comes to the 
stubborn, obstinate, one-idea-at-a-time man who blows lustily 
his own horn. 

We need not, then, be distracted about our lack of Wisdom
; for it is ours, as soon as we are sure we need it, and 
ask for it. We need not be anxious or hopeless over what 
seems impossible to us; for divine Justice is such that God 
would not expect anything of us which we could not perform. 
Divine Love U too great to give us needless occasions for 
anxiety; and divine Power stands guard to see thnt no temptation
 shall befall us but such as we are able to bear. 


OTHER PRESENT OCCASIONS FOB ANXIETY 

The possibility or the probability or the fear of loss tends 
to cause many a cautious one much anxious thought. We fear 
to lose our friends, our money, our health, our influence, our 
prestige, our mental acumen, our vouth. The effect of losses 
on others is more or less responsible for this fear which we 
have. But have we not learned that loss does not always mean 
loss? We lose one thing only to find that after all it was not 
so important as we had supposed. We lose one thing and find 
in its stead a keener appreciation of what we have left. We 
lose our life-in-self and find a life in more abundant measure. 
We lose the warm hearth -glow of the valley and gain the clear 
starlight of the mountain peak. We lose the warm hand-clasp 
of a friend and gain the unspeakable pleasures of the life of 
faith. Can we not trust God? Shall we not have the choicest 
portions, if we leave the choice to him? "Oh, rest in the 
Lord, wait patiently for him .... and he will give thee thy 
heart's desires." 

Shall wo worry over disappointments? Is it not rather 
finding fault with Omniscience? 

Delays make us anxious because of the element of uncertainty
. But must we know all things before the time? Having
 used the means at our disposal to avoid delays, shall we 
not wait in peace? "Blessed are the men who fear him; they 
ever walk in the ways of peace." 

Restraints tend to chafe us. We wanted this scheme to 
work out thus and so, and when we are unable to push it 
ahead we feel peeved. But if we left it with the Lord at the 
start and said ( If the Lord will,' where is our ground for 
worrvt 

SWvingir, en a bed of sickness, or otherwise thrown into a 
bayou off the main current of activity, arouse apprehension 
lest we become wholly useless. But perhaps there are some 
lessons for us to learn before we can be trusted with further 
activities. Or maybe we can do something 'on the shelf which 
we had not known to do before. 

Our faults would drive us to distraction if we did not 
remember that the Lord knew all about them before he called 
us. Nonchalance is not the proper mind toward them, but 
useless worry is just as bad. Balance is what we need, as well 
as conscience. 

Others' faults make us anxious, for fear we may be the 
victim of their injudition. But shall we not remember that 
"the battle is not to the strong, nor the race to the swift"? 
"Our lives are hid with Christ in God" and cannot be injured. 

Our failures in the past tend to discourage us regarding 
the future and to make us anxious about the outcome. But 
"we have not a high priest unable to sympathize with our 
weaknesses; but one having been tried in all respects like 
ourselves, apart from sin. We should, therefore, approach 
with confidence to the throne of favor, that we may receive 
mercy and favor for seasonable help." It is not so much the 
breaking of the lines of conventionality, the makeshift for 
virtue, which constitutes a mistake or failure. The deadly 
mistake is to give up hope and stop trying. Jt is mora vanity 
than devotion if we wish to give up just because we are not 
able to make as prominent a showing as others or as we had 
koped for ourselves. A mistake is not necessarily a fatal 
thing. 

Chastisements, when wrongly viewed, fill us with foreboding
. But is it not true that in many ways love and pain 
go hand in hand? 

Hardships cause us anxious thought; for we wonder 
whether we can endure them. But we have the Apostle's 
cheering words: "I can endure all things through Christ who 
strengthens." 

ANXIETT ABOUT THE FUTURE LIFE 

No undue care need be taken for that which is beyond our 
realm. We are promised the holy Spirit if we ask it; and 
the holy Spirit, dwelling richly in our minds, will guarantee 
the development of the fruits of the spirit; and we are distinctly
 told that 'if these things be in us richly and abound, 
so an abundant entrance shall be ministered unto us into the 
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.* 
Again : "He that hath begun the good work in you shall complete
 it unto the day of the Lord Jesus." Again, the consoling 
yet stirring word: "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life" — not I may, if I feel so inclined at 
the time, but "I will give thee a crown of life." 

Fear of the great change affects some. But why should it? 
we have nothing to lose and all to gain. Moreover our Master 
desires to have us there; for he prayed the Father, "I will 
that they be with me where I am." 

DROP OTTO BURDENS AT THE THRONE OF GRACE. 
To dispel anxiety, reverence is necessary. But much more 
than reverence is necessary. We might have reverence and 


[6277] 


(185-188) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


think of God as a mighty being, too great and too far removed 
to care for our welfare. We must fellowship with him, aa he 
invites us. Undoubtedly the relationship of children to a 
father is the one which Jehovah seeks to encourage in us. He 
says, "in everything." Not merely may we take the great 
trials of life to the Burden-Bearer, but also the little things 
that nag and annoy us not less. 

"Oh, what peace we often forfeit! 
Oh, what needless pain we bear! 
All because we do not carry 
Everything to God in prayer/' 

not complaining, but thankful for God's part in them. 

We have seen how many natural occasions for care may 
arise in our daily lives. And the Apostle knew all this; so 
he, as the mouthpiece of the Lord, gives us the recipe for 
losing them. He says, "Be anxious for nothing; hut [instead 
of thatl in everything by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving
, let your requests be made known to God." Constant 
touch with Jehovah, then, is the potion which drives from our 
spiritual systems the germ of care, and makes us sing, though 
in prison. 

As we come to realize him as our Father we shall wish to 
make our requests known to him. As the wisest of fathers he 
deals with us individually according to our several needs. He 
seeks to encourage us to decide for his way, but he never 
coerces us. Sometimes we are rebellious and foolishly insist 
on having our own way; and he lets us have it, only to find 
with godly sorrow that his way had been untellably better. 

In a large family or school many children suffer great 
nervous irritation from the habit of being considered collectively
 instead of individually. Demanding instant and unquestioning
 obedience is also harmful, as coercive restraint 
weakens character. But how long-suffering is the Lord! He 
knows we must eventually do his way if we love the right. 

A child shows the desire to exercise its own reasoning faculties
 by constantly asking, "Why ?" in its attempt to find the 
balance 'between the true and the false. The answer, "Because 
I told you so," may silence, but never satisfies. But how 
kindly are the words of our Father: "Come now, let us 
reason together" — 'Come and tell me what worries you; perhaps
 I can make some suggestions that will help you to see.' 
He gives us real aid ; for he helps us to harmonize submission 
and liberty, to substitute co-operation for obstinacy, and noble 
independence for slavish subserviency. 

TRUE SOURCE OF OUB PEACE 

If something worries us, let us take it to the Master-lVftnd. 
If we are in need, let us make it known to the Giver of every 
good and perfect gift. If then hi3 providence or reason suggest 
that we might properly expect a supplying of our need through 
some other channel than ourselves, it would not be amiss to 
let our request be made known there also — but to him first. 
Turmoil and strife of heart and mind are not conducive to the 
development of the richest character. But great care must be 
exercised in discerning between outward turmoil and that of 
the heart. Only wHen we are habitually losing our anxieties 
in the bosom of him before whose face every perplexity is plain 
as noonday can we have that truest Christian experience of 
the following verse: "And the peace of God, which passeth all 
understanding, shall guard your hearts and minds in Christ 
Jesus." Only in that peace which comes from a consciousness 
of our vital union with God Almighty can we use our powers, 
great or small, to the best advantage. 

Our confidence in him is not merely the blind and heathen 
confidence of the poet who, observing the passage of the waterbird
 across the heavens, said: 

"He who from zone to zone 
Guides through the boundless .sky thy certain flight, 
In the long way that I must tread alone 
Will guide my steps aright." 

That is good; but ours is better. Ours is a warm, sweet 
and personal faith in God, based on his word and on our own 
experience, "so that we can boldly say: The Lord is my 
helper, I shall not fear what man may do unto me" — be it 
Gethsemane, Hall of Judgment, the Way of Tears, or even 
Calvary. 

"Under his wings I am safely abiding, 
Though the night deepens and tempests are wild; 
Still I can trust him. I know he will keep me; 
He hath redeemed me, and I am his child." 


•IF" 


If I can warm with Love some lonely heart, 

Hope's lustre to some listless eye impart; 

If I can make a straight path for the lame, 

Or fan some smoldering Faith to fervent flame; 

If I may help some faltering foot to keep 

The painful, narrow way, though rough and steep; 


If thou, dear Lord, wilt use me, even me, 

To draw some trembling soul more close to thee ; 

If, when the end of all things is at hand, 

My feeble efforts may help one to stand ; 

If I may live to make truth's message plain — 

Ah! then, 'twill ne'er be said, my life was vain. 


GROWING STRONGER 

Luke 2:42-52; 2 Peter 1:5-8. 
[The first 12 paragraphs of this article were reprinted from an article entitled, "Holy, Harmless, Perfect," published 

issue of January 15, 1906, which please see.] 

he might bring everlasting life 


OUR LORD'S CONSECRATION AND BAPTISM 

Being free from sin, our Lord required no justification by 
another; and when he had reached manhood's estate, at the 
age of thirty years, he presented himself wholly, unreservedly, 
to do the Father's will. At the moment of consecration his 
earthly life was yielded up as a sacrifice for the sin of the 
whole world; and this consecration was symbolized by his immersion
 into water at Jordan. The remaining three and onehalf
 years of his life were already on the altar; and he merely 
waited for his sacrifice to be consumed, crying with his last 
breath, "It is finished!" 

Quickly following our Lord's consecration and its symbolization
 came the evidence that his sacrifice was accepted of 
God. We read that the heavens were opened unto him. This 
probably signifies that he was granted a vision of heavenly 
things, an insight into the deeper things of the Scriptures, an 
understanding of the higher things of God's Word. Hitherto 
he had in a measure understood about the lamb that was to be 
led to the slaughter, but saw nothing to identify the one who 
was to be the great deliverer or to explain the wonderful pictures
 in the Scriptures. But just as soon as he was begotten 
of the holy Spirit, he began to see that if he would accomplish 
the great work of blessing all the families of the earth it 
would be by a manifestation of loyalty and of righteousness. 
As soon as' his mind was illuminated he saw the things pertaining
 to the sufferings of the Christ. 

At his consecration at Jordan our Lord agreed to give up 
the human life, all rights and privileges as a human being. 
The ultimate purpose of this full surrender of his life was that 


to mankind*. The Father's 
arrangement with him, however, was such that our Lord might 
retain his personality, his identity. But after he was begotten 
of the holy Spirit, he was a new creature; and as a new 
creature he had his human body in which to develop character 
suitable for the high condition to which his successful accomplishment
 of his mission would lead. The latter part of our 
lesson for today calls to our attention the elements which 
enter into that character and which must be developed by all 
who would attain to membership in the body of Christ. 

GROWTH IN THE FRUITS OP THE SPIRIT 

The matter of cultivating Christian character is not one 
to be accomplished in a few hours or days. It is the work of 
a lifetime, a process of addition, virtue added to virtue, grace 
to grace, and assimilated by the spiritual germ of the new 
nature, until the embryo new creature is formed; and then it 
must continue to develop to completion. 

St. Peter indeed describes a most amiable character. But 
who can meditate upon hi a description without feeling that to 
attain this high eminence will be the work of a lifetime? 
Day by day, if we are faithful, we should realize a measure of 
growth in grace and of development of Christian character. 
We must see to it that we have the truth of God's Word, and 
that it is having its legitimate and designed effect upon out 
lives. And if the truth is thus received into good and honest 
hearts, we have the assurance of the Apostle that we shall 
never fall, but that in due time we shall be received into the 
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 


[6278] 


HELPING OTHERS 


[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "Who 13 My Neighbor," published in issue of July 1, 1000, whieh please see,] 

QUESTIONS CONCERNING EZEKIEL'S TEMPLE 


Question. — Dues Ezekiel \s Temple represent God's finished 
work only? 

Answer. — It represents both the finished work and the work 
in process. But when we apply the picture to the Gospel age 
the same gate, including the porch, symbolizes the tentative 
and the vitalized justification of the little flock and the great 
company, and the gate up to the porch the tentative justification
 of others of the household of faith. In the Gospel age 
picture the Holy represents the tentative condition of those 
begotten to the divine nature. After each age is over, the 
part of the Temple which had represented a wonc in process 
during that age represents the memory of that same work in 
the mind of God, of Christ and of the beings concerned in the 
work. 

Question. — Does the east gate of the inner court symbolize 
the fact that the members of the great company are developed 
after having been "raised to the spirit condition"? 

Answer. — It depends on the meaning attached to the expression
 "raised to the spirit condition." "Raised" means resurrected
, and is properly figured by the porch of the gate. A 
porch represents vitalization, resurrection, raising to the condition
 of the plane indicated by .the court to which the gate 
belongs. The outer-court north-gate-porch shows the final 
resurrection, or full life, through the process of resurrection, 
which will be gained by the hosts of mankind. Such a resurrection
 requires that all the conditions of obedience be met, 
and they will be met by all the loyal portion of mankind by 
the end of the thousand years, and by many individuals much 
sooner. The porch of the outer gate (east) represents the 
vitalization of tentative justification. For the little flock and 
the great company this takes place, after having met the conditions
 for justification, at the instant of begetting to the 
divine nature in the Holy. The ancient worthies will receive 
the vitalizing, or making alive of their tentative justification, 
at the beginning of the earthly phase of the kingdom of 
heaven, we believe in 1925, having met all the conditions during
 their first earthly lives. — Hebrews 11. 

On the divine plane (the building) and on the spirit plane 
(inner court) the vitalizing, raising, takes place first, in the 
begettal to the divine nature, as showoa in the porch of the 
Temple building. Those begotten to divinity find themselves 
in the Holy, having by the act of consecration unto death 
passed over the threshold — assuming that the consecration was 
accepted. The faithful 144,000 remain in the Holy till death; 
many of them passed into the Most Holy in 1878, following 
the Head, who went in A. D. 33. Those proving more or 
less unfaithful have been put out of the Holy by the million*, 
into the inner court east gate, there to meet all the conditions 
necessary for the birth to the spirit plane, represented by 
passing out of this gate into the inner court. While originally 
begotten to the divine nature, in the porch of the Temple, the 
great company nourish themselves poorly or poorly assimilate 
their spiritual food, the Word of God. This begettal therefore 
not resulting in divinity, they must count themselves as having 
been in the porch of this east gate; for it results in birth to 
the spirit plane, but not to the divine stage of that plane. 

It is after the begettal, the quickening, the raising to sit 
in the heavenlies { Ephesians 2:6) in this life, that those begotten
 to the spirit plane or to the divine plane become overcomers
 (Revelation 7:9), or more than overeomers (Revelation 
3:21), as the case may be. In other words they meet all the 
conditions of the Word of God as represented in the chambers 
of the gate or in the picture-lessons on the walls of the Holy. 
After having been born to the proper plane of being, they will 
grow greatly in knowledge and will forever practice the graces 
of the spirit; but they can never have any further change in 
plane of being, as far as we have any knowledge. — Ezekiel 
48:12, 14. 

Question. — What is signified by Ezekiel 46:24, "The ministers
 of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the people"? 

Answer. — These passages from Ezekiel read as follows: 
"After he brought me through the [priests'] entry [S], which 
was at the side of the finner north] gate, into the holy chambers
 [I, I, I, I] of the priests, which looked toward the north; 
and behold there was a place [J, J] on the two sides westward
 [west of the priests* chambers]. Then said he unto me. 
This is the place where the priests shall boil the trespass 
offering and the sin offering, where they shall bake the meat 
offering."— Ezekiel 40:19, 20. 

"Then he brought me forth into the utter [outer] court, 
and caused me to paas by the four corners of the court; and 
behold in every corner of the court there was a court [W, W, 


W, W], in the four corners of the [outer] court there were 
courts joined [made with chimneys] of forty cubits long and 
thirty broad : these four corners were of one measure. And 
there was a row of building round about in them, round 
about them four, and it was made with boiling places under 
the rows round about. Then said he unto me, TTiese are the 
places of them that boil, where the ministers [servants. Lovites
, the great company] of the house [the little flock] shall 
boil the sacrifice of the people." — Ezekiel 40:21-24. 

The foregoing refers to an important part of the treatment 
of the private sacrifices made by individuals among the people 
during the year after the day of atonement. The sacrifices of 
the day of atonement typified the "better sacrifices" of Christ 
(Hebrews 9:23), Head and body, during the Gospel age. In a 
general way any sacrifice pictures the consecration, the setting 
apart to divine service of the offerer (Romans 12:1), the 
specific purpose or object being indicated by the peculiar ritual 
of each sacrifice. 

In certain of the private sacrifices of the people the flesh 
of the animal offered was eaten by the priest or by the offerer. 
(Leviticus 7:7, 15) The eating signifies the appropriation of 
the offering by the person or being to whom it was divinely 
ordained that the part eaten should pertain. In a peace offering
 the breast and the shoulder (the best parts) were for the 
priest to eat, the rest of the animal being for the offerer, 
except the part burned. (Leviticus 7:11-18) In a trespass 
offering the part of the animal not burned was for the priests 
to eat. — Leviticus 7:1-6. 

This signifies that in the coming age when an individual 
consecrates or reconsecrates himself his consecration will be 
accepted as made to and belonging to the royal priesthood, 
Christ the great High Priest and the church the under priests. 
This will be proper because Christ bought the world with his 
blood; and for a thousand years everyone will belong to our 
Lord by right of purchase. — Ephesians 1 : 14. 

The flesh of the animal was not fit for eating immediately 
the animal was slain; nor will the consecration by a human 
being of himself be Teady for assimilation by the priesthood 
until something more is done, As before being eaten the flesh 
was washed with water ; so, too, ittfie person consecrating will 
be washed by the water of the Word. His being must be 
cleansed and made to approach closer to the divine standards. 
His new human mind aad will must continually be transformed
 by the renewing of that mind, through the Word of 
God relating to human perfection. — Romans 12:2. 

Even the washing did not finish the preparation of the 
flesh. It was still raw, tough, not tender enough to be eaten 
or assimilated; for the application of cold water did not make 
the flesh tender. The mere learning of the truth, will not 
transform character. Theory alone does not make a good 
workman; practice under difficulty causes the theory to become 
part of the character, the being, and makes the learner a good 
workman. The cold water of the truth touches the outside; 
only when heated to boiling does water penetrate throughout 
the entire substance. The Word of God, the truths destined to 
become a part of the very being, penetrates throughout, and 
thoroughly softens the whole being of the individual, when the 
lessons of the truth are learned and practiced amid fiery trials 
— when symbolical heat (trials) is applied with and through 
the water. — Hebrews 5:8. 

In the Hebrew Tabernacle the flesh was boiled or seethed 
before the door of the Holy. As in the consecration of the 
priesthood, "Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons, Boil the 
flesh at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation ; and 
there eat it with the bread that is in the basket of consecrations
." (Leviticus 8:31) "And thou shalt take the ram of 
consecration, and seethe his flesh in the holy place [court]. 
And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and 
the bread that is in the basket, by the door of the tabernacle 
of the congregation." — Exodus 29:31, 32, 

The significance is much the same here as in the subsequent
 private sacrifices of the people. In the private sacrifices
 the boiled flesh was *aten by the priest alone, or by 
priest and offerer, typifying the assimilation of that degree 
of human perfection which was signified by the flesh of the 
particular creature sacrificed. In the antitype the degree of 
perfection attained or desired by the offerer will be taught 
him by the royal priesthood — will originate with them, as 
will the character development accompanying the merit of 
Christ applied to and assimilated by the consecrator. 

The receiving of the flesh by the priesthood is from our 
viewpoint the receiving back by the Christ of the mental and 

[6279] (189-190) 


(190- 191) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


moral development of the consecrator, which is but their own; 
for the consecrator will have received it from them. (1 
Corinthians 4:7) Thus will the people acknowledge their dependency
 on the priesthood as the source of all the attainments 
and of the ideals connected with the gaining and the enjoyment 
of human perfection through restitution. They will separate 
themselves to the ownership and control of the royal priesthood
; they will give themselves to the Christ as Lord (owner) 
and Master. (Isaiah 2:3) They will acknowledge their new 
selves, their beings to be transformed by the renewing influences
 of the divine instruction and guidance of the coming 
age, as of the Christ and to and for the Christ, by whose 
merit and through whose ministry they may be made ready to 
be "delivered up to God, even the Father," at the end of the 
thousand years of probation, after which, "when all things 
shall be subdued unto him fthe Son], then shall the Son also* 
himself be subject to him [God] that put all things under 
him [the Son], that God may be all in all." 

Only through sacrifice, trial and suffering can the imperfect
 approach unto God. (Psalm 51:17-19) The imperfections 


DIVINE SANCTUARY 



THE TEMPLE OF EZEKIEL'S VISION 


A — Brazen Altar 
B — Temple Porch and Entrance 
C— The Holy 

D — Entrance Into Most Holy 
E — The Most Holy 
H — Separate Places in Inner Court 
I — Priests' Chambers 
J — Priests' Boiling Places 
K^Weatern Building 


L — Levites' Chambers for Washing 

Burnt Offerings 
M — Singers' Chambers 
N — Porch or Lobby <Jate 
— Inner Threshold of Gate 
P — Six Little Chambers in Gateway 
Q— Entry 
R— Door of Gate 
S — Private Steps for Priests 

[6'280] 


T — Four Tables for Slaying Sacrifices 
U — Inner Wall of Lower Pavement 
V — Thirty Chambers on Lower Pavement
 
W — Levites' Boiling Places 
X — Stairs to Gates 
Y — Stairs to Brazen Altar 
Z — Stairs to Temple Platform 


June 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(191 l?S) 


of the people can be eliminated only through great effort, 
spurred by chastisements; effort against the flesh engenders 
suffering, though finally that suffering emerges into the peace 
and joy of ripened character. (Hebrews 12:9-11) The chastisements
 and the sufferings will be the "boiling" of the flesh — the 
outcome of which will be a character of tenderness, like to the 
mind and character of the divine Christ, and fit to be acknowledged
 by and assimilated as their own by the Christ, Head 
and body. In that way it will be true that "that servant 
which knew his Lord's will and prepared not, neither did 
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. But 
he tHat knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, 
shall be beaten with few stripes." (Luke 12:47, 48) Those 
whose natural characters, whose fleshly minds, are tough and 
unassimilable for the priesthood, shall be "boiled" thoroughly 
until they are tender-hearted; but those who are readily responsive
 to the "ministry of reconciliation" will need but littln 
of the trials administered by and through the water of the 
Word of God. 

The eating of the ilesh by the offerer is the thorough assimilation
, by the consecrator, of the new human character ideals 
presented in the restitution teachings. There, too, 'tribulation 
worketh patience; and patience experience; and experience, 
hope; and hope maketh not ashamed, because the love of God 
[on the natural plane] is shed abroad in [their] hearts by 
the holy Spirit which is given' (TComans 5:4, 5) ; for all the 


willing and obedient, at least, shall receive of the holy Spirit, 
as says Jehovah, "I will pour my spirit upon all flesh" (Joel 
2:28) in the world-wide blessing, soon to come. 

In the Ezekiel Temple the boiling of that part of the sacrifice
 to be eaten by the offerer was done in one of the boiling 
places in the outer court (W, W, W, W), symbolizing the 
infliction of chastisements on the natural restitution plane. It 
was done by the Levites, symbolizing the fact that of all who 
are on the spirit plane the great company will be the moat 
directly identified with earthly matters. This flesh when 
"boiled" was eaten by the offerer, representing his moral 
assimilation of the ideals presented by the Word of God, touching
 upon human perfection. The flesh belonging to the priesthood
 is boiled in the boiling places (J, J) in the rear of the 
inner court, symbolizing the consecration of the offerer's new 
natural mind/ as sharing in the holy Spirit poured out upon 
all f osh, and symbolizing also the trials which he must endure 
mentally in connection with his chastisements. This boiling 
was done by the priesthood, suggesting that they will exercise 
supervision and direction over the acts of the great company. 
They collectively constitute a 'merciful and faithful priesthood 
in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the 
sins of the people. For in that they themselves have suffered 
[in this life], being tempted [tried to the "uttermost, "boiled"], 
thov are able to succor them that are tempted/ — Hebrews 
2:17, 18. 


THE TRIAL IN BROOKLYN 


The trial of the eight brethren from these headquarters 
was set for the criminal term beginning Monday, June 3, ir> the 
Federal Court of the Eastern District of New York. Affidavits 
had been filed by the eight defendants stating their reasons for 
believing ^that Mr. Justice Garvin was biased against us and 
our work. This action automatically removed him from the 
trial and adverted the case to Mr. Justice Chatfield. He, however
, referred it to a judge specially brought here from Vermont
 — Mr. Justice Howe. 

At this writing, one week of the trial has elapsed, with 
perhaps a little more than half of the testimony presented by 
the prosecution. Our legal counsel, Messrs. Sparks and Fuller, 
are loyally looking out for our interests, and under great 
handicaps, for the government has had three months for preparation
 and our counsel is obliged to prepare as we go along, 


because no disclosures were made in the indictment as to what. 
portions of our literature were objected to. 

It se<ems we have a fair-minded jury, but it is too early to 
be able to discern which way the trial will go. Of one thing 
we are certain: all concerned are perfectly willing to accept 
the Lord's providence in the matter, and rejoice that they are 
accounted worthy to suffer shame for his sake. 


Foreign Agencies .-—British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE
, Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner
 Str., 76 Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building
, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address the SOCIETY in 
every case. 

[Last appearance of this paragraph, which previously 
appeared in every issue since the agencies were formed.] 


You XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JULY 1, 1918 


No. 13 


A SOUND MIND 

"For Qod hath not given us the spirit of fear, tut of power and of love and of a sound mind." — 2 Timothy 1:7. 


Fear is one of the principal things that make life troublesome
. It was doubtless for this reason that our Master admonished
 us, saying, "Fear not, little flock." Fear, when it is unbalanced
 by hope, becomes desperation; and desperation spells 
misery. Fear is a prodigious magnifier, especially when it has 
been excited by any unusual object. The traveler rarely sees 
a small tiger; the landsman seldom experiences a gale at sea 
that is not a hurricane. 

In a Christian, the "fear of man that bringeth a snare" is 
counterbalanced by the fear of displeasing his Lord- As the 
Master said : "Fear not them that destroy the body but after 
that cannot touch the soul; but fear rather him who after 
he hath destroyed the body is able also to destroy the soul in 
Gehenna fire." 

We fear usually one or all of three things: weakness, disesteem
, mistakes — and the uncertainty which follows in their 
wake. Fear instilled into the mind of childhood unconsciously 
impresses and influences the whole life, years after the small incidents
 which gave rise to the fears have passed into oblivion. 

But the Apostle intimates in our text that the Father has 
not been content merelv to advise us to be fearless, but that 
he has given us those things which are necessary to put fear 
out of our lives. He has given us the spirit of power, i. e., 
power of purpose, which is courage; he has ^iven us the spirit 
of love, and the spirit of a sound mind. This is the powerful 
alliance against fear. For if we have power and courage we 
do not fear weakness; if we have love overflowing in our hearts 
we have that which makes us estimable in the Father's sight, 
and even to some extent in the sight of others. Hence we do 
not fear disesteem; for "there is no fear in love; perfect love 
casteth out fear." And if we have prudence, judgment, common
 sense, we have no fear of the desperation which needless 
mistakes bring. 

Courage may be likened to the little brother, love to the 


little sister, and common sense to the watchful guardian. 
Power might be disposed to use itself roughly at times; love 
might be too much impelled by tender feeling; but a sound 
mind modifies and directs them both. 

SOUND MIND MEANS SOUND JUDGMENT 

That quality which the Apostle terms "a sound mind" and 
which is popularly designated as "common sense" may be defined
 as the sound judgment of the mind when reflecting upon 
problems of truth and conduct, without bias from logical 
subtleties or selfish interests. Balanced judgment is as valuable
 as its application is rare. It is sometimes possessed to an 
astonishing degree — on matters of purely human import — by 
those outside of covenant relations with God. But this should 
not discourage us; for they were merely better born. 

But the Lord's people have a power within them which, if 
responded to and followed, will kelp develop the main features 
of a sound mind in them, no matter where they start on the 
scale. That power is a desire for the truth. Honesty, or a 
love of truth, is the basic requisite of a sound mind; for if 
we do not really desire the truth, then we are bound to become
 immersed in a hopeless tangle of illusions. One of earth's 
wise men has said: "The love of truth is the most noble 
quality of the human intellect, the most enjoyable in the interchange
 of confidences, yet of all qualities it is the most rare." 

Coupled to this desire for the truth is the capacity for its 
apprehension, which is possessed by every spirit-illumined 
child of God, and not by others. This fact is made plain by 
the Apostle: "The things of God knowcth no man, but the 
Spirit of God. Now we have received, not the spirit of the 
world, but the Spirit which is of God; that we might know 
the things that are freely given to us of God. Which tilings 
also Ave speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, 
b-t which the holy Spirit teacheth; comparing spiritual things 


[6281] 


US5 196) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


with spiritual. But the natural man receiveth not the things 
of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; neither 
oan he know them, because they are spiritually discerned .... 
but God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the 
Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God." 

Both the desire and the capacity for understanding the 
truth come from God. As we are again told: "It is God that 
worketh in you, both to "will and to do of his good pleasure." 
(Philippians 2:13) The desire for truth is from God, in the 
first place, while we are still natural men, in the sense that it 
is a fragment of the original likeness to our Creator. After we 
are begotten and illuminated by the holy Spirit this desire becomefl
 stronger an4 stronger and at the Bame time our minds 
are enabled to grasp the truth to an extent hitherto impossible. 

The Master himself places truth at the bottom of the 
structure when he says : "If ye continue in my word, then are 
ye indeed my disciples, and ye shall know the truth and the 
truth shall make you free." It is not merely doctrinal truth 
that we shall know, but also truth concerning ourselves and 
our spiritual status. How could we be set free from our own 
errors, if we did not desire and recognize the facts concerning 
ourselves? Common sense, or a sound mind, in the measure 
that it is possessed, enables one to see things as they are and 
to do things as they should be done. 

There is a number of elements which go to make up a 
sound mind, none of which must be overlooked. But let it not 
be thought that a sound mind is a passive thing, a kind of 
reference library. In some ways the everyday term "common 
sense" is to be preferred; for a sound mind means simply the 
capacity for sound, accurate, reliable judgment on the problems 
of life as they arise from day to day. 

PHILOSOPHY OFTEN UNESSENTIAL 

And let us observe right here that the philosophy of character
 development cannot be called a requisite as long as we 
are developing with reasonable satisfaction. It becomes valuable
 to us chiefly when something is wrong. It assists us to 
recognize just how far we have progressed and how far we have 
retrograded, and where the greatest pressure should be exerted
, to start us on again. But perception and reflection will 
accomplish nothing in us worth while without obedience. Obedience
, or conformity to the instructions given us by our Lord, 
is the vital thing in any case, whether we understand all of the 
steps of the process or not. More than one scriptural expression
 emphasizes this thought: "If ye know these things, h-appy 
are ye if ye do them"; "If ye do these things, ye shall never 
fall," etc. 

Our Christian course is like an apprenticeship at a trade. 
The master workman might sit down and attempt to explain 
the whole thing to the boy at the start, but very little would 
the boy understand or remember. What he does do is to say: 
"Now you do just as I tell you; and I will guarantee that 
after so long a time you, too, will be a master workman." So 
the Lord says, essentially, to us: "If ye love me keep my commandments
"; 'and I will make you meet for the inheritance 
of the saints in light. 1 The Lord does invite us to 'reason 
with him* and to 'think on these things/ still he makes it likewise
 plain that we can know only in part, until that which is 
perfect is come. 

We have probably all known some old brothers or sisters 
who had grown rich in the spirit of the Lord, not because they 
were able to explain the process of growth, but because, like 
the lily, they lent themselves to sun and air, and growth was 
a natural result. It never occurred to them to wonder why a 
certain command was given. It was enough to know that it 
was given. When they heard the Lord say: "Love your enemies
; bless them that curse you and pray for them that despitefully
 use you and persecute you for my sake," they simply 
loved their enemies, they blessed and they prayed without 
doubt or hypocrisy. When he said to them: "If ye forgive 
not men their trespasses, how can ye expect your heavenly 
Father to forgive your trespasses?" they simply forgave freely, 
up to seventy times seven and, like God, were too courteous 
ever to mention an account once cancelled. When he said: 
"Seek, ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness," they 
sought that kingdom. When he said: "Centre your mind on 
things above and not on things on the earth," they have simply 
done it, and in doing it have shown the greatest wisdom that 
was ever shown. When he said: "Speak evil of no man." 
they have kept their lips from speaking guile. 

It is largely when we realize ourselves at a standstill, or 
as making very slow progress that we can most profitably consider
 the whys and wherefores. 

STEPS TO GOOD JUDGMENT 
Perception, memory, thought, alertness, deduction, foresight
, reason, judgment: these are the steps which must be 

[628 


taken, consciously or unconsciously in the formation of sound 
judgment on any question. 

Perception stands for the first impress of an idea through 
one or more of the senses. When we see, hear, feel, touch or 
taste a thing we have perceived it. While this is an elemental
 step, still it is a very necessary one. Even the little 
rnollusks and tadpoles are capable of receiving impressions, and 
power to perceive increases with the elaborations and sensitiveness
 of the organism. The Apostle represents hearing as 
being that sense which is employed to announce the truth to 
us. He says: "Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the 
Word of God." That is, Cod's Word contains a message which 
acquaints us with certain facts, without which we would be 
unable to form an accurate judgment or to make a reliable decision
. The Master intimates that this message has gone forth ; 
still, "Who hath believed our report?" Not many. "Blessed," 
therefore, "are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for 
they hear. For indeed I say to you that many prophets and 
righteous men have desired to see what you observe, but have 
not seen; and to hear what you hear, but have not heard." 

But while hearing is a blessing, it is merely the start. The 
parable of the sower goes an to explain this matter further 
and to say: "When anyone hears the word of the kingdom, but 
considers it not, the Evil One comes and snatches away that 
which was sown in his heart. This explains that which was 
sown by the road." Those who do not consider the Lord's message
 do not go very far toward the development of a sound 
mind. "Israel doth not know ; [ because 1 my people doth not 
consider," complains the Prophet Isaiah. 

"That which was sown on rocky ground denotes him who, 
hearing the word, receives it immediately with joy; yet having 
no root in his mind, he retains it only a snort time; for 
when affliction or persecution arises on account of the word he 
instantly stumbles." Such a one perceives, thinks, and is alert, 
but he fails on deduction. He does not, or perhaps cannot, 
hold the proper relationship between the value of the truth, 
the present condition of the world, and the privilege of persecution
 for the Ward's sake. He does not exercise common 
sense, or he would know that anything of value must cost him 
dearly. Note the distinction between that man and the one 
who so valued the pearl of great price that he went and sold 
all that he had to obtain it. 

"That which wa3 sown among thorns denotes that hearer 
in whom the cares of this life and the deceptiveness of riches 
choke the word and render it unproductive." Such a one fails 
on foresight, reason and the final judgment or decision. 

"But that which was sown on good soil and produced fruit, 
one a hundred, one sixty and one thirty, denotes him who not 
only hears and considers, but obeys the word." To hear, to 
consider and to obey-j then, are the" three main steps to the acquirement
 or to the manifestation of a sound mind on any 
given subject. But aside from these three steps, there are five 
other intermediate steps which are well worth considering. 

PERCEPTION, MEMORY, THOUGHT 

Here, say, is a problem before us on which we wish to exercise
 common sense. Though we have heard and received the 
general message of the Lord, it may be that we have not yet 
perceived all the instructions he has given on the immediate 
question under hand. Here we should "search the Scriptures" 
with that love of directness and simplicity without which it 
is impossible to come to an accurate decision. 

For instance, we encounter the statement: "The righteousness
 of the law is fufilled in us who walk not after the flesh 
but after the spirit.*' We roughly perceive the ideas of walking
 after the spirit and walking after the flesh. Memory is at 
once called into play, for the meaning of the individual words 
themselves, then in a brief search of the mind to see if we can 
find anything that sounds similar. We 'call to mind the former 
things' and are thus enabled to profit not only by our own 
past experiences but also by the experiences of others. Without
 memory life would be a blank — a dreary void. 

Perception and memory merge into thought. We begin to 
consider — that is, if we love the truth above all things else. 
We ponder, we reflect, we contemplate; but, if we desire the 
truth, we do not dream. We are informed that, "as a man 
thinketh in his heart, so is he." If he thinks deceitfully, he is 
deceitful to that extent. Thought determines character. 

Thinking, not natural growth, makes perfect manhood. 
There are some who, though they are done growi ng, are only 
boys; the reasoning is feeble. Many who can run and jump 
and bear fatigue cannot observe, cannot examine, cannot 
reason or judge, contrive or execute — they cannot think. To 
have a sound mind it is necessary that we examine ourselves 
about our thinking. We should set ourselves to understand 
whatever we see or read. The Apostle assures us that if we 
"think on these things"— the thing* that are true, noble, pure 

2] 


July 1, 1918 


THE IV A TCH TO WER 


(197-198) 


and lovely — we will be built up to them. We cannot use common
 sense to walk either after the flesh or after the spirit without
 thinking. 

It is not reading, but thinking that gives us possession of 
knowledge. A person may see, hear, read and learn whatever 
he pleases, and as lni-ch as he pleases; but he will know very 
little, if anything, oi it beyond that which he has thought 
over and made the property of his mind.. Like certain silk 
worms which yield silk colored according to the food they have 
feci on, so our life gradually takes the tinge and hue of the 
thoughts to which we most accustom ourselves. If we think 
about the things of the flesh, make provision for pampering its 
desires and appetites, we are living after the flesh, and if we 
are thinking about the things of the spirit, the great principles 
whion Jehovah has established, and seeking to apply them to 
ourselves in harmony with Ms Word, we are living after the 
spirit. 

ALBKTNES8— MENTAL ENERGY 

Alertness is the next requisite. We are admonished to be 
"vigilant," to be "watchful," to be "ready," not to "sleep," nor 
be "slothful," In one place the Apostle seeks to "stir up our 
pure minds by way of remembrance." Alertness is energy applied
 toattention. It is like steam in a boiler. The boiler and 
the engine may be in 'perfect condition; but if there is no 
steam, no work will be accomplished. 

On this very point of mental vigilance cumes, perhaps, the 
severest test of our honesty in our search for the truth on any 
given subject. Our own faults, like our own noses, are so close 
wo cannot see them without great effort and insight. But, as 
the poet says: "Self-love is not so great a sin as self-neglecting
." For want of spiritual energy we allow the precious, 
though oft-times unpleasant truth concerning our motives to lie 
hidden; and we do not make progress. 

The value of our thought depends much upon the course 
we take — whether the subject in hand is examined fully and 
carefully, or only given an undecided glance, our thoughts reverting
 to other matters, to be treated in the same desultory 
way. That mental disposition is of great value which will 
enable us to give our close and undivided attention to any subject
 which we wish to investigate. Some may try to investigate
 a matter, but find that the mind wanders. It needs alertness
, effort, vigilance. 

However splendid may be a man's genius, brilliant his 
talents, and profound his intellect, if devoid of energy he is 
practically lifeless, and his powers are useless to theXord, to 
himself and to the world. Energy, literally from the Greek, 
means inwardworkingness; the bloom of the flower is energy, 
the increase of fruit is energy, the growth of the body is energy, 
yet in all these there i3 no violence. So with the holy Spirit, 
power or energy in us; its efficacy is not destructive, but none 
the less vital 

A man may possess a high degree of refinement, with stores 
of knowledge, and even a well-disposed mind; but if he is 
destitute of energy, he is like a watch without a mainspring, 
beautiful but inefficient and unfit for service. God has given 
us new courage, he has refreshed our despondent spirits by a 
message of cheer and hope, and he does refresh them by continual
 reminders of his grace. Let us, therefore, not stop in 
our efforts toward right decisions because of a dearth of alertness
; for we cannot dream ourselves into a character. But 
with the instruments and the forces which the Lord has given 
us we must forge one. 

DEDUCTION AND FORESIGHT 

Our alertness or mental energy opens up new avenues; it 
broadens the field of attention. Mental energy pushes the mind 
to draw deductions from the new things observed. Time and 
again our Lord and the apostles invite us to deduce the logical
 conclusion from the facts which have hitherto been made 
known to us. Our Lord chided the Pharisees, saying that they 
were able to draw correct deductions regarding the weather 
from the appearance of the sky, yet they were not able to discern
 the outcome of the most apparent spiritual situations. 
"Have ye not known?" "Dwye not see?" "Know ye not?" are 
all arguments which the Scriptures use and which show that 
we are expected to use our powers of deduction. But let us 
not deduce something that is not there. Our brethren in the 
centuries gone by made mistakes in this way. They saw that 
most of the worJd was not fit for the state of heavenly bliss 
and they deduced that the unfit must therafore go to eternal 
torment. If eternal torment had been & divine arrangement, 
so stated in God's Word, and if there had been no other time 
of trial or arrangement for mankind, then the deduction would 
have been correct. 

We are supposed to draw deductions from facts, not fancies. 
With the help of other Scriptures we can safely deduce that 


if we are walking after the flesh we are not walking after the 
spirit. We can safely deduce, too, that if we are walking after 
the spirit the righteousness of the law is being fulfilled in us, 
though we may not be able to see very much of that righteousness
. 

"LET US EEASON TOGETHER" 

Next in the attainment of a sound mind on any given 
problem comes foresight. Foresight is the power of looking 
ahead to determine the probable effect which the carrying out 
of our deductions will have. Closely linked to it and really 
growing out of it is precaution. We are not only told in the 
Scriptures that 'if we live after the flesh we shall die' but we 
are also told to make straight paths for our feet. If we stand 
on a railroad track and see a train coming, that is foresight; 
if we get off before it hits us, that is precaution. Foresight is 
a prerequisite of sound judgment, or common sense. How often
 we hear the exclamation: "Why didn't 1 think of that?" — 
meaning, "Why didn't I foresee that?" 

All these things lead us up to the point of reason, which 
is the process of comparison. We are admonished to "prove all 
things, hold fast that which is good." To prove a thing is to 
compare it with some known standard. It is a direct violation 
of this precept to allow such facts as we may possess to become 
rusty from disuse or to submit our minds implicitly to another 
without proper reasons therefor. 

Reason is the art of fixing the relativeness of things. It is 
by means of reason that it is possible to differentiate facts 
and to indicate to what category they belong. Thus and thus 
only can we "rightly divide the word of truth." Thus and 
thus only can we (t give a reason for the hope that is in us." 
Only thus can we fulfil the Apostle's prayer that 'our love may 
yet abound more and more in knowledge, and in all perception, 
in order that we may examine the differences of things.* — 
Ffhilippians 1:9, 10, Diaglott. 

To reason about a thing is to dissect it, to examine it from 
every point of view before adopting it, before deferring to it 
or rejecting it. Only by reasoning can we judge ourselves dispassionately
. The Psalmist approaches the question thus: 
"Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse [rectifyl his ways? 
By taking heed thereto according to thy word." Applying 
this principle to ourselves we see that we are to look at our 
ways, our thoughts, our words, our actions and compare them 
with the standards given us in the Lord's Word. If we be impelled
 by a desire for the truth and if; we "Judge soberly" we 
shall see wherein we have already attained to those standards 
and wherein we are still lacking. "Come now, let us reason 
together, saith the Lord of hosts." 

DECISION, THE SOUL OF CHARACTER 

We now come to the decisive factor of a sound mind, judgment
 or decision. We may perceive the things of the spirit; 
we may reflect upon and contemplate them; we may be keen in 
our interest and draw some very accurate deductions as to advantages
 to be derived ; we may foresee ourselves enjoying the 
fruits of the spirit and acting as an ambassador of the Lord; 
we may count the cost by process of comparing the things of 
this present life with the joys that shall be revealed in us, but 
when we definitely make the decision and gay, "I will do it; I 
will pay the price, cost what it may," then* and first then, is 
character really molded — and devils steo back an extra pace. 

Some one has aptly said: "A wise man is like a pin, his 
head keeps him from going too far." If a whole man be like 
a pin, then certainly decision is the point of that pin; for by 
decision his powers become penetrative and effectual. Decision 
is like a ratchet brake on an incline railway; it keeps one 
from slipping hack over the ground just gained. Again, decision
 may be likened to the skin of an apple. Not only is it 
the most 'beautiful part, but it preserves the rest of the fruit, 
as decision preserves the process of thinking just passed 
through with more or less labor. It is really better for the 
character to decide wrong than not to decide at all. We can always
 decide something about a question. We can decide to 
let it alone, or decide to let it rest until more information is 
at hand. 

"A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways." "Unstable
 as water, thou shalt not excel." These texts show the 
disadvantages of indecision. How many occasions for doing 
£Ood are passed by from irresolution! While we are saying 
to ourselves, Shall I, or shall I not? the moment flies awav and 
the blossom of joy which we might have jsriven to it is withered 
and often cannot be revived by anv tears of repentance. The 
irresolute man cannot perform any action well. 

On the other hand, decision of character is one of the most 
important of qualities to attain and maintain. In fact we 
must possess a good denl of it before we can give ourselves to 
the Lord. ( Knowledge is not our chief end; it is action — action
 inspired by love, but still action. We may hare a fine 


[6283] 


(198-199) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


RlOOKLVS. V. Y. 


education, learn to think most correctly and talk moat beautifully
; but when it comes to action, if we are weak and undecided
 we are of all beings the most wretched. All mankind feel 
themselves weak, beset with infirmities, and surrounded with 
dangers; the acutest minds are the most conscious of difficulties
 and dangers. They want shove all things a leader with 
that boldneBs, decision and energy which, with shame, they do 
not find jn themselves. Just such a leader we find in our 
Lord, who not only trod the way we tread, but trod it alone. 

Next to being* upright and faithful in the performance of 
duty, we should be decided; and then we shall make either 
friends or foes worth while. It is in vain to hope to please all 
alike: "Woe unto you when all men speak well of you/* Let 
a man stand with his face in whatever direction he will, he 
must necessarily turn his back to one-half the world. If a thing 
be right, let us do it boldly ; if it be wrong, leave it undone. 
Every day is a little life, and our whole trial time is but a day 
repeated. 

FOES OF A SOTJKD MIND 

There are three foes to the exercise of a sound mind. One 
is impulse, a perversion of power and judgment. Another is 
sentimentality, a perversion of love and wisdom. The third is 
illusion, a perversion of deduction and reason. 

Impulse is like a spring trap that operates generally to the 
injury of someone. It is action under snap judgment, wherein 
all the steps between perception and decision, except alertness, 
are almost completely overlooked. Adam's transgression itself 
was largely of this nature. He felt, he was keen on the subject
, he acted. When TJzzah steadied the ark he did it under 
impulse and paid for his lack of reasoning with his life. Had 
he remembered the Ijord*s commandments, had he thought of 
them sufficiently beforehand, had he been alert with a sense 
of obedience, had he been exercising the foresight which moments
 of quiet contemplation should have taught him as he 
walked beside the ark, he would have been preparM to stop his 
tendency to an impulsive meddling in matters not his own. 

Peter was impulsive in proclaiming hig lasting fidelity to 
the Lord. He merely perceived that Jesus wa^ the Christ, the 
son of the living God, and assumed that everything must be 
outwardly favorable to our Lord, who was one, naturally, with 
whom Peter would like to be always associated. His judgment
 lacked the calm, careful consideration and insight which 
became his at Pentecost. No one can allow his impulsiveness to 
govern and at the same time exercise a sound mind well, because
 a sound judgment includes careful and moderate comparison
 of the facts involved. The impulsive ones are very apt 
to be prejudiced in their conclusions; for prejudice is premature
 judgment. They jump from perception to energy and 
from energy to decision. They are always starting something, 
but it is oft-times something they wish they could stop. Sometimes
 they are like the man looking through the yellow-stained 
glass, when everything appears peculiarly honny : then they 
are like the other one who looked through the" blue-stained 
glass, when everything looks sombre and hopeless. Neither had 
an accurate judgment of the situation. 

Impulsiveness is a false enthusiasm traceable not to our 
fixed ideals, but to our wishes. It is often truer "Thy wish 
was father to the thought," Impulsiveness was the difficulty 
with the Galatian brethren; as the Apostle says: "Ye did run 
well for a time .... foolish Galatians," who hath bewitched
 you? 1 ' They had not properly fortified themselves 
with the reasons for their faith and were in danger of losing 

It is doubtless because we tend to jump bo conclusions and 
to other associated actions that the Lord has laid upon us certain
 restrictions such as, "Render not evil for evil." The impulsive
 tendency is to strike or apeak back wnen we are injured
. Occasionally such action mi#ht be right in itself. The 
Mosaic law provided for such retribution. But if we have parefully
 pondered the various phases of the Lord's will for us and 
if we have grasped the thought that he would be better pleased 
to have us consider a situation before we act, we are to that 
extent guarded, and our energy and decision are forced to wait 
on thought, foresight and reason. "He that is slow to anger 
is better than the mighty; and he thai ruleth his own spirit 
than he that taketh a city." 

Another hindrance to sound judgment is sentimentality. 

SENTIMENT VS. SENTIMENTALITY 
Now sentiment is a. noble thing. It was the noblest sentiment 
which God had toward the world which prompted him to make 
the arrangement for its redemption. No one can ever have a 
sound mind who absolutely ignores sentiment, if that were possible
. But sentimentality is the quality present when sentiment
 overrules reason, or when it forces a decision before reason
 has time to consider. Impulse and sentimentality often go 
hand in hand, like their legitimate prototypes, power and love. 
It was sentimentality when the inhabitants of Lystra named 
Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercury, and said: "The gods are 
come down to us in the likeness of men." Again, when St. Paul 
shook off the poisonous serpent from his hand and lived, the 
people of the island would do him worship, thinking he must 
be a god. 

Never will common sense have a chance to manifest itself in 
tose who permit such ephemeral and enfeebling impressions to 
govern the judgment and who fail to harmonize common sense 
and the emotions of the heart. Sentiment reasons and is capable
 of devotion. Sentimentality excludes reflective thought and 
ignores generosity. We are capable of sacrificing ourselves for 
sentiment. Sentimentality exacts the sacrifice of others. 

We have seen mothers oppose the departure of their sons, 
preferring to oblige them to lead an obscure existence near to 
them, rather than impose upon themselves the sorrow of a 
separation. Sentimentality and its derivatives, puerile pity 
and false sensitiveness, create illusions for those who do not 
practise the art of reasoning. 

ILLUSIONS LIKE WILL-O'-THE-WISPS 

Both impulse and sentimentality contribute to ot lead to illusions
. Illusions, like ideals, are made by imagination and 
hope. Inaccuracy is the difference. Imagination, in the sense 
of power to form and hold a mental image of an idea or of 
its effect on us, is real I v necessary to any process of reasoning. 
The Apostle sets this thought forth in the following words: 
"We behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lord and are 
changed Tby the effect of that image on our minds], from glory 
unto glory." That is, from the fragmentary descriptions in 
God's Word we are able to form a mental image or conception 
of his character. 

But imagination is usually so linked with sentimentality 
that the word has come to have a bad savor. So tho^ Apostle 
says: "Casting down imaginations and every high thing that 
exalteth itself against the knowledge [the exact knowledge or 
acquaintanceship! of God, we bring into captivity every thought. 
to the obedience of Christ." The idealist and the illusionist 
perceive alike, but the latter is not impelled by a desire for the 
truth. His wishes take the place of his memory of previous 
experience and of the promises and directions of the Lord. 
With such a one reverie takes the place of thought. There is 
indolence instead of alertness; fancy instead of deduction; desire
 instead of foresight; sophistry instead of reasoning. Is it 
any wonder that the decision, such as there is, is erroneous, and 
that illusion enshrouds the true powers of discernment? 

The "righteous" Jews of Jehus' day deluded Hiemshlves into 
thinking that no blessings could pass them by; but they, with 
the rest of the world, were drunken. They thought that, not 
because of a passion for the truth, but because of prejudice, 
which is traceable to nothing more than mental and moral indolence
. 


'BE OF GOOD COURAGE" 


"He of good courage find he shall 
Jesus gave us a perfect example of true courage based upon 
implicit confidence in the divine promises — such a courage as 
is needed by all of his people at this time. The Apostle suggests
 that we consider him, lest we become faint and we&ry in 
our minds. There is one kind of fearlessness, however, which 
is begotten of self-esteem, lack of humility. This is not the 
kind enjoined upon the Lord's people. They are to be both 
tender-hearted and humble-minded. The spirit of courage possessed
 by the saints is based largely upon their faith in the 
Lord. Realizing the divine love and providential care, these 
can apply to themselves the gracious assurance that "the 
Father himself loveth you," and that "all things shall work 
together for good to them that love God, to the called ones acstrengtli
&n thine heart." — Psalm 27:14. 
cording to his purpose/' — John 16:27; Romans 8:28. 

It is this realization of divine all -wisdom and all- power 
that gives the strength of heart referred to in our text. It will 
be readily seen, then, that this courage is based upon faith, 
though of course the faith must have a foundation of knowledge
. The proper relationship of our growth is primarily 
knowledge: faith, courage, activity, and all of these continue 
to grow, and in their maturity make us wise, faithful, courageous
 overcomers in respect to the spiritual matters to which 
we have been called through the great and precious promises. 

Sometimes we realize our deficiencies and are not able to 
locate the cause. Some one says, 'I want to be an overcomer, 
to gain the victory over the spirit of the world, over the teaT
6284] 


Jr:.v 1, 1918 


T HE WATCH TO W E R 


(200-201) 


dencies of my own fallen flesh anil over the wiles of the adversary
, but somehow I cannot; I fail.' Such should learn 
to look for the source of failure, the deficient element, and 
should fortify himself in respect to the same. Let him ask 
first, 'Is my failure to overcome due to a lack of courage? Am 
I fearful, "and hence unable, to fight the good fight of faith 
and, by the Lord's assistance, to gain the victory?' If he has 
the courage he may find that he has not been sufficiently trusting
 the Lord, but leaning too much on his own strength. Such 
should remember the Apostle's words, "When I am weak, then 
am I strong"; reversely, 'when I am strong in self-assurance, 
I am then weak, because the Lord wishes me to rely not upon 
my self j but upon him, his strength, his grace.' If the courage 
be found deficient, the reason evidently is that the faith is lacking
; and if so, there is a reason for it — either a lack of knowledge
 on which to build a faith, or a lack of exercise and development
 of faith. The knowledge is to be sought from the 
right quarter, in harmony with the Lord and his Word, and 
the faith is to be exercised continually, recognizing the Lord's 
interest in us as his children, as testified to by his Word andby 
noticing the leadings of divine providence in our daily affairs. 
LOVE CASTS OUT FEAR 

There is a proper fear, or reverence, and disinclination to 
offend our heavenly Father and our Redeemer, which we wish 
never to lose. Perfect love will not cast out this fear, but 
rather intensify it. The fear which love casts out is timidity, 
a servile fear or dread of the Lord or of Satan or of the fallen 
angels or of men and what they might do unto us. Perfect 
love cannot be attained without knowledge, faith, courage and 
overcoming. It is the result of the exercise of all this divine 
arrangement that brings us nearer to God and makes us truly 
thankful and appreciative of his gracious purposes and omnipotent
 power for their accomplishment. 

The spirit of courage needs special cultivation by the Lord's 
people; and this cultivation means growth in all the graces. 
For instance, if calamity befall us or threaten us we should 
immediately think of the fact that our Lord assures us that 
even an insignificant sparrow cannot fall to the ground without
 the Father's notice, and that we are of much more value 
than many sparrows. This thought at once strengthens t the 
heart, nerves the arm, quickens the pulse of endeavor, provided 
we can realize that God is for us, that no earthborn cloud intervenes
 between our souls and the love for us which he has declared
. If a cloud does obscure the Father's love we must the 
more earnestly, the more persistently get from behind it by 
getting our hearts right with the Lord, by going to him in 
prayer, by confessing our trespasses and by requesting mercy 
and grace to help and to restore us to his favor. 

"Be of good courage and he shall strengthen thine heart," 
is one of the blessings assured us in his Word. In the divine 
order courage is necessary to strength and victory. Some one 
has said, "One with God is a majority." With courage to 
grasp this thought and to hold it, things almost superhuman 
seem possible to the Lord's people, while without this courage 
they may naturally be weak and easily vanquished. 
COURAGE IN THIS EVIL DAY 

Never before, perhaps, was courage so needed as it is now 
needed in this evil day ; but the prophets' descriptions of this 
great trouble time are very figurative when they speak of fire 
and clouds and pillars of smoke, saying of this time, "I will 
show wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood and fire 
and pillars of smoke," etc. But the consecrated children of 
God need have no timidity in respect to these matters if they 
have the proper courage, developed by proper exercise and built 
upon proper faith, founded upon the knowledge of divine revelation
. Their attitude of heart will be, "I will fear no evil, 
for thou art with me ; thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me." 

Whether, therefore, storms financial, political, religious or 
demoniacal come his way the child of God may rest secure and 
be of good courage. The Lord is both able and willing to care 
for his interests and bring him off victor. Should the fallen 
angels he permitted again to materialize and personate either 
the dead or living, this class need have no fear. Their perfect 
love for the Lord, based upon a knowledge and appreciation of 
his truth, will lead them to triumph courageously over all the 
wiles of the adversary and his hordes. 

THE ELECT TO BE tTNDECEIVABLE 

The Scriptures abound with testimonies to the effect that 
the severe trials of the near future will be along the lines of 
deception. They speak of lying angels and deceivableness of 
unrighteousness and "lying wonders," and tell us that the Lord 
will send or permit a strong delusion that they may believe a 
lie. (2 Thessalonians 2:9-11) If we gain the right conception 
of the matter these deceptions are to affect the whole world, including
 fifes wise men, and indeed practically everybody except 
the "elect": and the "elect" will be preserved, not through 


their own wisdom or superiority, but through the power oi 
God. "For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, 
and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it 
were possible, they shall deceive even the elect." — Matthew 
24:24. 

Our Lord in the parable of the wheat and tares tells of the 
harvest work and how he would "gather together his elect 
from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other." 
(Matthew 24:31) It is by thus gathering them that they are 
protected in this time of strife and trouble when others are 
deceived. But they are not gathered physically into one place, 
but spiritually; their minds, their hearts, their affections are 
gathered together, centered. Our text tells us that our Lord 
is this great Center to which his elect must all be gathered if 
they would have rest or peace, if they would overcome the 
world, the flesh and the peculiar snares of the adversary, 
which will now be laid for the feet of all and will more or less 
entrap all except the elect class. 

"GATHER MY SAINTS TJNTO ME" 
Figuratively all of these "elect" ones a*e gathered, and the 
place is thus described, **I will say of the Lord, he is my 
refuge; in him will I trust"; and again, "He that dwelleth 
in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the 
shadow of the Almighty." Ah! no wonder that we also read, 
"No harm shall come nigh thee." How could harm come to 
any who aTe thus close to the Lord ? "A thousand shall fall at 
thy side, ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not 
come nigh thee; because thou hast made the Lord thy refuge; 
thou hast made the Most High thy habitation." — Psalm 91:1, 
2, 7. 

This nearness to God, into which his "elect" are gathered, 
is the source of their protection. And the dangers to others are 
in proportion to their distance from this citadel of strength. 
this fortress, this refuge or tower. 
"Then let our songs abound, 
And every tear be dry; 
We're traveling through ImmanueVs ground 
To fairer prospects nigh." 

"ALL POWER IS GIVEN UNTO ME" 
These were our Lord's words after his resurrection. They 
were true then. They have been true throughout the Gospel 
age, and they are still true today, because we are now living in 
tiie time of which it is written, "He shall take unto himself 
his great power and reign." His reign has in some senses of 
the word already begun. He has already marshaled forces 
which will complete the overthrow of everything opposed to his 
kingdom and its righteous laws. And we may be sure that the 
members of his body still in the flesh this side of the vail are 
no less subjects of his providential care than are the world 
and its affairs. We may be sure that nothing is transpiring, 
either in the nominal church or among the kingdoms of the 
world, among socialistic or political parties or in the financial 
world contrary to what will best serve our Lord's purposes in 
connection with the events just before us and the outworking 
of the same in fullest accord with the prophecies. 

Oh, that we could get this thought rightly settled in our 
minds! Yea, as the Scriptures say, "Settle it in your hearts" 
— that our Lord is at the helm superintending all of earth's 
affairs at the present time in a much more practical sense 
than ever in the past. And have we not seen his graciousness 
towards the church during the forty years of the harvest period
 that are already past? And can we doubt his continued supervision
 of the affairs of his betrothed to the grand consummation
? "He who hath begun the good work in us is able to 
complete it," and he who has thus conducted the harvest work 
is able still to direct his cause, to order, bless and use it to his 
own praise and to the blessing of his people. 

"Who led thee first will lead thee still; 
Be calm and sink into his will." 
Let us not be timid either as respects the affairs of the 
church in general, or as respects our own personal relationship 
to it and to the Lord. Let us learn more and more to be on 
the lookout for the leadings of his providence and for utilizing 
knowledge which he has given us from hia Word. Let us not 
be surprised concerning the fierv trials which try us and the 
stormy billows which may at times seem about to overwhelm 
us; "for greater is he that is on our part than all that are 
against us" — however numerous, however strong, and whether 
demons or men. Let us remember that we are called to be 
overcomers and that the victory that over com eth the world is 
our faith. — 1 John 5:4. 

REMEMBER OUR VOW 
"Resist the devil and he will flee from you," is the Lord's 
testimony, through James. This implies an assault by the 
adversary. It implies that he should be resisted and can be 


VII— 30 


[6286] 


(J01-204) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


resisted and that in the end he will flee from us, not because 
of arrogance or power on our part, but, as our Master said, 
"He hath nothing in me" ; so if he finds it useless to continue 
his assaults he will probably flee also from us to other fields 
of service. We remind all of our readers that whoever comes 
under the influence of Spiritism, Christian Science, Hypnotism 
or any other form of Occultism is thereby endangering himself, 
not only for the moment, but also for the future, because the 
evil spirits operating through these various channels seek, 
some in one way and some in another, to delude, bewilder, confuse
 the reason and bring into subjection the minds of those 
with whom they have to do. Hence any of the Lord's people 
who have affiliation at any time with any of these are specially 
warned of liability to intrusion by these spirits now. We remind
 all that the special channel through which they have had 
special success is human curiosity. We urge all of the Lord's 
people to restrain their curiosity, to rely on the Lord's Word 
and to have.no dealings whatever with any of these occult systems
. Let us remember our Vow unto the Lord along this line. 
One dear sister told us recently that before coming into 
the truth she had dabbled with Christian Science and Spiritism, 
and had been entrapped with mediumship. She was a writing 
medium and could distinctly feel something take hold of her 
hand and guide her pencil while she wrote on topics of which 
she had no personal knowledge. After coming into the truth, 
and realizing the source of this power, she resolutely repelled 
it in every way, asking the Lord by prayer for assistance. She 
gained strength to resist this influence, but has again been annoyed
 by the spirits taking her hand and endeavoring in various
 ways to arouse her curiosity so that she would yield her 
hand to them in order to learn their message for her. She 


remarked that she has now a fear and a dread of the evil 
spirits and a strong desire to be free. She finds herself freer 
from their influence when in the company of the Lord's people. 
We advised her against fear and against refusing to remain in 
a room by herself. By so doing she would be cultivating fear 
and subserviency and bringing herself into a condition of mind 
much more amenable to their intrusions. We advised her, and 
now advise all similarly affected, to set the will resolutely in 
opposition, to refuse all communication, to ask no questions, to 
receive no answers in any manner, but in the name of the Lord 
to command the evil spirits to depart, meantime going to the 
Lord in prayer "for deliverance and grace to help in every 
time of need." In times of peace and freedom from assault 
the mind can be stocked with strengthening Scriptural passages 
or helpful poems or words, so that these may be drawn upon 
in times of need. 

In conclusion, then, dear brethren, let us be of good courage
, of strong faith, of heroic determination. Let each see that 
his faith is not in himself, nor in his vows, nor in his very 
best endeavors, but in the Lord. Trust in the Lord and practise
 with your faith at controlling your thoughts, words and 
deeds and at bringing yourself closer to our Father and Redeemer
. We live in a time when worldly wisdom is taking 
note of this need of courage; and much courage there i*. But 
the greatest courage is moral courage, the true courage which 
the Word of God inculcates and through which we may not only 
rejoice in all of the present experiences of life, but ultimately 
come off "conquerors, yea, more than conquerors through him 
who loved us and died for us." "Be of good courage and he 
shall strengthen thine heart." 


"THERE WAS ALSO A STRIFE AMONG THEM" 


Alas! that in his last, sad, sacred hours on earth, 

There should be strife among the Master's chosen twelve — 

A strife to be the greatest, seeking selfish ends, 

Ignoring their sweet privilege to minister 

Unto their Lord, in this, his time of saddest need. 

Ah, me! that he, the alpha and omega, first 

And last, in lowliness must wash their dii3t-stained feet, 

To show that he who serveth most is chief of all! 


Ah, then! shall we not daily watch and humbly pray 
That no defiling "root of bitterness" spring upf 
Shall we seek selfish honors here, or rather wait 
Until we reach the* other side, where he, our king, 
Shall seat us in his throne, exalt his lowly bride! 
Dear Lord, oh, make us gentle, merciful and wise, 
Help us in honor each the other to prefer, 
Fulfilling thus the law of Christ, the law of Love! 


WORKING IN THE CHURCH 

Acts 2:41-47; 4:32-35; 6:2-4.— Augtmt 18. 


[Paragraphs 2 to 21 inclusive of this article, as it originally 
entitled, "The Early Church," published in issue of January 1, 1 

Whoever today refuses to acknowledge Christ Jesus as the 
Messiah, the Sent of God, whoever refuses to obey his teachings
, to follow him, is unrepentant no matter how fully he 
may believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah, the Sent 
of God. Even though one may sorrow at the record of the 
sufferings of Christ, he has not come to the point of repentance 
until he has renounced the sins for which Christ suffered, and 
has become a follower of the Master. Only such as are thus 
repentant have part or lot in the household of faith. God's 
proposition is not to save people in their sins, but to save them 
from their sins; and during this Gospel age the first condition
 of acceptance with God is that the sinner shall renounce 
his sins, accept our Lord as his personal Savior and follow in 
his steps. 

PROVIDING FOR THE POOR 

Some time later an emergency arose in the church, calling 
for a force of seven deacons to look after various temporal matters
, all of whom were chosen by the congregation — not by the 
apostles — as men of honost reputation, wise, and filled with 
the holy Spirit. This incident -suggests to us the loose character
 of the organization of the early church. It did not have 
cast-iron rules and laws, except that the Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Redeemer, was the Head of the church, and that no one could 
be recognized as a member thereof unless he had recognized 
our Lord as Savior and made full consecration to him, thereby 
receiving his spirit, and had also recognized as of his appointment
 and of the holy Spirit's designation his especially appointed
 apostles, as the authorized instructors of the church. 


appeared in issue of July 1, 1918, were reprinted from article 
902, which please see. The remainder is printed below. 1 
Aside from -this, the necessities of each case seem to have 
guided; and yet we may safely presume that in all the arrangements
 of the church, as well as in the teachings of the 
apostles, the holy Spirit directed, for the benefit also of those 
believing on the Lord throughout the entire age. 

We are not to suppose that there was an intentional partiality
 or neglect of the Grecian more than of the Hebrew 
women. Possibly it arose from the fact thai the apostles appreciated
 more keenly the needs of the native widows than of 
the foreign-born. These were all Jewesses, of course, whether 
born in Palestine or in Greece; for up to this time the Gospel 
had not been sent to the Gentiles. Doubtless there was some 
reasonable cause for the murmuring. In any event the apostles
 manifested their honesty of purpose in the matter by 
promptly instituting measures for the correction of the difficulty
, 

Jn this incident there is a lesson for all of the Lord's people, 
[f difficulties arise, based on temporal questions, likely to 
sprout a "root of bitterness" or to cause a schism in the church, 
the proper course would be to throw the responsibility upon 
tihe shoulders of the entire congregation, by asking for the election
 of some of the number who could give the matter better 
attention and could see that all were justly dealt with. We are 
not to forget that in this as in other ways the Lord has clearly 
indicated that the church as a whole is under his supervision, 
and that it is therefore proper that the general affairs of the 
church be conducted by the congregation, and not by one man 
nor by a clergy class. 


SPEAKING FOR CHRIST 

Acts 1:1-8. — August 25. 

[The first 12 paragraphs of this article, as it originally appeared in issue of July 1, 1918, were reprinted from article entitled
, "Good Confession Versus Bad Confession," published in issue of January 15, 1914, which please see.] 

Whatever circumstances may arise, the Lord's people will seems to give the thought: 'Do not be worried when you shall 
have such faith ami trust in God that they will conduct them- he brought before kings and Judges.' The way in which God 
selves courageously, relying on divine power. The Greek here will give us a mouth and wisdom may vary according to cir- 

[6286] 


.tur.v 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(?<r> :?om 


eumstances. Perhaps it may be by suggestions from another, 
perhaps in the hearing of the testimony of some one else; or it 
may be that an especially helpful text of Scripture would come 
into our mind. But the thought is that our trust is in the 
Lord, and that we are not to be in fear and trembing. 

If we find ourselves in any straits, any difficulties, we are 
to remember that the Scriptures assure us that "the angel of 
the Lord encampeth round about them that fear [or reverence
] him, and delivereth them." (Psalm 34:7) This thought 
should tend to make us cool and collected in mind, and should 
enable us to conduct ourselves courageously, feeling our close 
relationship with the Lord and having the confidence this 
would give us. Furthermore, we realize that we are not wise 
enough to know just what God's purposes concerning us may 
be. We know not, therefore, just how the Lord may prefer to 
have this or that matter eventuate. Unt "faith can firmly 
trust him, come what may." 

WORK OF THE CHURCH IN THE FLESH 

The Scriptures invariably teach that the church of Christ 
in the flesh is his representative. As the Apostle Paul says, we 
"fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, for his 
body's sake, which is the church." (Colossians 1:24) As wc 
have to do with the suffering of the Anointed One, so we have 
to do with the witnessing or ministry by which the members of 
the body have been called out from the world, separated, instructed
, and thus prepared for a share in the glorious kingdom
 and for the great work of judging the world which that 
kingdom will inaugurate. It is in this sense that our Lord declared
 to his disciples after his resurrection: '*Ye shall be my 
witnesses both in Jerusalem and in Judea, and in Samaria and 
unto the uttermost part of the earth." 

Primarily, the apostles were the witnessed who testified to 
us respecting our Lord's words, his death, his resurrection, his 
ascension, and his promises of a return to accept las faithful 
followers to a share in his kingdom, when he snail take unto 
himself his great power and reign. In a secondary sense all 
who receive the apostolic testimony and who declare it to 
others are likewise Christ's representatives and witnesses. 

Tn order that the apostles might fill this position of witnesses
 and might be enabled to give a clear testimony on the 
important subject of Christ's death and resurrection, which 
constitute the foundation for our hope, our Lord was present 
with them alter his resurrection and, as St. Luke declares. 
demonstrated the fact of his resurrection "by many infallible 
proofs," meanwhile explaining to them things concerning his 
coming kingdom, for which he had taught them to pray : ''Thy 
kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven." THE MESSAGE OF THE KINGDOM 

This explanation respecting the kingdom was necessary because
 as Jews they had properly looked for an earthly kingdom, 
and now needed to be informed that before the earthly kingdom 
could be established a heavenly kingdom must first be inaugurated
, and that they were eligible to a place in that heavenly 
kingdom, through which in due time the blessing would come 
to the earthly kingdom and would ultimately extend to all the 
families of the earth. — Genesis 22:16-18. 

As long as the Jewish dispensation remained, this information
 was not due to be given. It would be "meat in due season
" only after the Jewish nation, through its representatives, 
the priests and doctors of the law, had rejected the Messiah 
and had crucified him. But now that our Lord had died, it 
was "meat in due season" to the faithful to know that for a 
time God had rejected fleshly Israel from being his peculiar 
people in order to gather a spiritual Israel to be the holy nation
, the peculiar people, the royal priesthood, to show forth 
his praises and to constitute his chief agents for the blessing 
of mankind in due time. 

This work of calling the spiritual Israelites, and of inducting
 such as would heed the call into the new relationship, 
was the work which our Lord was committing to his apostles. 
To them he unfolded the things pertaining to the kingdom of 
God in such measure as they were able to appreciate them, 


leaving to the future the work of guiding them into all truth, 
into the deep things of God, under the ministration of the 
holy Spirit, which he had previously promised would show tlu*in 
things to come. 

Our Lord wished the apostles to understand distinctly that 
they wore not then in condition to undertake the new work, 
that the proper time for action had not yet come, that they 
would not be prepared until they should receive the holy 
Spirit, a power and unction from the Father, which would 
especially qualify and guide them in the important service of 
their commission. Moreover, it would be to them, and to all 
l>e]iever$ through them, a divine attestation that our Lord's 
work was approved of the Father and constituted a basis of 
reconciliation by which sinnoi'3 might return to harmony with 
their Creator. Furthermore, to those who consecrated themselves
 to the divine service and received the holy SpiriL i* 
was evidence that they wore accepted of the Father in the Ueloved
 and owned as, children and heir-; nt his promiM 1 **. jnintheirs
 with Jesus Christ their Lord, if po be that they would 
suffer with him that they might also be glorified together in 
(lie kingdom, when the due time should come. — Romans X:]<>, 
17. THE TIME FOR THE KINGDOM 

It was appropriate at this time, and in view of our J,ord\ 
instructions respecting the kingdom and the preparatory work 
for it, which the apostles were commissioned to do, that they 
should inquire respecting the time for its establishment. Therefore
, not knowing that the Lord was about to leave them, they 
asked respecting the ancient promises of Israel'3 restoration, 
whether or not these promises were now due to be fulfilled, 
whether or not Israel was to be released from the domination 
of the Romans and to become the greatest nation of the world, 
to be used of God in the blessing of other nations. 

It is worthy of careful note that our Lord did not rebuke 
the apostles, nor tell them that the thought in their question 
was foolish and would never have a realization. On the contrary
, his answer clearly implies that their expectations at 
least approximated the truth, but that he was not at liberty 
to gratify their curiosity as to the time features of the divine 
plan. The things to which they referred, and which God had 
promised, would be fulfilled in due course] but the times and 
seasons were not for them to know, the Father not being as 
yet pleased to reveal this information. 

Our Lord, however, clearly indicates that before Israel's 
restoration to divine favor the mission of his apostles must 
first be accomplished — that to which he was appointing them. 
He would not inform them whether or not their mission would 
be quickly accomplished. As a matter of fact, we see that it 
has extended over more than eighteen centuries. The restoration
 of Israel to divine favor cannot take place until Christ, 
}iis apostles and all hi3 faithful followers shall first have accomplished
 the work of witnessing to the world and of selecting
 the full number of the elect, of spiritual Israel. This is 
the work of chief concern. 

The times and seasons for the fufillment of God's promises 
to Israel after the flesh and to the world were to be left in 
God's power, with the assurance that when the due time shall 
have come the brethren shall not be left in darkness on this 
subject, but shall be guided by the holy Spirit into this and 
all other truths, a3 these become "meat in due season" for 
the household of faith. 

The work of witnessing was properly to begin at Jerusalem
, the center of Judaism, which God himself had chosen, as 
represented in the Temple. It was properly to begin with 
those who had knowledge of Jesus and his crucifixion. Amon^ 
these who had this knowledge were some of the most devout 
Jew-s from all quarters of the earth. It was appropriate that 
the truth respecting our Lord's death, resurrection, ascension 
and glorification with the Father, and respecting the gathering
 of spiritual Israel and of our Lord's second coming to receive
 them and to exalt them with himself in the Messianic 
Kingdom should be declared to those who had been instigators 
of his ignominious death and witnesses of his crucifixion. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


SOME WHO SAT IN DABKNESS NOW SEE THE LIGHT 
Deab Bbethben: — 

We wish to advise you that we are still in harmony with 
the divine plan, and that you have our sympathy and our 
prayers at all times. In the Lord's good time we hope to 
meet you at "the general assembly and church of the firstborn
, who are written in heaven." 

For the past twenty-six years I had been employed here 

as agent of the without even a reprimand or a demerit 

mark. Suddenly, without a moment's notice or a word of explanation
, I was dismissed and another man put into my place. 


I appealed to our superintendent for an explanation of this 
strange procedure; and he advised me that I had been dismissed
 by request of , the reason for which I was no doubt 

aware. This occurred four weeks ago. 

This procedure was all brought about by some Catholic 
priests who were sore because some of their flock had left 
them and had gone to the Methodist church. Later, these converts
 heard Brother in a public lecture here, and thereafter
 they came to our class. These friends are all Polish, but 
understand English quite well; and they are so delighted with 
the truth that they are very enthusiastic. There were thirty- 


[6287] 


(207-194) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, K. Y. 


eight immersed here an April 7 ; and the next day eight more 
came for immersion. We have heard that there are forty 
more who would be glad to come our way if it were not for the 
intense opposition. The population here ia mostly Polish Catholic
, and there is a wonderful awakening among them. A Polish
 speaker and three colporteurs came here, and were all arrested
, and thrown into jail. The colporteurs are out on $10,- 

000 bail; but the speaker will have to remain in jail until the 
war is over. 

May our dear Lord direct us in our efforts to serve the 
cause until we finish our pilgrimage here below is the prayer of 
Your brother in Christ, R. S. — Wise. 

GLADLY ENTERED THE GATE OF SACRIFICE 
Dejlr Brethren in Chbist: — 

Find enclosed a money order to be applied as you see fit in 
the interests of the Lord's work, and especially if needed in connection
 with the trial of the faithful brethren at this time. I 
wish also to express my appreciation of the truth and its service 

1 have enjoyed each volume of the Scripture Studies as only 
a truth-hungry soul could; and I cannot doubt that the author 
was divinely aided. 

I have always sought after God; and at the a^e of fifteen 
I began teaching a class of little girls in a nominal church. 
This was really a sacrifice to me in that I missed the fellowship
 of the other young folk in the older classes. But I stayed 
by it faithfully; and in the three years of my teaching I missed 
only three days, two of them being on account of sickness. But 
when I received the truth on God's plan for the whole world 
I saw how far short we Sunday School teachers were fallen. 
And how I did rejoice in the knowledge, which came to me as 
fast as I could assimilate it! I gladly entered the low gate of 
sacrifice in October, 1917, and am striving each day and hour 
so to run that I may win. 

As would be necessary to one coming in so late, things 
oame to me rapidly ; and I advanced accordingly. So I am now 
enjoying the meat of the Word, and praising God's holy name 
for his many favors toward me and for his numerous manifestations
 that I am his child. I am especially thankful for the 
"meat in due season" furnished through The Watch Toweb a,t 
this time. It has encouraged me so much to press on untiringly
 and to help in the reaping of the vine of the earth, to 
the extent of my ability. I am also rejoicing in the fulfillment 
of prophecy as manifested in the recent fiery trials, and am 
glad that you have been accounted worthy to suffer for him 
who bore it all for us. 

Praying continually for all the dear brethren, and looking 
forward to the great convention beyond the vail, I am 

Your sister in the one hope of our calling, G. B. — Jnd. 
GEATEFUL APPRECIATION OF THE WATCH TOWER 
Dicar Brethren: 

Beloved in the Lord, greetings in the name of our dear 
Savior. The Father's bounty supplied through The Watch 
Tower during the past twelve months has been lavish indeed. 
The last issues especially give evidence of the near approach 
of the kingdom of Messiah, for which we rejoice with you 
and all the dear family. May the Lord's grace and strength 
abide with you in your closing labors for all the saints. 

W T ith the assurance of my deepest love and sympathy and 
constant pravers, I am humbly, W. A. T. — Canada. 

HERALDS OF THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM 
Dearly Beloved Brethren in Christ: 

With peace and love we greet you. We" are remembering 
you dear brethren in our prayers, and we rejoice to note how 
wonderfully our Lord and Savior is guiding you and directing
 the work in these closing hours of the Harvest. Rejoice 
with U3, beloved ones, to know that all the saints of the Most 
High have been sealed and are now waiting their deliverance, 
when and as our heavenly Father deems best. What a wonderful
 time, to be standing on the verge of the inauguration 


of the Millennial Kingdom of our Master, for which the poor 
groaning creation has so long waited! Let us constantly 
keep our hearts within the vail, firmly trusting our Lord. 
"Faith can firmly trust him, come what may." 

Bear brethren, continue to fight the good fight of faith ; 
for without it we may as well drop out of the race at this 
time, and thereby lose the greatest prize ever proffered by 
our Creator, an offer never to be repeated. So may we voice 
the words of our dear Brother Paul: "I have fought a good 
fight; I have finished my course; I have kept the faith. 
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness 
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that 
day; and not to me only, but unto all who love his appearing
."— 2 Timothy 4:7, 8. 

We are the heralds, the antitypical John class ; and surely 
we are rejoicing very heartily to know that the Messianic 
Kingdom is so near its establishment, and that we shall have a 
share in it if we but remain faithful to the end of our way. 
If we do, Satan will be sorely disappointed; for we are the 
objects of his intensest hatred now. But let us keep our minds 
filled with our Father's rich promises. His generous assurances
 should not only anchor our hearts arid thoughts within 
the Most High, but dispel every approach of gloom. We are iu 
the light, which is shining stronger and stronger unto the per 
feet day. We have long known and experienced the force of the 
Master's words, "If the world hate you, ye know that it hated 
me before it hated you," Not being greater than our M aster, 
we need not be concerned in the slightest degree what the 
world's attitude is ; for we are sure of our heavenly Father's 
love. Let us pilgrim on, and not cease until we reach our 
heavenly Canaan. With loving wishes, I am 

Your brother by his grace, F. T. — Ohio. 

DUE CONSIDERATION FOB THE EIGHTS OF OTHERS 
Deab Brethren: 

Pardon me for taking your time just to ask if you would 
be so kind as to put into The Watch Toweb a piece asking 
brethren not to give such long talks in opening a testimony 
meeting and such long prayers in public. We have had to endure
 this for a long, long time. It seems to take the good 
spirit out of the meeting to have such long talks at the very 
beginning. I do not wish to find fault but the practice mentioned
 above does not seem to be the proper way of conducting
 a meeting. Your sister, M. M. 
[The above suggestion should be taken into very careful consideration
 by all who are leaders of devotional classes — -prayer 
and testimony, meetings. See suggestions on page- 319-322 of 
Volume Six Studies. Those who are chosen as class leaders 
should of all persons be the most careful in their consideration 
of the rights of others.] 

"APPLES OP GOLD IN PICTURES OP SILVER' ' 

Deab Brethren in Christ: — 

I feel impelled to express in this inadequate way my very 
deep appreciation of the May 15th Tower. My heart leaped 
for joy to see it arrive this morning, bearing these words of 
life and cheer to help us on to God. When we learned that 
the dear brethren were in bonds, we hardly dared hope for 
further "apples of gold in pictures of silver." But truly *'God 
is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart." 

The article, "Let Patience Have Her Perfect Work," seemed 
like a heart to heart talk with God, meat in due season, 
strength to the weary. We do appreciate your labors of love 
on our behalf and your faithful ministry towards the Lord's 
little ones. Who could doubt the organization or the message 
through the Towers? As we ponder over their precious messages
 we think, *He knows and loves and cares.* 

May God bless and sustain you all in every trial, and at 
last grant you the victory through our l^ord Jesus Christ. 
With sincere Christian greetings to all at Bethel, I am 

Yours in Christ's service, M. A. — B. C. 


Thursday night, June 20th, shortly after 10 o'clock, at the 
end of a fifteen-day trial, the jury returned a verdict of 
"Guilty" against all the brethren who had been arrested here 
early in May. Each one of the defendants feels absolutely 
innocent, knowing that he has no desire or motive to do 
injury to any one. At exactly 1:00 o'clock the next afternoon 
fin reality exactly at noon, as all clocks were running an hour 
fast on account of the daylight-saving aet] the sentence was 
pronounced by the Court: Twenty years imprisonment in the 
Federal Penitentiary at Atlanta, Georgia, for each, excepting 
Brother Giovanni De Cecca, the Court reserving sentence in his 
case until his past record could be investigated. 

We feel that the Lord, in hia perfect wisdom, has permitted 
it all for a good purpose and will overrule it ultimately for 


THE TRIAL AT BROOKLYN 

good and to his glory. Brother Russell stated that the work 


of the harvest would end in the summer of 1918, that the door 
would close and the dark night would settle down. The Master
 said, "When ye see these things begin to come to pass, then 
look up and lift up your heads; for vour deliverance draweth 
nigh." 

Take courage, beloved in the Lord, the kingdom is here; 
and soon by his grace we shall be forever with him and with 
each other. In the next issue of The Watch Tower we hope 
to give a more detailed statement concerning the trial. Be 
calm, be trustful, keep close to the Lord. Continue to prav for 
us, as we do for you. We all hope in a little while to oe in 
the presence of our king, where we shall have joys unspeakable 
nnd pleasures forever more. 


[628S] 


IN RE LITERATURE IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES 


Hereafter no literature in a foreign language will be issued 
from this office. The names of all subscribers to the foreign 
Towers will be transferred to the English Watch To wee list 
for the remainder of the term of subscription, unless the subscribers
 shall notify us to the contrary. Should any subscriber
 to a foreign Towee prefer to have his money refunded 
for the unexpired term of subscription, this will be done upon 
his written request to this office. 


Vou XXXTX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JULY 15, 1918 


No. 14 


THE NEW COMMANDMENT 

M new commandment I give unto you, That ye Jove one another; as I Jiave loved you, that ye also love 

one another" — John 13:34. 


The New Creation is not left without a law. It is a very 
oft repeated commandment: and the attainment of all the 
various things to which it is invited rests upon the keeping of 
it: "If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; 
even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in 
liia love. This is my commandment, that ye love one another 
as I have loved you/' (John 15:10, 12) This new commandment
 of the Lord made a great impression upon the mind of 
the loving Apostle John. He mentions the injunction a number
 of times: "This commandment have we from him, That 
he who loveth God love his brother also." (1 John 4:21) 
"For this is the commandment [marginal reading] that ye 
heard from the beginning, that we should love one another." 
"And this is his commandment, that we should believe on the 
name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he 
gave us commandment."— 1 John 3:11, 23. 

A great deal that passes for love will not stand the test. 
Many people have had large numbers of friends while their 
conditions were prosperous, and have been greatly surprised 
in the hour of reversal to find that they could count their 
true friends upon the fingers of one hand and have fingers to 
spare. The Lord does not wish his people, however, to cultivate
 an outward love for the fellow-members of the New 
Creation, but a heart love; nor would he have them as new 
creatures love each other coldly and indifferently, but fervently
: "Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the 
truth through the spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren. 
see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently." — 1 
Peter 1:22. 

A first consideration to the keeping of the new commandment
 is that the one we are invited to love as a new creature 
should be one who, like ourselves, is a partaker of God's holy 
Spirit; for "if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is 
none of his." (Romans 8:9) This love for those who have our 
Father's likeness is as superior to any earthly love as the 
heavenly relationships are superior to the earthly relationships
. In the history of our Lord's life is an incident which 
brings this fact forward with great prominence. While he was 
engaged in seeking those who should ultimately become members
 of the heavenly family, messengers came to him informing
 him that his mother and brethren stood without, desiring 
to speak with him. It is probable that our Lord loved his 
mother more than any other earthly being. There was a special
 bond between them due to the circumstances of his birth, 
which apparently they alone could fully appreciate, (Luke 
2:19; John 8:41. 42} But although Jesus loved his mother so 
dearly that his last thought was to provide for her a home 
with the Apostle whom he specially loved (John 19:26, 27), 
yet to those who wished him to leave off his preaching of the 
Gospel he answered: "Who is my mother? and who are my 
brethren ? and he stretched forth his hands toward his disciples, 
and said, Behold my mother and my brethren! For whosoever
 shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the 
same is my brother, and sister, and mother," i. e., 'he stands 
to me in a relationship that is at once close and tender and 
vital.'— Matthew 12:48-50. 

Undoubtedly the reason for the Apostle Paul's advice to 
unmarried consecrated ones to the effect that they would 
probably do better to remain so, was not because there is anything
 displeasing to the heavenly Father in this nearest and 
dearest of all human relationships, which he himself instituted
 and for which the creatures of his handiwork are by 
nature adapted, but because many , new creatures are not 
strong enough in character to make sure always that the 
Lord occupies the first place in their hearts, and the earthly 
companion the second place. Every marriage in which this 
balance is never lost sight of is beautiful, lovely and acceptable 
in the Father's sight. But it requires great strength of character
 to keep the Lord always upon the throne of our affections
. Henoe the sad condition arises that if a new creature 
becomes soul-sick and withdraws from the altar of sacrifice, 
his or her companion is very frequently drawn away, too. 
TWO CLASSES THAT PROFESS DISCIPIJBSHIP 

The fact that one professes to be the Lord's follower does 


special love which we feel; and which we must feel, for every 
one who has covenanted to lay his all at the Lord's feet. Then* 
are some who apparently feel very free to call upon the Lord's 
name, but who do not have the spirit of consecration. '"Nut 
every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the 
kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father 
which is in heaven." — Matthew 7:21. 

But if we find one who is a. true believer in the Lord and 
who has accepted him as his Savior and Redeemer and who i-i 
trying to live an inoffensive life, we are to count him as a 
brother, even though he may not have seen the privileges of 
the priesthood which are ours. Such brethren were very dear 
to the Apostle Paul ; and^ it was among them that he sought 
for those who shall be worthy of being counted brethren on 
the higher plane. Thus he said: "I beseech you therefore, 
brethren, by the mercies of God [tentatively justified], that ye 
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God" — that thus you may become actually justified. (Romans 
12:1) Those who have taken neither of these steps are not 
our brethren as yet, but are "by nature the children of wrath, 
even as others." — Ephesians 2; 3. 

The privilege of being sons of the divine family and of 
being recognized as such by other members of the family and 
of enjoying the blessings of such fellowship is limited. It did 
not exist before our Lord's day; it was limited then to one 
nation and to the few in that nation who could and did meet 
the conditions imposed. The divine sonship could not be 
reestablished until Father Adam's ransom price was provided. 
The terms of the heavenly salvation are not stated in the Old 
Testament; and until Pentecost not one Jew could be transferred
 from the house of servants to the house of sons. At 
Pentecost, however, the new family relationship began; and 
"as many as received him, to them gave he power to become 
the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name." — 
John 1:12. 

Many who suppose that they are children of God, or at 
least calculation are very worthy and very acceptable servants, 
do not have the spirit of sonship at all, but have an opposite 
spirit derived from an opposite source, and for that reason are 
designated the children of the devil: "Ye are of your father 
the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do" (John 8:44}. 
Christ said to some in his day. From this we can plainly see 
that the expression, "the fatherhood of God," when applied to 
all men in the present time, is incorrect. The fatherhood of 
God now is limited £o those who have received the spirit of 
adoption. "But ye have received the spirit of adoption 
whereby we cry, Abba, Father" — dear Father. 

PRIVILEGE OF COMFORTING THE BRETHREN 

One of the blessed privileges which we enjoy towards the 
other members of our Father's family is the privilege of comforting
 them in the midst of the sorrows which are peculiarly 
the lot of the sacrificing priesthood. The Apostle Paul in 
writing to the Thessalonian brethren said: "Ye know how 
we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a 
father doth his children." (1 Thessalonians 2:11) In writing 
to the Corinthian brethren, his great heart of love was allowed 
to overflow with the following wonderful passage of consolation
 and comfort to his brothers and sisters of the divine 
family who for the time made their home in the city of 
Corinth: "May grace and peace be granted to you from God 
our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. I thank my God continually
 on your behalf for the grace of God bestowed on you 
in Christ Jesus — that you have been so richly blessed in him, 
with readiness of speech and fulness of knowledge. Thus my 
testimony as to the Christ has been confirmed in your experience
, so that there is no gift of God in which you consciously 
come short while patiently waiting for the reappearing of our 
Lord Jesus Christ." — 1 Corinthians 1:3-7, Weym. 

It is a mistake for new creatures to withhold from one 
another the words of comfort which mean so much in the 
midst of storm. If we do withhold these words of comfort, it 
shows that we are deficient in the holy Spirit; for the holy 
Spirit was given to us, not only to be a comfort to our own 
hearts, but to aid us in our efforts to be a comfort to others. 


not necessarily mean that we should bestow upon him theThe holy Spirit is like the truth — the more of it we give away 

[6289] (211 212) 


:.H2-21.1) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


flROOKtYN, N. Y. 


the more we have left. "I will pray the Father, and he Bhall 
give you another comforter, that he may abide with you forever
."--John 14:16; 2 Corinthians 1:3-7. 

If through faithfulness to Ma vow of consecration a brother 
has brought upon himself the reproaches and persecution which 
the Master promised should be his portion, the love of all who 
are in the new relationship to Jehovah will be specially in 
evidence. It will be "without dissimulation" (Romans 12 ;9), 
without the hypocritical professions which characterize ( *thc 
worldly"; and because it is without hypocrisy but is genuine, 
fervent and continuous, no matter how great the blot upon the 
good name of the one that loves, it 'will teach a lesson that 
will leave a lasting impression for good upon all who witness 
it: "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if 
ye have love one to another." (John 13:35) And not only so, 
but this evidences to others that we are true Christians and 
have good grounds for hope of our ultimate acceptance with 
the Lord; and it will re-act favorably upon our own spirits, 
and we shall be conscious that we are pleasing to our heavenly 
Father. Like the Apostle, we shall be able to say, "We know 
that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the 
brethren." — 1 John 3:14. 

If we do not have this fervent love one for another, we can 
disabuse our minds of the thought, that we love God or that 
we are in his likeness, "He that loveth not, knoweth not God ; 
for God is love." (1 John 4:8} But if we do have that love, 
we can be certain that we are in close fellowship with him in 
whom all our hopes of life are centered. "If we love one 
another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us." — 
1 John 4:12. 

If our hearts are filled with this heavenly love we cannot, 
while we have earthly good things, sit calmly by and watch 
others suffer. "But \( any one has this world's wealth and 
sees that his fellow man is in need, and yet hardens his heart 
against him — how can such a one continue to love God?" (1 
.John 3:17, VVeym.) There is another side to this question, 
too; and that is that if we can help ourselves and get along 
without being burdensome to others we should do so, our 
thought being as far as possible to help other people bear their 
burdens but not to expect them to help us bear our own. 
"Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of 
Christ. . . . Every man shall bear his own burden." (Galatians
 6:2, 5) Love is an unselfish desire to do good to others. 
Therefore we should prefer to assist our brethren rather than 
have them bear our burdens. "It is more blessed to give than 
to receive." 

PROPER ATTITUDE TOWARD FLESHLY BLEMISHES 

The love for the New Creation is not to cease or to become 
cold when we discover.- as we may, that the new creature is 
for the time occupying an imperfect tabernacle. It is just 
possible that others may consider that our tabernacles are not 
perfect, so that there is opportunity for the exercise of the 
grace of Christian forbearance toward one another, as the 
Apostle admonishes: "I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, 
beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye 
are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering. 
forbearing one another in love." (Ephesian3 4:1, 2) If all 
were perfect in the flesh, there would be no opportunity for 
the exercise of this grace. 

There may be times, however, when it will be necessary for 
us to state some plain truths to those who for a time permit 
the weaknesses of their fallen flesh to interfere with their 
welfare as new creatures or with the welfare of others. When 
the time comes for speaking such truths we should make sure 
that they are spoken in love, and thus we, "speaking the truth 
in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, 
even Christ." — Ephesians 4:15. 

But there are many times when a quiet over-looking of 
unintentional faults is the greatest service we can render to 
an erring brother or to the church with which he is associated. 
Such patient waiting on the Lord for him to make the correction
 in his own time and way, rather than for U3 to disturb 
the peace of others, the Lord will count as endured for his 
body's sake. This no doubt was partly what the Apostle Paul 
had in mind when he said: "I now rejoice in my sufferings 
for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is the church." — 
Colossians 1:24. 

When it becomes necessary to speak plainly to a brother 
who is out of the way we must not forget to deal with the 
brother in the way that our best judgment leads us to believe 
will be most to his advantage. The variations in temperament 
and disposition amongst the Lord's true saints are perhaps 
greater than in any other class in the world. If there are 
any two of them alike we hare never noticed it. Hence in 
dealing with them we must "on some have compassion, making 


a difference; and others save with fear, pulling them out 
of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh." — 
Jude 22, 23. 

LOVE PROPORTIONATE TO CHRIST -LIKENESS 

There is a reason why we cannot help loving some of 
the Lord's saints more than others. As new creatures we 
cannot avoid loving most those who have most of the spirit 
of Christ, and even Jesus himself specially loved and was 
specially loved in return by that one of his disciples who 
had in him the largest measure of the Master's own spirit. 
John was especially "that disciple whom Jesus loved." — John 
21:7. 

No matter how hard we try, it will always be true as 
long as we are in these earthly tabernacles that "in many 
things we all offend." (James 3:2) The world because of 
its wrong condition of heart will recognize in our consecration
 only the odor of death. But while we shall occasionally 
give some slight offense to some of the Lord's brethren, because
 of their better condition of heart these offenses will 
be either overlooked or quickly condoned; and. for the most 
part, if we are loyal, loving and zealous we shall be to all 
such a sweet perfume of comfort and refreshment. "To the 
one we are a savor of death unto death; and to the other 
a savor of life unto life." — 2 Corinthians 2:16. 

Honest differences of opinion will arise between ourselves 
and other brethren. But if filled with a large measure of 
the Lord's spirit we shall be sure to make every reasonable 
effort to, avoid expressing differences of opinion on nonessentials
, which our experience has shown us engender strife. 
Rather we shall seek to "be of one mind, live in peace." — 2 
Corinthians 13:11. 

THE TRUE SPIRIT OP CHRIST 

The whole spirit of the Christian religion is that of service 
rather than lordship over others. And what a blessing it 
would be to all those who are ministering to the temporal 
or spiritual needs of the Lord's paints if they could realize 
that what they do for the least of these little ones they do 
in order to "serve the Lord Christ"! (Colossians 3:24) 
Let ua not forget that our greatest honor here below is to 
render service to those who are the Lord's, and let us not 
be too choice about the nature of the service, but be as ready 
to serve in a lowly capacity as in a more conspicuous position, 
for which perhaps we may not be suited. Of the twelve 
apostles chosen by our Lord, every one of the twelve desired 
for himself some great position in the kingdom, as is proven 
by the fact that when Jame3 and John sought the two most 
desirable positions, the remaining ten "were moved with indignation
 against the two brethren." (Matthew 20:24) Commenting
 upon this matter the Lord explained that this was 
not his own attitude and should not be theirs. His own 
steadfast purpose of heart was to be their servant and the 
servant of all, "even as the Son of man came not to be served, 
but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many." — 
Matthew 20:28, Diaglott. 

The purpose and the effect of our association with the 
Lord's brethren should not be that of mere entertainment, 
but rather to do what we can and all that we can to "build 
one another up on the most holy faith" and to "edify one 
another, even as also ye do" ( 1 Thessalonians 5:11)," thus 
"inciting one another to love and good works." (Hebrews 
10:24) Our love toward the Lord's brethren should be dignified
, simple, pure, and expressed with only such manifestations 
as would be proper between brethren. This love, when fully 
developed, will rejoice more in honors coming to another than 
in honors coming to self; and thus we shall, as the Apostle 
expresses the matter, "be kindly affect ioned one to another 
with brotherly love; in honor" preferring one another." — 
Romans 12:10. 

In this as in everything else it will be necessary for us 
to consider one another, making due allowances for individual 
peculiarities of temperament, and not forcing honors upon 
those who would be injured by them, nor failing to make 
every reasonable effort to see that the self -forgetful and 
lowly-minded receive the recognition which is their due. Loving
 the brethren in this way we shall "not love in word, 
neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth." (1 John 3:18) 
The desire to bless the Lord's brethren in every way in our 
power should become the all-absorbing purpose of life. We 
are aiming to be like Jesus, and this was his spirit: "He 
laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our 
lives for the brethren." — 1 John 3:16. 

As footstep followers of the Lord we shall be specially 
desirous to aid by precept and example the faint-hearted, the 
backward, the diffident, those lacking in combat iven ess and 
self-esteem. We shall wish to help the spiritually weak to 
gain strength by encouraging them to lay hold upon the Lord's 


[6290] 


July 15, 1918 


T H E IV A T C H T O W E R 


(213-214) 


promises and to trust in his providences on their behalf. Thus 
we shall be able to "comfort the feeble-minded, support the 
weak."— 1 Thess. 5:14. 

MODESTY A GRACE OF CHRISTIAN CHARACTER 

When the heavenly Father designed the mystical body of 
Christ, he did not design that all the members of that body 
should have the same office. He did not design that all should 
be "players' 1 (pilgrims, or elders, or deacons, or have other 
offices in the church) ; he designed that there should be many 
more of the "singers" (the less conspicuous members of the 
body who gladly join in the chorus of the new song). "And 
of Zion it shall be said this and that man was born in her: 
and the Highest himself shall establish her. The Lord shall 
count, when he writeth up the people, that this man was 
born there. Selah ['stop and think']. As well the singers 
as the players on instruments shall be there." (Psalm 87:5-7) 
"God hath tempered the body together, having given more 
abundant honor to that part which lacked." — 1 Corinthians 
12:24. 

With hearts filled with love for the brethren we are bound 
to bo very careful to spend so much time attending to our 
own business that we shall have no time to give to the busybodying
 to which many well-intentioned people give a considerable
 proportion of their time. Those who interest 
themselves in matters which do not particularly concern them 
soon neglect their own affairs, so that they are "not only 
idlers, but tattlers also and busy-bodies, speaking things which 
they ought not." (1 Timothy 5:13) Moreover, people who do 
this are likely to get into trouble and bring reproach upon 
the cause of Christ; and the Lord would not that any of us 
should suffer "as a busy-body in other men's matters." — 1 
Peter 4:15. 

Hence if we see where we think a brother could handle 
his own affairs much better than he is handling them, instead
 of going to him and telling him how we think that 
he should conduct matters which are only his private concern
 we are to remember the Apostle's advice: "Study to be 
quiet, and to do your own business." (1 Thessalonians 4:11) 
The Lord would have his people filled with a quiet ambition 
which would lead them to earnest perseverance and welldoing
, not a restless zeal for notoriety, for great exploits 
and for the direction of the affairs of others not specially entrusted
 to our charge. 

HOW TO DEAL WITH THE BRETHREN 

If we love our brethren as we ought, we shall make great 
efforts to control our tongue, though we shall not be able 
to do so perfectly; for "the tongue can no man tame" (James 
3:8) and "if any man offend not in word, the same is a 
perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body" (James 
3:2) Knowing the weakness of our fallen flesh, the Lord 
knew we would have difficulty in controlling our tongues 
even as respects our brethren in Christ, and so he has provided
 a rule by which slander in the church may be avoided. 
The rule is well known to all truth people, but it will bear 
repetition: "If thy brother shall trespfass against thee, go 
and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: If he 
shall hear thee thou hast gained thy brother. But if he will 
not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that 
in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be 
established. And if he neglect to hear them, tell it unto the 
church : but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto 
thee as a heathen man and a publican." — Matthew 18:15-17; 
Luke 17:1-4. 

It k hard to realize that one brother in Christ would 
render evil to another, and harder still to realize that the 
injured one would violate his covenant with the Lord and 
render evil in return,; yet there have been instances of this 
kind in the Lord's church. But those who are charged with 
the responsibility of preserving order in the ecclesias are 
charged to "see that none render evil for evil unto any man; 
but ever follow that which is good." — 1 Thessalonians 5:15. 

If a brother should make a slip and work injury to himself
 as a new creature and to other new creatures with whom 
he comes in contact, our spirit toward him should always 
be one of brotherly love, to help him regain his balance and 
his standing with the Lord, having due regard for the fact 
that we ourselves, through our selfish nature, may at times 
violate some of the requirements of the perfect law of love. 
"Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekneas; considering
 thyself, lest thou also be tempted." (Galatians 6:1) 
If we do have occasion to reprove or rebuke a brother, we 
should make sure that it is done only after we have exercised
 all reasonable patience. Even then we must be sure 
that it is done in love; and when the brother repents and 
makee some acknowledgment of his fault, we should be like 


the father of the prodigal: when we see the repentant one 
come in an attitude of humility, wo should go part way to 
meet him, and we should never be weary of thus granting 
forgiveness to the erring. 

Let us remember what Jesus said to Peter when he inquired
 if he should forgive his brother until seven times: 
"Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, until seven times; 
but until seventy times seven." (Matthew 18:21, 22) Jesus 
knew that by the time Peter had reached the place where 
he was willing to forgive his brother four hundred and ninety 
times, it would have become a settled habit and he would 
forget to count. Surely the heavenly Father lias forgiven 
us many more than four hundred and ninety times; and it 
may be necessary for us to ask for that forgiveness a considerable
 number of additional times, before that which is 
perfect shall have come. 

GOD'S METHODS OF PROVING HIS PEOPLE 

The Lord seems to hold out the hope that toward the end 
of our earthly career we may expect a larger measure of 
unity of the spirit than ever before. "Finally, be ye all of 
one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren." 
(1 Peter 3:8) Despite our best efforts to maintain tbis 
unity of the spirit, however, it is inevitable that in the tests 
which God's wisdom shall from time to time apply, some will 
be found unworthy, and divisions take place. "For it is 
necessary that there should be factions among you, so that 
the approved may be apparent among you." — 1 Corinthians 
11:19, Diaglott. 

The way that the heavenly Father is using to prove who 
of all earth's millions love him most, is to place those who 
have been begotten of his spirit where they may have opportunities
 to meet with one another ; and by the interest 
which they show in each other and by the efforts which they 
make to have fellowship with each other, he judges how much 
of the spirit of Ioyo for himself they possess. "If a man 
say, I love God, and hateth his brother [does not love him 
enough to seek personal fellowship with him] he is a liar; 
for if he loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can 
he love God whom he hath not seen?" — 1 John 4:20. 
HOW TO MANIFEST BROTHERLY LOVE 

We can show our love for our brethren by not being too 
harsh with them, not expecting more of them than they could 
render. That was not a proper spirit that was shown toward 
his fellow-servant by the one who had just been forgiven a 
great debt which he was unable to pay. — Matthew 18:23-30. 

We can show our love for our brethren who occupy positions
 as elders by avoiding the doing of anything which would 
injure them as new creatures. A kindly word of commendation
 or encouragement is occasionally a help to almost any 
of the brethren who serve in a public way, but we should be 
sure that it does not go beyond and work injury. If inclined 
to hold such in undue reverence, to give to them the place 
that Christ alone should occupy — "see thou do it not." — Revelation
 19:10; 22:9; Colossians 2:18, 19. 

We can show our love for our brethren by providing for 
those who properly have a demand upon us. The new creature 
must learn that it cannot in all matters do as it would prefer, 
but must in certain matters be governed by the obligations 
of the flesh; and one of these obligations is the care of those 
whom the Lord has placed in our charge. "But if any provide
 not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, 
he hath denied the faith and is worse than an infidel." — 
1 Timothy 5:8; 2 Timothy 3:5. 

We can show our love for our brethren by the zeal which 
we manifest to meet with those of like precious" faith. We 
are more or less like coals of fire, which, if separated, will 
tend to cool rapidly, but which, if brought together, will 
tend to increase in fervency the whole mass. The Lord's 
people are not encouraged to meet in gatherings in which the 
world, the flesh and the devil commingle, but to assemble 
with those who are justified and consecrated and who love 
the Lord. Such meetings are greatly to the overcoming of 
the world and the securing of a place in the kingdom. There 
is good company in such meetings; for Jesus said, "There 
am I in the midst." (Matthew 18:20) There Jacob's ladder 
touches the earth and the place becomes, as Jacob said, "the 
gate of heaven." (Genesis 28:17) "Not forsaking the assembling
 of ourselves together, as the manner of some is; 
but exhorting one another: and so much the more, as ye see 
the day approaching." — Hebrew 10:25. 

A GUARANTEE OF SUCCESS IK THE RACE FOR THE PRIZE 

We can show our love for our brethren by living within 
our means. The Lord's people should not be paupers; but 
rather they should "owe no man anything, but to love one 
another; for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law." 
— Romans 13:8. 


[6291] 


(215-216) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


Whatever we may uish to do for the members of the Lord's 
body who are still in the flesh should be done soon ; for they 
will not be here long. If Mary had waited a week later before 
she broke the precious alabaster box upon the Lord's head, 
she would never have used it on him. "Do not keep the 
alabaster box of your love and tenderness sealed up until 
your friends are dead. Flowers on the coffin cast no fragrance 
backward on the weary road. 53 It may be your privilege to 
do today the fast kind act or to say today the last helpful 
word to some member of Christ's body. 

One of the last things the Lord did was to wash the feet 
of his disciples. We may be sure that it was not done in 
the rudest and clumsiest" manner imaginable, but with that 
kindness, sympathy, love and appreciation such as Mary had 
but a few hours previous lavished upon him, when she wiped 
his feet with the hairs of her head. Since* the Lord thus 
demonstrated his willingness to serve us in even the humblest 
affairs of life, it follows that we "also ought to wash one 


another's feet." (John 13:14) We do not do this literally 
but with the "washing of water by the Word" (Ephesians 
5:26), helping to make the} feet members "meet to be partakers
 of the inheritance of the saints in light*" — Colossians 
1:12. 

There is no special occasion, so far as we know, for this 
lesson on brotherly love. The church everywhere seems to 
be rich in this grace 83 never before; and it is true now as 
in the days of the Apostle that "as touching brotherly love 
ye need not that I write unto you: for ye yourselves are 
taught of God to love one another." (1 Thessalonians 4:9) 
But would you have a prescription that will positively insure 
your winning the prize of the high calling? Would you have 
a single text that guarantees that you shall never fall? It 
is found in connection with this very subject: "He that 
loveth his brother, abideth in the light; and there is none 
occasion of stumbling in him." — 1 John 2:10. 


WHY EVERY FOOTSTEP FOLLOWER OF CHRIST MUST SUFFER 


"Beloved, tki 


nk it not strange concerning the fiery trial toMch is to try you, as though some strange thing happened 
you; but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are made partakers of Christ's sufferings." — 1 Peter 4:12, 13. 


unto 


Literally translated, this text would read "Beloved, think 
it not strange concerning the fiery trial among you that is to 
try you." This exhortation draws our thoughts back to the 
Lord's statement through the Prophet Malaohi, in which he 
announces that the Messenger of the Covenant would come 
suddenly — the One whose coming had been anticipated for 
centuries; and that it was a solemn question as to who would 
be able to abide the day of his coming, for he would sit as 
a refiner and purifier of gold and silver. (Malaohi 3:1-3) 
We apply this prophecy to the time of our Lord's first advent. 
We believe that he came then, as foretold; and that throughout
 this Gospel age his work has been that of a refiner of 
his people. 

In our text St. Peter seems to say, 'This is a fiery trial 
in which the entire church participates.' He did not necessarily
 mean that all the fiery trials will be among ourselves, 
but that the entire experience of the true ohurch throughout 
the Gospel age will be fiery. It is true, however, that our 
most severe trials usually come from our brethren in Christ, 
just as it was with our Lord, whose brethren, the Jews of 
his day, persecuted him. St. Peter's thought seems to be 
this: Whoever comes into the body of Christ must not expect 
that his way thereafter will be smooth; for, on the contrary, 
the church must endure fiery trials down to the very end 
of her course, in order that she may be prepared for the 
kingdom glory. 

It is true that the fiery trial through which the ohurch 
has passed has been more severe at some times than at 
others. It is also true that the Word of God indicates, that 
in the very close of this Gospel age there will be special 
testings which will try the faith of every member of the body 
of Christ in the flesh; and that these special testings will be 
permitted for the very purpose of demonstrating who have 
built their faith with the gold, silver and precious stones 
of God's Word, and who have built with the wood, hay and 
stubble of human tradition and "doctrines of devils." (1 
Timothy 4:1) During that "fire of the day of the Lord" 
the work of the first class will be preserved, but that of the 
latter class will be destroyed. — 1 Corinthians 3:12-15. 

We are not to suppose, however, that those who are 
living in the close of the Gospel age are being more particularly
 tried than were those who lived during the preceding
 centuries of that age. No one will be suffered to be 
tempted more than he is able to bear; for with every temptation
 the Lord will provide a way of escape. (1 Corinthians 
10:13) If God permits heavier trials and testings to come 
at any time, he puts something in the nature of encouragement
 upon the other side of the scale. And so the knowledge 
of the divine plan which the church now possesses should enable 
us to endure the trials of our day more easily than those 
who did not understand the Lord's purposes as thoroughly as 
we do. We should bear in mind the fact that while in some 
respects; our trial is more severe than was theirs, in other 
respects it is less severe. 

SUFFERING PERMITTED TOE A PURPOSE 

In our context the Apostle is discussing the various kinds 
of suffering which Christians must endure. From the worldly 
point of view — in fact, from almost any other viewpoint except 
that of knowledge of the truth — it seems very strange that 
Christians should be called upon to suffer; for when one becomes
 a son of God, an heir of God and joint-heir with Christ 
Jesus our Lord, it would seem only natural that divine favor 
should thereafter extend to all of his affairs. The worldly 


are inclined to say, 'Wlhat kind of God have you that will 
permit his devotees to suffer? Surely when one gives himself 
up to do the will of God he should thereafter be exempt 
from trials and difficulties. Surely God would take such care 
of his faithful worshipers that nothing could possibly hurt 
them.' 

Christian people are themselves often perplexed about their 
experiences — yea, ashamed; for they do not understand why 
a Christian should suffer. Yet St. Peter says, "If any man 
suffer as a christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him 
glorify God on this behalf." (1 Peter 4:16) This very suffering
 which causes perplexity is in harmony with the divine 
plan ; for God is dealing with the church individually in order 
to manifest their loyalty of heart. This loyalty to God and 
to the principles of righteousness will be demonstrated either 
by faith or by works. It will be out of accord with the present 
order of things, out of accord with the views of the world. 

The people of God well understand that long ago he could 
have restrained sin if he had chosen to do so. Since he has 
not done this, it is evident that he is making good use of 
present conditions in the world. If everything here w^re 
favorable to righteousness, loyalty to God would be a very 
easy matter. If those who are the people of God received the 
very best of everything, the wav to life would be both easy 
and popular. God explains in his Word, however, that everything
 shall work together for good to his people as new creatures
; that is, according to the spirit, not according to the 
flesh. Even what seems to be the very worst disaster he can 
make work out good to them who love him supremely. 

Only those, therefore, who see the divine plan can properly 
enter into this thought that a Christian has no cause to be 
ashamed of suffering, ignominy, persecution, endured for 
Christ's sake. Only those who can see the purpose in suffering
 can glorify God on this behalf, can glorify him when they 
are opposed, misrepresented, slandered. The character of 
these sufferings — the opposition of the world to God's people — 
is vefy much the same as to those which came upon our Lord 
Jesus. Ho was despised and rejected of men, even by some 
who called themselves holiness people. And so it has been 
all down the Gospel age. Those who have called themselves 
holiness people have despised and rejected those whom God 
has recognized as his saints. If we were of the world, the 
world would love its own; but because our Lord has chosen 
iir out of the world, therefore the world hates us, as the 
Master foretold.— John 15:18-25. 

PERSECUTION AN EVIDENCE OF LOYALTY TO GOD 

It was because our Lord would not enter into the arrangements
 of the Scribes and the Pharisees that he was 
despised and rejected by them. He did not refuse to eat 
and drink with sinners. On the contrary, he was willing 
to talk with them, even with the woman of Samaria and 
others of similar character. He was not proud, but humble. 
He did not deal with the world in the way that the Pharisees 
did. Therefore they rejected him. 

W r e read that the Scribes and the Pharisees were angry 
because our Lord taught the common people. Apparently 
they did not wish to have the people taught except in their 
way. When the average person is angry, he will say all 
manner of evil against whoever has aroused his ire. If, therefore
, any of God's people has had evil spoken against him 
because he has presented the truth to others, he is not to be 
ashamed of his sufferings; for they are just what the true 
Christian is to expect. Such sufferings become strong evidence 


[6292] 


h;iv 15, 1913 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(210 2)',') 


that he is on the side which God approves. Those Christians 
who complacently tell us that they are not receiving persecution
, that they are not suffering for Christ's sake, have good 
reason to doubt whether they are walking in the Master's 
footsteps. 

But we are not to consider persecution and suffering as 
evidences of loyalty to God unless they come as the result of 
Christian effort. If one were a consumptive before he became
 a Christian, his sufferings thereafter would be much 
the same as they were before. If one were to suffer as a busybody
 in other men's matters, he has good cause to be ashamed ; 
for on account of his greater knowledge, his responsibility 
is greater. Therefore he should not do what he knows to 
be wrong. It is a very easy matter to forget that justice 
is the great foundation principle which underlies the teachings
 of the Word of God. This principle is concisely expressed 
in the Golden Rule — "Do unto others as you would have 
them do unto you." No Christian should under any circumstances
 render less than justice to any one. Nothing is more 
necessary to the people of God than to have the Golden Rule 
always before their mind's eye and to measure by it every 
thought, every word, every act. 

WHAT IS INCLUDED IK BUST-BODYIKa 
Busy-bodying is the act of busying one's self about the 
affairs of other people. A large portion of the suffering 
which people in general undergo is the result of busy-bodying. 
We are not to meddle with other men's affairs; for we have 
all that we can do to keep our own matters straight. Many 
good people are unconscious offenders in this direction. They 
do not mean to be busy-bodies; indeed, often they do not 
realize that they are guilty along this line. God's people 
should keep so busy with their own affairs that they will 
have no time to criticise others. If circumstances are such 
that criticise we must, we should always do so in harmony 
with the Word of God. But we should be ever on the alert 
to help others, not to injure them. 

In the preceding chapter St. Peter says, "If ye suffer 
for righteousness' sake, happy are ye." (1 Peter 3:14) Elsewhere
 the Scriptures explain that the followers of Christ 
are called to suffer for right-doing; and that if they are 
properly exercised by such sufferings, they shall in due time 
reign with their Lord in his Messianic Kingdom; but that 
now they are called to suffer with him. This is not because 
God wishes to see his people suffer, but because their interest 
in his truth, their loyalty to him, will demonstrate the fact 
that they have developed the character which he approves. 

THE DIVINE STANDARD OP UVTNG 

During the Millennial age. suffering will indicate a failure 
to be in accord with the principles of righteousness ; but 
during this Gospel age the reverse is often true. This is 
because the conditions under which the church is called are 
peculiar, separate, distinct from any other arrangement. God's 
usual provision for his creatures is a blessing; for example, 
the angels are not suffering. But here on earth a peculiar 
condition exists. 

Six thousand years ago sin entered into the world. Ever 
since its entrance Satan has operated to deceive men, to 
make light appear to be darkness, and to put darkness for 
light. As a result of his efforts to oppose God and righteousness
, the world is bewildered. Mankind now have a natural 
tendency to do wrong. They are as prone to do evil as the 
sparks are to fly upward. 

While these conditions prevailed, God sent his Son into 
the world to die for the Adamic race. Throughout the Gospel 
age the Master's followers have been telling others that whoever
 is in accord w T ith God's righteous standards is in accord 
with God, but that whoever is in opposition to God's standard 
of righteousness is in opposition to God. That standard is, 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all 
thy mind, with all thy soul, with all thy strength; and 
thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Mankind as a race 
are out of accord with this standard. Our Lord Jesus, on 
the contrary, » was in full harmony with this principle, and 
laid down his life on the side of righteousness. Finally he 
brought upon himself the hatred of those who had other plans 
than those of God. The doctors of the law, the Sadducees, 
the Pharisees, the priests and the politicians — all these had 
their own ideas and plans, based upon selfishness. Our Lord, 
who steadfastly followed the lines laid down in the divine 
Word, was necessarily in conflict with their personal ambitions. 

Ever since the darkness of sin has entered the world, fallen 


man has naturally come to shun the light of righteousness. 
Therefore humanity does not like to come too close to the 
light or to the light-bearers. Men do not like to have the 
light of publicity thrown upon their schemes. When, therefore
, our Lord Jesus showed that the doctors of divinity of 
his day had taken away the key of knowledge from the common
 people, those who were in sympathy with the darkness of 
this world became so incensed that finally they crucified him. 

The true followers of Christ find that in the same proportion
 as they take their stand for the truth they will have 
persecution leveled against them. Whoever will strive to 
live godly, righteously, will suffer persecution, as the Scriptures
 have foretold. If they were of the world, the world 
would not hate them, but would love them and fellowship with 
them. This persecution which has come to our Lord and 
his followers does not emanate from any desire on the part of 
the world to oppose the divine plan, however. It is the 
result of blindness. (2 Corinthians 4:4-0) If the Jewish 
rulers had fully understood the situation, they would not 
have crucified the Lord of Glory. — Acts 3:14-18; 1 Corinthians 
2:8. 

Take, for instance, the case of St. Stephen. Saul of Tarsus 
verily thought that he was doing God service when he persecuted
 the first martyr. He had a zeal for God, but it was 
so misdirected that he became a persecutor of God's people. 
He tells us himself that he did this ignorantly, supposing 
that thereby he was serving God. Eventually it may be found 
that much of the persecution which the people of God have 
undergone has resulted not so much from bad motives as 
from ignorance or superstition. But whether the persecution 
cornea from those who do it ignorantly or from those who 
do it intelligently need not matter to those who are persecuted
; for if they realize that they are suffering for righteousness
' sake, they will have that satisfaction of mind which 
will make them happy. Blessedly happy are all who have 
suffered for righteousness' sake. Whoever is thus suffering is 
on God's side. As for the poor world, they are bewildered 
and know not what to do. 

ANOTHER SOURCE OF SUFFERING 

Suffering for righteousness' sake may come not only 
through persecution, but in another way.' If, for instance, 
one engaged in some part of the Lord's service has striven 
to be wise and reasonable, and yet finds that his service 
has brought upon him certain disabilities of a physical nature, 
he may rejoice in the fact that such suffering is for righteousness
' sake; for he has been trying to do right, trying to 
do the Lord's will. We are to recognize, however, that it is 
possible to suffer for foolishness' sake, also. We recall the 
record that Satan tried to induce our Lord to jump from the 
pinnacle of the Temple, declaring that the heavenly Father 
would not permit him to be injured. Had our Lord jumped 
from the Temple and broken a limb, he would have suffered 
for foolishness' sake; for such an undertaking would have 
been presumption. Yet, on the other hand, one might do something
 for foolishness' sake and receive a blessing; for God 
might perceive that he was ignorant of the unwisdom of 
his act. 

It is the duty of every Christian to study the Lord's 
will, to consider carefully the conditions around him, and 
to seek to follow so moderate a course in life that he would 
not only have the divine approval, but would cause as little 
inconvenience and trouble to others as possible. When he 
has done this to the best of his ability, he is to go forward. 
confidently relying upon the Lord's supervising wisdom and 
providence; for God will surely protect all those who put 
their trust in him. 

Whenever the fiery trouble is the hottest, we may be sure 
that the Lord's care is over us; and therefore we may rejoice, 
in that we are partakers of the suffering of Christ. If it 
was necessary that the great Head of the church should 
have such an experience with suffering to prepare him for the 
glory to follow, Ave may be sure that the members of the 
church will also need to suffer in order to be prepared to 
share with him in his glory, honor and immortality. In whatever
 way the suffering may come — whether it is from our own 
flesh or from others — if it results from our endeavor to serve 
the Lord we may be sure that is it for Christ's sake. If, 
therefore, we remain faithful to the end of our course, we shall 
have a share in the glory of Christ at the conclusion of this 
Gospel age, at the manifestation of the sons of God. — Romans 
8:19; Colossians 3:4. 


"Dare what conscience says is right; 
Do what reason savs is best; 


Do with all your rnind and might; 
Do vour dutv and be blest." 


[6293] 


THE NEW WILL THE BASIS OF CHRISTIAN CHARACTER 


% 'For ye are dead, and your life is h%d, 

We understand that there are only two great moral forces 
in the universe—good and evil, righteousness and sin; and 
that whatever is not right is wrong. By nature man was 
originally in full harmony with God. But by the disobedience 
of the perfect man whom God had made, sin entered into 
the world, with its resultant penalty of death. This original 
sin has been transmitted from parent to child until, as the 
Apostle says, all arc sinners, all are in this fallen state. 

After Father Adam had disobeyed God, he had the mind 
of Satan, who had the wrong mind — out of harmony with 
the divine arrangement. Because of Adam's deflection his 
posterity are all born wrong-headed and more or less wrongwilled
. We do not mean that the mind and the will of 
fallen man are wholly Satanic, but that mankind are born 
with depraved minds, 1 ' and are in more or less bondage to 
Satan. The onlv rectification is that we may have a new 
will, a new mina*. 

Here the Lord's message reaches us, offering forgiveness, 
reconciliation to himself, on certain conditions. When we 
inquire what these conditions are, we find them to be (1) 
a full surrender of the will to God and (2) an' acceptance of 
the divine will instead. A full response of the body is not 
expected; for this is impossible in our fallen condition; but 
a full surrender of the will is demanded. 

To those who during the Gospel age fully surrender their 
wills to God, a new nature is given. Instead of being servants 
of sin, we may now become servants of righteousness. This 
we do by stepping from the side of sin to the side of truth, 
the side of God — away from the side of Satan; for there 
are only the two sides. Whoever thereafter abandons the 
new will has gone back to the wrong side. When we became 
new creatures under the divine arrangement, we ceased to be 
old creatures. But if we should cease to be new creatures, 
what are we but old creatures again ? The new will has died ; 
the old will lias revived — come to life again. 

The Master said, "Ye cannot serve God and Mammon/' 
(Matthew 6:24) We cannot be servants of righteousness and 
of sin, of truth and of error. "His servants ye are to whom 
ye render service.'* (Romans 6:16) So long as the new 
creature maintains his relationship to God he is the servant 
of righteousness. But as soon as hi3 will is turned away 
from God, it is turned away from righteousness and is turned 
back to sin once more. It assumes, therefore, the Satanic 
attitude. 

TRUE MEANING OF CONSECRATION 

Many professed Christians do not understand at all what 
is concluded in consecration to sonship. Many do not understand
 that it means the renouncing of all earthly rights, 
earthly hopes, earthly ambitions. They think that consecration 
to God signifies a willingness to live moral, upright lives — 
nothing more. They have hot seen the depth of the Apostle's 
statement, "Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in 
God." St. Paul here means, Your wills are dead, and you 
have been begotten again as new creatures in Christ. Those 
who have not understood this have not become dead as human 
beings — have not taken the step of full consecration to God. 

A righteous will is the beginning of a righteous character
; for the will represents the intention, the ideal. If 
this righteous will is maintained and put into action, the 
result will be the development of a righteous character. 
But if this righteous will is lost, the character will deteriorate
. This would not mean, however, that the intelligence
 or the personality would be lost, but that the righteous 
character would be shipwrecked. (Ezekiel 13:24) The Scriptures
 liken such as lose their new will for righteousness to 
the dog returning to his vomit, and to the sow wallowing in 
the mire after having been cleansed. — 2 Peter 2:22. 

A new will is one's own making. The will of the fallen 
nature "is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed 
can be." the Apostle Paul assures us. (Romans 8:7) A man 
may take time for deliberation, may have a period in which 
he "is gradually determining what he shall do, during which 
the different organs of his mind are balancing the question 
of consecration. But the act of consecrating is the result 
of his final decision in favor of the Lord. His natural will , 
must be changed from its wayward bent, or at least from 
its irresolution, to a fixed determination in the right direction, 
to a determination to renounce the world with all its hopes 
and ambitions and to accept Christ as his Redeemer, together 
with all the heavenly promises centered in our Lord. Thus 
consecration is the first positive act of the new will. After 
consecration and acceptance by the Father, this new will forms? 
the basin of the new creature. The individual is received 
**f God through Christ for the high calling of the Gospel 
fliuivh. 


idth Christ in Qod? — Oolossians 3:3. 

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE WILL 

After one has fully consecrated himself and has been 
begotten of the holy Spirit, the old will is actually dead. 
So when our text declares, "Ye are dead, and your life is 
hid with Christ in God," it is not the body that is dead, nor 
is it the mind, the intellect; it is the old will that has been 
surrendered. The old will is not reckonedly dead, but really 
dead; for one could not have two wills at the same time 
any more that he could walk in two directions at the same 
time, or be in two different countries at the same time, or 
be two different persons at the same time. Therefore, to 
those who are in Christ Jesus, "old things have passed away ; 
behold, all things are become new." 

In one's mental make-up the will occupies the position of 
king, ruler, despot, autocrat. It rules the entire body — that 
is, it has the eight to rule; and it should rule. When the 
old will was rejected, the will of the Lord was accepted 
as the ruler of the human body of the person who consecrated 
himself. The right to rule was actually transferred from the 
old will, to the will of God in Christ. Thenceforth the person 
is freed from the domination of his old will, and subject to 
the new will, which is in harmony with the divine will. 

This new will, however, has difficulty in establishing its 
rule over the human body ; for its entire empire — the members 
of the body — is out of harmony with the new sovereign. The 
mind is more or less twisted and warped by reason of sin. 
Many of the faculties of the mind rather prefer the old master, 
and feel restraint under the regulations of the new will. They 
desire to be rebellious and to have their own way. Sometimes
 the new ruler, the new will, is too lenient with its 
subjects. The new creature must remember, however, that 
there is no alternative — that he must rule with an iron hand ; 
for if the will of the flesh should win the day, should again 
become master, it would mean that the new will was lost. 
that the new creature had died. This would mean eternal 
destruction — the second death. 

Whoever has once turned his will to God, and has been 
accepted by the Lord and begotten by the holy Spirit, is 
on trial for life or death. If he were to turn to sin, to 
practise sin wilfully, there would be no future hope for him. 
Therefore it behooves the new creature to rule his body, 
his mind, his passions, and to bear in mind the precious 
promises to which he has become heir in Christ. To do this 
he is granted the Word of God, Through the guidance of 
this Word he is to keep guard over his mind, to watch his 
thoughts, to scrutinize his conduct. No matter how rebellious 
his flesh may be, it is the part of the new will to oppose 
any disloyalty, to conquer and control his mortal body, to 
the full extent of his ability. Whatever he may lack in 
ability the Lord purposes to cover and excuse, under certain 
conditions. 

The new will feeds on the knowledge of the Word of 
God. As the child of God considers and admires the grandeur 
of the divine character — the wisdom, the justice, the love 
of God — he begins to copy these attributes; and thus he 
becomes God-like. By degrees he becomes a copy of God's 
dear Son. By his providences God so shapes our affairs as 
his children that things 'which would be too difficult for us 
will be taken out of our way. If our will remains fully submissive
 to him, all things will be made to work together 
for our good. — Romans 8:28. 

Such children of God will not be tempted above what they 
are able to bear; for the Lord permitting temptation will 
also provide a way of escape. (1 Corinthians 10:13) Noting 
all their deliverances, their succor in times of need, they 
will be strengthened and Mill become established in faith. 
Thus the Christian, as the new Avill grows stronger and 
stronger, is not apt to be turned this way and that by false 
doctrines. The new will cannot expect, however, to gain an 
easy control of the flesh. It must be continually at warfare 
with the tendencies of the old body. But through our Lord 
Jesus Christ the new creature's best endeavors will be ac 
counted as the fulfillment of the divine law. — Romans 8:1-4, 

SUGGESTIONS FROM OUR LORD'S EXPERIENCES 

In scanning the experience of our Lord Jesu3 for light 
on this subject, we perceive that at the time of hi a consecration
 at Jordan he gave up his own will as a man, and 
adopted the Father's will as his own. Thenceforth his human 
will was dead. W T hen in the Garden of Gethsemane he prayed 
to the Father, "Not my will, but thine, be done/* he had 
made no change of purpose. He did not mean that he had 
a contrary will in the matter. His mind was still the same 
as at consecration. But a condition had arisen in his life 
which perplexed him. He was not certain as to the Father's 


(21? _M8) 


[6294] 


July 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(J19 JJU) 


desire. So far as his own knowledge went he could see 
nothing to be gained by his suffering such great ignominy 
and shame as confronted him in connection with his death 
as the antitypical Passover Lamb. Perhaps he might he 
spared death as a malefactor, charged with being a blasphemer, 
an enemy of the Almighty. He was not sure whether this 
might not be merely an incidental that could be turned aside. 
If it could be turned aside, he wished that it might be so. 
But he desired to have the Father's will done, whatever that 
will might be. He left himself wholly in the Father's hands. 
This was his sentiment. , He expressed himself here in utter 
disregard of his human sentiments. 

Our Lord still had his human body with its preferences. 
His human preference would be to be spared experiences of 
shame. His preference as a new T creature would be that he 
bo not put to death as a blasphemer against the Father 
whom he loved and revered. He had no thought, we may be 
sure, of any other than a sacrificial death; for he had told 
his disciples that he Would be crucified. But as the consummation
 of his sacrifice drew near, he saw what he was 
facing — the mock trial and all that it involved, the false 
charges, the humiliation, the deep shame — and the matter 
became all the more serious in his mind. He was not sure 
whether it was necessary for him to endure this shame and 
to be regarded as an enemy of God. If this was necessary, 
he had not a word to say. We do not understand his words 
to indicate that he had a will in any wise contrary to that 
of the Father. 

DIVINE OVBEBULIKQ IN DAILY AFFAIBS 

The question might arise here, If our Lord was not certain 
that the heavenly Father was planning every detail of his 
experience, should we have the thought that our Father plans 
and arranges every little incident of our experiences? 

There are probably extremes of thought upon both sides 
of this question. Our brains differ. Our experiences are 
varied. Apparently different ones of us are naturally inclined 
to view matters from different standpoints. We believe that 
naturally many of us are not likely enough to look for the 
lx>rd's providences in the details of life. For our own part, 
we are rather of the opinion that many would have still 
greater blessings if they would watch more carefully along 
this line. Some, however, carry the thought of the^ Lord's 
overruling providences to an extreme. Such would be inclined 
to think that if they were to step into a puddle of water 
the Lord would have to do with it. 


But we are assured that "the angel of the Lord encampeth 
around about them that fear him, and delivereth them." 
(Psalm 34:7) Personally, we are striving more and more 
to see the providences of the Lord in all our affairs. We are 
also assured that "the steps of a good man are ordered of 
the Lord." (Psalm 37:23) This does not mean that we are 
to think that everything we do, every step we take, is necessarily
 ordered of the Lord, even, when it proves to be a 
misstep; but that the general course of a righteous man is 
under the Lord's supervision. God gives his angels, his 
messengers, charge over his people. (Psalm 91:11, 12; Hebrews
 1:14) We are merely instruments in his hands, if 
we are guided by him. As respects the work in our own 
hearts, however, we are more than this; and we are to use 
our reason in respect to our course, in respect to how we 
shall employ our talents for the Lord — how 1 we shall do 
volunteer work, how we shall present a book or a tract, etc. 
We are to use our brains, seeking to have them guided by 
the Lord. 

We have great respect for those who go to God each 
morning and ask him so to guide their affairs for the day 
that they may have some opportunity of witnessing to the 
truth. It seems to us that the Lord would be pleased with 
such an attitude, and would feel thus: "Here is a willing 
servant, and I will give to this one an opportunity of 
service." We greatly admire that implicit reliance on God 
which realizes that we are nothing of ourselves, that our 
sufficiency is of the Lord, that he is using us as instruments, 
and that we are to be on the lookout for opportunities to 
serve him and his. We notice that all of our dear Redeemer's 
steps were ordered of Jehovah God. While at first he was 
not able to see clearly that his final humiliation was ordered 
of God, yet a little later he saw that it was so ordered, 
and that it was a part of the dregs of the cup which he was 
to drink. His experiences were designed of God. 

Probably this is true of many of our experiences. Things 
that we think are the fault of others or may have come our 
way by chance are quite probably more or less, perhaps 
fully, under divine supervision. God would not, we know, 
interfere with the conscience of any one; but co-laboring with 
the circumstances of life, many things are surely ordered 
for the carrying out of the divine purposes concerning us. 
and he will turn aside whatever would be to our injury. 


HOW WILL IDENTITY BE CARRIED INTO THE SPIRIT LIFE? 

much pleased also to know that there is a special 


We have been asked, "How will the new creature, the new 
soul, in the future be identified with the old creature, the old 
soul? In other words, How shall we know ourselves?" We 
reply, There is of course, nothing in nature which would 
explain this matter; for it is something that is entirely outride
 of anything belonging to nature. In this new creation God 
has given" us something entirely distinct, new. The new creature
 is not an earthly creature, and nothing that is of the 
earthly being will ever have a part, to our understanding, in 
that new creation, either now or at any time. Nothing will 
carry over from the human to the divine, from the human to 
the spiritual. 

Rehearsing some of the things we have said: The human 
being here is more or less depraved. He hears something 
about God, about the divine nature, a-bout what sin is, about 
why it is undesirable, about the reconciliation which God has 
provided through Christ and the invitation given to some to 
become joint-heirs with Christ in his heavenly kingdom. He 
becomes conscious of all this through his ears, through his 
natural perceptions— or through human powers; for he has 
no other powers. He must have the hearing ear, else he 
would not heed the message from God at the present time. 

Some have more of the hearing ear, some have less. The 
one who has more of the hearing ear would be more attentive, 
more pleased, when he would learn that God has some program
 for the salvation of sinners. The more depraved would 
have less of the hearing ear. The depraved person would be 
living on a low plane, therefore he would have less inclination
 to come to God, less of a disposition to listen to anything 
that God would have to communicate. Even as respects the 
class who do hear with greater or less distinctness, the 
adversary has dulled their ears to some extent with false 
"doctrines of devils." 

But what we hear of God's gracious invitation to become 
associates with Christ Je'sus rejoices our hearts. To us who 
have the hearing ear this is indeed good tidings. We say, 'I 
nm glad that God has invited me to come back into his family, 
that he has provided for the covering of my imperfections. I 


am very ~~ r - . - , 

invitation now to those who have the mind of Christ and 
desire to walk in his steps, and I gladly avail myself of God's 
loving arrangement. In harmony with this invitation I offer 
myself a living sacrifice.' 

VAEIO0S STEPS IN BECOMING A NEW CEEATUBB 
Now I have been converted. How? I have turned around. 
From what? From the way of sin and of my own will to go 
the way of righteousness and the way of God's will. 'Was- this 
conversion? Yes. This consecration of myself to God includes 
everything that belongs to me, all that I am and have— the 
human ego, the personality, with all its hopes, aim3, possessions
, in every -shape and form. 

Did this make me a new creature? No. It put me into 
the way that made me eligible to that position. The next 
step was the imputation of the merit of Jesus, to cover all my 
sins, all my imperfections. Did this make me a new creature? 
No. Of what use, then, was the imputation ? It 
made me acceptable to God as a living sacrifice. The next 
thing in order was for God to accept the offering and to indicate
 'his acceptance by the begetting of the holy Spirit. What 
this means we do not know. We nre not wise enough to 
know. God foreknew our Lord as the Head of the Christ body, 
and he foreknew the class which is to form that body. And 
now, by coming in under the conditions which he has laid 
down, we are accepted of him as members of this anointed 
company, and become new creatures in Christ. The merit of 
Jesus still operates on our -behalf, because of the imperfections
 of our mortal flesh. It is now our wedding garment, our 
bridal robe. 

When we have become new creatures is the matter determined
? Oh, no! It is only begun. I am to prove my devotion
 and loyalty, to show that the surrender of my will was a 
genuine thing. How can I do this? By contact with the 
truth I am exercised by it. If I have been in error in any 


way, and the error is clearly pointed out by the truth, my 
lovalty will be determined by 'the diligence with which I weigh 


__. ___ t lgence 1 

and decide the matter. If I* decide slowly, it means that I am 


[6295] 


1220-221) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


a little obtuse, somewhat dull of hearing, or that I am 3low 
to respond to the will of God. If I decide quickly between the 
truth and the error, decide for God, it will mean that I am 
loyal to God's will, his truth, that I am quick to hear his 
voice and prompt to obey ; and I shall be all the more pleasing 
to him aa a loyal, faithful child. If I should decide the matter 
slowly, would the Lord cut me off? No. Perhaps lie would 
give me some chastisements in the school of Christ. "A 
bruised reed will he not break, and smoking flax will he not 
quench."— Isaiah 42:3; Matthew 12:20. 

In one Bible picture the newly, begotten ones are represented
 as embryos, not yet born. In another picture they are 
shown as children, not having attained the stature of manhood
, but as growing in grace, knowledge and character. 
Either picture is a very beautiful one, but we cannot mix the 
two. We cannot imagine the unborn child growing in knowledge
, etc. ; and we cannot imagine a prenatal embryo as developing
 toward manhood. We perceive in the embryo picture 
that every unborn child must grow, and that it is dependent 
for growth on nourishment. If some accident should happen, 
if there should be some miscarriage, the embryo would never 
he born. 

So we see that from the time we are begotten of the Spirit 
the embryo new creature must develop. The new creature 
there began its life. It then drew its sustenance from provisions
 already present. The human mother was the same 
woman before the embryo life began that she is after the child 
is begotten. So the Lord's provision and arrangement had 
supplied all the nourishment and sustenance for the new 
creature before the new life had its start. 

From another viewpoint, tliia new creature in Christ is 
now the governing power in the individual life. It is the 
only existence that God recognizes and that we recognize; it 
is the only one that is to have any control over this mortal 
body. How does the new creature have the control? We 
answer, By the transfer of the will from human interests and 
domination to the doing of the Lord's will. God*s will is now 
our will. We have no other, no contrary will. The clamorings
 of the flesh are to be ignored by this new will. As 
beings of a new nature we have superior rights in the human 
body, indeed — the only rights; f r all the earthly rights 
imputed to us through the merit of Jesus are relinquished aa 
a sacrifice, that we may gain the heavenly rights, the spiritual 
blessings. Having accepted our sacrifice God does not give us 
a new body in which to operate. We have still to make use of 
the same mortal body with its weaknesses and blemishes. 
THE HUMAN BODY OTJR SERVANT 

What are we to do with this mortal body? We are to see 
that it is kept under; we are to browbeat it and compel its 
submission to the new ruling power in our lives. 
Moreover, we are determined to make this body an active 
servant to the new creature, to render material assistance in 
ministering to its growth and in serving the brethren, who are 
running in this same narrow way. Some might say that we 
are treating our body unkindly ; but from the divine standpoint 
we are treating it as wisely as possible, in order to get from it 
the best service for God. If it is God's will that we undertake
 some great work for him, we will certainly put the body 
through a course of training to this end. 

We say to our body, 'You are my body only for the time 
being. I, the new creature, purpose to use you. in the service 
of my Lord/ The old creature, the mortal flesh may demur, 
and may say, *I have some rights. 5 W"e answer, 'You have no 
rights. They are all relinquished; that is, what rights you 
may have thought you had; for in reality you were under the 
condemnation of death and never had any rights. The rights 
imputed to you when you were offered to God, were granted 
only that they' might be sacrificed with Christ. You are 
legally dead now, and have nothing to say in the matter. I 
shall use my judgment as to what you shall or shall not do. 1 

If T should yield to the desires of the old creature, it 
would prosper in its aims and projects, and the new creature 
would be puny and weak in courage, in strength and in every 
way. The new creature must control all the interests of the 
body, granting it only what is best for the development and 
the interests of the new life. The old self-life, reckoned dead, 
must be daily crucified until the end of the narrow way. It 
must die of neglect. The new will must admit of no compromise
. Thus we shall grow spiritually and become built up 
into Christ our living Head; and the stronger we become 
spiritually, the sooner shall we be ready for our change. 
This change \3 the birth of the new creature in the first resurrection
. It is the receiving of our new spiritual bodies. Not 
one atom of this mortal body will ever get into the new condition
 beyond the vail. 

This new creature that now lives in a mortal body feeds 


not upon natural bread, but upon "every word that proceeded
 out of the mouth of God." (Matthew 4:4) But as 
God has a work for the new creature to do while in this 
mortal body, this earthen vessel, I am to take reasonable care 
of miy body; for it is the only instrument of operation which 
the new creature now possesses. If I so misuse my body as 
to unfit it for eervice, I would not be exercising the spirit of 
a sound mind and would not be in harmony with the will of 
God. But the new creature is to have the control, to dominate 
the servant and not permit the servant to dominate him. 
OUR IHDIVIDTJAUTY, OB IDENTITY, PERMANENT 

If we continue faithful to our contract with the Lord we 
shall soon have new spiritual .bodies, and then we shall be 
new souls. But our ego, our personality, our individuality, 
our identity, will form a distinctive part of the new soul. It 
is really the ego, the personality, that makes the soul. The 
body alone would not make a soul, whether a natural body or 
a spiritual body. The elements of which the natural body is 
composed might be disintegrated into their original condition, 
and would then form no part of the soul. — Genesis 2:7. 

Soul is that which comes down from father to child. 
Adam gave soul, being, to his children. At birth each of 
these became a soul, a being. This spark of life has come on 
down through the ages, from father to child. In the resurrection
 of the new creature, the soul, the being, composed of the 
new will and the character which has been developed, is transferred
 to new conditions and becomes a new soul. It has an 
altogether different body, with new powers and greatly enlarged
 capacity. This will be a body through which the 
developed new creature may fully express all the desires and 
aspirations of its nature. Nevermore will there be discord 
between the mind and the body. All will be perfect harmony 
and concord. All our longings will be fulfilled to the highest 
degree, 

"Can you explain to us," it may be asked, "how this new 
life will be transferred to the new body?" We cannot. In 
the case of our Lord Jesus we have the statement that the 
spirit-being left the heavenly condition, came to earthly conditions
 and became a man, subject to human limitations; and 
we have the assurance that this same One who came into the 
world, who died, arose from the dead and who ascended into 
heaven, was to come again in the glory of the Father. (Matthew
 16:27) It is the same ego that came at the second 
advent. It has changed its status, in that it now has vastly 
enlarged powers, in that the ego is now operating in a 
glorious spirit body of the highest nature — the divine. This 
ego had a spiritual body at first; it had a human body afterward
. It has now a new divine body, superior to all. But 
the ego, the individuality, has persisted under both these 
changes. So our ego, our personality, is to pass from this 
earthly body and be given a new body. 

The power by which all this can be accomplished is divine 
power. If anybody can explain to us what were the component
 elements of the first soul, if he can show what composes 
the spark of life or what it is, perhaps we could explain the 
process of the creation of new creatures in Christ. Or if any 
one can explain what makes the germ of wheat grow, how it 
gets life, perhaps wo could explain how the new creature is a 
new life-germ, how it grows, and how the identity, the individuality
, is preserved and carried into ^he heavenly condition. 
We must trust in divine power for this whole matter, as 
respects both the resurrection of the church and the resurrection
 of the world. Whoever doubts divine power cannot believe 
in the resurrection. 

PHILOSOPHY OF RESURRECTION INEXPLICABLE 

Wo cannot imagine, for instance, just how it will be that 
Moses or Abraham or anyone else of the remote past could 
ever be resurrected so that he could know himself, could read 
the story of his life in the Bible and remember that it was 
all true. How that can be only God knows. You do not 
know; I do not. We believe it because God says it. It is just 
as difficult to understand about the resurrection of a man and 
the bringing of him back to life in a fresh, new body as it is 
to understand how the new creature, the new soul, can be 
brought into its new body, and can still have its identity and 
know himself and all that he has experienced in the earthlife
. 

We are hoping soon to get one of these spirit bodies. 
When we get it we shall know all about it; for the Scriptures 
declare that then we shall know even as we are known. { 1 
Corinthians 13:12) We might find illustrations to help us in 
this matter — as when a record is taken on tne phonograph. 
Something, a certain vibration of air,* went out of the mouth. 
This force made little indentations upon the cylinder of wax. 
Now. then, if we know how to reproduce the human voice 
thus, it gives us a hint how God with his unlimited powers 


[6296] 


July 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(221-222) 


could preserve everything recorded by the convolutions of our 
brains, all that we call memory, how it could be preserved 
absolutely — everything -by which we could know ourselves in 
the future. We do not know ourselves now by the number of 
pounds weight we register or by the cut of our beard or by our 
clothing. We know ourselves by something in our mind. But 
if our reason were gone, if our memory were gone, then we 
would not know ourselves. 

Cod, who has made us new creatures, is the all-powerful 
One who knows how to preserve our identity, to reproduce our 
memory in our new bodies. And the more we come to know 


about him and the length and breadth and height and depth 
of his wisdom, power and love, the more we are able to 
appreciate all he has toid us, and the stronger is our confidence
 in him. It is to the wise a glorious tiling that God 
should promise a resurrection. The world cannot understand 
it; to them it is foolishness. They cannot believe in a resurrection
 from the dead. Therefore they cannot have the joy 
that we have through the exercise of faith. Soon will our 
faith be swallowed up in sight. Then all the mysteries that 
puzzle us now will be made clear; they will flee away as mist 
before the morning sun. 


If he, the holy, harmless, sinless One, 
Must needs be perfected through suffering, 
Wouldst thou then seek to tread a path less steep 
To reach heaven's goal and win thy Father's smile? 
Ah, no! My soul, when pain and "sorrow cross 
Thy threshold, be thou swift to welcome them, 
Then whisper low within thy heart of hearts, 
"Another opportunity to show 
My King how much I love, what I can bear 
For him!" And as the weary days go by, 


PERFECT THROUGH SUFFERING 


Cling closer to the hand that wounds thee so, 

Lean harder on the breast of him who loves 

Thee, even as he loved his only Son; 

And pray, "Lord, spare me not, burn out all dross, 

Let nothing but the piirest gold remain, 

And help me ir the hottest fire hold still! 

Do thou, great Lapidist, grind on, that I 

May perfectly reflect the glorious light 

Of love divine! Oh, fit me for some place 

Within thy royal diadem to shine!" 


N. Y. PRESS COMMENTS ON THE RECENT TRIAL 


The following articles from the press will be of interest to 
the dear friends who have learned through the July 1st 
Watch Tower what verdict was returned by the jury in the 
trial of our brethren here. We accept this verdict as of the 
Lord's permission, realizing it to be one of the "all things'' 
which work together for good to them that put their trust in 
God. "Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be 
afraid." 

Commenting upon the outcome of the case, the Editor of the 
Xew York "Evening Post" said on June 22: 

w 'In the opinion of the court the religious propaganda 
which these defendants have vigorously advocated and spread 
throughout the nation, as well aa among our allies, is a 
prreater danger than a division of the German army. ... A 
person preaching religion usually has much influence and if 
he is sincere he is all the more effective. This aggravates 
rather than mitigates the wrong they have done.' 

"After uttering these word3 Judge H. B. Howe, of the 
United States District Court in Brooklyn, sentenced the religious
 persons before him to twenty years each in prison, 
with one exception. It was necessary, he said, to make an 
example of those who sincerely taught this religion, which, 
like that of the Mennonites and the Quakers, and many another 
sect, forbids the taking up of arms. They were guilty' plainly 
of having urged men to follow what they considered the teachings
 of the Lord and to apply literally the commandment, 
'Thou shalt not kill.' So the jury could do nothing less than 
find them guilty of having violated the statutes of the country
, whatever may be the correctness or incorrectness of their 
attitude toward the moral and religious law. We trust that 
teachers of religion everywhere will take notice of this judge's 
opinion that teaching any religion save that which is abso-* 
Uitely in accord with statute laws «is a grave crime which is 
intensified if, being a minister of the Gospel, you should still 
happen to be sincere. There is no doubt that Judge Howe 
made his sentences severe enough; they are about double those 
imposed by the Kaiser upon the Socialists who have been trying
 to upset his wicked regime, and three times longer than 
many sentences imposed upon would-be regicides." 

The New York "Tribune" of June 22, said: 

"Joseph F. Rutherford and six of the other seven Russellites
 convicted of violation of the Espionage Act were sentenced
 to twenty years each in the Atlanta penitentiary 
yesterday by Judge Howe, in the United States District Court, 
in Brooklyn. Sentence of the eighth defendant, Giovanni de 
Oecca, was deferred. His companions, each with a pink carnation
 in has lapel, marched out of court to start their sentence. 

"This is the happiest day of my life,' said Mr. Rutherford
, on his way from the court to the jail. 'To serve earthly 


punishment for the sake of one's religious belief ia one of the 
greatest privileges a man could have.* 

"In imposing sentence the judge declared that in his opin* 
ion the religious propaganda advocated and spread throughout 
the nation as well as among our allies was 'a greater danger 
than a division of the German army.' 

" 'If they had taken guns and swords/ he said, and joined 
the German army the harm they could have done would have 
been insignificant compared with the results of their propaganda
. A person preaching religion usually has much influence
, and if he is sincere he is all the more effective. This 
aggravates rather than mitigates the wrong they have done. 

" 'Therefore, as the only prudent thing to do with such 
persons, the court has concluded that the punishment should 
be severe. The sentence is that the defendants, Joseph F. 
Rutherford, William E. Van Amburgh, Robert J. Martin, Fred 
H. Robison, George H. Fisher, Clayton J. Woodworth and 
A. Hugh Macmdllan, serve a term of "twenty years in the Federal
 Penitentiary at Atlanta, Ga,, on each of the four counts 
of the indictment, but that the sentences commence and run 
concurrently.' 

"The defendants retained self-possession that has characterized
 their ' conduct throughout the entire trial. As the 
judge's words fell on their ears not a shade of emotion crossed 
their faces. 

"One of the strangest demonstrations that the marshal's 
office in the Brooklyn Federal Court has ever seen was held 
by the families and intimate friends of the convicted men soon 
after the prisoners had been taken to the grand jury room. 
Messengers were sent out for fruit, candy and sandwiches, and 
after a short prayer meeting a gala feast was spread. Following
 this the whole company made the old building ring with 
the strains of 'Blest Be the* Tie That Binds/ 

" 'It is all God's will,' they told each other with faces 
almost radiant. '-Some day the world will know what all this 
means. Meanwhile let us be thankful for the grace of God 
that has sustained the dear brothers and sisters during their 
trial and look forward to the great day that is to come.' 

"Counsel for the defence announced that they would take 
immediate steps to appeal the case to the United States Circuit
 Court of Appeals. Jesse Fuller, one of the defence's 
attorneys, made every legal effort yesterday morning before 
the sentence was imposed to have the verdict set aside. Every 
motion was denied by Judge Howe, and one of the motions 
made on the ground that the 'ascendency of the mdnd of the 
court had affected the freedom of the witnesses, the defendants 
and the counsel for the defence/ evoked from the court a 
severe reprimand." 


LETTERS FROM 

PREPARATION FOR PTJTURB SERVICE 

Dearly beloved Brother Rutherford : — 

We heard this morning of the result of the trial, and 
hasten to assure you. and all the other dear brethren concerned
, of our love and sympathy with you and them. We 
know that you nor they have the" least bit of sympathy with 
Germany and her devil-possessed ruler, and no jury can make 
yon a traitor. We were not at all surprised at the result, as 


THE BRETHREN 

the report of the proceedings from day to day showed that 
your conviction was a foregone conclusion. Not only so, but 
for forty years our dear departed Pastor pointed out to us 
from the Scriptures just the condition of things which has 
come to pass, including the prediction (based upon the Word 
of God) that at the end of this age, the Lord's people would 
be persecuted and treated as traitors, anarchists, etc. If we 
had nothing more to prove that we correctly understand the 


[6297] 


(222 223) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Bible and that we have the tbuth, the coming about of matters
 exactly as Brother Russell pointed out from the Scriptures
 would he sufficient to convince us. We know that we 
are in the hands of our heavenly Father; and that while he 
does not approve of injustice, "he nevertheless permits it, 
because he sees that we need these experiences to chisel, polish 
and prepare us to become the judges of the world in the next 
age. Men may sneer at us for holding what seems to them 
such a fantastic idea, but they will in due time find out that 
we knew what we were saving. Then we shall render to them 
just judgment along the lines of mercy and love. 

Again assuring you and the other dear brethren of our 
continued love and prayers, we beg to subscribe ourselves, 

Your brother and sister in the Lord, 

W. W. M., and R. B. U.—Vla,. 

RESOLUTIONS OF SYMPATHY AND 1.0VB 

Dear Brethren: — 

I have the honor to inclose herewith a resolution by the 
Washington Ecclesia; also another resolution addressed to 
Messrs. Sparks and Fuller, Attorneys-at-Law, Brooklyn, N. Y., 
with the request that you cause the same to be delivered to 
them. These resolutions were passed by unanimous vote. 

Yours in the sufferings of the Lord Jesus, 

J. A. D., 8ecy. 
A RESOLUTION 

RESOLVED by the Brethren in Christ at Washington, 
D. C, in meeting assembled, Sunday evening, June 23, 1918, 
that we do tender to our brethren in the Bethel Home and 
Brooklyn Tabernacle, bereaved of seven of their foremost 
fellow-members Uy permission of our heavenly Father, our 
loving sympathy in their sorrow T and their loss; and that 
we do assure them of our continual prayers on thedr behalf 
and of our continued loyalty and support, and of our desire 
for a continued service by the pilgrim brethren as long as the 
Lord permits, 

A LETTER TO THE BETHEL FAMILY 

Dearly Beloved wf Christ: — 

The peace of God be multiplied unto you, and his blessings
 abundantly be your portion! I think of you often and 
pray for you much; and 1 am sure that our Father is blessing
 you. 

Prison life seems strange; and yet every experience is attended
 with joy, since we look at all such from the heavenly 
viewpoint. Trjily now we can sing: 

"Fade, fade, each earthly joy, 
Jesus is mine!" 

In fact, there are now no earthly joys; but we are looking 
with joyful anticipation to our gathering home. Seven days 
in jail changed our appearance somewhat and reminded us 
that the process of death is working in our flesh. On the 
eighth day we were removed to a prison with more light and 
freedom. We now have seven cabins (cells) on a corridor 
shut out from other prisoners, and we can have fellowship 
together all the day. At night, when the great iron doors 
close and each one is locked securely in his cell, we call out 
to each other and discuss God's precious^ Word. Then we 
silently talk with the Lord; and we talk to him about you 
and all the dear sheep, and beg him to protect you. 

If the Lord so wills we would be glad to come to you 
once more and try to aid you in some manner; and to this 
end we have hoped that bail may be granted to us. Our 
Father's will be done! We often feel in a strait betwixt 
two — whether we would prefer to depart or to come and 
M»rve you a season before we go homo. His will be done! 
1 feel sure that all these experiences are ripening the church 
preparatory to the final ingathering. Your letters and letters 
from the dear ones elsewhere show how sweetly they are 
yielding to the fire that is consuming the sacrifice. This 
brings joy to my heart. I count it all joy to be privileged to 
have some part in filling up "that which is behind of the 
sufferings of Christ for his body's sake, which is the church." 
I thank our dear Father for being so good as to send six. 
brethren with me, that we may have these privileges together. 

Several years ago it was my pleasure to travel over some 
of the land which St. Paul traversed while ministering to the 
saints. I also visited the prison where he \va=* confined at 
Rome. Now we are having some like experiences in prison; 
and our Father has permitted it. and will overrule it all to 
our good. As we now read the experiences of St. Paul they 
have a keener interest for us. Only if now we can faithfully 


finish our course, we shall join the Apostle and Brother Russell
, and then see the Lord! Weep not for us, beloved; 
indeed, I am sure that you do not, but that you rejoice with 
us. If I could come down once a day and look over the place 
and see that you are all safe and happy, I think I should 
feel better. But then I wonder if the Lord does not permit 
Brother RusseLl to look about Bethel daily. I know the Lord 
has made all necessary provision. 

Let not your dear hearts be troubled, neither fear what 
man may do unto you* I hardly think the Government 
powers will attempt to disturb you in the home or in the 
office. Stay by the ship, trusting in the Lord. Only permit 
me to suggest that you be calm and do as little talking about 
the trouble as is possible. Go quietly about your work, but 
keep at it until the Lord says: "It is enough!" From what 
I hear I judge that these trials are drawing all of the Lord's 
dear ones closer together; and such should be the case. We 
therefore expect that every one at the Bethel will "in love 
serve one another/' Remember the admonition of St. Paul to 
avoid thotse who cause divisions, and who have sought to 
destroy the flock of the Lord. The time is now here for each 
one to set his house in order. The King is at the door. 

Do all you can to encourage the dear sheep of the flock. 
Comfort them with the sweet promises of an early and glorious 
home-coming. Never have I loved you so much as now. I 
miss you — and that is putting it lightly. How sweet it will 
be to gather around our Father's throne and rejoice with joy 
unspeakable forever morel 

While it is true that we know not what awaits us, I think 
there may be ft short season of freedom and some more service 
for his dear people. That is all according to his will. His 
will be done ! Your messages to the brethren have been 
greatly appreciated. May the Lord reward you richly! Know 
of a certainty that we greatly love you. The grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ be with you one and all. 

Your brother and servant by his grace. 

J. F. Rutherford. 

[The above letter was written on June 28, in L. I. City 
Prison,] 

PLEDGE HEARTY SUPPORT AND LOYAL CO-OPERATION 

Dearly beloved Bethel Family: — 

At a special meeting of the Boston Ecclesia held on Monday
, June 24, when about four hundred were in attendance, it 
was unanimously voted that a committee be appointed to 
express the sentiment and sympathy of the Ecclesia to you in 
this your hour of sorrow. While we fully realize your greatest 
source of comfort comes from the Great Comforter, we also 
know that the sympathy of kindred minds of the 3ame 
mystical body is, by the grace of God, a help and consolation 
in times of affliction. 

As it has seemed to be the good pleasure of our heavenly 
Father in recently removing from active executive service the 
officers of our Society who have so faithfully served us in the 
past, the Ecclesia at Boston very heartily, as well as unanimously
, indorse the selection of the brethren in whose hands 
tfhe matter of continuing the harvest work has been intrusted. 
We believe the Watch Tower Bible and Tragi 1 Society and 
kindred organizations to be the Father's only channel for dispensing
 the meat in due season for the household of faith, and 
we pledge our loyal support and hearty co-operation. 

Yours in the name of our dear Redeemer, 

The Church at Boston. 

LOVING SYMPATHY FOR THE BRETHREN 

Dear Brethren prisoners of Jesus Christ: — 

Greetings in our glorious Bridegroom's mime. T cannot 
refrain from writing to you and sending abundance of Christian
 love to you all in bonds. How gladly would I share your 
position if it were my opportunity, but I can share and do 
share part of your sufferings mentally! My heart has been 
sick when I think of the dear saintly heads that will have the 
prison pillows to lie upon; but it will soon be exchanged for the 
Master's breast. What can I say, dear brethren, that could 
comfort you but assure you of my prayers hourly on your 
behalf, and to promise I will strive more faithfully to fight 
on and meet you all in the kingdom of God, 

My heart goes out in sympathy to the dear help-mates. 
May God who alone can comfort and sustain these dear sisters, 
yea, and the Bible House brethren, too! 

Again assuring you of our love and prayers on your 
behalf, I remain 

Your sister in Christ Jesus, MRS. W, T. H. — Ont. 


[6298] 


You XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., AUGUST 1, 1918 


No. 15 


OUR DELIVERANCE DRAWETH NIGH! 


''The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore cast off (he 

of hght." -Hamuli* 12:12. 


icorfcs of darkness, and let us ynt on the, artuor 


We can see only one way in which the Apostle could have 
said in his day that the night was far spent. He evidently recognized
 the period of time since sin had entered the world as a 
time of darkness, of night. In proportion as man became 
alienated from God, the darkness became more intense. As sin 
abounded, many could not see what was right and what was 
wrong. This condition still prevails. So far have they fallen 
from the likeness of their Creator that their minds are benighted
. The Apostle says that because men did not choose 
"to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a 
reprobate mind." (Romans 1:28) Their minds became darkened
, unable to distinguish right from wrong. 

St, Paul tells us that all this is what we might expect 
from a reign of sin — a reign of darkness. Satan's opposition 
to God made him a leader of those men who wmild not have 
God's way; and all down the centuries these have been the 
majority. In their fallen condition their minds were perverted, 
and they became an easy prey to the wiles of the great adversary
. This darkness, which the Apostle styles night, has been 
a period of six thousand years. Now, however, we realize that 
we are in the dawning of a new dispensation. Darkness is giving
 place to light in matters relating not only to the church, 
but aUo to the world. If it was true in the day of the Apostle 
that the night was far spent, how much more forceful is the 
expression in our day! 

SURELY ALL SHOULD BE AWAKE NOW! 

The light of the glorious Sun of Righteousness is even now 
breaking over the lull -tops. It cannot shine upon the whole 
world until all the members of the church of Christ are glorified 
and exalted to power in the Messianic Kingdom. Then the 
darkness of sin, ignorance, superstition and wrong-doing will 
be dispersed. 

In the verse preceding our text the Apostle points out to 
the Church at Rome great responsibility saying: "Knowing 
the time, that now.it is high time to awake out of sleep; for 
now is our salvation nearer than when we believed." But 
how much more significant are these words to ua of today, than 
to them! The Christian is to realize that the whole world has 
been asleep, in a sort of stupor respecting the highest, best and 
noblest things. When the child of God gets his eyes partially 
opened, he begins to weigh and measure matters after a different
 fashion from that of his previous course. As his eyes open 
still more widely, everything takes on a new aspect. He is 
able more than ever before to estimate rightly the value of 
things of this life and finds them not worthy to be compared 
with the glorious things which belong to the life eternal. He 
sees that for six thousand years the world has been groaning 
under the bondage of sin and Satan, but that the blessed 
morning of the great Sabbath of hallowed rest and refreshment 
is about to dawn. 

As the Christian realizes all this, he should feel disposed to 
arouse himself, shake himself thoroughly from the dust of ignorance
, superstition, blindness and sordidness, and to live 
more fully in harmony with the glorious hopes which he now 
entertains — living for the new era, the new dispensation. Instructed
 more fully from the Word of God, he will not expect 
his salvation, his deliverance, except in connection with the 
second presence — the parousia — of our Lord Jesus and the establishment
 of his kingdom. He will see a new force, beauty 
and meaning in the words of the Apostle Peter: "Wherefore, 
gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and set your hope 
perfectly on the grace that is to be brought unto you at the 
revelation of Jesus Christ."— 1 Peter 1:13, R. V. 

EEIGN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS AT THE DOOR 

The thought of the second presence of the Lord was continually
 before the Apostles ; and our Lord evidently designed 
that it should be a constant incentive to the members of his 
church throughout the entire age. This undoubtedly, was one 
reason why he did not particularly explain the length of time 
that would intervene before the setting up of the kingdom. 
From God's standpoint it would be a short interval; and even 
from the human standpoint it would be short to each individual
, who would have only the few remaining years of his life 
wherein to make ready for the glorious things of the future; 
and "in death there is no remembrance." 

As St. Paul looked back and perceived that in his day about 
4178 years of the reign of Bin and gross darkness, upon the 
world" had passed, he could realize that truly the night was 
far spent, that the blessed day of deliverance was drawing 
nigh. And now we, who live in the dawn of this great day, 


are most highly favored by the Lord. We can see the particulars
 regarding this time, which were obscure in the Apostle's 
time. We are standing at the very threshold of the Golden 
Age! As soon as the harvest of this Gospel age shall be gathered
, the work of change, the transformation from the reign 
of evil to the reign of righteousness, will take place; and it 
is nigh, even at the door. Surely it is now high time that all 
who are truly the Lord's should awake out of sleep, cast off 
all "the works of darkness." and put on the "whelp armour or 
God that Ave shall be aide to withstand in the evil d:iy."- 
Kphesians 0:13. 

"ARMOR OF LIGHT" ESPECIALLY NEEDED TODAY 

Whatever will not stand the fullest investigation in the 
light of this day of Christ, whatever will not win approval in 
the new dispensation now coming in, should be promptly renounced
 by all who hope for the Tx>rd's favor as his children, as 
disciples of Christ. If we really are Christ's we belong to the 
new era, not to the old. We should therefore live in accordance 
with our citizenship and with our responsibility to the prince of 
light and in opposition to the prince of darkness. 

We are forewarned by the Apostle that this period of time 
in which the change from the dominion of the "prince of this 
world" to that of the prince of glory takes place, will be an 
especially "evil day" — a period in which all the children of 
light will be crucially tested. It is a day that is to "try every 
man's work, of what sort it is." It is to be a day of fiery 
trial, through which only the gold, silver and precious stones 
w r ill pass unscathed, in which all the wood, hay and stubble 
of error, sin, human tradition and falsehood will be entirely 
destroyed. We are even now in the fires of this day, in the 
time when the wood, hay and stubble are being consumed ; 
when higher criticism, evolution, Christian science, hypnotism 
(whether known under its own name or whether called mind 
cures), etc., are devouring as a flame all the faith structure of 
those children of God who have not continued faithful to the 
Lord, and who, therefore, have not been kept by his power, 
through the Word and through his providences. 

"WALK AS CHILDREN OP LI0HT" 
All who are truly the Lord's should "walk honestly, as in 
the day." We are not yet fully in the day; but we belong to 
the day, and are therefore to live as nearly as possible up to 
the perfect standards of the future. So to live will mean selfdenial
. It will mean that we shall be misunderstood by the 
world and all who have its spirit. It will mean that we shall 
be thought foolish, that we shall be considered enemies — not 
so much by those who are in gross darkness as by those who 
profess to be the Lord's people, to be children of the light, but 
who really prefer darkness and error to light and truth. 

We are inclined to lay special stress on the word, "honestly
," used by the Apostle, and believe that he used it advisedly
 and in a particular sense. As we look about us today, we see 
that dishonesty is very prevalent. Not merely in the world, 
where we expect to find a certain amount of duplicity, misrepresentation
 and deception, and to see people passing for 
what they are not, do we find this kind of dishonesty very prevalent
, but amongst professing Christians. We have even 
known professed ministers of the Gospel to boast of their dishonesty
 — to declare that they never have believed the creed 
which they have professed to believe and which they have 
vowed that they would teach. Intelligent ministers of all denominations
 are preaching what they do not believe, standing 
for creeds and confessions of faith which misrepresent their 
own sentiments. They are acting dishonestly; they are searing 
their consciences; they are putting themselves into conditions 
where they cannot make progress into the light of truth ; for 
surely God does not purpose to have dishonest people in his 
elect Church, If these do not very quickly change and become 
honest, they will certainly have their portion with the hypocrites
; for it is the hypocrites who are dishonest. 

HONESTY A BASIC TRAIT OF CHARACTER 
Christians, above all other people in the world, should be 
honest and sincere in their professions. They should be honest
 in their dealings with their neighbors, with their brethren, 
and especially in their confessions respecting their Crod and 
their faith. This test must be met by every one who names 
the name of Christ. Those who love the favor of men more 
than the favor of God, who would rather confess and profess 
a lie than to espouse an unpopular cause — even when they 
know it is God's cause — will be given up to their He. Such 
are surely proving themselves unfit for the kingdom, unfit to 


[6299] 


(.'28 229) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, X. V 


reign with Christ, whatever else they may eventually attain, 
if later through stripes and humiliation they take the proper 
course. 

This was the very essence of the Apostle's declaration in 
his second letter to the church at Thessalonica, when he 
spoke prophetically of this piesent "evil day," and the great 
trial that would at this time come upon the church. He declared
 of those who would prove unfaithful that God would 
"send them strong delusions that they should believe the lie" 
— 'because they were not honest — because they did not obey the 
truth in the love of it, but acted deceitful, hypocritically. He 
says of these that God will send them delusions in order "that 
they may be condemned" — not damned, as in the common version
 of the Bible — that they may be condemned to suffer the 
consequences of their dishonorable and disloyal course. They 
will come to the place where they will be greatly humiliated 
before those whose esteem and favor they have so sought to 
retain. They will be seen by all in their true garb, stripped 
of their cloak of hypocrisy. 

Great will be their shame and humiliation then. Through 
tribulation and in difficulty must they retrace their steps if 
they would attain eternal life, would come back to the favor 
of God and of their fellows. But it will be a great blessing if 
they are restored and led into the way of life, even through 
very severe chastisements and afflictions. We may well rejoice
 that so soon all error, dishonesty and fraud, of whatever 
nature, will be exposed and dethroned, and that truth and 
righteousness will be enthroned in their place. 
STABS TWINKLING IN THE NIGHT 
But there has not been utter darkness at any time through 
all this long reign of evil — not the blackness of night. 
Throughout the past six thousand years there have been certain
 lights — like stars in the night-time. I>uring the Jewish 
dispensation, the Law Covenant as a moon reflected the light of 
the glorious Sun of Righteousness, later to dawn upon the 
dark world. Our lord Jesus, when he came, was the bright 
star that heralded the coming morning; for his sacrificial work 
made the morning possible and ensured its dawning. 

Throughout the Gospel age true Christians have been lights 
shining in a dark place. The light that now shines from the 
Lord's true people is not appreciated by the world in general; 
for it is a spiritual light. The light of the law given by 
Moses to the Jews was one which the world could better understand
. It was an earthly light; for it gave earthly rewards
 and earthly punishments* The world cannot understand
 the light-bearers of the Gospel age. They say: "If 
these were children of God, and he were really caring for them, 
he would not permit them to have so many difficulties and 
have such a hard time as they apparently have. They do not 
have any easier time than the world, whom they call sinners; 
and often their lot seems harder. How is this a manifestation
 of the Lord's special favor?" 

But the Word of our God makes all this plain to those who 
trust in him. There we learn that this is not the time to receive
 the rewaxxl. While those who live a holy life do not have 
a very peaceable time as respects their outward circumstances 
and surroundings, nevertheless the peace of God is within, ruling
 in their hearts. It is a peace that is wholly independent 
of outward conditions. 

We know that our own righteousness is but as filthy rags. 
We know that our depravities, while covered by the robe of 
our Savior's righteousness, must gradually be purged away, 
or we could never be fit for the kingdom. All this we see; but 
the world and worldly Christians do not see it. So we must 
not expect to be understood until the new age with its blessed 
light is ushered in and all the vapors of darkness are dispelled
. Then the vail of unbelief and ignorance will be removed
 from the eyes of all. Meantime^ we have a responsibility
 which those who cannot see do not have, and we could 
not excuse in ourselves the manner of life which seems reasonable
 or excusable in others. We know a better way. How 
thankful we should be that the Lord has graciously opened our 
ears to the melodies of heaven, which none others can hear ! 

This "armor of light" which we wear is composed of various 
pieces, each one of which is essential to our proper protection, 
especially in this "evil day." First we wear the robe of Christ's 
righteousness, "the wedding garment." Then, under the other 
figure, we wear the "armor of righteousness," the "armor of 
light," which represents not only our standing in Christ, but 
our spiritual attainments in him. W T e are to have on the 
"breastplate of righteousness," and must carry "the shield of 
fai£h." We must have "our feet shod with the preparation of 
the gospel of peace." We must surely wear also "the helmet," 
the covering of our intellect from the assaults of this "evil 
day"; for we need this protection now as never before. We 
must also have "our loins girt about with truth." We cannot 
serve acceptably and effectively if girded to service with the 


girdle of error and dishonest profession. We must have truth 
in both doctrine and practise, in both head and heart. 

We do not understand that either the putting on of the 
Christian armor or the putting off of the works of darkness 
is an instantaneous matter. We should put these dark works 
off as rapidly as possible, however — as rapidly as we are able 
to see our imperfections and defects. A Christian who has had 
twenty years' experience ought to be able to do much better 
than one w T ho has just started in the way — who has but just 
begun to scrutinize his conduct — his thoughts, words and doings
. It seems to take some longer to make this transfer than 
others. We are all endeavoring, if we are faithful, to put 
off the works of darkness altogether, and to put on securely 
the whole armor, seeking day by day to put on more and more 
kindness, gentleness, meekness, humility, love. 
TH£ TRIUMPH OP 3^0VE 
In the chapter preceding the one from which our text in 
taken, St. Paul has been giving some wholesome counsel concerning
 the proper course of the Lord's people in the everyday
 duties of life. His advice seems to cover a wide range 
of the little vexatious cares and trials that every one must 
meet, and to instruct us how to triumph in them through the 
mighty power of love. He evidently thought of the thin veneer 
of worldly politeness which often covers deep-seated selfishness, 
and showed that the politeness and kindness of manner manifested
 by the Lord's people should be only the genuine article. 
He say3: "Let love be without dissimulation [pretense, hypocrisy
]. Abhor that which is evil [all shams and insincere 
pretensions] ; cleave to that which is good. Be kindly affectioned
 one to another; in honor preferring one another." He 
remembered the temptations and vexations of life, of our business
 relations and intercourse with the world and of its natural
 tendency to engross time, energy and thought. 

The Apostle also remembered the poverty and losses of 
some of the Lord's dear people, and counselled sympathy and 
hospitality — "distributing to the necessity of the saints, given 
to hospitality." He tells us that we should "rejoice with them 
that rejoice, and weep with them that weep" ; that we should 
"mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate" ; 
that we should "be not wise in our own conceits"; that we 
should "bless them that persecute" us, and "recompense no 
man evil for evil"; that we should "provide things honest in 
the sight of all men" — not only the brethren, but the world 
also. Thinking of the numerous trials of patient endurance 
arising from contact with those of undisciplined hearts, he 
urged, "If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably
 with all men. Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but 
rather give place to wrath [get out of its way, do not allow it 
to overtake you] ; for it is written, "Vengeance is mine, I 
will repay, saith the Lord." Therefore, "if thine enemy hunger
, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing. 
thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head." You will make him 
ashamed of his conduct as he sees its contrast with yours. 

Further, he says, "Be not overcome of evil, but overcome 
evil with good." I>o not allow the trials and annoyances, or 
the misunderstandings which sometimes bring us acute pain, 
to make you sour or vindictive or cold or unsympathetic; nor 
the more favorable or prosperous circumstances to make you 
proud or highnxinded or wise in your own conceits; for the 
Lord may try us in both ways as tests of character. 

He also reminds us that we should be law-abiding citizens, 
"rendering to all their dues ; tribute to whom tribute is due ; 
custom to whom custom; fear [respectful deference or submission
] to whom fear; honor to whom honor/' Finally, he 
declares that if there be any other commandment, it is briefly 
summed up in the one word — love. He urges that we be diligent
 in the cultivation of this supreme quality of character — 
this all-embracing grace — '"knowing the season," knowing that 
the time is short in which to build up ourselves in this Godlike
 and Christ-like character. We surely have not a moment 
to lose if we desire to be approved of our God. 

If the Apostle could say to the saints of his day that "now 
it is high time to awake out of sleep," with how much greater 
force do his words apply in these closing days of this Gospel 
age! In the clear light of unfolding time-prophecy, we see 
that we are now living at the very end of the reign of sin 
and death ; that the night of Borrow, pain and tears is almost 
over; that the glorification of the last members of the Christ 
body is very soon to be completed. Yes, beloved, "the night is 
far spent" [about ended] and the glorious day of deliverance 
and blessing is *at hand. Even now the first faint streaks of 
dawn appear. Then let us cast away every encumbrance, everything
 that would hinder us in the slightest degree in running 
•successfully our glorious race. Let us press on with renewed 
vigor, looking neither to the right nor to the left, but keeping 
our eyes "fixed on the glory of tbe prize," and soon, please God, 
the victorv shall be ours! 


[6300] 


EVERLASTING BLESSINGS 


"In the Lord Jehovah trusting, everlasting strength have wo; 
He himself our sun, our glory, everlasting light shall he; 
Piverlasting life is ours, purchased by the life laid down; 
And our heads, oft bowed and weary, everlasting joy shall 
crown. 


"We shall dwell with Christ forever, when the shadows iiee 
away, 

In the everlasting glory of the everlasting day. 
Unto thee, beloved Savior, everlasting thanks belong, 
Everlasting adoration, everlasting praise and song." 


JOSEPH AND HIS BRETHREN 


"Come near to m-e, 1 pray you, . . , lie not gnrrvd 

do urn my father hither. 1 
Wnat story in all the writings of all the nations compares 
in simple pathos with that of Joseph and his brethren! Who 
can read this tale of ancient time and far-off land without 
tears starting to the eye! Yet this fragment of Hebrew history
 is not only a beautiful story, but also a possible prototype
 of things soon to come, wherein the joyous tears of mil* 
lions of people may bring home to the hearts of all true Christians
 the same, yes, greater heights of joy than that which 
moved the hearts of the first lsraelitish family. When the 
whole Israel of God, the true Israel, draw near together, "seeing
 eye to eye" throughout the length and the breadth of the 
earth, the final drama of the Gospel age will have reached its 
climax, preparatory to the grand ingathering into the glories 
of the kingdom. 

The story of Joseph's reunion with his brethren finds its 
setting at a time when "the famine was sore in the land/' 
There had been seven years of plenteous harvest, and food for 
all had been gathered in Egypt; but the brethren of Joseph 
were dwelling in a land where such provision had not been 
made. Already there had been two years of famine, and in* 
the five years to come it seemed impossible for any one to survive
 the dearth of bread. 

These facts may have been designed to picture circumstances
 in the present time. Joseph's brethren, dwelling with their 
father Jacob in the land of Canaan, had all professed faith 
in God, and had dwelt in abundance. Now, too, God's children 
have had an abundance of spiritual food, the Word of God, up 
to the time of the closing of the door of membership in the 
bride of Christ — at or about the Passover of 1918. Abundantly 
did the rain, the present truth, come down from heaven : the 
truth of God descended from the spiritual heavens upon all believers
 everywhere. Suddenly, about Passover, certain divinely 
permitted circumstances stopped the rains from heaven; and 
then the famine set in, a sore famine for the hearing of the 
Word of God. The only real spiritual food anywhere is that 
within the storehouse of the anti typical Joseph— Christ, Head 
and body, on both sides the vail ; and the only way to obtain 
this food is by meeting the conditions set down by Christ. 
BENJAMIN, TYPE OF THE GBEAT COMPANY 
In the picture Cod seems to be depicted in two offices; as 
Pharaoh, king over Joseph (the little flock}, and as Jacob, 
father of Joseph and of Benjamin (the gresut company) and 
of the other brothers (the professedly justified), including Judab
, a class of believers not spirit-begotten but specially loving 
toward Benjamin, the great company. {Genesis 44:14-34) If 
we apply the picture to our dav, the time may be regarded as 
between a year and a half and two years after the spiritual 
famine period began (about April, 1918), or October, 1910, to 
June, 1920. The countries typify, not places but conditions of 
the classes involved. Joseph in kingly power represents Christ, 
Head and body, partly beyond and partly this side the vail, 
also in kingly power. (Psalm 149:5-9) Canaan pictures the 
condition of professed relationship to God; while Egypt appears
 to represent in some respects the kingdom conditions 
since the closing of the door to the high calling. As in all pictures
 of this kind, not every detail may be expected to apply. 
In any interpretation of this nature it must always be understood
 as tentative, until actual experience has proven or disproven
 the correctness of the application. 

The picture relates to the approaching ingathering of the 
great company and other believers into present truth. (Jeremiah
 40:7-12) The Greater than Joseph has been recognized 
as bringing about changes since 1874, but he has not been 
known as Christ; nor have the body or feet members still 
this side the vail been known. "And when Joseph [Christ] 
came home, they brought him the present [consecration! 
which was in their hand [power] into the house, and bowed 
themselves to him to the earth" — worshiped Christ the Head, 
in their trouble and distress. — Genesis 43:26. 

During Christ's presence he has been searching, judging, 
the hearts of believers as to their vital relationship to our 
Father: "And he asked them of their welfare [religiously] 
and said, Is your father [our Father] well [Is it well with you 
toward our Father], the old man [the Ancient of Daysl of 
whom ye spake [preached]? Is he in good health Ta living 
reality* to youl? Then they answered, Thy servant our father 


Haste, and hring 


nor angrif with yourselves. . .. 
" — Genesis 45:4, 5, 13. 
is in good health [It is well with us toward him]. He is yet 
alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance 
[worshiped Christ the Head]."— Genesis 43:27, 28. 

Christ, Head and body, has considered the great company 
(Benjamin) very favorably, and has often spoken of God's 
graciousness to them: "And he lifted up his eyes, and saw 
his brother Benjamin [the great company], hi3 mother's son 
[both children of the Covenant of Grace], and said: Is this 
your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me? [All believers
 have m prayer to Christ made special mention of the 
spirit- begotten great company]. And he said, God be gTacious
 [show special grace and favor] unto thee, my son." — 
Genesis 43:29. 

MILLIONS SOON TO EEOEIVE THE TRUTH 
The time will soon have come for the blessing of the great 
company. The feet members of Christ will yearn in love for 
the revealment of themselves to the spiritually-minded, but not 
altogether faithful Christians, soon to be released from blindness
 and from religious bondage. This class will be the little 
brother Benjamin of the Joseph class. The two classes started 
together as babes and children in Christ. It will be in troublous
 times ; but the tears of the little flock will be the tears of 
a holy joy, shed in the secret place, the Holy: "And Joseph 
made haste, for his bowels [heart affections] did yearn upon 
his brother [the little flock w T ill yearn over those dear to them 
and coming soon by millions into the truth], and he sought 
where to weep, and entered into his [secret] chamber and wept 
there."— Genesis 43:30. 

"And he washed his face [the priesthood may; not show 
signs of weeping], and went out ami refrained himself, and 
said, Set on bread [present <ome features of truth 1. And they 
set for him by himself [the feet members u*vd uniqmdv upon <1 ; 
vine truths], and for them by themselves [mere believers assimilate
 the Bible truths intended for them], and for the Egyptians
 which did eat with him by themselves [religious worldlings
 and believers cannot assimilate the same idea si ; for that 
is an abomination unto the Egyptians" — worldlings abominate
 the truths about the blood-bought sacrifice.— Oenesis 
43:31, 32, 

"And they sat before bim [all are before Christ in these 
judgment days], the firstborn according to his birthright, and 
the youngest according to his youth [before Christ all believers
 occupy their true and hence appropriate position] ; and 
the men marveled one at another [at the discerning classification
 of Christians]. And he took and sent messes [measures 
of Bible truth] unto them from before him [all truth comes 
from Christ] ; but Benjamin's mess [the truths of the great 
company] was five [a divine or spiritual number] times so 
much [the great company feed upon spiritual truths] as any 
of theirs [the professedly justified]. And they drank [imbibed 
doctrines], and were merry [happy] with him"— in the truth 
made known to them. — Genesis 43:33, 34. 

THE ANTITTPICAL BENJAMIN'S CTJP 
"And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill 
the men's sacks [vessels, minds] with food [the truth] as 
much as they can carry, and put every man's money in the 
sack's mouth [truth cannot be bought except by consecration]. 
And put my. cup, the silver cup [the Bible truths on spiritual 
subjects], in the sack's mouth of the youngest [great company
], and his corn money. And he did 'according to the word 
tha<t Joseph had spoken. "—Genesis 44:1, 2. 

Then follows the story of the finding of the cup in Benjamin
's sack, representing the general recognition by the great 
company of their possession of the Bible in its spiritual phases. 
(Genesis 44:3-14) The one who has the cup— the spirit of 
the Word — is recognized as facing dea<th. The great company
 members are seen by "Christians" generally to be consecrated
 in a way that will bring about the death of their fle^h: 
"With whomsoever of thy servants it [the cup] be found, both 
let him die. and we [the* professedly justified] also will be my 
lord's [Christ's] bondmen" — servants on the human plane. — 
Genesis 44:0. 

Eventually the class having the antitypical cup is to live as 
the servant of the Greater than Joseph; and the associates of 
the Benjamin class, former persecutors of the Joseph comVII
— 31 


[6301] 


(230 231 > 


(231-232) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Bruoxlvn, N. Y. 


pany, are to be blameless: "He [the great company] with 
whom it [the cup, the spirit of the Word] is found shall be 
my [Christ's] servant [Revelation 7:15]; and ye [once persecutors
] shall be blameless" — after a Millennial age repentance 
and cleansing.— Genesis 44:10; Leviticus 10:26-28, 
ALL CHRISTIANS NOW ON JUDGMENT 

In verses 14-34 Judah represents a specially loving and 
zealous class among the professedly justified believers, such a 
class as might, through a good heart condition, become in the 
earthly phase of the kingdom sons of the ancient worthies and 
gain life with them on some spirit plane* — Ezekiel 46:16, 17. 

It becomes a time of judgment for all the brothers of 
Joseph ; for he says : "Wot ye not that such a man as I can 
certainly make trial?" (Genesis 44:15, margin) The brothers 
then acknowledge their wrong-doing toward Joseph : " And Judah
 said, What shall we say unto my lord? [What can sinful
 nominal Christianity say?] What ehall we apeak? Or 
how shall we clear ourselves? [They cannot clear themselves 
of the charge of persecuting God's elect and of much other 
evil-doing]. God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants 
[through the interpretations of Revelation and ^zekiel and 
through churchianity's manifest persecution of men of God] ; 
behold, we are my lord'3 [Chrises] servants, both we and he 
also [the great company] with whom the cup is found." — 
Genesis 44:16. 

"And he [Joseph, representing Christ] said, God forbid that 
I should do so [only the spirit-begotten can be servants on the 
heavenly plane] ; tout the man [great company] in whose hand 
the cup [spiritual things] is found, he shall be my servant; 
and as for you [the professedly justified], get you up in peace 
unto your father [in the earthly phase of the kingdom]. Then 
Judah, [a specially noble class of mere believers] came near 
unto him [drew especially near to Christ], and said, O my 
lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's 
ears, and let not thine anger burn [as in the troublous days 
here spoken of] against thy servant; for thou [Christ] art 
even as Pharaoh" — all should honor the Son even as they honor 
the Father. — Genesis 44:17, 18. 

FUTUBE WOBK OF THE GBEAT COMPANY 

In Judah's recital (44:19-34) are the following words: 
"We have a father [our Father], an old man [the Ancient of 
I>ays], and a child of his old age [the great company], a little 
one [babes, children, little ones in Christ] ; and hi3 brother 
[the Christ, Head and body] is dead [as dead, outcast as sinners
 to other believers], and he alone [the great company 
alone, as it seems to the Judah class] is left of his mother 
[the Covenant of Grace], and his father [our Father] lovefeh 
him. [How tenderly does God love all his spirit-begotten children
!] If he should leave his father, his father would die [a 
figure of the Father's great love for the great company class] . 
And thou [Christ] sai&st unto thy servants, "Except your 
youngest brother come down with you [learn the present truth 
at the divinely foreknown time], ye shall see my face no 
more" — no kingdom favor can come to the now professedly 
justified unless the great company gain the knowledge and 
character development necessary for its coming great work. — 
Genesis 44:20-23. 

"My father said unto us, Ye know that my wife [the Covenant
 of Grace] bare me two sons [the little flock and the great 
company], and one [the Christ, Head and body] went out 
from me [so it seems to all other believers], and I said, Surely 
he is torn to pieces la living sacrifice] and I saw him no more 
[so it seems to other believers, who have never been able to 
discern the mystery of Christ in us]." (Genesis 44:27, 28} 
"His life [our Father's life, through spirit-begetting] is bound 
up in the lad's life Ithe great company has its spiritual life 
direct from God]. How shall I [noble, but not wholly consecrated
 believers] go up to my father [approach unto God] 
and the lad be not with me?" — Believers depend greatly on the 
great company for spiritual assistance. — Genesis 44:34. 
MANIFESTATION OF THE BODY OF CHEIST 

The divinely appointed time has now about come for the 
mystery, the great secret of God, "hidden from ages and from 
generations/' to be completely and finally finished, and for the 
great company and all other believers to see who are the members
 of the body of Christ. As the narrative proceeds: "Then 
Joseph [Christ, Head and body, including the body members 
still this side the vail] could not refrain himself before them 
all [the time will have finally come, possibly at about thetime
 before mentioned] and he cried, Cause every man [of 
the Egyptians, worldly churchists] to go out from me!" [In 
the final fall of ecclesiasticism, wherein the false followers of 
Christ will be detached from the real. {Jeremiah 23:3!): K/* 1 
kiel 24:21}] And there stood no man [worldling] with him 
[the Christ] when he made himself known unto his brethren. 


[when the truth cornea to the great company and to other believers
 as to who are the real feet members of Christ, whom 
they had Bold into Egyptian bondage and oppression]. "And 
he wept aloud [a great outburst of repressed love on the part 
of the body members] ; and the Egyptians and the house ot 
Pharaoh heard" — it will be manifest even to the worldlings 
who have gone out. — Genesis 45:2. 

"And Joseph [through the Christ, body members] said unto 
his brethren [it will be made known to all believers] 1 am 
Joseph [these hitherto despised and cast out ones are the true 
body of Christ] ; doth my father yet live [is our Father a living
 reality to you] ? And his brethren [mere believers] could 
not answer him [former persecutors could have nothing to 
say] ; for they were troubled [margin, terrified] at his presence
" — in deep trouble because of Christ's second presence and 
especially because of their treatment of his feet members. — 
Genesis 45:3. 

"And Joseph [through the feet members] said unto his 
brethren, Come near to me, 1 pray you [draw near to Christ in 
renewed consecration]. And they came near. And he said 
[through the feet members still on earth], 1 am Joseph [the 
true members of Christ] your brother [all believers are brethren
 on one plane or another], whom ye sold into Egypt" — 
whom ye as believers persecuted. — Genesis 45:4, 

"Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves 
[do not weep or gnash your teeth in self-reproach and useless
 regrets] that ye sold me into Egypt [ostracised, misrepresented
, persecuted the feet members] ; for God did send me 
before you to preserve life" — without the help of the feet members
 the great company and other believers would die religiously 
in the stress of troublous times. — Genesis 45:5. 

"For these two years [possibly from the spring of 1918 
to the winter of 1919 or spring of 1920] hath the famine [for 
the truth] been in the land [among professing Christians] ; 
and yet there are five years [to the Bpring of 1925, to the 
resurrection of the ancient worthies] in the which there shall 
neither be earing nor harvest" — no general religions work for 
the world can be done. — Gen, 45:0. 

FEET MEMBERS LIKE POLISHED BRASS 
"And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity 
in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance 
[first from the bondage of a fallen ecclesiasticism], So now it 
was not you that sent me [the suffering body members] hither 
[to the time and conditions mentioned] but God ['the cup that 
my Father hath poured'] ; and he hath made me a father to 
Pharaoh [Genesis 41:38-45], and lord of all his house ['all 
power in heaven and earth 5 ] and a ruler throughout all the 
land of Egypt" — 'lord of lords.' — Genesis 45:7, 8. 

"Haste ye [the time is short for reconsecration before the 
Gospel age ends] ; and go up to my father [reconsecrate yourselves
] and say unto him Lthank God for the truth revealed], 
Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all 
Egypt [all the world]. Come down unto me ['thy kingdom 
come'], tarry not [the time for the kingdom is at hand]. And 
■thou [mere believers and great company, and God with them] 
shalt dwell in the land of Goshen [a specially favored condition
 in the world], and thou shalt be near unto me Junto 
Christ, Head and body, including those still in the ilesh], then 
and thy children, and thy children's children [all whom you 
have taught to believe in the Lord] and thy docks and thy 
herds [animals represent the individuals as to the flesh], and 
all that thou hast [everything wholly consecrated to Christ]. 
And there will I [Christ, Head and bodyl nourish thee [mere 
believers and great company, with present truth] for yet 
there are five years [1919 or 1920 to 1924 or 1925] of famine 
[of the truth to the people generally]; lest thou and thy 
household [of faith] and all that thou hast, come to poverty" 
— spiritually. — Genesis 45:9-11. 

"And behold your eyes [eyes of understanding, anointed 
with the word of truth] see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin
 [spiritual understanding of the great company], that 
it is my mouth [the body members in the flesh are Christ's 
mouthpiece — 'in Christ's stead we beseech you, Be ye reconciled
 to God 5 ] that speaketh unto you. And ye shall tell my 
father [thankfully acknowledge to our Father] of all my glory 
in Egypt [not least of all, Christ's glorious victory over apostate
 ecclesiasticism], and of all that ye have seen; and ye 
•shall haste and bring down my father hither [in your consecrated
 hearts]. And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck 
and wept [the blessing of knowledge of present truth and of 
full reconciliation to God will come to the spirit-begotten great 
company, as well as loving fellowship with the body members 
of Christ on earth]: and Keniamin [the gre;it nuiipiirv] wept 
upon his neck" — great joy of the great company over the revealment
 to them "of the Christ in the flesh.— Genesis 45:12-14. 


[6302] 


Atgust 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(232-233) 


"Moreover, he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them 
[enjoyed the mutual spirit of true reconciliation with all believers
] ; and after that he talked with them" — [the feet members
 will teach present truth directly or indirectly through 
preaching and through print to the great company, and through 
them to all believers during the brief period of opportunity 
after the fail of ecclesiastic-ism].— Genesis 45:lo. 


That it wa3 Pastor Russell's belief that there should come a 
time when the body members on earth should become manifest, 
or show forth the truth to everyone, is apparent from the following
 extract from The Watch Tower of 1916, page 344, in 
comment on Revelation 1:15: "In the end of the age, the feet 
members of the body of Christ will be illuminated by the truth 
and will shine forth as polished brass." 


DIVERSITIES OF OPERATION OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 

11 And there are diversities of operations; but it is the same God which worheth all in all** — 1 Corinthians 12:6. 


Now, as at all times, there is a variety of operations
 of the holy Spirit. This Spirit is holy or divine
 power, the power of God. It is an invisible power, which 
manifests itself in many different ways. God is a Spirit Being
, powerful, yet invisible to human sight. Likewise the 
angels are powerful, invisible beings, and manifest themselves 
by their works, their operations. The only way by which spirit 
beings may become visible to humankind is by the performance 
of a miracle. The spirit must assume a material body for the 
purpose of manifestation to human eyes. 

During the ages preceding the Gospel age holy spirit 'beings 
manifested themselves at various times to godly men and 
women, to deliver messages from the Lord. In the initiatory 
stages of the Christian church, also, in the days of the apostles
, there were angelic manifestations to God's people. But 
after the apostles died and the church became established, 
these manifestations ceased, having accomplished their designed 
end. It is noticeable that whatever angelic manifestations and 
revelations have been received since that time have always been 
misrepresentations, deceptions, leading many away from the revealed
 truth of the Scriptures. At a time when the canon 
of Scripture was almost completed, the Apostle Paul put the 
church especially on guard on this point, declaring that the 
Word of God is sufficient, "that the man 6f God may be perfect
, thoroughly furnished unto every good work," and warning
 that in the latter times "some would depart from the faith, 
giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of demons." — 2 
Timothy 3:13 17 ; 1 Timothy 4:1. 

The Apostle is very sweeping in his statement of the allsufficiency
 of the written Word, saying, "All Scripture given 
by inspiration of God is profitable for doctrines, for reproof, 
for correction, for instruction in righteousness." There was 
no need for further revelations. And he said: "But though 
we or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you 
than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed
." (Galatians 1:6-9) Evil spirits, fallen angels, have 
certain powers of manifestation which they received originally 
from God, but which they have misused. Very many have 
been deceived by these angels into thinking they were receiving 
revelations from the Lord; for they often speak in the name of 
the Lord, transforming themselves, outwardly, into angels of 
light, as the Apostle forewarned. (2 Corinthians 11:13-15) 
(See also our pamphlet on "Spiritism is Demonism") To listen 
to any of these revelations, whispering* in the ear, or impressions
 upon the mind, is indeed very dangerous. Every mental 
impression should be tested by the Word of God, written for 
our guidance. Whatever will not stand this crucial test should 
at once be rejected. The delusions of today along this line 
are very subtle, the deluded apostles of the fallen spirits being 
transformed as apostles of light. God's Spirit always operates 
in full harmony with his written Word. 

SPIRIT'S OPERATION IN DIFFERENT AGES 

Every perfect creature made in God's image and likeness is 
possessed of the holy Spirit. Before his fall Adam had the 
holy Spirit — the holy mind or disposition implanted by the 
Creator in the heart of this perfect man. The prophets of old 
had the holy Spirit, and on certain occasions were operated 
upon directly by this Spirit, or power of God, to write and 
speak words that often they did not themselves understand. 
(Ezekiel 20:49; 1 Peter 1:10-12) In this sense they had 
God's holy mind to the extent that they sought to do God's holy 
will; but the operation of the power of God upon them when 
they received divine messages was mechanical. 

Comparing the Spirit's operation in the persons of the 
prophets before Christ with its operation in the apostles during
 our Lord's ministry, we see that some of the same things 
were done by the prophets, though not everything. In some 
instances sleeping ones were awakened from death by the 
prophets; leprosy was healed by Elisha; the widow's cruse 
of oil was supplied by Elijah; bitter waters were healed. In 
all these instances the miracles were wrought in the divine 
name, by the holy Spirit, or power, of God. 


When our Lord Jesus was in the world, the power which 
he communicated to his disciples was a measure of his own 
power, his own spirit. After his resurrection, he breathed 
upon them and Baid: "Receive ye the holy Spirit." In this 
instance there may have been a communication of a measure 
of power at the time, or it may have been a forceful way of 
telling them that they were in a few days to receive this power
, this holy Spirit, in a special way, after he had ascended 
to heaven to appear for them. At any rate it is not to be confused
 with the operation of the holy Spirit at Pentecost. 

The communication of the holy Spirit in the outpouring 
at Pentecost was something altogether new, different from any 
previous manifestation of divine power. The holy Spirit as it 
came upon the church at this time was from the Father. The 
{Father had directly recognized them as sons. The Lord Jesus 
was indeed the agent in bestowing this blessing, but he declared
 that it was from the Father. He had previously told 
them to tarry at Jerusalem until they were endued with power 
from on high — until they should receive "the promise of the 
Father." (Luke 24:49) Some of the outward manifestations 
of the holy Spirit at this time and its after results were the 
same as when Jesus himself had communicated the holy power 
to them during his ministry. 

But a manifestation of the holy Spirit might mean one 
thing at one time and another thing at another time. In the 
ease of the prophets of old, the outward manifestation was 
given in order that the people might notice and therefore give 
the more earnest heed to the message; and the purpose seema 
to have been the same when our Lord sent forth the disciples, 
the twelve, and the seventy, in his name — that his message 
that the kingdom was at hand might be carried all over the 
country, for the purpose of awakening people to the fact that 
Messiah had come. After Pentecost, the message of the disciples
 was that this same Jesus whom the Jews had crucified had 
been raised from the dead. With great power they gave witness
 to this fact. 

The same holy Spirit now operated for a different purpose, 
to convict the Jews and lead them to Christy This same holy 
■Spirit will also operate in the future when it will be poured 
out upon all flesh. Its operation will be manifested in enlightenment
 of the mind, in assistance and instruction, in gradually 
healing the nations — mentally, morally and physically. 

BEGETTING OF THE SPIRIT DIFFERENT FROM ALL 

But the special feature of the holy Spirit's operation during 
this present age is different from any other. It consists of a 
begetting of a new nature, and is accompanied by a supernatural
 illumination of the heart and the mind, enabling one to 
grasp spiritual truths, to see into the deep things of God, never 
seen before. The new mind is small in its beginning, but 
must grow day by day, feeding upon the Word of God, becoming
 more and more able to appreciate and assimilate the things 
of the Spirit, which the natural man perceiveth not. The embryo
 new creature, the babe in Christ, must grow in grace, 
in God's favor and in spiritual strength, becoming more like 
Christ in character, more fixed and established in the truth 
as it i-s in Christ Jesus. 

In John 7:39 we read, "The holy Spirit was not yet given, 
because Jesus was not yet glorified." The Father could not 
give this spirit of sonship to any until Jesus had been crucified
, had arisen and had ascended into heaven, the Moat Holy, 
to present his sacrificial merit on behalf of those who would 
be of the church; in other words, after he had deposited his 
merit in the Father's hands for the benefit of all of this class ; 
for none could receive the spirit of sonship save through the 
Redeemer. 

During this Gospel age, some have had the blessed privilege 
of thus receiving the Spirit, of becoming Bona of God, on & 
spiritual plane; and if this class continue faithful to their 
covenant with the Lord, they shall be bom beings of the divine 
nature. Such an offer was never before made, and never will 
be repeated. This class receive special instruction and guidance
 from the Father through Christ for the high position to 


[6303] 


(234-238) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


which they have been called. No longer, as in the apostles' 
day, do the spirit-begotten receive miraculous gifts of the 
Spirit ; for these are no longer needed. But they have the 
fruits of the Spirit, which have remained, and which are far 
more important than were the gifts. These fruits are to be 
developed in their characters by study of the Word, by prayer 
and by painstaking effort day by day. 

The new creatures in Christ are the anointed class. The 
anointing and the begetting result from the same operation of 
the holy Spirit. The begetting represents our individual start 
in the new life. The anointing represents our coming into the 
body of Christ. When we present ourselves in consecration 
and are accepted, we are at once begotten of the holy Spirit 
and inducted into the body, coming thus under the anointing 
which flows from the ofreat Head, Christ Jesus. The one operation
 of the spirit begins the individual work and also the new 
relationship as one of the anointed company, or body of Christ. 

The various fruits of the Spirit which must be developed 
as we go on in the new life are the most desirable that could 
be imagined. They are enumerated by the Apostles Paul and 
Peter in somewhat different phraseology. St. Paul specifies 
these fruits as love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness
, faith, meekness, self-control. The Apostle Peter lists them 
as faith, fortitude, knowledge, self-control, patience, godliness, 
brotherly love, and lastly the 'broad general love that covers 
all men even our enemies. This list is very comprehensive 
and includes all the fruits of the holy Spirit. If we bear these 
fruits richly, aboundingly, he says, we shall never fall, but 
shall have abundant entrance into Christ's kingdom. 
DEGREES OF SPIRIT'S MAHIFESTATION 

hi considering the fruits of the holy Spirit as given in 
the Word, we must suppose that all of these are fully developed
 in any being who is in the likeness of God and has been 
tested and proven, the difference on the different planes of 
life being not in kind but in degree, according to the capacity. 
Mankind have lost the image and likeness of God to a very 
large degree. Hence in a natural man of today those qualities 
are lacking which would have been present had he remained 
perfect. The members of the Gospel church are put through 
manifold trying experiences designed under divine blessing and 
assistance to develop these very qualities; for as they are, if 
faithful, to be exalted to the very highest plane of being, they 
must develop these spirit-fruits to the highest degree; and supernatural
 illumination is granted them in order thai they may 
be able to successfully accomplish this. 


While we remain in the imperfect tabernacle, the flesh, we 
cannot manifest these precious fruits perfectly, because the 
flesh is unable adequately to show forth the sentiments of the 
new heart, the new mind. Sin has so marred the human brain 
that it will not perfectly respond to the holy mind within. 
For this reason the robe of Christ's imputed righteousness must; 
be supplied to cover our need until our earthly course is finished
. 

VARYING DEGREES OF GLORY 

Considering the restitution of the world in the age just before
 us, we see that God has set aside the thousand years of 
Messiah's kingdom for tne purpose of instructing mankind and 
of bringing them back to full perfection of mind and morals. 
This bringing of men back to the image of God will mean that 
they will become sons of God, and will then possess all the 
fruits and graces of the holy Spirit that the church must now 
develop. What, then, will he the difference between these different
 classes? We answer that as we have stated above, the 
difference will be one of quality and of quantity, not of kind. 
The operation of the holy Spirit in human conditions would 
necessarily be limited; for men will be sons of God on the 
human plane. Similarly, the manifestations of spirit-fruits in 
angels would correspond to their plane of being. 

To illustrate these various differences, we might take some 
of the precious jewels We might let the emerald represent 
human perfection, the topaz angelic perfection, and the diamond
 divine perfection. These are all precious, all beautiful. 
Each is perfect on its own plane, but their planes are different 
one from another. The diamond emits the greatest degree of 
light. Thus it will be with the divine nature. The Lord has 
promised that the faithful church shall have the very highest 
glory and honor — immortality. Hence she will manifest all 
the glorious attributes of perfect character in the highest degree
 of any of Jehovah's intelligent creatures. 

But all of the sons of God, on whatever plane, will have 
God's holy Spirit. None others will be permitted to continue 
their existence beyond the final test to follow the Millennium. 
God will have a glorious universe throughout the ages of 
eternity; and from every inhabited world peeans of praise shall 
rewound, to be taken up and repeated by every loving, loyal 
heart in every part of Jehovah's boundless domain. Existence 
will be sublime in that glad day, for which all other days 
have been made; and the most glorious heritage of all will 
be the heritage of the Christ of God. 


CHRISTIAN GIVING 

[The last two paragraphs of this article were reprinted from Vol. VI Studies in the Scriptures, p. 343, The remainder was 
reprinted from article entitled, "Will a Man Rob God; Yet Ye Have Robbed Me," published in issue of June 15, 1890. Please 
see the articles named. 1 


CONQUERING EVIL 

SEPTEMBER 8. — EPHESIANS 5:11-18. 

LThe first seven paragraphs of this article, as originally published in August, 1918, were reprinted from article entitled, 
"The Sin of Govetousneas," published in issue of July 15, 1898. Paragraphs 8 to 11 inclusive were reprinted from article entitled
, "Aha,b's Sin— -Covetousneas Murder," published in issue of September 15, 1915. The remainder of the article was reprinted 
from article entitled, "Awake Thou That Sleepest and Arise," published in issue of March 1, 1902. Please see the articles 
named. 1 


WINNING THE WORLD TO CHRIST 


September 15. — Matthew 5:13-10, 28: Acts 10:9-15. 

return of christ tlik only hope of the world two thoughts forming the basis of the theory that the world must be 

converted during the gospel age — commission of the church— disciples to be gathered out of all nations-- 
the gospel to be preached world-wide as a witness to the people — this tortion of the work finished. 
"Go ye into the world, and preach the gospel to the whole creation."— Nark 16:1.">. 
From time to time we have demonstrated that there is no been the cord which has drawn hundreds of noble lives to selfhope
 whatever of general world-blessing through Christ along 
the lines commonly held by Christian people; that is, the conversion
 of the world by present-da.y missionary efforts. We 
herewith review this subject, not with the purpose of casting 
disrespect upon all missionaries, but in order to demonstrate 
afresh the fact that this world-conversion-through-foreignmissions
 delusion is doinsr positive and serious harm to the 
Lord's true people by leading to false expectations and, consequently
, to misdirected efforts. 

Foreign missions were undertaken with two convictions, one 
correct, the other false: (1) The correct, scriptural conviction
 that the only name by which any can be saved is the name 
of Jesus — faith in his sacrificial dearth, and obedience and devotion
 to him; (2) The false, unscriptural conviction that there 
is no hope for any who die in ignorance of the only name 
whereby we must be saved. These intertwined theories have 


■sacrifice, especially during the first half of the nineteenth century
. They have been the cord also which has drawn, and still 
draws, millions on millions of money from sympathetic purses. 
And we need not wonder if the money has in turn drawn some 
into the missionary work simply for an honorable and easy living
. 

swoo oi ONnoa Koiiovan 
We are not objecting to the sacrifice of noble lives and of 
consecrated money, however; for we firmly believe that lives 
and money given with sincerity have been ^leasinsr to the Lord, 
even though given under some serious and discreditable misapprehensions
 of the divine chararter and of the plan for 
human salvation. But we hold that this mixture of truth and 
error is very injurious to the people of God, in that it diverts 
their hearts and their efforts away from the truth, away from 
Bible study, away from growth in knowledge and in the graces 

f6304] 


August 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(238 239) 


of the holy Spirit. Moreover, it inculcates instead the thought 
that the chief object of life for all Christians should be the 
snatching fellow creatures from the hands of an angry God 
intent upon hurling them into eternal torment at the hands of 
demons; or, if not this, the making and contributing of money 
to pay the expenses of those who do the snatching. 

As a result Christian people "have no time" to study the 
Father's Word, no time to study the divine plan, no time to 
cultivate their own hearts. They often say to themselves, and 
sometimes unguardedly to others: 'Bible study? Nonsense! 
We already know enough when we know that millions of human
 beings are going down to hell. By and by we hustlers 
who have been 1 less careful for our own spiritual development 
and for Bible study, but more on fire and burdened for souls, 
will have brighter crowns than will these hair-splitting Bible 
students, if indeed they are not rejected from heaven entirely.' 

But with the advance of intelligence a reaction from so unreasonable
 a position was bound to come; and it has come. 
IVople in general no longer believe in the horrible devil-god of 
the past, seeking for any possible pretext for the torture of 
;is many as possible of his creatures. Reason is asserting itsolf
; and man no longer poses as the sinner's only friend to 
save him from a malicious God. Any such proposition is too 
absurd for the enlightenment of the twentieth century. 

But men will have theories; for these are still, as ever, the 
basis of action, the rudder of human effort. It has become evident
 to all thinkers that one or the other of the strands of the 
original mission-cord is false, unreliable, rotten. Question: 
Which of the two strands will they reject? 

We answer that the true one will be rejected and the false 
one retained. Men will continue to believe that all hope ends 
with death; and they will reject the inspired declaration that 
faith in Christ is the only hope, and his the only name. They 
have already concluded, and are becoming more and more convinced
, that although the name of Jesus is a good rallying cry, 
especially when missionary contributions are called for, yet 
it is not the only name for salvation. They have concluded, 
but do not care to declare it in so many words, that education 
and civilization are, rather, the only names for salvation. And 
at home and abroad the term salvation is more and more coming
 to mean, not a personal relationship to him who is the light 
of the world and in whom alone is life everlasting, but social 
progress, municipal and national reform — social uplift. Thus 
lias the false idea of missions and of their conversion of the 
world led God's people farther and farther awfey from his 
Word, which in their zeal without knowledge they reject, 

MISSIONS TO SUCCEED DURING THE MILLENNIUM 

To those who are rightly instructed on the subject by God's 
Word, who lean not to their own understanding, but who daily 
search the Scriptures to be thereby taught of God, the utter 
failure of missions to convert the world to even the imperfect 
conditions which prevail throughout Christendom is faithstrengthening
. This failure demonstrates beyond question the 
truth of the Scripture teachings that God is not yet attempting
 the conversion and salvation of mankind, but is leaving 
that great work for the future, to be accomplished by the Messianic
 kingdom, when it shall be established in power and great 
glory during the Millennium, It corroborates fully the Bible 
declaration that the present work of God is the election of a 
church which, when polished, finished and glorified with her 
Ix>rd and Head, shall by and by bless -all the families of the 
earth as Abraham's seed. (Galatians 3:8, 16. 29} Then will 
be fulfilled the petition of our Lord's prayer: "Thy kingdom 
rome ; thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

Many students of the Bible derive a wrong thought from 
our Lord's commission to his disciples just before his ascension. 
That commission divides itself into three parts: (1) Making 
disciples of all nations; (2) baptizing them ; and (3) teaching 
them. (Matthew 28: Id, 20) The Greek word which in the 
Authorized Version is rendered teach in verse 19 is altogether
 different from that so rendered in verse 20. (See margin
) The former Greek word signifies to proselyte or make 
disciples ; the latter, to instruct. Thus it will be seen that a 
wrong thought is derived from this text by those who interpret 
it to mean: 'Go and convert all nations.' This is not the 
thought; but rather, *Go ye and gather converts from all nations
, and baptize and teach these converts.' 

This view is in accord with our Master's declaration on 
other occasions, when he testified that the world would not 
be converted at his second coming, but quite the reverse. It 
is also in harmony with his statement in Matthew 24:14: 
"This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world 
for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." 


A TRUITFUL SOURCE Or ERROR 

Whoever gets the wrong thought respecting the commission 
of the church is apt to take the wrong course in his endeavor 
to comply with IU Those who have concluded that the Lord 
designed the conversion of the world during the Gospel age are 
led to various subterfuges, in both mind and conduct, in oTder 
to attempt to carry out the commission which they have misunderstood
. This is leading some at the present time to ignore
 the Scriptural definition of the terms of membership in 
Christ's kingdom — to lower the standard of both faith and 
conduct, in order to admit a larger proportion of the human 
family and to convince themselves and others, if possible, that 
the world is growing better and is being converted. 

Furthermore, some not only have concluded that the preaching
 of the cross of Christ and faith in the redemption is unnecessary
, but have even gone beyond this and have claimed that 
even an historical knowledge of Christ is unnecessary, that 
heathen religions are to be esteemed as part of the preaching 
of the Gospel, and that the heathen obedience to their own religious
 customs is to be esteemed as obedience to the Gospel. 
Thus more or less false views of the church's commission are 
leading astray many who see no hope in any other way of ever 
attaining to that which our Lord commissioned nearly nineteen 
centuries ago, and which otherwise they would feel has so far 
failed most miserably and can never be accomplished. 

On the other hand we hold that, rightly read and understood
, the commission has been fulfilled ; that the message of 
Christ and the Messianic kingdom haB been proclaimed, directly
 or indirectly, with more or less force and energy, in 
every nation under heaven, and that as a resist some from 
every nation have been made disciples ; and that incidentally a 
witness has been given to all the peoples of the earth respecting
 the redemption and the divine provision for salvation 
through the Redeemer. Of these disciples gathered out of all 
nations by the Lord's message a "little flock" will be found to 
whom it will be the Father's good pleasure to give the kingdom
, in joint-heirship with Jesus in glory as the seed of Abraham
, through whom during the Millennium all the families of 
the earth shall be blessed. Only from this standpoint can our 
Lord's commission be properly appreciated and its fulfillment 
recognized. 

THE WHOLE CHURCH COMMISSIONED 

That our Lord gave this commission, not merely to the 
apostles, but to all who should believe on him through their 
word, is clearly shown by the words with which he closed the 
commission: "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of 
the age." The apostles did not live until the end of the age; 
and hence the Lord's words signify that he will be with all of 
his followers who avail themselves of his commission and endeavor
 to present his message to those having ears to hear out 
of all nations. Of course he did not mean that he would be 
present with them personally; for he had already told them 
that he would go away but would return at the end of the age 
(John 14:2), and his words are not to be understood as contradictory
. In the present instance his meaning evidently was 
that he would supervise their work, would be the real Head 
of the church, would oversee all of their affairs, would be with 
them in the sense of supporting, guiding and counselling those 
who would walk in his way and proclaim his message, in pro 
portion as they were faithful to the charge. 

This assurance of the Lord's presence was designed to give 
the apostles courage for the work which he was committing to 
them. Whih he was with them in the flesh they merely followed
 his directions; and as soon as he was smitten they were 
as sheep having no shepherd. Now he was going away ; but he 
wished them to realize that his power would be with them 
and that his supervising guidance of their affairs would be 
granted them, as surely as while he was with them in the 
flesh, though apparent only to the eye of faith. According to 
their faith it should be unto them a strength, a power. 

All down the Gospel age the Lord's people have similarly 
been required to walk by faith and not by si^ht ; and doubtless 
the lesson has been valuable to them in spiritual upbuilding, 
much more so than had he remained in the flesh with us. If, 
then, the thought of the Lord's spiritual supervision of his 
work was to be a source of encouragement and strength to 
those who would attempt to teach in his name all down the 
age, much more may we of the present time realize his actual 
presence in the close of the Gospel harvest. Although we see 
Jesus with no other than the eye of faith, yet we who believe 
have joy unspeakable and both strength and courage for the 
work; for he is once more present with his church in the harvest
 work, even as he was with the apostles in the sowing of 
the «eed at the beginning of the age. 


[6305] 


INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


Question: — Was Adam foreordained to fall into sin? If bo, 
how could it be said that he had a fair trial T 

Answer: — Adam waa not compelled to sin. God did not 
foreordain that he must disobey the divine command. That is 
to say, Adam was not limited in the exercise of his will. He 
could will to do right or wrong. The decision was left open 
to himself alone. The fact that God knew in advance what 
Adam would do is an altogether different matter. While we 
realize that God is so great that he has power we can neither 
understand nor appreciate, yet the Bible clearly indicates that 
Adam had a free will. If he had not a fair, full chance, then 
he could not have been justly condemned. Therefore the Scriptures
 clearly present the fact that he was not deceived ( 1 Timothy
 2:14) Not only was he created in God's image and likeness
, but he had knowledge and at the time of his deflection 
understood what the penalty for disobedience would be. However
, God evidently had much sympathy with Adam in the fall, 
and did not purpose that this fall should work Adam's eternal 
ruin. Hence the Bible tells us that God had arranged in advance
 that Christ should redeem Adam. Moreover, our merciful
 Creator has also provided that Adam might have more 
knowledge before his final destiny would be fixed. 


Question: — Do we understand that there is a restitution 
call now open to mankind? 

Answer : — Until the glorification of the church there can be 
no individual or personal restitution work. There ie, ( however
, a restoration work beginning so far as the preparing of 
the world is concerned. During the past forty-four years a 
marvelous progress has been made, wonderful inventions that 
in so short a time have made the world rich and have brought 
blessings of comfort and convenience never before dreamed of. 
These great improvements have come because we have entered 
the "times of restitution" mentioned in Acts 3:19-21. But as 
far as mankind is concerned, we understand restitution to human
 perfection is not due to begin until the Messianic kingdom
 shall have been fully established. That beneficent reign 
is in process of establishment now. But not until the last of 
the feet members of the body of Christ shall have passed beyond
 the vail will the work of restoring humanity under the 
New Covenant begin; for that covenant cannot be sealed with 
the blood of Christ until the church has passed into death and 
the merit released for application to the world. Then the covenant
 will begin to operate for the benefit of all the families 
of the earth. 


Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y M AUGUST 15, 1918 


No. 16 


INFILLING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT PROPORTIONATE TO SPIRITUAL CAPACITY 

"Be filled with the Spirit." — Romans 8:9; Ephesians 5:18. 
There is a necessity for this infilling, refilling, continuous 
filling of the Spirit of God. By nature we have the disposition
 common to the fallen race to which we belong. This 
hereditary disposition is more or less influenced bjr environment
, training, etc.; and the new mind haa difficulty in getting 
fully in tune with the Infinite. Additionally, our memories 
are poor, and our natural tendencies are in the direction 
opposite to our spirit of consecration, the Spirit of the Lord. 
It is therefore necessary for the child of God to go frequently 
to the throne of heavenly grace in order to he filled more and 
more with the Spirit of the heavenly Father, the Spirit of our 
Lord Jesus. 


"// any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of 7&8." 

In the use of the word spirit, it is very necessary that we 
have in mind the wide range of meanings which this word possesses
. For instance, God is a spirit, and the angels are 
spirits; that is,, they are spirit beings. This signifies that 
whatever kind of organism they have, it is so different from 
the human organism that mankind cannot see them. Angels 
might he present with us and yet be invisible, unless a special 
miracle wa« performed by which they might take on a body 
of flesh. 

Another thought connected with the word spirit is much 
in line with our general usage of the tern* — that which is 
ethereal. For instance, we speak of the mind, the spirit, the 
disposition of a person. Indeed, in our Common Version of 
the Bible these words are used synonymously. "If any man 
have not the Spirit [mind, disposition] of Christ, he is none 
of his." (Romans 8:9; Philippians 2:5; I Corinthians 2:16) 
We also use the word spirit to mean the life principle, the 
energizing power which all living creatures possess. The 
power i3 something which cannot be touched or handled. Still 
another use of the word spirit is in connection with liquors. 
In this sense it has the thought of that which will lightly 
pass away as a gas, that which will become invisible, which 
will evaporate. 

In our text, however, the word spirit is used in its own 
peculiar way — to signify the new mind, new will, new purpose, 
begotten in the consecrated children of God through his 
exceeding great and precious promises, written in his Word. 
Originally man was in the image and likeness of God. 
Then he had a spirit, or disposibiop, very much in accord with 
that of his Creator. But after sin had operated for a short 
time, selfishness and depravity were developed; and in time 
these evil propensities vitiated his spirit, or disposition. 
Thereafter instead of having a spirit of holiness, man had a 
spirit of unholiness, of sin; and all of Adam's posterity have 
been born with these evil tendencies marked in their brains. 
Naturally we are inclined to do the wrong thing rather than 
the right, because of our having inherited these weaknesses 
and blemishes from father Adam. 

THE BEGETTING OP THE HOLT SPIRIT 

God has purposed that during the Gospel age and through 
the Gospel message, those desirous of being in harmony with 
him may get back his spirit. Very few care to do this, however
 ; and the iew who do are said to be holy. This class give 
up their own spirit, mind, disposition, will, and adopt instead 
the divine standards, the divine will. What these divine 
standards are they must learn from the Scriptures. 

From the time of his consecration and his acceptance by 
the Father through the Advocate ( 1 John 2:1), the Christian 
is said to be begotten of the holy Spirit. That is to say, a 
new mind, a new disposition, a new personality, had its start, 
its beginning, when God accepted him. Just what this spark 
of the new nature is, we mny uot surely know. But we recognize
 the experiences which result from its possession. This 
begetting of the Spirit of God starts a new life. The start of 
this new life is not, however, the end of the matter. He is to 
strive to be "filled with the Spirit/' 

(239-243) [6306] 


INCREASE OF SPIRITUAL CAPACITY 

In the case of the Master, it is written that the Father 
gave not the Spirit by measure unto him. (John 3:34) This 
statement implies that God gives the Spirit by measure to 
all of the members of the church. The reason for this difference
 is that our Lord had a perfect organism. Because 
he had left the heavenly glory, because his life principle had 
been transferred from the heavenly plane to the earthly, ho 
was therefore without any taint of Adamic imperfection of 
being. Being thus perfect, he could receive readily and could 
comprehend without limitation. He could absorb fully and 
completely of the Spirit of God ; for he was born in the 
image of God. 

With the church it is different. In our case we receive only 
by measure — not that God has limited us to a measure, but 
that we are not able to absorb, to receive, a full measure. 
Some may receive more and others less, according to the 
natural condition of our body, the condition in which we were 
born, our environment, etc. In proportion as our life is given 
up to the Lord and in proportion as we make straight paths 
for our feet, we will choose a pathway in life that will be 
most helpful to us and will most assist us in overcoming the 
weaknesses of our flesh. Thus we shall become the better 
enabled, and the more quickly, to be filled with the Holy 
Spirit and to receive a larger measure of it as time goes by. 

The Lord's people are privileged to be filled with his 
Spirit and to enlarge their capacity for greater infilling. 
Our knowledge enlarges, our appreciation enlarges, and our 
needs enlarge. Thus we grow in grace and are enabled to 
receive more and more of the Spirit of God. For this reason 
a Christian who has had years of opportunity for development 
ought to be more able to absorb readily, ought to have a 
much larger spiritual capacity, than when he first entered 
the Lord's family. He should be filled with the Spirit of God 
and of Christ. This should give him more and more of the 
spirit of a sound mind, should make him more God-like. 

This Spirit of the Lord, manifested in the lives of his 
people, is a spirit of meekness. Whoever possesses this spirit 
will not be proud nor boastful ; for he will see that God is 
not pleased with the proud. Therefore he will humble himself
, in order to be lowly in mind and in heart, as was the 
Master. If he makes a mistake in judgment, he will be the 
first to recognize and correct the error. Gentleness also is 
an element of the holy Spirit. Some people are naturally 


•U-1-.usr 15, 1<>18 


THE WATCH TOWER 


gentle; others are noisy and rude. Tho.se, nowever, who have 
the Spirit of the Lord will more and more have a tendency 
toward gentleness. Such will have kindness and sympathy 
for others. They will not wish to harm anybody, but rather 
to do good to all with whom they come in contact. Thus they 
will demonstrate that they have the fruits of the holy Spiri^ 
meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness
, love — increasingly developing within themselves day by 
day; for whoever becomes infilled with the spirit of the truth, 
the spirit of holiness — and only those — will manifest these 
evidences in their daily lives. 

ANOINTING VS. BEGETTING OF THE SPIRIT 
The expressions, "anointing of the holy Spirit/' and "begetting
 of the holy Spirit," apparently refer to the same experience
 from its twofold aspect. In one sense of the word, the 
impartation of God's holy Spirit to any one is the begetting 
of a new life, the start of a new nature. From the other 
viewpoint the impartation is the start of royalty, distinguishing
 those who are designed for membership in the divine 
royal family, according to the divine purposes. The begetting 
of the holy Spirit is to a new nature — the spiritual. The 
anointing is to an exalted office — membership in the body of 
Christ. 

Under the divine arrangement for Israel the ceremony of 
anointing with the holy anointing oil was confined to the 
priests and the kings. The antitype of this ceremony, we 
may understand, is fulfilled in Christ and his church, who are 
anointed to be both kings and priests unto God, a royal priesthood
. (Revelation 1:5, 6) From the divine viewpoint there 
is but one great kingly priest, the Christ, Head and body. In 
the Jewish type Aaron represented the Head of this great 
antitypical priest. The type shows that the holy anointing 
oil was poured upon the head of the typical high priest and 
ran down to the hem of his garment. (Leviticus 8:12; 
Psalm 133:2) The sons of Aaron did not receive an individual
 anointing; for they belonged to Aaron, who was 
anointed. And so it is in the antitype. Only when we come 
into the Christ company are we members of the Anointed One. 
The phrase, "the anointed," is the English equivalent of 
the Hebrew Messiah and of the Greek term Ghristos. In other 
words, the Messiah, the Christ, is the Anointed One — the longpromised
 seed of Abraham who is to bless all the families of 
the earth. Whoever, therefore, becomes a member of Christ 
becomes a member of the Anointed One, the Messiah; for 
these terms express the same thought. Hence, when the 
Apostle Paul declares that the church are members of the 
body of Christ, he means that they are members of the Lord's 
Anointed, members of the Messiah. — 1 Corinthians 12:12-23. 
We have already called attention to the fact that the holy 
anointing oil was poured upon the head of Israel's high priest 
and ran down over the skirts of his garment. In the antitype, 
the heavenly Father anointed the great Head of the Christ at 
Jordan. (John 1:32-34; Acta 2:33; 10:38) As in the type 
the oil ran down from the high priest's head to his body, so 
in the antitype. All the members of the body of Christ 
receive their anointing through the great Head of the church — 
Christ Jesus. Hence the Apostle John says, "The anointing 
which ye have received of him abideth in you" — the entire 
church. (1 John 2:27) From the moment that any one 
becomes a member of the body of Christ, he comes under this 
anointing — under its provision and its influence. When he 
turned his back upon sin, accepted our Lord as his Savior 
and offered himself in full consecration, then our Lord accepted
 him and presented him to the heavenly Father, who in 
turn received -him and begat him with the holy Spirit. He 
thus became a member of the church which is the body of 
Christ, and so came under the anointing influence of the Spirit 
of God. 

ILLUMINATING INFLUENCE OF THE HOLT SPIEIT 
Throughout the Gospel ago our Lord becomes surety for all 
who are accepted of God and begotten of the holy Spirit. To 
these our Lord imputes the merit of his righteousness and 
accounts them as members of his body, members of the 
Anointed company. This acceptance will continue until every 
member of the Christ shall have been received. The heavenly 
Father purposes to receive this entire company — ;all for whom 
our Lord acts as Advocate. 

The anointing of the holy Spirit has the effect of enlightening
 the eyes of understanding of those who receive it. The 
thought of unction, oiling, is also connected with the phrase. 
The holy Spirit smooths out, modifies, mollifies the disposition 
of all who receive this "unction from on high." This work 
begins in their minds and their hearts, and gradually shows 
itself in their conduct, as they manifest the fact that they 
have been anointed with the holy Spirit of God. 

In the case of the Christian the begetting is a power which 


he receives from the heavenly Father and which is the start 
oi a new life. As no human child is conscious of the moment 
of its begetting, so no spiritual child of God can know the 
exact time of his begetting. In either case the best evidence 
is the indication that life exists. As in the case of natural 
birth the first manifestation of life is the quickening, so it is 
with the Christian. Those who are begotten of the holy 
Spirit are quickened, energized, made lively or active. From 
the moment of begetting they make a measure of development
, growth in grace and in knowledge of the Lord, until 
they reach the place where they wish to do something to 
show their love, their devotion. Then, and not until then, 
will others 'take note of them that they have been with Jesu^ 
and have learned of him — will perceive that the same mind U 
in them that was in Christ Jesus our Lord. 

The work of Christ and the church during the Gospel ago 
is outlined in Isaiah 61:1-3. This outline has no reference, 
however, to the work of the Millennial age. The entire Christ 
is anointed to preach the Gospel. As the Apostle declares, 
preaching is the method by which God is selecting those who 
respond to the preaching. (Romans 10:13-15; 1 Corinthians 
1:21) God is always pleased with those who endeavor to du 
right; but during the Gospel age he has been inviting a 
special class to give him their hearts. The first of this class 
was our Lord Jesus, whom the Father anointed with the holy 
Spirit at Jordan. In due time, at Pentecost, the same holy 
Spirit that had anointed our Lord came in anointing power 
upon his followers assembled in the upper room in Jerusalem. 
The antitypical holy anointing oil, poured out upon the antitypical
 priest at Jordan, had begun to reach the body of 
Christ. 

Throughout this Gospel age the message has been proclaimed
, promising joy, peace and comfort to those who have 
ears to hear. Not many have responded; not many have 
received the blessing. Not many have seen the privilege ot 
sacrificing now with our Lord in order to share in his glory 
later on. This message of the kingdom is not one of damnation
, but of comfort. Therefore the broken -hearted of the 
present time are the most ready to respond,' The self-satisfied 
and prosperous, those who have all that they desire, are not 
at all likely to hear the message of God ; for the world hold** 
too many attractions for them. Yet in due time they will 
find that the things which look so bright and beautiful to 
them turn, sooner or later, into ashes, as it were — prove 
merely to be disappointments. 

THE ANOINTING INDICATIVE OF OFFICE 

In studying the typical priesthood, we note that Aaron 
and his successors in office were anointed with the holy 
anointing oil as indicative of the divine blessing and authority
. The kings of Israel also were anointed to their office. 
Even in the case of our Lord it was necessary for the Father 
to manifest the antitypical anointing in some way. At the 
age of thirty years Jesus presented himself to God at Jordan 
to be the promised "priest after the order of Melchizedek." 
(Psalm 110:4; Hebrews 5:1-10) He had received the divine 
invitation to become a priest, and had accepted it. Had he 
not been thus invited by God, he might have gone through the 
form of baptism at Jordan without any further results. That 
is to say, if God had not invited our Lord to consecrate himself
 to the divine service, his baptism would have been merely 
an empty form; it would not have been followed by a begetting
 of the holy Spirit to a new nature — the divine. But since 
he had been "called of God, as was Aaron," this course was 
followed by the proper results. He was begotten to the divine 
nature. He became a new creature. 

After our Lord had presented himself to be a servant of 
truth, of righteousness, and had offered himself to be the 
antitypical priest, the Father indicated his acceptance of the 
sacrifice by imparting the holy Spirit to our Lord; and the 
fact that our Lord received the holy Spirit demonstrated that 
he was the one who was to be the "priest after the order of 
Melchizedek." John the Baptist bore witness to our Lord's 
special anointing of the Father. After his baptism at Jordan, 
the Scriptures speak of Jesus as the Anointed, the one who 
had received a special anointing from on high, an anointing to 
the office of priest— ordained, if you please. 

Just what our Lord received from on high we can only 
conjecture. That he actually received some power from God 
is evident from the record of the Scriptures. When he went 
up out of the baptismal water, "the heavens were opened unto 
him" as they had not been at any previous time or to any 
previous person. (Matthew 3:16) This opening of the 
heavens we do not understand to have been a rift in the sky. 
The thought is that the higher, #piritua) things were thenceforth
 opened up to his understanding, 


[6307] 


(245-246) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


THE PUEPOSE OF THE ANOINTING 

This anointing of the holy Spirit which our Lord Jesus 
there received was the divine evidence that he was to be this 
priest after the Melchizedek Order, and it was followed by the 
illumination of his mind by the heavenly Father, This illumination
 had the effect of so enlightening his perceptions that 
thereafter he could understand the purpose and object of his 
experiences. Thus he was enabled to appreciate the things 
which were taking place, and to carry out his consecration to 
sacrifice his own flesh. This work he finished at Calvary, as 
he declared with his dying breath. On the third day after his 
death on the cross, the Father raised him from the dead to be 
a priest in the full sense of the word, a priest with a spirit 
body. "The Lord is that Spirit.'* (2 Corinthians 3:17) "He 
was put to death in flesh, but quickened in spirit/' 

As we study tjie records of our Lord's experiences after his 
anointing with the holy Spirit at Jordan, we receive a proper 
conception of the subject of anointing. We recall the statement
 of the Apostle Paul, that God gave Jesus to be the Head 
over the church which is his body, and that the spirit-begotten 
followers of Christ are the members of that body which is the 
church. (Ephesians 1:22, 23; 1 Corinthians 12:27) This the 
Apostle terms "a great mystery" — that the Messiah was not 
to be merely an individual, but a company over which Jesus 
would be the Head. Then he points out the fact that our 
Lord Jesus is the Anointed Head of the anointed company. 

In Psalra 133:2, the Prophet David also points out that 
this anointing of the holy Spirit would not be merely upon the 
High Priest, the Head of the Christ, but also upon the members
 of the body — that the holy anointing oil ran down from 
the typical high priest's head over his entire body. This signifies
 that all the members of the body of Christ would have 
the same divine authorization — ordination by the same holy 
Spirit— as had the great Head. As the Head of the anointed 
company was anointed to preach the glad tidings of great 
joy which Bhall be to all peoples, so all the members of that 
Christ company are anointed to preach the Cos-pel. As the 
Head of the church was to do a work of sacrifice, so all the 
members of the body are to do a work of sacrifice and to 
lay down their lives in the service of God. As the Head was 
divinely appointed to do a great work, «o all the members of 
the body of Christ are to be his joint-heirs in the blessing of 
aJl the families of the earth. — Romans 8:17; 2 Timothy 2:11, 
12; Galatians 3:8, 16, 29. 

THE EFFECTS OF THE ILLUMINATION 

These thoughts give us a clear appreciation of the church 
of Christ and of her opportunities through Christ Jesus her 
Head. The Scriptures point out the fact that of themselves 
the individual members of the body can do nothing, but that 
only as they abide in Christ can they partake of the divine 
promises. If we abide in him and surrender our lives to him, 
if we seek to know and do the will of God, then we shall 
become joint-heirs with our Lord in all those things to which 
he is to become heir. Only one class is to possess the Messianic
 kingdom — the Christ of God, the anointed company; 
and only by walking in the footsteps of our Redeemer may 
any one become a member of that class. Only one priesthood 
is to bless the world during the incoming age; and only by 
becoming a member of the Christ can any one become a 
member of that royal priesthood. 

Whoever receives the anointing of the holy Spirit will 
thereby become illuminated. The effect will be the same as it 
was with our Lord Jesus. In his discussion of this subject the 
Apostle points out that those who received this illumination 
were afterward put through a great fight of afflictions. (Hebrews
 10:32, 33) Without the illumination of the holy Spirit 
the members of the body of Christ would not understand the 
meaning of their peculiar experiences. All mankind learn 
something from their experiences, except those who are hopelessly
 dull. But only the church of Christ are properly 
qualified to get the full blessing out of all the trials and 
sufferings of the present time. 

This increase of knowledge on the part of the church is 
due to the illumination of mind which results from spiritbegetting
. We learn from experience that all things arc 
working together for good to us because we love God and are 
called according to his purpose. We come to realize that only 
by much chiseling and polishing can we be fitted and prepared
 for a place in the Messianic kingdom. We gradually 
perceive that the dross in our nature must be separated from 
the gold, and that the gold must he refined. We come to 
know that only by threshing and winnowing will the wheat be 
prepared to be part of the loaf which is to be broken for the 
world of mankind. We realize that if we remain faithful unto 
death we shall ultimately shine forth as the sun in the kingdom
 of our heavenly Father. — Matt, 13:43; Mai. 4:2. 


God has a great work for the church to do in the future, as 
well as the comparatively small work of the present time. In 
order to be qualified for that future work we must have a 
new nature. When St. Paul declares that the church is God's 
workmanship, he means that the body of Christ is a new 
creation. (Ephesians 2:10; 2 Corinthians 5:17) God created 
man in the divine image and likeness; but man has fallen 
from his original perfection. Since man's creation the heavenly 
Father has rested, so far as humanity is concerned, leaving 
the entire work of man's restoration for Messiah to accomplish
 during the Millennial age. 

A NSW OEEATION 

Meantime God is bringing forth a new creation, different 
not only from men, but from angels, cherubim and seraphim. 
This new creation is to be on the divine plane of existence. 
The begetting of the holy Spirit is with a view to transforming
 some members of the fallen Adamic race into new creatures 
in Christ. Whoever does not receive this begetting of the 
holy Spirit cannot become a member of the new creation. The 
■begetting which we receive from father Adam is the begetting 
of the flesh. The begetting which we receive from the 
heavenly Father is the begett.ng of the holy Spirit. 

Unless we receive a new life we cannot become new 
creatures in Christ. This new life is represented by the 
begetting of the holy Spirit. At the moment that we receive 
this begetting of the holy Spirit, we are also given life-rights 
as new creatures and are received into the family of God. As 
new creatures in Christ we must continue to grow and develop, 
in order that we may be born in the resurrection. Our Lord 
Jesus was the first born to this new nature, this new being. 
The church are also to be the first born from the dead. 

In order for any one to be born on the spirit plane of 
existence in the resurrection, it is necessary that he should 
be developed as a new creature. This would not necessarily 
mean that he would attain the same perfection of works that 
our Lord had; for this would not be possible, since we have 
not the same perfection of mind, of brain power. But it 
means the same perfection of will. Only as we keep our wills 
submitted to the heavenly Father's will shall we grow as new 
creatures. To whatever extent we permit self-will to come >n. 
to that extent we are not submissive. As new creatures we 
must be fully submissive to the will of God in Chmt. Thus 
shall we be copies of God's dear Son; and only in thus becoming
 copies of our Lord and Head shall we have a share in the 
first resurrection. The begetting will receive its verification 
in this resurrection, when all who have been spirit-begotten 
will be born on the spirit plane. But the anointing will not 
reach its verification until after the resurrection; for those 
who attain unto the first resurrection will be the perfect 
Anointed Ones, ready to begin their future work. 
THE CHRISTIAN'S CBOWN OF LIFE 

The life which the spirit-begotten will receive in the resurrection
 will be of a different kind from that which we have 
now. The animating principle with which we now have to do 
is the same which we have had since our birth. W T e have not 
yet surrendered this life except in our minds. In our consecration
 we surrendered both our wills and our life as human 
beings. We have surrendered the right to control our human 
life, even unto death. The new life will differ from the old in 
that it will operate through a different organism. We are 
trusting that according to the Lord's promise we shall attain 
inherency of life — "the crown of life, that fadeth not away." 

Now the spirit- begotten new creatures in Christ are 'n 
the embryotic condition. They are not yet born of the Spirit. 
They are actually new creatures, however, in the sense that 
the new nature is begun in them; but they are not new 
creatures in the sense of completion of being. In our Lord's 
case, although he had devoted his life at baptism, nevertheless 
he was three and one- half years in giving it over. But not 
until he had fully laid it down could he receive the new 
nature in its completeness. Up to that time he did not 
possess his new life except in the sense that when he had 
surrendered his earthly life at Jordan, he there received the 
new life by faith. When on Calvary he surrendered his 
earthly life, the new life was awarded him ; and when he arose 
from the dead, he received it in its fulness. 

We are now new creatures who have not yet received the 
new body. Although God has given us the earnest of the new 
nature (Ephesians 1:13, 14), yet an earnest is not a completion
 of the matter. As long as we have this treasure of 
the new nature in an earthen vessel, that vessel must invariably
 be taken into consideration. When we shall have fully 
surrendered the things of an earthly nature, then will be the 
time of our "change/* when our Lord will give us the glorious 
spirit body promised to the faithful overcomer: "Be thou 
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.'" 


[6308] 


RIGHT MUST WIN 


"God's glory is a wondrous thing, 
Most strange in all its ways, 
And, of all things on earth, least like 
What men agree to praise. 

"Thrice blest is he to whom is given 
The instinct that can tell 
That God is on the field when he 
Ts most invisible. 


"And blest is he who can divine 
Where right doth really lie, 
And dares to take the side that seems 
Wrong to man's blindfold eye. 

"And right is right, since God is God; 
And right the day must win; 
To doubt would be disloyalty, 
To falter would be sin." 


THE DIVINE SANCTUARY AS SEEN IN EZEKIEL'S VISION 

STUDY I 

TABIiKNACLE SHADOWS — TEMPE.E SYMBOLISMS NEW IMPORTANCE — THEIE SCOPE — ALL IN CHRIST 


The actual Hebrew Tabernacle and its ritual were merely 
types of realities to come. The Temple of Ezekiel, seen in a 
vision, and perhaps never intended to be actually constructed, 
was a symbol both of things to come and of things that have 
been. 

The Tabernacle was of the first or Mosaic Law Covenant, 
and had nothing of real merit in its services, "having a [mere] 
shadow [an unsubstantial representation] of [actual and substantial
] things to come, and not the very image [exact likeness
 or substantial reality] of the [actual] things." The par* 
ticipants in the Tabernacle ritual believed themselves cleansed 
from sin, not perceiving that "the law can never with those 
sacrifices [of bullocks, goats, rams, lambs, etc., for sin, trespasses
, etc.] which they offered year by year continually, make 
the comers thereunto perfect [justified before God]," 

There was no more actuality about the sin-cleansing 
efficacy of the Tabernacle rites than in the shadow-figuree upon 
a motion-picture screen. Both are pictures for the instruction 
of those for whom they are intended; the former being "types 
and examples for our admonition" (1 Corinthians 10:11) The 
Tabernacle rites "served unto [the purpose of] the example 
[type] and shadow [obscure representation] of heavenly things 
[the real things] ." (Hebrews 8:5) They were but an 
evanescent "shadow of [genuine] things to come; but the body 
[the real solid substantial or essence] is of Christ (ColosHians
 2:17)"; for "the things which are seen are temporal 
[evanescent, transitory], but the things which aTe not seen 
[the things connected with the divine Word] are eternal [like 
'the word which abideth forever']." 

SFIBITTTAI, EDUCATION PBOVIDED FOB 

Anything intended for purposes of instruction must be 
made with the utmost accuracy, in order not to mislead but 
to edify* It is not surprising that, in preparing the shadows 
and types for the spiritual education of the very sons of God 
himself, to be educated to become the actual priests and kings 
of the eternal and all-embracing kingdom of God, "Moses was 
admonished of God when he was about to make the [typical] 
Tabernacle [so filled with absolutely essential lessons for the 
coming royal priesthood]; for, See, saith he [God], that thou 
make all things [exactly] according to the pattern showed 
thee In the mount [Mount Sinai, where the typical law waa 
given]." "According to all that I shew thee," said God to 
Moses, "after the pattern [of the Tabernacle, and the pattern] 
of all the instruments thereof [each thing in nearly every 
detail being typical, educational], even so shall ye make it" 
(Exodus 25:9) ; "after their pattern, which thou wast caused 
to see in the mount." — Exodus 25:40, margin; Hebrews 8:5. 

In the carrying on of this educational ritual, -every act 
had to be done exactly right; indeed, it was in a sense an 
impossibility for anything to be done wrong; for any error 
in performing a rite was prevented by the death of the careless
 or ignorant priest, as in the instance: "And Nad-ab and 
Abihu [priests] the sons of Aaron [the high priest], offered 
strange fire [fire not taken from off the brazen altar] before 
the Lord, which he commanded not [God authorized the use of 
the altar fire alone]. And there went out fire [like lightning] 
from the Lord [out of the Most Holy], and devoured them 
[killed them] ; and they died before the Lord." — Leviticus 
10:1, 2. 

To the father and the brothers, horror-stricken,. but bound 
by divine command neither to manifest grief at the death even 
of son and brother, near and dear (Leviticus 21:10), nor to 
interrupt the holy ritual (Leviticus 21:12) prepared for the 
education of the tentatively divine sons of God, the solemn 
warning came from Moses, God's representative; "Uncover not 
your heads [murmur not], nor rend your clothes [manifestations
 of grief] ; lest ye die. And ye shall not go out from the 
door of the tabernacle of the congregation [the Tabernacle 
structure] le»t ye die." — Leviticus 10:6, 7. 


TABERNACLE AND TEMPLE TEACHINGS 

The Tabernacle was peculiarly the type for the instruction
 of the little flock. The lessons taught by it, as presented 
in "Tabernacle Shadows," were almost exclusively concerning 
the consecration of the priesthood and the sacrifices of the 
day of atonement, with brief treatments of the ashes of the 
red heifer and of the sacrifices subsequent to the day of atonement
. Most of it in anti-type concerns the work of the antitypical
 day of atonement, the Gospel age, the consecration of 
the little flock, and the tentative justification of the believers, 
the household of faith of the Gospel age. Not much attention 
is given to the great company or to the work of the Millennial
 age. 

The Temple of Ezekiel deals symbolically in very small 
measure with the overcomers prior to the Gospel age; to a 
larger degree with the Gospel-age overcoming of the little 
flock; in quite distinct detail with the great company; and to 
a considerable amount with the Millennial age work, including 
that of the little flock, the great company, the ancient worthies
, the Jews and other people of the world. It supplements 
the 'Tabernacle Shadows/' particularly in respect to the obscure
 treatment of the great company in the 'Tabernacle 
Shadows" and the meagre attention devoted to the great age 
about to be inaugurated in power and glory. 

Throughout the Temple chapters of Ezekiel and in the etudy 
of the plan and ritual of the Temple, the condition and the 
work of the various classes are shown; first as living actualities
 as the classes struggle through their warfare with sin and 
imperfection; and finally as memories when the overcoming 
has been accomplished and the days of struggle may be lived 
over again in the minds of the blessed ones on the various 
planes of being, who shall not have "received the grace of God 
in vain." 

"TABBBHACLB SHADOWS" A FBOFITABLE STUDY 

The importance of the Hebrew Tabernacle is difficult to 
overestimate. It was the dwelling place of Jehovah among his 
people: "At the door [type of Christ, the Word of God, 'I am 
the door'] of the Tabernacle [type of Christ, Head and body] 
of the congregation [type of all people ultimately in covenant 
relationship with God] before the Lord; where I [Jehovah] 
will meet you, to speak unto thee. And there I will meet with 
the children of Israel [all in covenant relationship], and the 
Tabernacle [Christ, Head and body] shall be sanctified [set 
apart, consecrated] with my glory [Christ, Head and body, the 
glory of God]." "And there will I meet with thee [Moses the 
mediator, type of the Christ the Mediator], and I will commune
 with thee from above the mercy seat [divine justice], 
from between the two cherubim [divine love and power] which 
are upon the ark [Christ, Head and body] of the testimony 
[covenant, the word of God], of all things which I will give 
thee in commandment [the new commandment, the spirit of 
the law] unto the children of Israel [all who shall ultimately 
be in covenant relationship to God]." — Exodus 29:42, 43; 
25:22. 

The wonderful divine lessons to the consecrated Christian
 lie in the fact that "Christ [Head and body] being coma 
an high priest of good things [divine blessings through the 
Word] to come [in the two-phase kingdom of God], by a 
greater and more perfect Tabernacle [the Christ, Head and 
body], not made with hands [but the divinely 'begotten new 
creatures], that is to say, not of this building [not the earthly 
tabernacle], entered in once [once for all] into the holy place 
[the Most Holy, type of the divine condition], having obtained 
eternal redemption [deliverance by purchase] for us." — Heb. 
9:11, 12. 

Of what immeasurable importance it is for the consecrated 
Christian to understand the Tabernacle! For there, by God's 
grace, he is to live forever: "Lord, who shall abide in thy 
Tabernacle [the divine condition]? who shall dwell in thy holy 

[630$] (247-248) 


(248 249) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, $. Y. 


hill [in the royalty of divinity J ? He that walketh uprightly 
and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his 
heart." {Psalm 15:1, 2) Speaking prophetically of the great 
Christ, Head and body, David says: "I [the Christ] will abide 
in thy Tabernacle forever; I will make my refuge [margin] in 
the covert [secret place, the divine condition, the Most Holy] 
of thy wings [provided for in the divine Word]." (Psalm 
61:4) How much the child erf God should want to know about 
his future eternal home! Especially now that the great tribulation
 spoken by the Lord is right upon the royal priesthood
, how comforting to realize that "in the time of trouble he 
shall hide me [the Christ] in his pavilion [his beautiful 
abode] : in the secret [the holy, the divinely begotten condition
] of his Tabernacle [the new creature in Christ, the new 
mind, the word of God] shall he hide me/' (Psalm 27:5) The 
church has joyed greatly and grown strong in the study of 
"Tabernacle Shadows." 

EZEKIEI/S TEMPLE ALSO PROFITABLE 

Of scarcely less profit to the new creation is the study of 
the divine sanctuary shown by the Prophet Ezekiel. Twice 
does the prophet emphasize the extraordinary privilege of understanding
 the significance of his wonderful vision, and urges 
not merely the giving of the keen attention of the spiritual 
eye and ear, but the setting of the heart upon the deep things 
of God therein revealed to the sons of Jehovah : "Behold with 
thine eyes [of the new mind], and hear with thine [spiritual] 
ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall shew thee; for 
to the intent that I might shew them unto thee [this is the 
purpose of bringing the new creature to the knowledge of these 
things} art thou brought hither [to the present time and 
opportunity, for the Ezekiel Temple contains lessons indispensable
 now to the sons of God)." — Ezekiel 40:4. 

It is important to the new creation's welfare now, as a 
preparation for future service of the Lord, to give attention 
to even the minutiae of the Temple: "Set thine heart [margin
], and behold with thine eyes [of divine understanding], 
and hear with thine [spiritual] ears [unstopped], all that I 
shall say itnto thee concerning all the ordinances [ritual] of 
the house [the house of sons] of the Lord, and all the laws 
['out of Zion shall go forth the law/ (Isaiah 2:3)] thereof; 
and set well thine heart [margin] upon the entering in [the 
porch and the Holy, the begettal and the divinely begotten 
condition] of the house [the divine condition of the Christ, 
Head and body, both in this life and in the divine life to 
come], with every going forth [gates, Christ, the Word of 
God] of the sanctuary [the entire structure, the divine kingdom
 in all phases and planes]." — Ezekiel 44:5. 

It would scarcely be possible for our Father to tell his 
children in stronger language the importance of the message 
of the Temple of Ezekiel's vision. The Temple teaches more 
plainly than hitherto some lessons about the condition and the 
work of the royal priesthood, the great company, and the 
ancient worthies, 

A MARVELOUS FAMILY SECRET 

The Apostle Paul maikes very clear that "ye [the little 
flock] are the Temple [eternal abiding place, where God will 
meet with men] of God, and that the Spirit [power, influence, 
word] of God dwelleth in you [the Word of God abides in the 
consecrated Christians]. The Temple [Christ, Head and body] 
of God is holy [set apart from everything else to the divine 
service of Jehovah], which Temple ve [the little flock] are." 
(1 Corinthians 3:16, 17) "Your body [the body of Christ] 
is the Temple of the holy Spirit [through the Word ; God often 
identifies himself with his Word], which is in you [the Word 
of God U in our mind, hoaTt and character], which ye have of 
God [the divine Word comes from God exclusively]." (1 
Corinthians 6:19) The Temple which Christ spoke of, "Destroy
 thi3 temple [the body of Christ] and in three [onethousand
-year] days I will' raise it up [resurrect it to the 
divine plane]," was first his literal, perfect body of flesh and 
also his mystical body, the Church. "For he spake of the 


Temple [divine sanctuary] of his body [the body members]." — 
John 2:19, 21, 

In gaining knowledge about the Temple of God the church 
is learning about herself, her present experiences and her 
coming work and glory. The Temple building was the structure
 of which Christ spoke; yet it was but the central feature 
of a system of courts, rooms, walls, pillars, and porches on 
different planes, which collectively composed the divine sanctuary
, The various parts of the sanctuary symbolize the persons
, conditions and offices of the classes in the kingdom of 
God. In due time all beings in heaven and in earth will together 
become the sanctuary of the holy Spirit, when God pours out 
his Spirit upon all flesh, as foretold by the prophet Joel. 

This is one of the family^ secrets of the sons of God; for 
our beloved Father has made it manifest to his sons, "Having 
made known unto us [the house of sons] the mystery [secretj 
of his will [the divine purpose, plan], according to his good 
[how goodness characterizes our God!] pleasure ['thou hast 
pleasure in uprightness' (1 Chronicles 29:17) ; 'all things for 
thy pleasure are [exist] and were created'] which he hath 
purposed in himself : that in the dispensation [the better 
order of things soon to come] of the fullness of times [in the 
Millennium] he might gather together [many need gathering 
in] in one [one great world-wide and universe-wide church 
or family] all things [all intelligent beings] in Christ [a being 
is in Christ who has in him the words of Christ. All are to 
learn the truth], both which are in heaven [the fallen angels, 
now out of Christ, are to have the opportunity to return] and 
which, are on earth [few on earth have the truth about the 
Word of God; practically all, living and dead, need to be 
gathered into Christ]; even in him." (Kphesians 1:9, 10) 
The divine sanctuary of Ezekiel's vision depicts all the classes 
in heaven and on earth which are to learn the pure Word of 
God and be gathered into Christ. 

UNIVERSAL HARMONY WITH GOD 

In a sense God and Christ identify themselves with the 
Word issuing from the Father and uttered by the Son. The oneness
 between Father and Son is a oneness of mind, word, character
. Human beings now learn the Word of God relating to the 
divine mind and character, and become one with God and 
Christ, in answer to the Savior's prayer: "Holy Father, keep 
through thine own name [through sonship] those [the little 
flock 1 whom; thou hast given me, that they may be one [in 
mind, and character] even as we are. ['I and my Father are 
one.'] Neither pray I for these [the twelve apostles of 
Jesus] alone, but for them also [the whole church] which 
shall believe on me through their word f ultimately al I 
classes]; that they all [the 144,000] may be one; as 'thou, 
Father [through the divine Word], art in me, and I in thee, 
that they also may be one in us." — John 17 :11, 21, 22. 

"Be like-minded," counsels Paul, "having the same love, 
being of one accord [purpose] of one mind." {Philippians %:2) 
That happy age of a universe wholly in the mind, Word of 
God, is pictured by the prophet Jeremiah: 'They shall [need 
to] teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his 
brother, saying, Know the Lord [learn to know the Word of 
the Lordl : for they shall all [all on earth and all in heaven] 
know me [have the mind of God, each appropriately to his 
plane of being] from the least of them unto the greatest of 
them." (Jeremiah 31:34) Then will the divine sanctuary be 
finished. Then the Word of God will be true that is written: 
"And I saw no [earthly] temple ['built with hands] there [in 
the two-phase kingdom of God]: for the Lord God Almighty 
and the Lamb [through the Word of God in all and all in it] 
are the Temple [the Divine Sanctuary] of it." (Revelation 
21:22) God and Christ themselves will be the Divine Sanctuary
; for they identify themselves with their Word ; and it 
will be the indwelling Word of God. appropriate to each 
being in his function and plane, that will constitute the 
various 'beings as members of those classes and as parts of 
the sanctuary wherein it will give Jehovah pleasure forever 
to abide. 


THE CROSS MUST PRECEDE THE CROWN 


My dear Brother: 

In the name of our Redeemer and King I greet you. 
Grace be multiplied to you and all of like precious faith. 

With eagerness I look for the mail, since every letter brings 
gladness to my heart. You understand I can write but one 
letter per week, hence little opportunity to answer all the 
dear ones who so kindly write me. As opportunity offers, 
please assure them of my deep appreciation of their words of 
loving kindness. I learn that the dear consecrated ones are 


standing steadfast in the Lord, joyfully "bearing the reproaches
 that reproached ' him." Dearly beloved they are, 
from whom T have much consolation. 

In our Father's due time we shall be gathered to the great 
General Assembly. When I find myself asking, "Is my work in 
the harvest done?" at once my mind turns to the encouraging 
words of Volume 3, pages 230 and 231, and especially to 
Hebrews 10:36, 37. With much spiritual profit we can now 
read Volume 3, Chapters 6 and 7. Sobiptube Studies. I am 


[6310] 


Ai'fiusT 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(249 2r.O) 


patiently and joyfully waiting on tlie Lord, having in mind 
the encouraging words of Hebrews 3:6. Thank God for his 
exceeding great ami precious promises ! 

The Kingdom of God which we seek is not in the things 
pleasing to the flesh (Romans 14:17) but is of the Spirit, in 
peace and joyful hope. How glad we are to forget the things 
behind and look to tne great prize where our joy and pleasures 
will be eternal! How could we better learn the lessons necessary
 for the royal priesthood than by experience! Such 
thoughts cause my heart to leap with joy. 

My dear wife arrived Friday and spent an hour with me. 
The messages of love from the family and others I greatly 
appreciate. Presents are not receivable, except at Christmas 
time, when the privilege is graciously granted without limitation
. I express my deep gratitude for those sent, just the 
same. 

J hope you are all pursuing the Berean Studies faithfully, 
and growing in the fruits and graces of the Spirit. Be diligent 
in this, beloved, and be steadfast to the end. 1 am happy in 
the Lord in my present situation, and I am confident all the 
dear saints in joyful anticipation are waiting for his loving 
smile and the blessings of his glorious reign. But the cross 
must precede the crown. Saw our brethren Sunday, who send 
love. 

With much love to you, the family, and all of like 
precious faith, I remain 

Your brother by his grace, 

Joseph K. Ritthkkforp, Atlanta, Ga, 


FRUITS OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE 

i Paragraphs 15-23 of this article, as it originally appeared in issue of August 15, 1U18, were reprinted from article entitled
, "The Teacher and the Lesson,'* published in issue of February 1, 1910, which please see. J 

Septembeb 22. — Matthew 25:20-23; 5:3-10. 
parable of the founds covebs the 11nt1re gospel auk — our lord's return — beckoning with jus servants faithfulnessrewarded
 with rulers hip — unfaithfulness leads into outer darkness of the wobx.p fruits of character essenTIAL
 TO JOINT-HEIRSIIIP WITH CHRIST IN HIS MESSIANIC KINGDOM. 


"All things are yours; . . . and ye are Christ's 

The parable of the pounds is an illustration of the fact 
that at his second advent our Lord, before appearing to the 
world in power and great glory in a time of unparalleled 
trouble, will be present among his consecrated people, many 
of whom will know of his parousia, or presence. He will do 
among them a judging work, and decide their rewards in proportion
 to their faithfulness. 

It is well to keep in memory the difference between the 
paraible of the pounds and that of the talents. (Luke 19:11- 
27) Both pounds and talents represented money; but a talent 
is sixty times as valuable as a pound. In the parable of the 
pounds each servant received one pound; in the parable of the 
talents the number received varied. In some respects all of 
God's people have one comttnon footing and one common privilege
 of service, as represented by the pound. In another 
respect their opportunities, privileges and advantages vary, as 
represented by the talents. 

The parable of the talents is another parable of the kingdom
 of heaven. Our Lord Jesus himself went into the 'far 
country," even heaven itself. (Hebrews 9:24) But before 
he departed, he delivered to his servants certain blessings, 
privileges, opportunities, "to every man according to his 
several ability," The beginning of this parable was in the 
days of the apostles, when Jesus ascended on high and at 
Pentecost shed forth in the Father's name the holy Spirit, 
communicating a blessing upon each one of his followers, a-s 
represented in the opportunities and privileges given to each. 

All down the Gospel age these servants have been making 
more or less use of their privileges, and more or less wisely 
exercising themselves to serve the Master. Some traded with 
their talents — used them in preaching, teaching, etc. Others 
hid theirs in the earth, perhaps under cares and responsibilities
. ''After a long time the Lord of those servants cometh 
and reckometh with them." This long time is the Gospel age, 
in the end of which our Lord was to return to hear the 
report of his servants and to reward them. This is the 
parousia of Messiah, and his testing, sifting work in his 
church. 

THE EEOKONING HOUB NOW PBESEHT 

We should distinctly note that this testing and proving is 
not of the world; for our Lord has never recognized as his 
servants any except the fully consecrated. Many Christian 
people believe that we are now in the time when the servants 
of the Lord are rendering up their accounts, and when he is 
commending some and reproving others. But all of this testing
 and rewarding of the servants of Christ is evidently prior 
to any outward manifestation of the king in his glory; for 
the worthy ones are to share with the Master in hia glorious 
apokalupsis. (1 Peter 4:13) Therefore this testing must 
demonstrate who are the worthy ones. 

In the parable the servant who had received five talents and 
had used them wisely, energetically, faithfully, loyally, had 
doubled them, and was invited to share in the Master's joy and 
glory. His reward would be a position as ruler over many. 
In other words, the service of the present life is but an insignificant
 one in comparison to the glorious ministry which 
awaits the Lord's faithful people in the future, when they 
shall sit with Messiah in his throne and, as kings and priests, 
shall bless, instruct, uplift and control all the families of the 
earth. 


; and Christ is God's." — 1 Corinthians 3:21, 23. 

The servant who had been given two talents and who was 
equally faithful received his Master's approval in equally kind 
and benevolent terms. He also was a good and faithful servant
 over a few things; ho also would be set as a ruler over 
many things; he also might enter into the joy of his Lord. 
But the servant who had failed to use his talent was branded 
as wicked and slothful. He knew in advance that the talent 
was given him for use, because he had professed to be a faithful
 servant. His failure to use the talent proved him to be 
disloyal, unfaithful. Therefore it was taken away from him. 
It is not for us to presume to say that the Lord will have 
no blessing whatever for that unfaithful servant. All the 
time he was a servant, he respected the talent as his Master'^ 
property; he did not lose it. But he did not use it properly. 
Seemingly he represents a class very similar to that called the 
"foolish virgins" in another parable. This class will not only 
fail to get into the glories of the kingdom but will surely 
get into the time of trouble and its outer darkness, disappointment
 and chagrin, with which the Scriptures declare the Gospel
 age will end and the Millennium be ushered in. The Lord 
grant that this lesson may help some of his consecrated servants
 to be more faithful, more careful, in the use of their 
consecrated talents, in order that they may glorify the Lord 
and may hear his "Well done!" in the end! 

OTO LOBD'S MESSAGE DUTBBENT FBOM OTHERS 

Fear of the Master has been one great difficulty with many 
of us in the past. We should have gotten better acquainted 
with him. We should have learned more respecting his true 
character and his real purposes. If now the eyes of our understanding
 are opening, if now we are seeing the beauty of 
our talents and privileges of service as never before, let us 
quickly dig the talent out of the earth, wash it free from all 
soil and use it carefully, zealously, vigorously, for the praise 
of our King, redeeming the time, knowing that the days are 
unfavorable. 

Of our Lord we read: "Never man spake like this man!" 
(John 7:46) He was "the man Christ Jesus"; but he was 
not a fallen man, not a sinner. H13 life was not derived from 
Adam, but was transferred from a heavenly to an earthly 
condition. Hence as a man he was "holy, harmless, undented 
and separate from sinners.*' (Hebrews 7:26) More than this, 
at the time of his consecration unto death he 'entered into a 
covenant of sacrifice with Jehovah, and thereupon he received 
the anointing of the holy Spirit, "the power of the highest." 
What need have we for wonder, then, when we read that "he 
taught as one having authority," as one who knew and understood
 the things which he presented! 

The beatitudes illustrate the difference between the teachings
 of Jesus and those from all other quarters. He had a 
new view of what to present. His is a message different from 
all others. While other teachers instructed the people to hold 
up their heads, to remember noble ancestors, etc., and thereby 
be blessed, the Master encouraged his disciples to realize that 
the poor in spirit, the humble-minded, would receive the greater 
blessings. While other teachers held forth the rich, the great, 
the learned, the mighty, the influential among men as the 
patterns to be copied, if happiness would be attained, in the 
beatitudes our Lord sets forth the very reverse. His prescriptions
 for happiness have indeed been followed by a few; and 


[6311] 


(251-252) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


these alone appreciate their merit and are finding the promised 
blessings, both for the present life and for that which is to 
come. 

The contrast between the ten commandments of the Mosaic 
law and the eight beatitudes declared by our Lord illustrates 
in considerable degree the difference between the law dispensation
 and the dispensation of grace. The law instructed the 
house of servants what they should do and what they should 
not do, "Moses was faithful as a servant over all his house." 
(Hebrews 3:5, 6) He delivered to the house of servants, 
typical Israel, the divine law, by the keeping of which they 
might be blessed and used in the divine service. 

But the Gospel message is a still higher one. It does not 
ignore the law given by Moses to the house of servants, but 
recognizes that law as just, holy and good. It perceives that 
Israel did not obtain that which they sought — everlasting life 
— 'because unable, through the weakness of heredity, to keep the 
spirit of God's perfect law. The new dispensation which Jehovah
 God inaugurated through Jesus provides a full ransom 
sacrifice for all sinners, and purposes ultimately to -bless and 
assist whosoever will of all mankind out of the weaknesses 
of heredity. The law feature will be maintained, but graee 
and mercy will render the necessary assistance to the keeping
 of that law. 

MEEKNESS A OHAEA0TEEISTI0 OF CHRISTIANS 

Before that new era of world blessing is introduced, however
, the divine arrangement purposes to gather a special 
class, all of whom must have the character likeness of God's 


dear son, our Lord Jesus Christ. These are to be his jointheirs
, in every sense of the word — in the sufferings, selfdenials
, persecutions and sacrifices of the present life, as well 
as in the glory, the honor and the immortality of the future 
existence. 

Our Lord emphasized the thought that undeserved persecution
 is an evidence of fidelity to himself and his doctrines. 
As many had spoken evil of him, so many would speak evil 
of those who would seek to follow closely in his footsteps. As 
he had been reproached and reviled, so his followers would 
be treated. All this the Master would have them receive as 
evidence or proof of their faithfulness in God and of the divine
 acceptance of them. These trials would demonstrate that 
God found them worthy of shaping and polishing for his service
, whereas others without such persecutions would have 
every Teason to doubt that they were in preparation for the 
kingdom. Those who are enduring such trials should rejoice 
and be very glad. They should realize that in the kingdom 
there will be different grades of honor and dignity; and that 
the more they suffer for righteousness' sake, the higher and 
greater will be their reward. 

The prismatic sum of all the graces of the holy Spirit is 
love; and those who possess them are lovely and lovable. By 
and by, if faithful to the end of the way, they shall be made 
perfect in holiness and shall be with and like him who is 
altogether lovely, the chief among ten thousand. Our call 
is to attain these blessed conditions in the kingdom, as heirs 
of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. 


WHAT IT MEANS TO BE A CHRISTIAN 

September 29. — 1 John 3:1-24. 

importance op cobbeci doctrine as related to character building how to begin the christian life — what is meant 

by growth 1$ gbace — our lord's instructions to his followers — the chbistian a steward — his duties and obligations
 — the royal law of love incumbent — «0d first in all his conduct of life. 
"My Utile children, let us not love in word, neither with the tongue; but in deed and in truth" — Verse 18. 


We are aware that in our day the confused and confusing 
doctrines handed down from the dark ages have become so 
obnoxious to reasoning people that many are inclined to say: 
Away with doctrines! It matters not what a man believes; 
it matters everything what he does. We sympathize with 
those who hold this sentiment, although we cannot agree with 
it; for we hold that doctrine is all important to both faith 
and works. If this were not so, our Lord would not have 
given his doctrines so important a place in his teachings and 
in his parables. No one can build a proper life unless he 
have some foundation, some doctrine, some faith. A man with 
no faith, no hope, is sure to be correspondingly lacking in 
character. We believe that the important thing i3 that we 
should have a proper foundation, a proper faith, a proper 
doctrine upon which to build character and good works. — 1 
Corinthians 3:10-15. 

A Christian is one who intelligently believes that by nature 
he is a sinner, that by divine grace Jesus Christ the righteous 
died for the sin of the world, and that through faith in the 
atoning blood and obedience to the Redeemer's teachings he 
has become a new creature in Christ. (2 Corinthians 5:17) 
To such, "old things have passed away; and behold, all things 
have become new." Such new creatures are separate and 
distinct from all other members of the race. Instead of earthly 
aims, hopes and ambitions theirs are all heavenly. 

It is not sufficient, however, that these should make the 
proper start of faith in Christ and full consecration to do the 
will of God and not their own will. It is incumbent upon 
them that, having been begotten of the holy Spirit, they shall 
grow in grace, in knowledge and in love. (2 Peter 3:18) This 
is styled "putting on Christ"; that is to say, adding the graces 
of character which God will accept and reward with association 
with our Lord Jesus Christ in his kingdom. For these consecrated
 believers Cod has made provision of spiritual food 
in the Bible, "meat in due season" for the household of faith. 
(Matthew 24:45} These are represented as at first "babes in 
Christ," requiring "the milk of the Word." But if they are 
faithful they will gradually attain "the full Btature of a man 
in Christ Jesus," "strong in the Lord and in the power of his 
might." 

THE OVERCOMEBS, THE ELECT OF GOD 

Such spirit-begotten Christians must needs "fight a good 
fight," not with others, but with themselves, overcoming the 
weaknesses and besetments of their own" fallen flesh, the allurements
 of their environment, and the wiles of the adversary of 
God. Such as are faithful in these respects arc Scripturally 
styled "overcomeTS," "the very elect." The promise to them 
is that they shall have part in the chief, the best, resurrection, 
and thereafter be no longer human beings, but spirit beings 


of the highest order, "partakers of the divine nature." 
(2 Peter 1:4) In death these are "sown in dishonor," "in 
weakness," human beings; but in their resurrection they are 
raised "in glory," "in power," spirit beings. — 1 Cor. 15:43. 

Our Lord's promise to these overcomers reads: "To him 
that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, 
even as I overcame and am set down with my Father in his 
throne": "I will give him power over the nations"; etc. Again, 
he saysr: "Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first 
resurrection; on such the second death hath no power, but 
they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign 
with him a thousand years." 

All of our Lord's teachings are applicable to this special 
class; namely, those who become his disciples, his pupils, his 
followers. He did not assume to be a teacher of the world, 
but merely of those who leave the world, sacrificing all to 
become his disciples. To these he said: <r 5Te are not of the 
world, even as I am not of the world" ; and, "If the world hate 
you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye 
were of the world, the world would love his own; but because 
ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the 
world, therefore the world hateth you." The great Teacher 
did not include the church nominal as his disciples, but rather 
counted them in with the world. In evidence of this conclusion
 we note the fact that the world which persecuted our 
Lord was the Jewish nation, professedly God's consecrated 
people; and that those who have persecuted the followers of 
Jesus have likewise been nominally people of God, but actually 
of the world, 

DITTIES AND PSTVU^EOES OP CHRISTIANS 

These are the Christians addressed by the Master when 
he said: "Love your enemies." Christians are to love their 
enemies in the same sense in which God loves the world; that 
is, sympathetically. They are not to love their enemies in 
the sense of affectionate love and tenderness, such as they 
bestow upon their own families, friends and lovable persons. 
As defined by our Lord Jesus, their love for their enemies 
should be such as would lead them to feed even their bitterest 
enemy if he were hungry or to clothe him if he were naked. 
They should not pray against their enemies, but for them in 
the sense of wishing for them that enlightenment and true 
wisdom which would turn them from being enemies and evildoers
 and make of them followers of Jesus or, at least, welldoers
. 

Christians are not to lay up for* themselves treasures on 
earth; for they have renounced the world and all hopes of a 
future life on this globe. Their walk in the footsteps of Jesus 
signifies that as he cast aside all earthly ambitions, hopes 
find aims, so would they, taking instead the heavenly am- 


[6312] 


August 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(253-254) 


bit ion a , hop os and aims. In other words they live for the 
future. This will not hinder them from the ordinary pursuits
 of life to the extent that these may be necessary in providing
 "things honest in the sight of all men" for tneir families
, etc. But with these Christians any overplus above life's 
necessities represents so much of opportunity for serving the 
Lord and his cause; and in so doing, they are laying up treasure
 in heaven. 

This does not signify, however, that they must live "from 
hand to mouth/' nor that they must riotously distribute their 
possessions to others. On the contrary they are to seek in all 
things to have the mind of the Lord to do God's will. The 
mind of God is a sound mind. Therefore these Christians 
who are seeking to do the divine will tire said to have ''the 
spirit of a sound mind." This mind dictates that they live 
wisely and economically. 

STEWARDSHIP AND CITIZENSHIP 
To these Christians, everything that comes to them or 
that they possess by nature is considered a thing of God; for 
in becoming followers of Christ they made a full consecration
 of their wills, their all, to God. Hence from that moment
 onward these Christians are merely stewards of their 
time, their talents, their influence, their property, their all. 
According to the way they use their stewardship, investing 
their talents to the Master's praise, will be his commendation 
of them, as represented in the parable. Whether many talents 
are possessed or few, the commendation is to those who have 
been faithful in the use of their talents, not for self-aggrandizement
 or show or for worldly accumulations of treasure, but 
in the service of God, showing forth his praises in the assisting
 of others and of themselves to the knowing and the 
doing of the will of him who called them out of darkness into 
his marvelous lightChristians
 are to "lend, hoping for nothing in return," 
and not, as do the worldly, merely willing to do good to those 
who would do as much or more in return. Thus they are to 
illustrate the fact that they are children of the Highest, that 
they have been begotten of God, that they have his holy 
disposition, and that more and more it is shining out in their 
words and in all the conduct of life as they grow in the character
 likeness of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

In their daily warfare with the world, the flesh and the 
devil, Christians have for their u?e the most powerful weapon 
known in the world — the "Sword of the Spirit, which is the 
Word of God." (Ephesians 6:17; Hebrews 4:12) This does 
not intimate, however, that they are not to put bars and bolts 
upon their doors to prevent robbery. Nor does it signify 
that they may not call for police protection; for this is something
 they pay for in taxation and are therefore entitled to 


according to the laws o»f the world. They are ever to be lawabiding
 and io "do good to all men according as they have 
opportunity, especially to the household of faith." 

While it is our business as Christians to render obedience 
to the laws, customs, usages, of this world, in so far as these 
do not infringe upon the explicit instructions of the Word of 
Cod, yet this does not mean that we are to become partisans 
in political strifes and contentions amongst men. Let the 
world manage its own affairs in whatever way it thinks best. 
Let us accept whatever it provides; let us be thankful for 
whatever may come, realizing that God will care for us under 
all circumstances, that in any event our highest interests are 
conserved. 

GOD FIRST WITH THE CHEISTIAK 

The Christian is to "owe no man anything." This does 
not ncce-sariiy mean that he must not under any circumstances
 borrow; but that if he borrows, he shall be prompt 
to meet the obligation. There is, however, the standing advice
 of the Word of God that the children of the great King 
should be lenders rather than borrowers. "Do good and lend." 
Indeed, we believe that it would be to the advantage of the 
Lord's people to put in practice this sentiment in the most 
absolute sense, and never to borrow anything, never owe anything
, always pay for what he needs at the time of purchase 
or else wait until under the Lord's providence he can pay for 
it in advance. 

There is one thing, however, which the Apostle Paul implies
 that we are continually owing to our fellow creatures, 
not only to the members of our own family and to our own 
neighborhood, but to all men; and that is love. (Romans 
13:8-10) Under the divine law we owe them this, and it is a 
part of our Christian duty to discharge this debt daily. We 
are to be ready to do good to all men at the expense of our 
own time and convenience; but we are to be ready to lay 
down life itself for the brethren of Christ. Moreover, we are 
to seek opportunities for laying down life day after day, in 
the sense of giving of our time to the communication of the 
truth or in helping in any manner the Lord's brethren to put 
on the whole armor of God. 

It will be remembered, however, that the law of love is 
divided into two parts; love to God, and love to our neighbor. 
The loving of our neighbor would therefore be only a part 
of the fulfilling of the law of love. After loving our neighbor, 
and even laying down our life for him, we would need to see 
to it that we do not neglect to love the Lord our God with 
all our heart, with all our soul, with all our mind and with 
all our strength, so that every human interest would be 
gladly sacrificed in response to our conviction of the divine 
will. 


WHAT OUR DYING LORD COMMENDED TO THE FATHER 

"Father, into thy Juinds I commend my spirit"— -Luke 23:46. 


We recognize this statement as among the last words of 
our Master while on the cross. There is a special force in 
this expression which perhaps can be seen from only one viewpoint
. We contrast it with King Solomon's declaration that 
at death: "The dust shall return unto the earth as it was, 
and the spirit shall return unto God, who gave it." (Ecelesiastes
 12:7) The wise man's statement refers to the death 
of humanity in general, and implies that 'both the body and 
the life-principle which energizes it are the gift of God, and 
that they have been forfeited. All mankind are dying. Whether 
their death occuts when they are a week old, a month old or 
at a hundred years, it is merely the letting go of the current 
of life, the spirit of life. Mankind have no right to life; for 
our first parents lost this right by disobedience in Eden. God 
permits each child of Adam to use as long as possible the 
spark of life which he has inherited from his parents. Therefore
 it is proper for mankind to preserve their lives a3 long 
as they ean by means of physical care of whatever kind. 
SPIBIT OF LIFE DEFINED 
The privilege of liei% the spirit of life, goes back to God 
at death. It does not belong bo us; we cannot hold it for 
ourselves. It is absolutely in the divjne keeping. It is not 
a thing; it is a privilege. If one man should say to another, 
"I will give you the right to cultivate this field for a year," 
we would understand that when the year has terminated, the 
field will return to the owner. So it is with the privilege of 
living. Xo human being can truthfully say that he has a 
right to life. Everything like ownership was forfeited in Eden 
■by the first man's disobedience; and at the death of each individual
, the spirit of life goes back to God who gave it. 

In the case of our Lord Jesus, however, it was different. 
He was "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 


(Hebrews 7:26) He permitted his life to be taken from him 
by wicked men, although he could have retained it if he had so 
desired. He was merely laying it down, permitting it to be 
taken from him; and so when on the cross he said, "Into thy 
hands I commend my spirit," it was still his spirit, unforfeited
 by sin; and he commended it to the Father's care. 

It should be noted that our Lord, at this time, was the 
possessor of two un forfeited sets of life-rig] its — one as a new 
creature and the other as a human being, both of which were 
committed to the Father's care. On the third day the Father 
returned both these sets of life-rights to our Lord — one to 
be his own personal inherent possession, everlastingly, the other 
{the human right) as a surplus left on deposit with the Father. 

This trustful commitment to the Father's care implied our 
Lord's faith in God's promise to raise him from the dead. 
Our Lord Jesus still has that right to human life. Although 
as a human being he gave up his life, nevertheless, he still 
retains the right to his life as a man. The new creature did 
not die. As a new creature our Lord slept, but as a human 
being he died. Because of his obedience to the will of God 
even unto death, he was raised on the third day a spirit being
. It is this right to human life that he will eventually 
give to Father Adam and all the human family who will be 
willing to receive it on the divine terms. 

We see, then, that there is a special meaning in our Lord's 
dying statement, "Into thy hands 'I commend my spirit." The 
phrase, "into thy hands," seems to convey the thought of entrusting
 to the Father's care; for the hand figuratively represents
 power. While both hand and arm represent power, 
yet the hand more particularly bears the thought of skill, 
care, divine power, supervision and interest. Thus our dying 
Lord placed in the Father's care his life and all of its rights, 


T6313] 


(254-255) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BrookIyn, N + , Y. 


as a deposit, that in due time he might apply it in harmony 
with the divine plan for human salvation. 

Our Lord had left the heavenly courts in order to accomplish
 a ransoming work for Adam and his posterity. His 
change of nature from a spirit to a human being was made 
with a view to enabling him to be the ransom price for mankind
 — a perfect man for a perfect man — Greek, antilutron, a 
corresponding price. (1 Corinthians 15:21, 22; 1 Timothy 
2:5, 6) At the age of thirty years, he presented himself at 
Jordan to become the ransom price for all humanity; and 
he continued to give that price in laying down his life, which 
in the Father's due time would constitute the ransom price 
for Adam and all of his posterity. This work of laying down 
his life, of surrendering it, of sacrificing it, of permitting it 
to be taken from him, he ended when on the cross he cried, 
"It is finished!" 

Nothing more could 'be laid down than was laid down 
there at Calvary — a ransom, a corresponding price for Adam. 
But it was not paid over in settlement of Adam's account; 
for had it been so done, Adam and all of his posterity would 
then and there have been turned over to the Lord Jesus, On 
the contrary, the price was merely laid in the hands of divine 
Justice as a deposit, to the credit of our Lord Jesus, in order 
that later he might apply it in harmony with God's plan. 
While still on earth our Lord could make no use whatever of 
the ransom price. He must ascend on high, there to appear 
in the presence of God before even his disciples could be 
brought into fellowship with the Father. 

THE MEANING OF PENTECOST 

Ten days after our Lord's ascension, the holy Spirit was 


poured out upon the disciples, who according to his instruction
 had met in the upper room. This outpouring was the 
evidence that they had been accepted of the Father through 
the merit of the Lord's sacrifice. He had used as an imputation
 the ransom merit which he had deposited in the Father's 
hands when on the cross he had cried, "Into thy hands I 
commend my spirit" — my life and all of its rights. 

Our Lord did not give that merit to his disciples, but merely
 imputed it to them. It was not for them to possess, but 
for the world of mankind, "a ransom for ali,, to be testified in 
due time/' All who become footstep followers of our Lord 
renounce at consecration their share in the restitution blessings
 that are coming to mankind at our Lord's second advent, 
in order that they may have a share with their Redeemer in 
a still greaiter blessing — glory, honor, and immortality — the 
divine nature. 

When all of the church class shall have been glorified with 
their Lord, then it will be the due time for our Redeemer to 
transfer to divine justice the merit of his death, which he 
placed in the Father's hands as a deposit when he died on 
Calvary. When this ransom price shall have been formally 
delivered over to Justice in the end of this Gospel age, then 
it will no longer be a deposit at our Lord's command, but will 
have been exchanged for Adam and his posterity, the world 
exf mankind, ali of whom will he immediately transferred by 
the Father to- the Son, that the work* of the Millennial Kingdom
 may begin. The ransom price is designed to bring to 
Adam and his race the earthly life and the earthly life-rights 
and honors which were lost in Eden through disobedience. 


KEEPING THE LAW VS. 

The Scriptures say that "the law hath dominion over a 
man so long as he liveth." {Romans 7:1) As regards our 
Lord, we are not to understand this statement to mean that 
God's law did not have dominion over him befdre he became 
a man ; but rather that when manhood was reached, he had a 
full responsibility. Jesus was born under the Jewish law, 
and hence was subject to its requirements. During childhood 
the measure of responsibility to the law would be proportionate
 to the amount of intelligence of the child; and so of our 
Lord as a youth we read that "he grew in wisdom and in 
stature, and in favor with God and man." — Luke 2:52. 

Our Lord Jesus was perfect — "holy, harmless and undefiled
" — from childhood; and he kept God's Law as a child, 
though not with the same degree of intelligence that marked 
his mature years. With more wisdom came more responsibility
 and a deeper appreciation of that law. One is responsible
 according to his knowledge and intelligence. — Hebrews
 7:26; John 8:46. 

An incident is related, that his mother and Joseph were 
grieved, when Jesus was twelve years oi age, because he had 
remained behind in Jerusalem; and when they found him he 
had been inquiring of the doctors of the law in the Temple 
respecting certain features of the law. His motther asked 
him why he had taken such a course as to cause them so 
much anxiety. He answered that he thought that they would 
know he had reached the age when boys were expected to have 
certain responsibilities: they knew also that he had a great 
commission, and should not have thought it strange that he 
wa3 attending to it while they were in Jerusalem. Having 
learned from the proper source that he would not be eligible 
to the privilege of sacrifice until thirty years of age, he was 
content to go back to his home and be subject to Joseph and 
Mary. 

JESUS' DEATH KEOESSAET TO FULFIL TYPES 

We do not understand that the keeping of the law on the 
part of our Lord would have necessitated hia death. No law 
could require the death of any one except a transgressor of 
that law. The Mosaic law could demand the death of all others
 of the Jewish nation, for all others had violated it; but 
it had no claim against Jesus, for he had kept its every requirement
. This term, "the law," may be viewed from two 


FULFILLING THE LAW 

different standpoints, however; the one view represented in the 
ten commandments and the other in the typical features of 
the law — the various offerings, sacrifices, etc.; yet it was all 
one law. The fulfilling of the requirements of the few commandmerits
 did not necessitate the death of Jesus; for he 
fulfilled them by obeying them — the proper way to fulfil any 
law. But as for the typical features, these required a sacrifice
 in order to their fulfilment; and whoever would be 
that sacrifice must fulfil, in antitype, these features of the 
Law. 

So then, to fulfil the types of the law, it was necessary 
that Jesus should die. After his consecration, he said to the 
two disciples who walked with him on the way to Emmaus, 
"Wist ye not that those things must he fulfilled?" Then he 
expounded unto them the Scriptures — all concerning himself. 
He said, "O foolish, and slow of heart to believe all that the 
prophets have spoken? Ought not Christ to have suffered 
these things, and to enter into his glory?" (Luke 24:24-27) 
He could never have entered into his glory, could never have 
been the Messiah, unless he had taken these very steps and 
had had these very experiences. The Mediator of the New 
Covenant must sacrifice hia life before he could mediate that 
covenant; he must of necessity be the antitype of the Jewish 
sacrifices. 

Many use the expressions, keeping the law and fulfilling 
the law, synonymously. But these two expressions may be 
very well differentiated as we have just shown — the keeping 
of the moral code of the ten commandments, and the fulfilling 
of the types of the law. When Jesus consecrated himself at 
Jordan, he fulfilled the type of the slaying of the bullock. 
When he finished that consecration on the cross, and later 
rose and ascended into heaven and presented his blood, the 
merit of hia sacrifice, before Jehovah God,, he fulfilled the 
type of the taking of the blood of the bullock into the Holy 
of Holies and sprinkling it upon the Mercy Seat. In the type 
all this was done by the high priest. Jesus himself made the 
offering of himself, his human nature, to God. The mind, the 
will, of Jesus became the priestly antitype, and offered up 
his flesh. The Father recognized that priest by anointing 
him with the holy Spirit at Jordan. The work of sacrifice 
then proceeded to its actual culmination. 


LET US BE EXAMPLES OF SUBMISSION 


TO THE LOBD'S DEAR PEOPLE: 

Grace and peace be multiplied unto you all, through our 
Lord Jesus Christ 

We know how anxiously your dear hearts are longing to 
get some message from our imprisoned brethren through the 
columns of the Tower, and we had hoped to he able to print 
letters from them in its columns, but by the advice of counsel 
we are refraining from doing this, and urge you one and all 
to possess your souls in patience. We believe that the Lord's 
dear sheep need the regular visit? of the Tower for their encouragement
 and spiritual upbuilding, and we desire to print 
therein only that which will serve this end, and at the same 
time keep well within the requirements of the Espionage Act 
and the Overman Bill, and thus avoiding the slightest suggestion
 of opposition to the Government in its hour of stress. 
Many things written and said with innocent intent, which 
would be entirely proper in normal times, would be detrimental
 to the Government's interests now; and we do not 
wish to hinder the Government in the prosecution of any of 
its plans in connection with the groat war. These plans of 


[6314] 


ArcvsT 15. 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(252-259) 


necessity place restriction upon our work. These restrictions 
may seem severe to those who have never been accustomed to 
such limitations \ but let us remember that they apply, not 
only to the I. 1$. S. A., but to- everybody else and every other 
organization. Let us try to be examples of submission without
 murmuring. No doubt the Lord is permitting these experiences
 as tests to us all. We are sure you cannot appreciate
 difficulties which confront the Executive Committee; 
and we remind you of our lack of experience, and hence the 


greater need of care on our part and of your sympathy and 
prayers. 

We appreciate very much your loving messages and assurances
 of co-operation, and assure you in return that we are 
willing to comply with the law of the land, to the end that you 
may have the continued, regular visits of The Watch Toweb. 
With much Christian love, we remain, 

Your brethren and servants in the Lord, 

Executive Committer 


The Watch Tower Editorial Committee; 
This journal is published under the supervision of an 
Editorial Committee, at least three of whom have read and 
approved as truth, each and every article appearing in these 


columns. The names of the Editorial Committee now serving 
are: w. e. spill, w. e. page, r, h. barber, j. f. stephenson. 

F. T. HORTH,* 

* [First appearance of this paragraph in this form. I 


Vol. XXX IX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., SEPTEMBER 1, 1918 


No. 17 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


Zionism is a theme of perennial interest to the Lord's people
, who for many years have watched with deep sympathy 
the evidences of the return of divine favor to God's chosen 
nation. The beloved Seventh Messenger has written much upon 
this subject in both the Scripture Sranins and the columns 
of this journal. In Vol. 2, Studies 4 and 7 he has demonstrated
 the fact that Israel's "seven times*' of divine disfavor 
fully ended in October, 1914: and that shortly after that date 
tho Jews would return to Palestine, He also pointed out 
that the year 1878 marked the turning point in the history of 
Israel j for in that year an event occurred which indicated 
clearly the beginning of the return of divine favor to the 
Jews/ In June of that year the "Berlin Congress of Nations" 
was held, in which Lord Beaconsfleld, then Prime Minister 
of Great Britain, took the leading part. We quote: 

"There England assumed a general protectorate over the 
Asiatic provinces of Turkey, among which was Palestine; 
and Turkey amended its laws relating to aliens, which greatly 
ameliorated the condition of the Jews then residing in Palestine
, as well as partially opened the door for others to locate 
there, with the privilege of holding real estate. But we must 
remember that the year A. IX 1878 was but the turning point 
of returning favor to Fleshly Israel. W have already 
learned from our study of 'The Times of the Gentiles' that 
Jerusalem and its people will continue to be trodden down — 
controlled and oppressed by the Gentiles < UNTTL the times 
of the Gentiles be fulfilled/ and hence, though favor was due 
and began in A. D. 1878, the Jew will not be received back 
into full favor until A. D. 1914. Thus their rise again to 
favor will he gradual, as was their fall from it." — Vol. 2, 
pp. 220, 221. 

Shortly before his death, October 31, 1916, Pastor Russell 
wrote concerning the Jewish hope: 

"We are free to say that the restoration of Israel has not 
been accoiraplished as rapidly as we had anticipated. Nevertheless
 the Jews in Palestine seem to be thus far wonderfully 
sheltered; and doubtless many of their co-religionists in the 
war districts, especially in Poland, would be glad if they had 
gone to Palestine when they had opportunity. It ^difficult 
to say how the conclusion of the war rrvny affect the interests 
of Israel. It looks as though the trying experiences of the 
Jews would arouse considerable numbers of them eventually 
to go to their homeland. We have never expected, however, 
that all the Jews would return thither, but rather a representative
 company of them, just as in the case of the return 
from Babylonish captivity— only about 52,000 returned, notwithstanding
 the great hosts that went to Babylon in the 
captivity. The returning ones represent those fullest of faith 
in the Tx>rd and his promises, and doubtless will be dealt with 
as representative of the whole. We remind our readers that 
when this volume was written r 1 8S9 ] the Jews themselves 
had little thought of going to Palestine. Now Zionism has 
sprung up, and has taken a deep hold upon the hearts of the 
Israelites. Although it was a secular Zionism at first, it has 
gradually turned to religious sentiment and hope." — Vol. 3, 
p. ii. 

Within less than a year after his death the joyful message
 was flashed around the world that Great Britain had 
promised the establishment in Palestine of a Jewish national 
center to which "Jews from all countries might unite in 
spread iing the influence of Jewish thought and idea-Is from 
Palestine to other parts of the world, in complete harmony 
with other peoples." In November of last year came the 
cheering news that General Allenby had taken Jerusalem from 
the Turks. Still later, about the Passover season, 1918, a 
committee of representative Jews arrived in Jerusalem to form 


the nucleus of a new Jewish Republic, a homeland for Israel. 
In June of this year, just forty years from the time when 
through the influence of Lord Beacon sfield the door of Palestine
 was reopened to the Jews, the Zionists held their twentyfirst
 annual convention at Pittsburgh. This convention has 
attracted much attention, and is said to have accomplished 
more than had all the preceding twenty conventions. Below 
wo quote froan various newspapers relative to this subject: 
AIM OF THE AMERICAN ZIONISTS 
An excerpt from the Pittsburgh Gazette-Times reads: 
"The main object of the Zionist movement in the United 
States is to aid in the re-establishment of a Jewish homeland 
in Palestine after twenty centuries of striving, thereby fulfilling
 Old Testament prophecy. There is no thought of any 
large number of American and English Jews returning to 
this homeland, but rather the setting up of an ethical center; 
the making of Jerusalem a City of Prayer for all peoples, 
rather than a rallying point for political activities. One of 
the cherished hopes of some of the leaders is a World University
 for the study of spiritual questions, as distinguished 
from the purely intellectual or materialistic. 

"The Great War has given a wonderful impetus to the 
restoration of Palestine to the Jews, which is altogether different
 from the restoration of Belgium, Serbia and Rounxania 
to their respective peoples. The same world event is proving 
an emollient in racial and sectarian affairs, and at times are 
more propitious for tiie Zionist m vement than ever before. 
For this reason the Pittsburgh convention will attract the 
attention and sympathy of a great mass of people who under 
different conditions would be less interested." 

Our readers will perhaps recall that the thought above 
expressed h the same t, xt Pastor Russell set forth in hi s 
sermon on Zionism, delivered in the HippodTome on Oct. 0. 
1910. On that occasion he said: 

"It is not my thought that the eight millions of Jews in 
the world will all go to Palestine, even though it has been 
estimated that the land could support more than twice that 
many. It is my thought that some of your most earnest 
and saintly people willgo to Palestine quickly and that the 
rejuvenation there will be astonishing to the world. Further 
it is my thought that the Jews in every part of the world, in 
proportion as they come under the holy influences of God's 
promises through the prophets, will go to Palestine sympathetically
 — by encouraging those who can better go than 
themselves and bv financial assistance and the establishment 
there of great enterprises."— Sermons, page 482. 
BESTJME OF PROCEEDINGS 
From the Pittsburgh Dispatch we clip the following: 
ir With all its constituent bodies cemented into one national 
organization operating under one head aJid in one direction — 
that of rehabilitating Palestine, the ancient home of the Jews 
— the Federation of American Zionists last night concluded its 
twenty- first annual convention in Soldiers' Memorial Hall. 
With the amalgamation of the many subsidiary organizations 
into one powerful body, the old name of the federation was 
dropped and hereafter the body will be known as the ZioniBt 
Organization of America. 

"The final day of the convention, which was the most 
important and largest that the organization has ever held, 
was marked by the completion of the amalgamation of the 
new national body, which will devote ite efforts for the restoration
 of Palestine, by the adoption of a constitution and the 
election of officers for the ensuing year. 

"Justice Louis D. Brandeis of the Supreme Court of the 
United States, who had served as honorary head of the old 
organization during the past year and wiho is one of toe 


[«815] 


(260-261) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


foremost Zionists in America, was re-elected honorary president
 of the new body by acclamation. The otiher officers, all 
of whom have been leaders of long standing in the Zionist 
movement, were also elected by acclamation. 

JUDGE MACK PBESIDENT 

"In addition to Justice Brandeis, the following were elected 
to administrative offices: President, Judge Julian W. Mack, 
of the United States District Court of Chicago; vice presidents
, Rabbi Stephen S. Wise, of New York, and Dr. Harry 
Friedenwald, of Baltimore; executive secretary, Jacob de Haas. 
of New York; secretary for organization, Louis Lipsky, of 
New York; secretary for education, Miss Henrietta Szold, of 
New York; comptroller, R. D. Kesselman, of New York; 
treasurer, K. W. Lewin-Epstein, of New York; assistant treasurer
, Louis Robisohn, of New York. 

"The constitution, as prepared by the constitution committee
, headed by William C. Cowen, of Philadelphia, chairman
, was adopted at the afternoon session. It provides for an 
executive committee of 40 members, 18 of whom shall be 
residents of New York and the remainder from various sections 
of the country and authorizes the executive committee to decide
 the places of convention. The constitution permits one 
delegate to the national convention to every 100 members and 
makes one-third of the total number of delegates a quorum. 
It also provides that the convention shall elect its own chairman
 and declares for proportional representation in the district
, the majority in the district being permitted to have 
two-thirds of the delegates and the minority one-third. 

THE RESOLUTIONS 

"Resolutions were adopted mourning the loss of comrades 
in Europe, extending sympathy and assurance of co-operation 
to those who have suffered imprisonment and expatriation; 
greeting members of the Jewish Legion of Honor, urging every 
delegate to take necessary steps to form a lo^al committee 
in his community to stimulate enlistment in the Legion of 
Honor; expressing deep appreciation to the British Labor 
Party for affirming the declaration of the- British Government 
with regard to the restoration of Palestine; expressing deep 
appreciation to the Inter-Allied Conference for Labor and 
Socialism for its attitude on the Britisth declaration; extending 
greetings to the Conference for Labor and Democracy; extending
 greetings to the newly formed United Organizations 
of New York for the Restoration of Palestine, and recommending
 to the executive committee of the Zionist Organization of 
America the unification and simplification of all funds collected
 in America for Zionist purposes. 

"Cablegrams of greeting from Nabum Sokolow, of the 
Zionist International Political Committee, and the American 
Zionist Medical Unit en route to Palestine, were read." 

The Afaccabaean, the official organ of the Zionist Organization
 of America, states the principles of the Zionist movement. 
We quote from the August number: 

TJIK PITTSBURGH PROGRAM 

"la 1807 the first Zionist Congress at Basle defined the 
object of Zionism to be 'the establishment of a publicly recognized
 and legally secured homeland for the Jewish people in 
Palestine/ The recent declarations of Great Britain, France, 
Italy, and others of the allied democratic states, have established
 this public recognition of the Jewish national home as 
an international fact. 

"Therefore we desire to affirm anew the principles which 
have guided the Zionist Movement sinco its inception and 
wfrictfi were the foundation of the ancient Jewish state and 
of the living Jewish law embodied in the traditions of two 
thousand years of exile. 

"1. Wo declare for political and civil equality irrespective 
of race, sex or faith of all the inhabitants of the land. 

"2. To insure in the Jewish national home in Palestine 
equality of opportunity we favor a policy which, with due 
regard to existing rights, shall tend to establish the ownership
 and control by the whole people of the land, of all natural 
resources and of all public utilities. 

"3. All land owned or controlled by the whole people, 
dhould be leased on su<<h conditions as will insure the fullest 


opportunity for development and continuity of possession. 

"4. The cooperative principle should be applied so far as 
feasible in the organization of all agricultural, industrial, commercial
 and financial undertakings, 

"5. Tlhe system of free public institutions which is to be 
established should embrace all grades and departments of education
, 

"0. Hebrew, the national language of the Jewish people, 
shall be the medium of public instruction." 

THE RESOURCES OF PALESTINE 

"Although Viscount Bryce is an acknowledged authority 
on Balkan and Near Orient questions, it is curious that he, 
too, is under the spell of the usual mistake concerning Pales 
tine. If Viscount Bryce had said that the Palestine of the 
time of the Judges was as small as Massachusettes he would 
have been in the right. But to say that this is the size of 
the kingdom of Solomon shows 'how little our land is know* 
even to the best Biblical students. 

"The Palestine of Solomon, as is well known, extend < 
from the Brook of Kgypt to the River Euphrates, and embraces
 a stretch of land which equals, if it does not surpass, 
the area of Italy, with over 100,000 square miles. As we have 
reason to believe, the British Government intends, as soon a* 
its armies have won the necessary victory, to restore to the 
Jews the boundaries of King Solomon. Within this enormous 
area most of the land, although apparently desolate and barren
, is really very productive, and it is only the Turkish government
 that reduced the most fertile provinces to desolation
. 

"Most of the Jewish colonies, owing to the reluctance of 
the government, as well as of the Arabs, to sell to the Jews 
cultivated land, have been founded in the midst of the desolated
 parts of the country, and at the outset no one believed 
that the Jews would be able to transform them into really 
fertile lands. But the Britialh army today, in its advance in 
southern Palestine, has found that these colonies, surrounded 
as they are by rocks and swamps, are the finest evidences of 
wfoat the Palestine of the future will be. 

"It is a known fact that out of a total area of at least 
twenty-five million acres of cultivable land only two million 
are cultivated by the Arabs and a quarter of a million by the 
Jews. But once a stable Hebrew government is established 'there 
with the help of the Allies, and irrigation methods comparable 
to those of Egypt introduced, the remainder of the land will 
be transformed into a wonderful farming region, especially if 
we consider the fact that the Jordan, the Letani, the Auja, the 
Yabok, the Yarmuk, and the Arnon have, according to well informed
 engineers, water for the irrigation of many million 
acres. And the rainy season, which is nearly tropical, provides
 the balance of the water necessary foT a vast irrigation
. 

"It is interesting also to note that most of the cultivable 
land does not belong to the inhabitants themselves, but to 
the government, and once the Palestine state is established and 
the land transferred to the new state, in accordan 3 with international
 law, possibilities of life and work would be provided
 not for 600,000. as Lord Bryce suggests, but for ten 
times as many." — Veio York. Globe, 

HONORS FOR JEWISH JTOGES 

The American Werkh/ Jewish Ncv:s records with pleasure 
another signal honor conferred by President Wilson upon 
American Jewry. Judge Julian W. Mack, of Chicago, Judge 
of the United States Circuit Court, a prominent educator, and 
newly-elected President of the Zionist Organizations of 
America, has been named as one of the ten men chosen by the 
President, from whom is to be selected an Umpire on all War 
Labor disputes. 

With equal pride, the Jewish people have learned of the 
appointment of Major Norman Bentwich, a young British 
Jew, as Procureur General and Judge of Appeals in the oc 
cupied parts of Palestine. The Jewish people have assumed 
important government posts in all lands, and now we have evidence
 that they are making rapid strides towards self-government
 in a land of their own. 


HONESTY OF HEART VS. PERFECTION OF WORKS 

"The Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the ouUr-ard appearance, but the Lord 
looketh on the heart." — 1 Samuel 16:7. 


netting into the wrong attitude of heart, Saul, king of 
Israel hnd knowingly violated the plain, specific command 
which the Lord had sent him through the Prophet Samuel. 
Apparently the king was not of evil intention, but rather 
lacked proper respect and reverence for God and for his 
divine arrangements. As a result, he was rejected of the 
I/ord. This rejection because of disobedience meant not only 


King Saul's ultimate removal from the kingdom, but the 
Lord's selection of another man of another family for the 
office of ruler in Israel and representative of the Lord upon 
the throne. 

In due time the Lord sent the Prophet Samuel to the 
little town of Bethlehem, there to offer a sacrifice, and incidentally
 to find and anoint the one who would some day 

[6316] 


Sfptember 1, 1918 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


1261-2*2) 


l>e exalted to the throne of Israel. When he arrived at Bethlehem
, the prophet, apparently according to divine instruction, 
associated himself with the family of Jesse, grandson of Ruth 
and Boaz, to the intent that after he had offered the sacrifice 
he might without public display anoint a member of Jesse's 
family- — one whom the Lord had chosen for the rulership of 
his people. Jesse had eight sons, tihe youngest of whom was 
herding sheep at the time when the prophet was looking for 
the Lord's choice for the kingly office. 

One by one tihe seven older sons of Jesse were inspected 
by the prophet, who thought that surely the Lord's anointed 
must be before him. Samuel was looking at the matter as a 
man. from the human viewpoint. But the Lord Raid to him: 
"Look not on his countenance or on the height of his stature; 
because I have refused him; for the Lord seeth not as man 
seefch; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the 
Lord looketh on the heart." The prophet then in perplexity 
asked Jesse whether he had not another son. Jesse replied 
that there was one, a mere lad, who was out with the sheep. 
The prophet said: "Send and fetch him; for we will not sit 
down till he come hither." When David came, the Lord indicated
 to Samuel that the lad was the one who- was to be 
anointed. WHAT GOD LOOKS TO SEE IN US 

Although tihe brothers were noble young men, yet David 
was the one with whom the Lord was pleased. Evidently 
God had seen something about David's heart that led him to 
choose the boy. He was not always pleased with David's actions
, however; for the record tells us that upon several 
occasions David was guilty of sin. But on the whole he was 
a very loyal, earnest-hearted man; and God was seeking a 
king who would have the right kind of heart, one whose experience
 would be such that in due time he could write the 
Book of Psalms, a king who would be a blessing U> the people 
of Israel. 

This principle of choice applies everywhere. God knows the 
motives of the human 'heart—the springs of thought. He sees 
what we cannot see. We merely conclude from the outward 
appearance whether some people seem more courageous or 
weak, and others less so; but we cannot judge their hearts. 
Some people may have very vicious sentiments, and yet be 
able to cover them up. Others might be veTy dishonorable, 
and yet be able to conceal their true heart condition. Nothing
 is hidden from his sight. Therefore all who are in the 
right attitude would seek to have their heart just such as God 
would approve* 

The qualities of heart which meet with the divine approbation
 are meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly-kindness, love. With these fruits of the holy Spirit 
God is well pleased. If his people are in the right attitude 
of heart they will be seeking after, striving after, the development
 of these qualities; for "God looketh upon the heart." 

To the Jews God gave the law, with the promise that whoever
 would keep it would live by so doing. To some this 
might seem as if God was looking upon the outward appearance
 of the individual. But not so! He knew all the while 
the true condition of the fallen race of mankind. He was 
fully aware that the Jews could not really keep the law. 
In fact, he gave them the law in order to demonstrate that no 
fallen human being can keep the divine law perfectly. Meantime
 he was looking at the heaTt. Amongst those who sought 
to keep the Mosaic law were some who had the spirit of 
the law, and who at heart were seeking to do the will of God. 
This class were rightly exercised by their experiences, and in 
the resurrection will constitute the ancient worthies, who will 
be made "princes in all the earth," during the Millennial 
reign of Christ. 

CAN THE CHTOCH JUDGE THE HEART NOW? 

At our Lord's first advent we see this same principle illustrated
. When he came to the Jewish people and offered theim 
the Gospel, the terms and conditions were such that only the 
honest-hearted were able to profit by the divine message, 
Those who weTe not honest at heart were repelled, not by any 
act on God's part, but by their own heart-attitude. They 
did not care to follow our Lord* To the Jews he said: "Come 
unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden; and I will 
give you rest." The honest-hearted were indeed heavy laden — 
burdened by their failure to keep the law. This class needed 
help; and they were blessed under the Gospel message. Of 
one such our Lord declared, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in! 
whom is no guile/' (John 1:47) To this claBS the Master 
said, "To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom 
of heaven." {Matthew 13:10-17) But to others his teachings
 were dark sayings; for God wished to favor only those 
whose hearts were right before him. 

All who are spirit-begotten recognize the fact that a real 
Christian is a dual being, that there is on inner and outer 


man. (2 Corinthians 4:16; Jiphesians 4:22-24 J While the 
world sees only the outward appearance, we know that the 
brethren in Christ have new hearts. Therefore, in dealing 
with them, we endeavor to see only the new creature. The 
world may say of a child of God; "You cannot deceive me 
about that person; I see through his little schemes.'* But 
the world judges only from the outward appearance. The 
Lord's people, however, know that it is quite possible to have 
a pure heart, and yet to have an imperfect power of expressing
 the sentiments of that heart. Realizing that we are ourselves
 endeavoring to live after the Spirit and to walk after 
the Spirit, we should think of others of the Lord's people with 
sympathy and try to see them according to the heart. When 
they tell us that their heart is thus-and-so, we should look at 
the heart and give them credit for the motives there, rather 
than judge them by the imperfect endeavors to express their 
real sentiments. 

We acknowledge that a good tree cannot bring forth bad 
fruit, nor a bad tree good fruit. Yet we pee that the fruit 
which is natural to a tree may be more or less changed by 
conditions. So amongst the Lord's people, in all those who 
have experienced a change of heart there will be an outward 
manifestation of that fact; and good fruits will be seen maturing
 more or less rapidly. If this class make mistakes, they 
will regret their failure; and if they regret this, they will 
bo glad to make restitution. If they have misrepresented 
some one else, thev will desire to offer apologies. 

Probably we all know some of the Lord's people who 
are continually making slips and blunders- — doing many things 
which they ought not to do, and leaving undone those things 
which they ought to do. Yet we do not reject them, as 
brethren. " On the contrary, we endeavor rather to judge 
them, not according to their imperfect works, but according 
to their profession of heart; and we look to see whether 
we can find in them some evidences of the development of the 
fruits of the holy Spirit; for we are not to reject any one who 
gives evidence of heart loyalty to God and the principles of 
righteousness. THE ANTITYPICAI, DAVID OIASS 

Our text appeals to us all in connection with the high 
calling of the Gospel age; and year by year we realize more 
and more its general applicability. Like the Prophet Samuel, 
we are the Lord's messengers seeking for those who are to be 
anointed with the oil of gladness, the holy Spirit, that they 
may be kings and priests unto God in his kingdom. We too, 
like the prophet, might fear to proceed with this work of 
anointirfg if we did not realize that the work of sealing the 
elect is a secret work which the world cannot understandIndeed
, no one can understand this matter of the sealing, the 
anointing of the holy Spirit, except those who have received it 
themselves — the David class, the beloved of the Lord. 

The name David signified beloved; and as it applied especially
 to our Lord, of whom Jehovah said, "This is my heloved
 son," so also it applies to all the members of the body 
of Christ. Each of these must be beloved; else he cannot be 
accepted as a member. To such the Head says, "The Father 
himself loveth you"; and again he admonishes us to love one 
another as he has loved us. (John 15:12) It is not too 
much to say that all who receive this anointing of the Lord 
must ultimately be of this David, or beloved, character. The 
spirit of love must be in them — love for the Lord and love for 
one another; else they are none of his. 

In seeking for the Lord's anointed who shall by and by 
reign in Millennial glory for the blessing of all the families 
of the earth, we notice that as in the type David was accounted 
by his brethren too insignificant to be considered in connection
 with Samuel's mission, so also in the antitype. Our Lord 
Jesus was disesteemed of his brethren; and when the suggestion
 was made that he should be the Lord's anointed, his 
people hid as it were their faces from him — disdained him, despised
 him, and considered him hopeless in regard to anything 
great or glorious — "as a root out of dry ground." The same 
has been true respecting the members of his body, the true, 
elect church. They also have been despised and rejected of 
men. Of this class the Apostle declares that they are accounted
 as the filth and offseouring of the world, considered 
fools for Christ's sake. — I Corinthians 4:10-13. 

Again St. Paul declares that not many great, wise, mighty 
or noble hath God chosen, but the foolish, the weak, the despised
, in, order that no flesh might boast in his presence. 
(1 Corinthians 1 : 26-29) St. James presents the same thought, 
saying, "God hath chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, 
and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them 
that love him." (James 2:5) This principle of the divine 
selection of things that are not esteemed amongst men, in 
order to bring to naught those things which are esteemed 
by men, is noticeable throughout the Gospel age. 


VII— 32 


[6317] 


(Jo2 <!6.1) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Hrookian, \\ V. 


Often ihave we. like the Prophet Samuel, looked about us 
amongst men seemingly eligible to a place in the kingdomr— 
looked upon those high in position, socially, intellectually, morally
, educationally, and in the esteem of men — and have expected
 that sureiy the Lord would sanction their anointing 
with the "oil of gladness" and would grant them a knowledge 
of the truth pertaining to the kingdom, only to find ourselves
 mistaken and to be reminded afresh that God looketh 
not upon the outward appearance, but on the heart. 

We concede that we are unable to read the heart; but we 
are satisfied to accept the divine decision in such matters 
and to trust tfaat when in due time all the secrets of this 


present life shall have been disclosed, we shall be able to understand
 the meaning of the Lord's selections more completely 
than we do now. We shall tiien be able to see what a difference
 there was between the hearts of those whom he accepted
 and the hearts of those whom, though outwardly 
humble, he did not so highly favor in respect to the kingdom 
call. Meantime, we must simply wait, trusting the Lord and 
accepting his decisions, even as' did our dear Redeemer when 
he said: "I thank thee, Father^ Lord of heaven and earth, because
 thou hast hidden these things from the wise and prudent
, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, Father; 
for so it seemed good in thy sight." — Luke 10:21. 


ST. PAUL'S LONGING OURS 


"For 1 am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to dep&rt 
The Apostle's longing was for the time of Christ's second 
presence when he*, with all others who love Christ's appearing
, would receive that reward for which they had labored 
and in comparison with which all the prizes of present fame 
seemed dwst and air. We are now living in the time to which 
the Apostle looked forward, On Scriptural evidence elsewhere
 presented we believe that Christ's return has taken 
place and that, having raised the sleeping meimibers of his 
body, he is now taking a hand in the affairs of earth, preparatory
 to a complete establishment of his kingdom of blessing
. 

We are living in the time where all the rays of prophetic 
light centre, the slightest knowledge of which was sufficient 
to spur to deeds of unparalleled bravery, to heights of incomparable
 moral courage, the faithful ones of past ages. If a 
distant view of this time thrilled them and enabled them 
to prove faithful against all manner of odds, is there not a 


and to be with Christ, which is far better." — Philippians 1:23, 
thousand times more cause for us living here and now? 

If deatin seemed gain to Paul, though he knerw he would 
have a long period of waiting in the grave, is it not much 
more gain for us w!ho do not need to sleep, but who may be 
changed "in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye?" To the 
faithful everything is to gain and nothing to lose! Can any 
sacrifice seem too great, any pain too keen, if we can but win 
Christ and be found in him ? What if we are sown in diphonor
? We shall be raised in glory. 

If we can share the unutterable joy of joining in that 
resplendent pageant, that magnificent cavalcade, that heavenly 
train, every one of them a miracle of grace, every one 
a radiant jewel to reflect the exceeding riches of God's love 
eternally, if we can join that train as it leaves earth and 
wends its way past moon, sun and stars, past angels, principles 
and powers to the smile of God ftimself, we too shall know 
that ^Tjeing with Christ, which is far better." 


THE DIVINE SANCTUARY AS SEEN IN EZEKIEL'S VISION 

STUDY II 

THiC LIVING WOBD CONDITIONS DETERMINED BY THE INDWELLING WORD AIX-IMl'OBTANCE OF THE W T OBD OF GOD CONDITIONS TYPED 

IN TABEBNACLE AND TEMPLE 


What the world of mankind needs above all things else is 
life, everlasting existence. 

"I am came," said our hlessed Savior, "that they might 
have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. " 
(John 10:10) Ohrist might have said: "That they might have 
the Word of God*' ; for of the Word he said, '"The words that 
I speak unto you, they are life*.'* (John 6:63) In a way 
we cannot appreciate until in the kingdom, the Word of 
God has life, as says Paul: "The W 7 ord of God is living 
(•quick' as in 'the quick and the dead')"; Peter adds: "The 
word of God, which liveth and abideth forever." — Hebrews 
4:12; 1 Peter 1:23. 

It is the indwelling Word that brings life everlasting to 
beings on <ftny plane of existence. Having the Word is equivalent
 to having in the very being Ohrist, who is the Word. As 
says John, "His name is called the Word of God" (Revelation
 19:13) ; and, "We have heard, and seen with our eyes, 
have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word 
of life." (1 John 1:1) It was the new creature, the new 
mind, the divine mind, that constituted Christ; it was the 
word in 'him that had life and was alive, begotten to divinity. 
Whoever has the Word of God appropriate to his plane of being
, has life, and is or will be in Christ, on the proper plane, 
As says Paul: (<r He [Codl'will gather together in one [family
] all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which 
are on earth.'* (Ephosians 1:10) He will have the Son, and 
with tha Son have life. "He that hath the Son hath life" (1 
John 5:12), and with clearer reference to the Word. "He that 
helieveth on the Son [has his words] hath life." Conversely, 
in the lacking of the words of Ghri«t. U death; for "Tie that 
helieveth not the Son [has not Christ's words within him] 
shall not see life, but the wrath [evidences of divine wrath in 
imperfection and disease of mind and body] of God abideth on 
him."— John 3:36. 

ALL-IMPORTANCE OF GOD'S WORD 

It is the possession of the Word of God peculiar to a 
certain plane of being in the kingdom of God that causes 
and will cause a person to become a being on that plane. "As 
he [a man] thinketh in his heart, ho is he." (Proverbs 23:7) 
The inner thoughts determine the plane or condition of a being 
in the finished work. A man who meditates upon fallen earthly 
things is of the earth, earthy," a fallen, imperfect man. One 
who meditates upon the Word of God relating to justification
 by faith is tentatively justified. Another whose meditations
 are, through the indwelling Word, partly upon spiritual 
things and partly upon earthly, is begotten to the spirit nature
 and in the resurrection will be a member of the groat 


company, upon the spirit plane. Still another whose heart 
meditations are concerning the things of God, the divine 
characteristics, and who makes it his one great end to live a 
godlike life, is begotten to the divine nature, to the nature 
of God, to divinity, and in the resurrection will be a divine 
being, on the divine plane, of the divine condition. — 2 Peter 
1:4. 

For, explains Paul, "God giveth it [the seed, the mind, the 
•character that survives in the resurrection] a body [an, imperfect
 body, a perfect earthly body, a spirit body, or a divine
 body] as it hath pleased him [according to the divine 
pleasure that as a man thinketh so is he], and to every seed 
[every mind or character] its own body [the body befitting 
the mind or character]." (1 Corinthians 15:38) "Minds are 
composed of thoughts, and thoughts are expressed in words; 
and according to the words which are in a man's mind so is 
determined the plane or condition of the man in the resurrection
. 

No greater lesson is taught by Tabernacle or Teanple 
than the all-importance of the Word of God. Nearly every 
feature of these divinely provided buildings teaches concerning
 the Word of God." In a sense, the Tabernacle and the 
Temple teach about two things, the Word and the flesh. The 
mind of God is expressed relating to the mind and character 
development necessary to be pleasing to God on the divine 
spirit, perfect huiman and depraved human planes, and the 
privilege and duties to be carried out in the use and disposition
 of the fleshly bodies of the members of the various 
classes developed from the Adamic race, the world of mankind
. THOUGHTS DETERMINE DESTINY 

For example, in the Tabernacle sin offering of the day of 
atonement, the Word of God for the divinely begotten new 
creatures, typed in the high priest at the brazen altar, is to 
slay and burn up the appointed portions of tho fleshly goat, 
in the prescribed manner, and for the animal to be slain and 
consumed exactly as God had directed, while the justified flesh, 
typed in the copper of the altar, is directed to bear continuously
 the fiery trials, for the sacred altar fire was never to be 
allowed to go out. It is the indwelling Word of God relating
 to each plane that constitutes the being on each plane 
what he is; the justified human being a justified one, the 
sacrificing priest a sacrificer, the divinely begotten priest offering
 up his heart's best endeavors; the Christ applying the 
merit in behalf of the world, the satisfier for sin ; and finally 
the glorious and higihly exalted blesser of the people, the benefactor
 of all humanity. 

Each being is what he is through the power of the Word, 


[63183 


SEPTEMBER 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(J63-264) 


God thus "working in him to will and to do." (Philippians 
2:13) As Paul says: "God make you perfect in every good 
work, 1 to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing
 in his sight, through [the words of] Jesus Christ; to 
whom be [the] glory [honor] for ever and ever." (Hebrews 
13:20, 21) "For we are his [God's] workmanship [through 
the indwelling Word] ereated [made so] in [the indwelling 
Word of] Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before
 ordained that we [tihe Christ primarily; ultimately all on 
all planes who shall through the Word be in Christ] should 
walk in them. It is [all] the gift of God [through God's 
Word]." (Ephesiana 2:10, 9) Every being in every condition
 [plane] is and will be what he is through God's Son, 
through whom as the Divine Logos [Word, Spokesman] "God 
hath m these last days spoken unto us by his Son, who upholding
 all things by the word of his [God's] power [hath] 
sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high."— Hebrews
 1:1-3. PLACE SYMBOL OF OOKDITION 

In both Tabernacle and Temple a place types a condition
. The condition represented bv each place is determined 
by that to which the Word pertains which finds lodgment in 
the mind and the heart of each being and find 3 expression 
in the thought^, words and acts, habits and character in the 
flesh; for God shall judge all men according to the deeds 
(deeds are the expression of thought, mind, word) done in the 
flesh, whether the deeds be good or whether they be evil, and 
"out of the abundance of the heart [mind, affection, will, purpose
] tlhe mouth speaketh" (Matthews 12:34) ; and out of the 
same abundance proceed the acts that make the character; and 
character determines destiny. 

A person whose mind contains nothing but the ideas, words, 
of fallen humanity, however good tihose ideas may be, and 
who is in no covenant relationship with God, is in the condition
 typed in the Tabernacle "outside the camp." He is "dead 
in trespasses and sins" (Ephesiana 2:1) ; he "shall of the 
flesh reap corruption" (Galatians 6:8) ; he is judicially dead 
because "the wrath of God abideth on him'* (John 3:36) ; and 
he "shall not see life," because none of the living and lifegiving
 words are received into his mind, as a seed into good 
soil, into a good and honest heart. In the Divine Sanctuary of 
Kzekiel this condition is symbolized by the land outside the 
sanctuary. 

The condition of those w r ho have indwelling the Word of 
God relating to the perfect human nature is symbolized in the 
Temple by the Outer Court and its gates. In the Gospel age 
and in the ages preceding the Gospel age, this condition) 
appears in the eastern portion of the Outer Court and in the 
east gate of the Outer Court. During the period prior to the 
Gfoepel age, justification was had only tentatively by tihe 
ancient worthies, and is figured in t(he east gate oi tihe Outer 
Court as far in as over the threshold of the porch. Tentative
 justification during the Gospel age is depicted in the 
same manner. The vitalized justification of the Gospel age 
and tihe vitalization of the justification of the ancient worthies
 — their "better resurrection" — are symbolized in the porch] 
of the east gate of the Outer Court, and in the part of the 
Outer Court between the east gates of tihe Outer and Inner 
Courts. PRIESTS IN THE TEMPLE 

In the Tabernacle the condition of tentative justification 
is typed in the Court by the space between the gate of the 
Court and the door of the Holy. The condition of vitalized 
justification is not definitely and separately typed; and if at 
all, it is obscurely represented in the Court for the priests 
and for tihose Levites typing the great company, when they 
are in the Court. The fleshly justified bodies of those In tOie 
Gospel ag'e who have received the holy Spirit, may be regarded
 in two ways; (1) as dead justified bodies, whose inward
 fat (loving inward zeal) and vital organs (representing 
the life itself) are being consumed on the altar, or (2) as 
living justified bodies suffering on the cross. "By him all that 
believe are justified from all things, from which we could not 
be justified by the law of Moses" (Acts 13:39), and "being 
justified by faitfh, we [the little flock] have peace toward God," 
and "a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law." 
—Romans 5:1; 3:28. 

The condition of those glorious ones who have been "more 


than over comers/' have become "partakers of the nature of 
God," and have won the great reward of divinity, is typed 
in both Tabernacle and Temple in the Most Holy. In both 
Solomon's and Kzekiel'^ Temples the Most Holy is given the 
significant name of "The Oracle." The expression '"oracle" 
means the Word of God, and suggests that in the condition 
of divinity, the Christ, Head and body, will together be the 
Word of God, the sole channel of expression of the divine 
will, plan and purposes. 

In both Tabernacle and Temple the condition of those begotten
 to the divine nature, is typed in the Holy. As tihe 
walls of the Holy in the Tabernacle and the articles therein, 
typing the Christ, are of gold, typing the divine nature, it is 
signified that tihose begotten to divinity, and having the divine 
mind, have divinity in the sense that it they do not let slip, 
or lose, the treasure they have received, they will surely have 
the divine nature in heaven. They have divinity tentatively, 
just as the tentatively justified hnve justification tentatively, 
or in a probationary manner. The condition typed by the 
Holy may be termed tentative divinity. 

LEVITES IN THE TEMPLE 

In the Temple the condition of the great company , who 
will be born of the spirit, but not to the divine nature, is 
clearly represented in uhe east gate of the Inner Court, and 
the spirit- born condition of the great company is symbolized 
in the Inner Court, The little flock and the great company 
are both begotten to divinity in the porch of the Temple 
building. The little flock retain in their bodies the wonderful 
treasure of the words of God relating to divinity, to perfect
 love, and so let those words find free course in their 
bodies, that they will be accounted worthy of the first resurrection
 to. glory, honor, and immortality. 

A very- largo class of those begotten to this divine nature 
and entering and being in the Holy for a time, prove unfaithful
, and are put out of the Holy into the east gate of the 
Inner Court. In the resurrection they will find themselves 
members of the great company, servants of the priesthood, 
Levites, and their begetting of the Spirit will be, because of 
its outcome, as though they had been begotten in the porch 
of the east gate of the Inner Court. They are portrayed by 
Paul, "Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, 
which is [being in] Jesus Christ. I have laid the foundation 
[of the words about being in Christ] and another buildetih 
thereon. The fire [searching judgment or inspection of divine 
justice] shall try every man's work. If any man's work shall 
be burned [exposed as not of divine love] he shall suffer loss 
(of the divine nature) ; but he himself shall be saved [as a 
spirit-born member of the great company]"; and, "I deliver 
such an one La apir it-begotten one turned to following after 
the flesh] unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that 
the spirit [the spirit-begotten being] may be saved." — 1 Corinthians
 3:10-15; 5:5. 

HOW FTJKOTIONS ARE TYPED 

As the Tabernacle type is intended for the instruction of 
the little flock, the condition of the great company is only 
obscurely typed. Hie great company are begotten, with the 
little flock, in the Holy to the divine nature; but the great 
company, proving measurably unfaithful, are put out of the 
Holy into the court. Thenceforth they are typed as Levites, 
not distinquished from other Levites, who type believers not 
having the spirit, until the end of the Gospel age. At a time 
still future, and designated Scriptural^ as the fall of ecclesiasticism
 (the city), all the Levites typing mere believers will 
go out of the court condition and leave in the court the 
Levites typing the great company. While the court does not 
there type the spirit-begotten condition of the great company, 
they are the only ones left in the court condition. From this 
fact it is easily seen how the Inner Court of the Temple, which 
corresponds in location to the Court of the Tabernacle, symbolizes
 the condition of the great company. 

In the Tabernacle the functions or offices of the various 
classes are symbolized by the use of things in the various 
places. In the Temple their functions and offices are symbolized
 in the pavements or spaces surrounding tihe Outer and 
Inner Courts proper and those surrounding the Holy of the 
Temple building. 


ABRAM LEAVING HOME 

October 6. — Genesis 12:1-0. 

divine plan of salvation foreshadowed in abraham's experiences — his call to seperate himself from his native land, 

nis kindred and his father's family — the great covenant which god made with him — how followers of christ 

become part of the seed of abraham — this seed to be multitudinous — its work. 

"Be thou a blessing" — Verse 2. 

Father of the faithful is a title which is justly applied all history. The most enlightened peoples of earth look back 

to the patriarch Abraham, one of the grandest characters in to him as the divinely appointed channel through whom all 

[6319] 


(.'65-2o6) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


their religious hopes and prospects have been received. God's 
promises made to Abraham constitute the foundation of faith 
for Jews, Christians and Mohammedans, although many of 
them are not aware of this fact. 

The Jews are Abraham's descendants through Isaac and 
Jacob; while the Mohammedans represent especially the Ishmaelite
, Keturah and Esau branches of Abraham's family. Christians
 profes9 to have become heirs to the chief est blessings 
promised to Abraham's seed by becoming heirs and joint-heirs 
with Christ Jesus, whom they consider the antitype of Isaac 
and the heir to all things. The Now Testament claims that 
the church of Christ, composed partly of Jews and partly of 
Gentiles, is the antitype of Rebecca, Isaac's wife and jointheir
. In this picture Abraham typified Jehovah God, Isaac 
typified Jesus Christ, and Rebecca the cihurch. The New Testament
 teaches that this spiritual seed of Abraham is yet to 
be God's agency in blessing all the nations of the world.— 
Ualatians 3:8, 16, 29; 4:22-31. 

FOLLY OF REJECTING THE BIBLE BECOBD 
Alas, how much of the New Testament teaching was lost 
sigtht of during the darkness of medieval times! Christians 
forgot their high calling, forgot that the Messianic kingdom 
was yet to bless all the families of the earth. Instead, they 
got the narrow view that merely the saintly elect would be 
saved at all, and that to all eternity this little flock would 
look over the battlements of heaven and see the remainder of 
mankind in torture, groaning in un tellable anguish to all eternity
. Only now are Bible students gradually getting freed 
from these erroneous teachings and coming back to the truth 
of God's Word. Only now are we learning the true import of 
St. Paul's words to the church: "If ye be Christ's, then are ye 
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise" made to 
him, as recorded in today's lesson. 

Under such circumstances one would think that every 
Jew, every Christian, every Mohammedan, would have absolute
 confidence in the fact that Abraham once lived. Indeed, 
it has been merely tiheir confidence in the promises whicih 
God made to their great ancestor Abraham that has held the 
Jews together as a nation, and that has gathered Christians 
from all nations to be heirs of that same promise. What excuse
 would the Jews have, living as they do in every nation 
and speaking many languages, for continuing to keep themselves
 Jews at all if they repudiate the peculiar promises of 
God whioh relate to them as a people and which caused them 
originally to remain separate from all other peoples, according
 to divine instructions and in hope of a blessing ultimately? 
The Jew or the Christian who would repudiate Abraham 
as a mythical personage would simply make himself ridiculous 
in the eyes of all intelligent thinkers. Such an individual 
would do himself credit to renounce all claim to either 
Judaism or Christianity, and thereby he would benefit those 
from whose company he would thus separate himself. 

Abraham's birthplace was Ur of the Ohaldees, the ruins 
of which are now called Mugheir, a mound on the western 
bank of the Euph rates, one hundred and twenty miles to the 
north of the Persian Gulf. This land is thought by modem 
scholars to have been about the size of Scotland, and it was 
known as the richest portion of Asia, His father Terah was 
a heathen. Polytheism, the worship of many gods, prevailed 
throughout this region. Jewish legends tell us that as a boy 
Abram, as he was originally named, loathed the vices with, 
which he was surrounded. W T hen only fourteen years old he 
refused to join with the family in idol worship, and on one 
occasion destroyed seventy-two costly images. 

GOD'S CALL TO ABRAHAM IK US 
From Ur the family migrated to Haran, about five hundred
 miles to the northwest and in the direction of Palestine. 
There Abram remained until his father Terah's death, when, 
he moved to the land of Canaan. According to the account 
given by St. Stephen (Acts 7:2, 3) God's dealings with 
Abram began while he was still in Ur. This city was then 
situated on the Persian gulf, whose waters have receded more 
than one hundred miles since that time. Ur is said to havo 
been a great maritime city, built with a wall and having a 
high degree of civilization and a large commerce. God called 
Abram out of the midst of its evil surroundings in order that 
he migfot be the founder of a new nation that would be holy 
and obedient to God. The words of the call are not fully given, 
nor are we informed of the manner in which it was conveyed. 
It is sufficient for us to know that *he recognized the message 
as from God and that he rendered prompt obedience. 

Evidently the Lord fixed no earlier date than the death 
of Terah for Abraham's going into Canaan. Otherwise the 
latter would not have been justified in delaying to go until 
after that event. Doubtless he had something to do with the 
migration from Ur to Haran. It took them away from the 


idolatrous scenes of the metropolis to the quieter conditions 
of pastoral life, and would be recognized by Abraham as a 
step in the right direction, a step toward Canaan, so that on. 
the death of his father he could quickly enter upon the divine 
arrangement. 

THE ESSENCE OF THE PEOMIBE 
A portion of the call is recorded: "Get thee out of thy 
country and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, 
unto a land that I will show thee; and I will make of thee 
a great nation, and I will bless thee and make thy name great; 
and thou shall be a blessing; and I will bless them that bless 
thee; and in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
—Verses 1-3. 

In harmony with this call Abraham, who was then seventy 
five years old, took up his journey at the death of his father 
Terah and went to the land of Canaan. There were no landed 
estates in those days. The land was free to all. Sometime before
 this, Abraham's elder brother, Nahor, had married and 
had set up an establishment of his own. His other brother, 
Haran, had died, as had also his father Terah. Abraham had 
married his half-sister Sarah; and together with his nephew 
Lot, the son of his elder brother Haran, he removed his flocks 
and herds to Canaan, so called because inhabited by the descendants
 of Canaan. — Genesis 10:18. 

The Bible makes a clear distinction between faith and 
credulity. Abraham was not credulous, but filled with faith 
in God. This featureof his character especially endeared him 
to the Almighty, who 1 v cause of that faith styled Abraham 
his friend. As St. Paul writes: "Abraham believed God, and 
it was accounted to him for rig \teousIless. !, (Galatians 3:6) 
The Bible does not claim that Abraham was perfect, nor that 
any other member of the fallen race of man is perfect. On 
the contrary, the very reverse of this ia declared: "There is 
none rigthteous [perfect], no, not one. . . . All have sinned 
and come short of the glory of God." (Romans 3:10-23) No 
human being measures up to the glorious image of God, as 
first it was represented in father Adam. Although Abraham 
had the weaknesses incidental to the fallen condition of the 
human race, yet withal he had a noble character. 

Abraham was not the friend of God because of his perfection
 as a man, nor because of his great education, nor because 
of any wonderful intellectual powers, None of his attainments 
are held up to us as a basis of his special favor from God 
and his special relationship to the Almighty. Nevertheless, 
we see that he had intellectual powers. The fact that he was 
very ricih indicates that he was a good manager. His skill as 
a leader of men and as a general was shown at the time when 
Lot and all the wealthy Sodomites were taken captive by King 
Chedorlaomer and his associates. In the most matter of fact 
language we are told that Abraham promptly armed three 
hundred and eighteen of his own servants, pursued the victors, 
routed them by strategy and recovered the spoils.— Gen. 
14:8-16. OHHJ>EEN OF ABRAHAM 

But it was not for his skill as a general, nor for his generosity
 in dealing with the spoils nor for Ids generosity on 
other occasions that God loved Abraham. The quality in him 
that God esteemed is repeatedly mentioned in the Bible as 
his faith. "Abraham believed God." He did not lean to his 
own understanding, did not believe in his own imaginations 
or in those of other men or in dreams or fancies. To have God 
as a friend and guide is to be esteemed far beyond every earthly 
blessing. 

From the divine standpoint Abraham's children include only 
those who have a faith in God similar to that of the patriarch
. The original evidence of his faith and obedience was the 
rite of circumcision of the flesh, which figuratively represented 
a turning away from sin to be obedient to> God and thus 
to become inheritors with Abraham of the promise made to 
him and to his seed. To the Jews circumcision has become 
largely a mere ceremony, in which they have little or no 
faith. Such faithless observance of the rite entitles them to 
no special favor from the Almighty. But all Jews who still 
trust in the God of Abraham and in the wonderful promises 
made to their great ancestor are subject to divine favor and, 
according to our understanding of the Bible, will soon be recipients
 of marked evidences of that favor at the hands of 
the glorious Messiah, the long-promised seed of Abraham, who 
is soon to set up God's kingdom and to bless all the families 
of the earth. 

St. Paul explains that all Christians who faithfully carry 
out their part of the individual covenant which they have 
made with God, whether they came originally from Jews or 
Gentiles, become the spiritual ^oed of Abraham, heirs of certain
 spiritual promises not yet fulfilled. But the Apostle tells 
us that as the natural seed must maintain their faith in circumcision
, to mark their separateness from the Gentiles, so 


[6320] 


Srptkmber 


1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(266-^.7) 


the spiritual seed must have an antitypical circumcision of 
the heart, still more effective, separating them from the world 
and from sin, marking them oil* as God's peculiar people 
zealous of good works. — Titus 2:14. 

We therefore exit or t both Jews and Christians to honesty 
and faithfulness, to obedience to God; the one class, that they 
may inherit the heavenly promises ; the other class, that they 
may be ready for the inheritance of the earthly promises, which 
will be theirs as soon as the heavenly, spiritual seed of 
Abraham shall have been completed by their change of 
nature in the first resurrection. The return of Palestine 
to the Jewish people is a marked evidence that soon God will 
deal with his chosen nation as in the days of old/; but first 
must come "the time of Jacob's trouble," after which they 
will recognize their Messiah, as the Scriptures foretell.- — 
Zedhariah 12:9, 10. 

THE GBEAT OATH-BOUND COVENANT 

The great promise made to Abraham, and confirmed to 
Isaac and to Jacob, reads thus: "In thy seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." This promise was for the 
future, not for the patriarch's own time. The world was not 
blessed in Abraham's day, nor did he have even one child at 
the time this promise was given. Isaac did not fulfil this 
promise; for it was repeated to him and later to his son 
Jacob. (Genesis 26:1-5; * 28:12-15) Isaac was merely a 
type of the greater seed of Abralham who in due time would 
bless all mankind. Jacob and his descendants, the twelve 
tribes, fleshly Israel, still looked for a great Messiah to fulfil
 uhe promise, to bless them and through them all the families
 of the earth. 

The Apostle Paul referred to this covenant made with 
Abraham, and declared that the seed of Abraham therein 
mentioned is the Christ. All Christians agree to tihis, even 
though they have not distinctively and properly associated it 
with the declaration of the promise. But the Apostle makes 
it clear to us that Ghrist is the seed of Abraham, that Jesus 
is the Head of the Christ, and that the overcoming saints of 
the Gospel age are the body. In other words, the long-promised
 seed of Abraham which is to bless all the world is not 
an individual, but a composite body. This is distinctly indicated
 in Genesis 22:17, where the heavenly seed is likened to 
the stars of heaven, a multitudinous company. 

The spiritual seed of Abraham, then, is the Gospel church, 
Jesus the Head and the church the body. (Galatians 3:29) 
It follows, then, tfhat this seed could not be completed until 
tihe full end of the harvest of the Gospel age is reached. That 
time is here, we believe. What a wonderful thought is involved
 in tfbis plain interpretation of the Word of God! It is 
filled with hope for spiritual Israel, the spiritual seed, for 
fleshly Israel, the natural seed, and ultimately the Millennial 
blessings for all the families of the earth. 

THE VEBT CREAM OF THE PROMISE 
To the churcti of Ghrist belongs the very cream of the 
Abrahajnic Covenant, "tihe riches of God's grace." The promise
 implies the greatness of the seed of Abraiham, the Lord 
Jesus Christ and the overcoming church of the Gospel age. 
This greatness is so wonderful as to be almost beyond human 
comprehension. Those who during the Gospel dispensation make 
their calling and election sure in Christ are to be joint heirs 
with him in the glorious Millennial kingdom which is to- be 
God's agency in bringing about the promised blessing of all 
mankind. To whatever extent we are able to grasp the meaning
 of these wonderful promises, they speak to us of blessings, 
favors, "exceedingly abundantly more than we could ask or 
think."— Ephesians 3:20. 

The second class to be blessed under the Abrahaanic 
Covenant is fleshly Israel. We are not forgetting that God 
declared them to be a stiff-necked, rebellious people; that they 
slew the prophets and crucified our Lord. Nevertheless, the 
Scriptures clearly hold that after they have had a period of 
chastisement, wthich they have been undergoing since our Lord's 
crucifixion, and after spiritual Israel shall have been glorified
 in the kingdom, then a blesbing from the Lord will come 
upon natural Israel. They shall be saved or recovered from 
their blindness: and as the prophet declares, "They shall look 
upon me whom they have pierced and they shall mourn for 
him/' for the 'eyes of their understanding shall be opened. 
We rejoice, too, that the Lord will pour upon them "the 
spirit of grace and supplication." This God will do, not because
 of their worthiness, but because of his promise made to 
the fathers; for this is his covenant with them when he shall 
take away their sins. 

But if God is to have mercy upon the natural Israelites, 
whom he declares to have been still-necked, hard-hearted and 
rebellious, would it surprise us that his benevolent purposes 
should be to bless others than the Jews — others who in the 
past did not have the privileges of that favored nation, and 
whose course therefore was less in opposition to the light? It 
should not surprise us; and so we find in this great oathbouixl
 covenant a blessing for all nations, all peoples. Let us 
look at the promise again, remembering that our heavenly 
Father made it deliberately and subsequently bound himself 
to its provisions by an oath, and that therefore without a 
peradventure this promise shall be fulfilled. It reads: "In 
thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." — Hebrews
 6:13-19. 

What is the blessing so much needed by all mankind? It 
is the very blessing which Jesus declared that he came to give, 
saying, "I am come that they might have life, and that they 
might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10) It is life 
that the whole world needs; and our Lord Jesus declares himself
 to he the great life-giver. Indeed, in the Syriac language, 
in which our Lord probably discoursed, the word life-giver is 
the equivalent to our word savior. Jesus came to save mankind
 from sin and its just penalty of death. It is a human 
invention of the dark ages to attach eternal torment as the 
penalty for sin. It is the divine arrangement to attach to 
sin a reasonable, just, but terrible penalty — death. It is because
 all mankind are sinners that the race is a dying one; 
and for our Lord to give life implies that he will take away 
the sin and all necessity for this penalty. Hence "Christ died 
for our sins." ftjTTJKE OP HEATHEN PEOPLE 

The clear teachings of the Scriptures are to the effect that 
at the present time salvation is only for the church class, who 
are the spiritual seed of Abraham under our Lord Jesus Christ 
the Head of this seed; and that when this Christ company 
shall have been completed, a blessing shall extend to every 
member of the Adamic race, the blessing of a full opportunity 
to know the Lord, to understand the advantages of righteousness
 and to choose oetween obedience and everlasting life, on 
the one hand, and disobedience and everlasting death on the 
other. 

The blessings of the future will be of such a kind that 
every one who has not had a full opportunity during this 
present life will have it then. This will not be an opportunity 
to become members of the little flock, the spiritual seed of 
Abraham, not an opportunity to have part in the great change 
from human nature to divine, not an opportunity to sit with 
the Lord in his throne, but an opportunity to obtain that which 
was lost in Eden — human perfection, everlasting life under human
, earthly, paradisaical conditions — an opportunity of coming
 again into the divine likeness, abnost obliterated in the 
human family during the six thousands years of the fall. 

Surely the hearts of the Lord's people are stimulated as 
they contemplate the meaning of the great Abrahamic Covenant
! It gives our souls encouragement as we perceive how 
gracious is the character of our heavenly Father, how wonderful
 is the plan which he has devised for the salvation of 
mankind, and how wisely he has carried it forward step by 
step up to the present hour 1 . By his grace we are what we are. 
By divine favor we have been called to joint-he irship with 
our Redeemer as members of the seed of Abraham, which in 
the near future will begin the great work of blessing all the 
families of the earth. 


TWO KINDS OF LIFE AT THE SAME TIME 


The word life may be used in different ways. No one 
but our Lord ever had a right to two kinds of life at once. 
He had a right to human life; for having been made flesh, 
he committed no sin and never violated or forfeited his right 
to life. He was always obedient to the divine law. His life 
was not taken from him ; as he declared, he laid it down of 
himself, (John 10:17-18) The Father's reward gave to him a 
new life, on the divine plane. Hence he had the right also to 
the divine life. He therefore had a right to two lives. Our Lord 
is to give his human life to the world of mankind, and the offer 
or gift of this life will be made during the thousand years of 


his reign on earth. If he were still a man, and should give that 
human life away, he would have no life for himself; for when 
he would apply his life for Adam, he would lose life altogether. 
But this right to life on two planes of being has never 
been ours, as disciples of Christ, We were born under sentence
 of death. We had no right to life on any plane. God 
never recognized us as having even earthly rights. The 
Apostle Paul says, "The life that I now live in the flesh, I 
live by faith of the Son of God." (Galatians 2:20) Before 
this he was in a dying condition, and the whole world is 
dead in trespasses and in sins. 


[6321] 


( 268 270) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BuooiaYjr, N\ Y. 


The only life-right the Lord's people have is spiritual, although
 actually they still have a measure of human life. Our 
work now is the laying down of the earthly life with ChriBt. 
Our human body is being sacrificed. It is reckoned dead, but 
it is really dying daily. As new creatures we nave life and 
a right to life, as recognized by God. The Apostle John says, 
'The world knoweth us not, because it knew him not/' (1 
John 3:1) So then, we are dual beings while in the flesh, 


though we are not dual-minded. The world does not understand
 this. The world did not know that Christ Jesus was 
a dual being when here on earth, after his consecration and 
baptism in Jordan. They knew not that he had a right to 
two lives — the one which he had not yet fully laid down, and 
the one which he had not yet fully assumed, life on the divine 
plane. 


ABRAM HELPING LOT 

[Paragraphs 1 to 11 of this article were reprinted from the article entitled, "Abraham was Very Rich," published in issue 
of January 15, 1913. The remainder was reprinted from the article, "The Oath-Bound Covenant," published in issue of February
 15, 1907. Please see the articles named.l 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


Question: What should be our attitude toward those who 
have withdrawn from our meetings and are in opposition to 
present truth? 

Answer: Those in opposition to the Lord's arrangement 
for this time should be treated according to St. Paul's advice 
to the early church: "Mark them that cause divisions and 
offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and 
avoid them." (Romans 16:17) Mark those wlho arc tending 
toward division. Do not make them your bosom friends; 
do not elect them elders, deacons, etc.; for to do so would be 
to encourage thorn in their wrong course. Do not encourage 
any one who is in a hypercritical condition of mind or who 
finds fault with the brethren. Moreover, do not permit any 
suctti disposition to gain an entrance into your own heart. 
Let us be gentle, courteous, but firm in our dealings with the 
opposers. If any such should approach us, we would shake 
hands with him, just as we would do with any worldling who 
would offer us his (hand; but we would not make of them 
confidential companions, would not fellowship with them. 
Let birds of a feather flock together. Out Lord Jesus is our 
bosom friend, or should be. We desire to be intimate with 
those who have most of his character likeness and who are 
therefore most like him. Counsel with those who have tihe 
spirit of the Lord. 


Question: What are the "heavenly things" mentioned in 
Hebrews 9:23? 

Answer: Under the Law Covenant a series of types cooperated
 — the animals, the sacrificing of the animals by the 
priests, the various parts of the Tabernacle, etc. All these 
were necessary; and the blood also was necessary to their 
cleansing, or purifying, which was there typically accomplished
. In Hebrews 9:23 the Apostle says that the heavenly 
things, the antitypes (the word heavens means the high or 
heaved up things) are purged with better sacrifices than these. 
These better sacrifices we understand to be the sacrifice of 
Jesus and of the church which is his body; and these better 
sacrifices purge the higiher things, typified by the Court, the 
Holy, the Camp, etc. Thus our Lord makes atonement for 
the church and for the world, making full reconciliation for 
iniquity and providing for the bringing in of the everlasting 
condition which God has promised: The words heaven and 
heavenly in this text have no reference to spiritual things. 


"'Dreamer of Dreams!' We take the taunt with gladness, 
Knowing that God, beyond the years men see, 

Hath wrought the dreams that count with them for madnea* 
Into the substance of the life to be." 


TWO GENERAL CLASSES IN THE RESURRECTION 


We have been asked, In view of the fact that some will 
never reach the condition of perfection, how shall we understand
 the words of the Apostle Faul in Acts 24:15, that both 
the just and the unjust are to be resurrected? 

This Scripture seems very plain and simple if we give 
careful attention to what we read. Those Jews who stood by 
and heard the defense of the Apostle before Governor Felix, of 
which the words of Acts 24:15 are a part, had every reason 
to believe that all of the just would have a resurrection- That 
is what they had been taught by their forefathers. And now 
the Apostle Paul was not only reiterating this, their conviction, 
but adding to it. He says, "There shall be a resurrection, both 
of the just and the unjust"; that is to say, the resurrection 
for which God has provided, and which is yet to come, is not 
only for the good, but also for those who are now evil. 

The thought is not that those who remain in an unjust condition
 will be granted a full resurrection. The text does not 
state that all tlhe unjust will be resurrected, brought to perfection
 of life. There are some now justified who will share 
in the resurrection, even as there are others who are not now 
justified who will also have a share in the resurrection. And 
all mankind will have a stfiare in God's provision for a resurrection
. The just will have a special resurrection, which will 
be a reward for their special obedience. But the opportunity 
will during the incoming age be thrown open for all to gain 
everlasting life, through Chrjst. Those who are now just, the 
church clasa, will be "changed in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye/' from the earthly to the heavenly condition*-— made 
perfect spirit beings. Those of the past dispensations, justified
 in God's favor through faith, are to be brought forth perfect
 men, instead of in the condition in which they died — imperfect
 men. This will be after the merit of Christ will have 
been applied for all the world. 

So we have the resurrection of the highest class of the 
just — the "little flock" — on the divine plane; that of the great 
company on a lower plane; that of the ancient worthies on the 
earthly plane — three classes who pass their trial, their testing
, in the present life. But it has been provided in the divine 
plan that the remainder of men may gradually be raised fully 
up, out of every frailty, back to the original perfection that 
Adam had in the beginning. They are unjust now, they have 
never come into relationship with God. The divine purpose 


is that the death of Jesus shall effect the release of the whole 
family from the condemnation in father Adam. Therefore, the 
entire thousand years of the Millennial reign of Christ have 
been set aside for the resurrection of the world. 

HOT ALL THE UNJUST TO BE BESTJBREOTED 

But how large a proportion will profit by this arrangement
 remains to be seen. The Scriptures say that during the 
next age a sinner a hundred years old shall be cut off from 
life altogether. They declare that such a sinner will be but 
a lad, in comparison to what he might have become if he had 
availed himself of the opportunities provided at that time. 
(Isaiaih 65:20. See especially Leeser's translation) It will 
be entirely their own fault if any do not profit by the bless 
ings of that day. Only wilful, personal rejection of God and 
his merciful salvation through Christ will consign any one 
to the second death. 

Note carefully that the Scriptures do not say that all shal] 
participate in the resurrection. How about the justified class ? 
Will they all be resurrected? Oh, no, there will be some who 
have been justified but who will go into the second death. 
And so with the world. After they have had a full opportunity
, under clear light, -whoever then sins wilfully against 
this ligflit, will receive the penalty of the second death. But 
nothing will be lacking, so far as God's provision is concerned
; 

The Lord said, "Xhe hour is coming w<hen all that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and 
alhall come fortih ; they that have done good, unto the resurrection
 of life; and they that have done evil, unto a resurrection 
by judgment." (John 5:28, 29. R. V. and Emphatic Diaglott) 
Tfhose who have pleased God in that they have exercised faith, 
have made consecration of t/hemselves to the Lord, and who 
obeyed the leadings of his providences and his Word — these 
are the ones who have done good. God does not ask any more 
of them than that they shall show their loyalty by doing their 
best, that they shall seek to live in harmony with his will 
according to their ability, whether they lived during this Gospel
 age or during the ages preceding. 

Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the prophets, and all others less 
prominent who are mentioned in Hebrews 11 — these died in 
faith. With these ancient worthies God declared tihat he was 
pleased, and that they shall have a "better resurrection." The 


[6322] 


.September 1, 1918 


T HE IV A T C H TOWER 


(270-271) 


superiority of their resurrection will be that they will be 
awakened perfect human beings; while others of the world will 
have to go through the thousand years to attain perfection. 
BESUEBECTION MEANS MORE THAN AWAKENING 

They thiit have done good will come forth to a resurrection
 of life. Some of these will receive a resurrection of life 
on the human plane, others on the spirit plane, still others 
on the highest order of the spirit plane — the plane of the 
divine nature. Then Jesus tells ua about the other general 
class — those who have done evil. This includes all whom God 
cannot approve and accept. Those who are not accepted are 
those who have not done good according to God's standard; 
they have done evil; they were unjustified. Many of them 
have been respectable, moral people, but they axe not wortihy 
of the "better resurrection." 

These will come forth also that they may attain, if they 
will, complete raising up to life. They will be awakened 
from the tomb in order that they may have a resurrection. 


They will be resuscitated from hades, the grave, the death 
state; but their awakening from the tomb will be only the 
beginning of resurrection. Some will be awakened only to die 
again later, because of failure to accept God's terms of blessing
. 

The resurrection process will go on day by day, week by 
week and year by year during tihose thousand years — the 
great resurrection day, that great day, the last day, during 
which there will be an opportunity for all to gain life eternal. 
But whoever will not make the proper progress will be accounted
 unworthy of a full resurrection. Those only who will 
be adjudged worthy of eternal life on God's terms will get it. 

Thus there will be a resurrection, a bringing up to perfect
 life, both of the just and of the unjust. All that are in 
the graves shall be brought forth, shall come to a knowledge 
of the truth, to the intent that they may be restored, if they 
are willing and obedient, to all that was lost in Adam and 
redeemed by the world's Savior — Christ Jesus our Lord. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 

GREETINGS FEOM THE CINCINNATI CONVENTION withthe context. Additionally, as it stands in the Authorized 

Dkar Bbethren: — Version the text gives no real reason for what God was about 

Jn remembrance of the manifold disinterested and self- to do; for it merely says, "For that he also is flesh," a stateHacrificing
 services rendered by you on our behalf we, the 175 ment which appears superfluous if applied to man, but which 

members of the I. B. S. A. representing churches from five if applied to the sons of God on account of what they had done 

states, assembled today in convention at Cincinnati, herewith by straying away or leaving their "first estate" as Jude says, 

express our heartfelt gratitude to God for your help in our would be a real reason. 

progress toward joint-heir ship with Ghrist Jesus, and assure Assuring you of our appreciation of your past services 
you of our keen appreciation, our deep and abiding love for and a continuance of our love to yourselves and of our loyalty 
you and of our constant bearing of all of you to the throne of to the medium which the Lord has so long used for the proheavenly
 grace. mulgation of the "meat in due season" for the household of 

Yours in the bonds of Christian fellowship, faith, we remain 

I. B. S. A. Convention. Your brethren in the narrow way, 

HID IN THE CLEFT OF THE BOCK F. W. D. and H. R. — England. 

Dear Bbethben in Christ;— in RE "tabernacle shadows" 

We thank our dear heavenly Father and our present Lord Dear Brethren in Christ: — 
for your labors of love on our behalf, and are grateful to him Having found Watch Tower articles invaluable for a 
that it is according to his wisdom that we still receive The thorough study of "Tabernacle Shadows" I enclose a list of 
Watch Tower, which is full of the "meat in due season", and such references from the Towers from 1014-1917. This supplewhich
 is so helpful to the household of faith at this time. We ments a list from Towers from 1907 to 1914, which was pubpray
 that the Lord's blessing may continue to be upon you lished in the issue of August 15, 1915. and which was sent in 
all. How sweet is it to know that througlh all the trials by a brother in California. Possibly you may consider this list 
and temptations of these latter days he knows and cares and is also helpful. 

watching the crucible to see that the precious metal is not in- Every succeeding issue of the Watch Tower is indeed 

jured by the flames, hut that just enough heat is applied to "meat in due season," and we wish to express both our graticleanse
 it of dross so that it may perfectly reflect his glorious tude for your arduous labors on our behalf and our steadfast 

image I t confidence in your devotion as our heavenly Father's human 

How precious is the knowledge of ihis wondrous plan, and agents in directing the closing work of the Gospel harvest and 

the knowledge that he neither slumbers nor sleeps in his watch under the present but unseen Chief Reaper, our blessed Lord, 
care over Zion! We can rest completely in him, always as- Your sister bv his grace. Mrs. A. M. T. — Til. 

sured of his love, and knowing that all things are working " rfffrfncfs 

together for our good and to his glory. Truly it is precious watch tower bkferlnces 

to be hid in the cleft of the rock, where only that part of the r . . SUBJECTS TEAR PAGE 

storm reaches us whieh comes through Jehovah's hand. ffi£i N £5 b2$$T. 1 1 1 .' \ \ \\\\\\\\\\\\\:\\ \ \ ml a? 

Your sister by his favor, D. M. — Kans. Progressive Steps of Justification and Sanctiflcation . . .1914 67 

SUGGESTIONS AS TO AH OBSCURE TEXT The Spirit-Begotten in the Holy 1914 79 

^ » u w** BXAV "° AO iU « "»«"*"»* a** Expiation of Sin— Adamic and Partially Wilful 1914 153 

DEAR BRETHREN: — Legal Expiation by Scape-Goat Class. . .* 1914 154 

At a Berean Study here recently an explanation of Genesis The Antitypical Scape-Goat 1914 155 

6:3 was asked for. Not finding it "explained in the Scripture ^"aSd'will' '.".'. lSil 190 

Studies we investigated with the help of Strong's and Young's Body of Christ No Part "of Ransom' '.'.'.'..'.'.'.'.'/.'.'/.'. '.i9i a 277 

Concordances and Professor Bush's notes on Genesis, and Jesus' Human and Spirit Natures Typified 1914 349 

found that the HeW word ruach .translated ^ spirit .in thU &^™d Vpi&tion of ' bur- L.Vd- , Huin.u Life" 14 " 9 

instance, is the same word translated spirits in Psalm 104 :4 Bights 1915 35 

and has the same thought as the Greek word pneumja, trans- The Church No Part of the Ransom 1915 36 

lated spirits in I Peter 3 :19 and applied to the angels. Would f£°*««? d ^I ^Jft".'. ::::::::: i :\ i ! ! ! \ Mil III 

we be justified in using the word spirits (plural) in Genesis Tne Ransom and the 6m Offering 1916 87 

6:3? Especially seeing that the word "strive" from the He- Value of Scape-Goat's Suffering 1916 89 

XrJTi **"•-? on ft once ^Vw^^w™ troZr^ln^V/S^ ::::::: :::::::::: ziSiS lol 

thought of to rule, m the sense of to control as a sovereign, Hag n an80m Price Been Paid 19 16 108 

and that the word translated "for that he also" is from the When and How is Justice Satisfied? 1916 108 

Hebrew b^hag-g*m, which as a ^*7*™*J^ * » tra ? S^e^^ ! ! ! ! ! ! \ \ '. /lilt III 

or to sin with more or lees apology, is also used only once. Raneom Price Deposited with Divine Justice 1916 183 

If this is so, would it not corroborate the inference of He- Ransoming Work — Legal and Practical Phases 1916 188 

brews 2:2, that the first dispensation was under the control of Scope of Abrahamic Covenant 1916 1«9 

, „ \ j. j ^r»i«« *i,«» A /«.^ nr^Til/t maA +tt«o. Office of Advocate and Mediator Contrasted 1916 220 

angels? A suggested rendering therefore would read thus: .ratification. What? When? How? 1916 281 

"And the Lord said, My spirits shall not always rule man; for Interesting Questions in re Type* 1916 299 

they have strayed away [while being] in flesh; yet their days Af M *p> B » Fo » ow . Typ« at Once 1916 300 

[o/rulingl shall be o/e hundred «fd twenty ye^rs. [longer/" £5 fec^ l\l 

Understanding that God does not strive with sinners and mom* riohist cowohms 

that the words "he also" imply others than man being flesh, THE *»<*" ZIOHIST COKOBBS8 

together with the fact that the one hundred and twenty years Deab Beotheb in the Lobd: — 

referred to evidently did not apply to the age limit of man, Ju3t a note to assure you of our continued love and loyalty 

since Noah, his sons and even Terah lived after the flood much to the Lord, the truth and the brethren, and of our daily petilonger
 than this period, would this not tend to support the tions to the throne of heavenly grace on your behalf. May 

suggested interpretation ? It seemingly is In complete harmony the dear Lord grant that your faith fail not in this the most 

[6338] 


(271-275) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


trying experience in your life. The Pittsburgh friends are 
rejoicing in the opportunity to suffer with you, and the Lord 
is granting the daily strength. 

On Saturday and Sunday we had the pleasure of hearing 
our dear Brother Thorn expound the further unfolding of God's 
plan. He spoke of the restoration of the Jews to their land, 
called the attention to the significance of their Passover Supper
 coming the day following ours, and also to the significance 
of the opening date of the recent Zionist Congress in Pittsburgh
, June 22nd, the day following a most memorable day in 
the history of our Society. Note how in tihis wonderful sequence
 of events the ceremonial and governmental features of 
the movements effected have been kept separate and distinct. 
This Congress accomplished more than did tihe former twenty 
Zionist conventions put together; and we are agreeably surprised
 to learn that it occurred forty years to the month after 
the Congress of Berlin, 1878, the first ray of hope to the Jew 


since the dispersion in 73 A. D. We are also glad to note that 
this important Congress honored the home city of our beloved 
Pastor, who for the past forty years has through his writings 
been calling the attention of the world to the significance of 
that event. 

"A little while, now he has come, 

The hour draws on apace, 
The blessed hour, tihe glorious morn 
When we shall see his face. 
How light our trials then will seem, 
How short our pilgrim way, 
This life of earth a fitful dream, 
Dispelled by dawning day!" 
With further assurance of our daily prayers, and requesting
 your prayers for our guidance, we are 
Your brother and sister in the Lord, 

0. M. & B. I. M.— Pa. 


Vou XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., SEPTEMBER 15, 1918 


No. IS 


THE NEW COVENANT 

"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a New Covenant with the house of Israel 
and with the house of Judah." — Jeremiah 31:31. 


The new covenant is the Scriptural name for the new arrangement
 between God and man which will be instituted at 
the beginning of the age to follow this, and by which God purposes
 to receive the world of mankind again into favor with 
himself. The covenant relationship which Adam originally enjoyed
 with his Maker, and its resultant harmony with him, 
was based upon contingent obedience to the expressed will of 
God, and was forfeited by disobedience. 

This covenant relationship with God was renewed typically 
at Mount Sinai, with Israel. (Exodus 19:1-9; 24:3-8) Through 
Moses as mediator, God promised that if Israel would keep his 
law they should have everlasting life. The inauguration of 
that Law Covenant was effected by their mediator, six months 
after Israel left Egypt, through the sacrifices of bulls and of 
goats; the children of Israel solemnly agreeing to their part 
of the covenant. These Atonement Bay sacrifices were repeated 
year by year continually; for the blood of bulls and of goats 
could never take away sin. (Hebrews 10:1-9) Israel failed to 
gain the blessing promised in their Law Covenant. God foreknew
 that Israel would fail; but through their endeavors he 
was giving an object lesson which would in the future be a 
lasting blessing to Israel and to the world. 

The mediation of the old Law Covenant brought Israel into 
a typical covenant relationship to God. The mediation of the 
new Law Covenant will bring not only Israel, but all mankind
 who will have come into line with the kingdom arrangements
, into actual covenant relationship. Then each individual 
will be finally tested by Jehovah, as Adam was in the beginning
, to demonstrate whether he is worthy of everlasting life. 
None who fail to stand the test will be permitted to enter upon 
the eternal ages of blessing to follow. 

THE EFFECT OF THE "BETTEB SACRIFICES" 

God will introduce this new Law Covenant through the 
Mediator of the New Covenant, Christ Jesus, in whom the entire
 arrangement centers, and through whom it will be carried 
out. For a period of a thousand years this Mediator will do a 
work of mediation for mankind. And he will not only be 
Mediator, but will be Priest, Prophet. King, Judge. As 
priest, he will uplift and bless humanity and receive the^r 
offeringa* (See Tabernacle Shadows, pp. 93-100) As king he 
will rule mankind in righteousness; as prophet he will teach 
them; as judge he will decide and pass sentence, favorable 
or unfavorable. It will require the full thousand years to 
bring the people out of their condition of death and degradation, 
to restore whosoever will of all mankind to the image and I'kenes
^ of God, lost by Adam in Eden. 

The basis of mediation on the part of the better Mediator 
will be the "better sacrifices" of this Gospel age. Let us notice
 the Apostle's declaration regarding this matter. In referring
 to the type, he says, "It was therefore necessary that the 
patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these ; 
but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than 
these." (Hebrews 0:23} The words "heavens" and "heavenly 
things" as used in tins text do not refer to spiritual things; 
for nothing spiritual is secured by these better sacrifices. Only 
human blessings, human rights, are thus secured. The word 
"heavens" means "heaved up, or higher"; and in order fro understand
 its specific meaning in any text, the word must be 
defined in harmony with its context. St. Paul is here contrasting
 the types of the Jewish age with the antitypes of 
the Gospel dispensation. 


In the an ti typical arrangement the sacrifices will never be 
repeated. They are offered once for all. Through the "better 
sacrifices" the an ti typical Mediator will have the power to 
start the world with a clean slate, as it were. Then the work 
of uplift, of restitution, will begin. As the Lord declares 
through the prophet, "I will take away the stony heart out 
of your flesh and give you a heart of flesh." — Ezekiel 30:26; 
11:19. DEATH UNDER THE NEW ORDER 

Thus Adam's Bin and ^condemnation, which came to mankind
 by heredity, will no more be remembered by anybody; 
that is to say, it will be no more a torturing remembrance. 
While the lessons learned by the world through their experiences
 with sin and death will never be forgotten, nor their 
benefits lost, nevertheless these experiences will cease to distress
 mankind. The joys which will then be theirs will swallow 
up the sorrows and tears erf the past; and the minds of mankind
 will be filled with the wonderful truths, the wonderful 
blessings, the glorious new projects and prospects continually 
opening before their widening vision. To all eternity the perfected
 earth will be filled with a race of happy, perfect beings 
in the human likeness of their Lord, 

The work of taking away the stony heart, and the giving 
of a heart of flesh will be gradual, however. Many will awake 
to shame, in proportion to their wilfulness in sin in the past. 
But the disciplinary processes of the kingdom will gradually 
relieve all who are amenable to the influences of righteousness
 and to the work of reformation then instituted. By degrees
 their hard-heartedness will disappear, and they will become
 more and more tender-hearted and affectionate. No member
 of the human race will longer be held accountable for 
Adam's sin. In Ezekiel 18:2-4, we read of present conditions
: "Tile fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children
's teeth are set on edge." But during the next m^p the 
effects of the sour grape of sin will be gradually eliminated. 
Under the new order, whoever dies will die for his own sin, not 
for the sin of his fathers. 

Since all mankind are in a condition of imperfection, all 
will in that day still bo liable to commit sin. The only arrangement
 by which they can attain to everlasting life will be 
by their adoption into the family of the Mediator — the Christ 
— who will quicken their weak mortal bodies. Although no 
divine condemnation will hold over against them from their 
past, yet only such as come into proper relationship with the 
Mediator will receive the divine blessing. Under the New 
Covenant the special favors of the Lord will be only for the 
obedient. Whoever rejects the opportunities then offered will, 
at the close of the first hundred years , be destroyed from 
amongst the people. — Isaiah 65:20, Leeser. 

THE SEALING OF THE NEW COVENANT 

God cannot consistently enter into a covenant with people 
who are under his own sentence of death. Under the typical 
arrangement of the Law Covenant, the death of bulls and of 
goats was accepted as a sacrifice to God ; and the people of 
Israel, thus typically cleansed, were enaibled to enter into a 
typical relationship with him. This did not mean that the 
•blood of bulls and of goats was sufficient to take away sin ; 
but that it was a typical representation of the real sacrifices, 
under the Grace Covenant, the Covenant of Sacrifice. 

If the New Covenant were now sealed, then all the Wood 
of the covenant must have bee© previously prepared, must have 


[6324] 


KkptSmbsr 15 ( 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


{27G 


been already fully shed. If this were true, then we could have 
no chance of sharing in the death of Christ. It is evident, 
then, that the New Covenant is not yet sealed. The antitvpical
 bullock has been slain, and his blood taken into the Most 
Holy. The an ti typical goat is in process of being slain. When 
its sacrifice shall have 'been fully completed, its blood will be 
sprinkled upon the heavenly Mercy Seat by the great Hkfh 
Priest, as was the blood of the builock. In other words, the 
merit of Jesus, now in the hands of Justice, will then be free 
from embargo, and will be applied by our High Priest as an 
offset to Adam's sin. At the end of this Gospel age, now about 
closed, all the sacrificing will be over, and the great Mediator 
will be ready to do the work assigned to him for the world. 

Tlie first work of the new dispensation will be the application
 of the blood upon the antitypieal Mercy Seat, in heaven, 
to make reconciliation for the sins of "all the people" — the entire
 race of Adam. Until that shall have been done, the New 
Covenant cannot be inaugurated. This -second presentation of 
tlie blood of Jesus, of the merit of his sacrifice, will effect the 
sealing, or making valid, of the covenant. 

NEW COVENANT BENEFITS WORLD-WIDE 
For many centuries the New Covenant has been promised 
(Jeremiah 31:31-34), but it has not yet gone into effect. As 
soon as the blood of the Atonement shall have been applied for 
the sins of all the people, the New Covenant will become operative
. At the beginning of the new dispensation the world 
will begin life anew, so to speak. The condemnation resting 
upon them for six thousand years will have been canceled. Satisfaction
 to Justice will have been made for Adam and for his 
posterity, who fell in him. All the resultant blessings are to 
come through the Redeemer's hands, as Mediator. Throughout 
the Millennium, all who ever would have life must obtain it 
through this great Life-giver. (John 5:21} None can receive 
a share of the blessing provided save by the terms of the New 
Covenant and by endeavoring to live up to thera. All who 
do so will be helped and grante 1 graee sufficient through the 
Mediator, 

The sprinkling of the blood upon the heavenly Mercy Seat 
on behalf of all mankind will take place before restitution begins
, before the legal right to live can be given even to the ancient
 worthies. Nevertheless, although the sins of the past 
will be fully canceled, whoever would have God's blessing, 
God's approval must become "an Israelite indeed" — must become
 a believer in God, by believing in the'Mediator, who will 
be God's Representative, and by nlacing himself in the hands 
of the Christ for training and uplifting. This law of the New 
Covenant will be applicable to every son a-nd daughter of 
Adam. Whoever would attain life everlasting must accept 
Christ and join this earthly kingdom class; for Christ's kingdom
 will rule the world until all sin and all wilful sinners 
are destroyed. 

The entire race of mankind will receive some benefit from 
the New Covenant, irrespective of their acceptance of Christ, 
in that they will be awakened from the tomb and be brought 
to a knowledge of the truth. (1 Timothy 2:3-6) The Scriptures
 tell us that as by the offense of one man condemnation 
passed upon all, so by the obedience of one man the free gift 
comes to all, unto justification of life. (Romans 5:12, 18) 
Because of the application of Christ's sacrificial merit for all 
men, it will be just for God to awaken the world from death 
and give all an opportunity to attain justification to perfect 
life. This free gift of God through Christ does not guarantee 
eternal life to any except upon specific conditions. We would 
say, therefore, that the benefits of the New Covenant will be 
applicable to everybody in a limited sense. If God had foreseen
 that nobody would adopt this arrangement, that fact 
would no doubt have altered his plan. 

THE SIN TTNTO DEATH 
At the introduction of the new age, all the accounts against 
humanity will have been canceled by divine Justice, and mankind
 will be turned over to the Mediator; for if they were 
kept under divine Justice, they would immediately be condemned
 again, because of their inability to do perfectly. Therefore
 the Father will not take cognizance of sinners. For a 
thousand years they will be left under the merciful provisions 
of the New Covenant. Those who will obediently do their best 
will receive all the blessings of the kingdom; and those who 
will not become obedient under those conditions will go into 
the second death. 

During the Gospel dispensation, the only ones who can 
commit the sin unto death (1 John 5:16), blasphemy against 
the holy Spirit (Matthew 12:31, 32), are those who have 
t>een enlightened of the holy Spirit. St. Paul says, "As touching
 those who were once enlightened, and tasted of the heavenly
 gift, and were made partakers of the holy Spirit, and 
tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the age to 


come, and then fell away, it is impossible to renew them unto 
repentance." (Hebrews 6:4-0. Rev. Ver.) Their sin would be 
wilful; for it would be ''blasphemy against the holy Spirit.*' 
Therefore only the church are on trial now. We who have 
been begotten of the holy Spirit are on trial for life or death 
eternal. Those who now die the second death will have no opportunity
 in the future. (Proverbs 21:16) If those now begotten
 of the holy Spirit are faithful, they will be granted to 
be members of the glorified bride of Christ. Tnose of the spiritbegotten
 wiio fail to attain a place in the bride class will, if 
overcomers, eventually receive life on a lower plane. They 
will be of the great company, the virgins who serve the bride. 
(Psalm 45:13, 15) But if they fail to attain either of these 
positions, all that remains for Ihem is the second death. 

As for the world, their day of judgment, as individuals, has 
not yet fully come. They are still in condemnation through 
father Adam — not recognized as having any rights at all. Some 
of the world are excellent people; but even these have neither 
part nor lot in the salvation of the present time. The blessed 
arrangement for them is in the Millennial age, when, it they 
yield full obedience to Jehovah's Anointed, their sins and their 
iniquities will be forgotten. 

As the sins of the church are now canceled, so likewise will 
the whole world go absolutely free from the condemnation of 
Adamic sin ; and they will have all the kingdom opportunities 
and privileges, it they accept of Christ, the great Mediator. 
Nevertheless, they will suffer stripes, as a result of the deeds 
done in the present life — not as a punishment for their sins, 
which have during that time all been remitted, but because of 
the habits previously formed, the character developed; for 
the weaknesses of the fallen nature will have left wounds, 
which will require more or less rigorous treatment in order to 
their healing. With the world it will then be true, as now 
with the church, that if they shall sin against the spirit of holiness
, the holy Spirit knowingly and wilfully, the penalty 
will be a second condemnation — to the second death, destruction
. 

While our Lord Jesus said that all manner of sin would be 
forgiven except blasphemy against the holy Spirit, yet the 
Pharisees, to whom these words were addressed, could not 
commit this sin, because they had not the fulness of knowledge
.— Matthew 12:31, 32; Acts 3:17. 

FORGIVENESS OF ADAMIC SIN ABSOLUTE 
When God recognizes the satisfaction of justice and cleans 
the slate for the sinner race, this does not mean that he has 
merely transferred the account to Jesus, who will hold it 
against them. Our Lord will not hold against mankind the 
things which the Father has forgotten. On the contrary, as 
the Representative of the Father, the Lord Jesus will be glad 
to give to men the benefit of that forgiveness, merely holding 
them at a distance from the Father during the period of their 
imperfection, standing between as Mediator, to give whosoever
 will of (mankind time for restoration, development of character
, etc., and taking away the stoniness of their hearts and 
giving them hearts of flesh. 

The Lord through the prophet says, * 'Their sins and their 
iniquities will I remember no more." The Apostle Paul call.* 
attention to this statement. He points out that under the Law 
Covenant this was not done, but that the =iins remained; for 
although atonement was made afresh for Israel year by year. 
nevertheless the inferior sacrifices could not take away sin. 
{Hebrews 8:10-12; 10:1-4, 16, 17) This New Covenant in 
Christ, however, will absolutely take away sins. See Jeremiah 
31:31-34; Ezekiel 36:25-29. When mankind becomes n part 
of Israel, the promises made to Jews will apply to Gentiles 
a-lso- "PBINCES IN ALL THE EARTH'* 

The Scriptures tell us that "out of Zion shall go forth the 
law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem." { Isaiah 2:3; 
Micah 4:2) When the kingdom is set up the ancient worthies 
will be made "princes in all the earth." (Psalm 45:16) This 
arrangement will appeal first and primarily to the Jew, who 
would naturally be the first to come under the new regulations. 
We may not say that all the Jews w T ill do so, but that this will 
be true of at least a considerable number of them. In time 
others of the world will join. There are many well-meaning 
people who have not taken the vow of consecration to the 
Lord, but who would like to help rather than to hinder others
. Such will in due time attach themselves to the kingdom, 
which shall be "the desire of all nations." — Haggai 2:7. 

In the case of the ancienr"worthies, the earthly "princes ?' 
their freedom from imperfection will make them conspicuous 
amongst mankind. As the world come to know about theBe, 
they will say, "Are not these God's people?" Mankind will perceive
 that God has rewarded the ancient worthies by giving 
them an instantaneous resurrection to perfect life, and will 


[6325] 


27S) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Hrooki.vn, N. Y. 


learn that their "better resurrection" was given because of 
faithfulness in the past. 

EXPIATION OP WHJTJL SIN 

Our Lord Jesus, having laid down the ransom price for 
the sins of the whole world, has placed it in the hands of Justice
 as a deposit, to be held during this Gospel age for the 
benefit of the church class. At the end of this age he will apply
 it to the cancelation of the claims of Justice against Adam, 
which will include all sins due to the fall. Jehovah God will 
accept the price and will remit the Adamic sins. There will 
be some sins, however, which will not be covered by this great 
Sin-offering. These are wilful sins conumtted by members of 
the race. As wilful sins are not covered by the Sin-offering, 
but only Adam's sin and those sins resulting from Adamic 
weakness, God has mercifully arranged that the sufferings of 
the great company class, the "scape-goat" class, necessary to 
the destruction of their flesh, which they had covenanted to 
sacrifice, will be utilized as an expiation — not as a sin-offering 
—for these wilful sins of the world. — Leviticus 16:8, 10, 20-22. 

When the great company shall have finished their course, 
the Atonement for sin shall have been fully accomplished, 
and the account against the world upon the books of Justice 
shall have been fully squared. Divine condemnation will be entirely
 lifted from the race, the new covenant of blessing will 
then be inaugurated. Then it will be the part of the people 
to come up to the requirements of the New Covenant, by 
earnestly striving to do their best. If, however, because of 
imperfection they unwittingly violate God's Law during the 
Mediatorial reign, they will not be amenable to that law ; for 
the Mediator will stand between them and that law. 

COVENANT EELATIONSHIP WITH GOD CONDITIONAL 

The Mediator will not, as we have said, hold against any 
one the transgressions of this present life. But it will require 
long, patient effort to regain the perfection from which the 
first parents of the race fell. Some of mankind have fallen 
much further down than others, because of having inherited 
greater depravity, or because of a more perverse disposition 
and of a less effort to control their fallen nature. But under 
the gracious arrangements of the New Covenant, the great 
Mediator purposes to grant the necessary assistance, by nelping
 the people individually to understand the requirements of 
the new arrangement, by v p r <> m ptly punishing any attempt to 
do wrong, by rewarding every effort to do right, and by supply* 
ing strength, physical and mental, to meet the requirements 
of his righteous rule. 

By the close of the Mediatorial reign those who respond 
and make earnest efforts to advance, will be brought to a condition
 of human perfection and of covenant relationship with 
Jehovah, as was Adam at the beginning. Then they must be 
subjected to the same test of loyalty as was Adam, with no 
mediator between them and God's justice, How many will 
maintain that relationship, and how many will lose it and 
suffer destruction, we cannot know. That some will prove unworthy
 of life and meet this extreme penaltv of wilful sin — 
the second death — is clearly shown. See Revelation 20:7-9: 
22:14, 15. 

The ancient worthies are to be at the head of the earthly 
phase of the kingdom. They will form its nucleus, ruling 
under the glorified churoh, which will be invisible. These 
worthies cannot come forth from the tomb until divine justice 
has been satisfied for the world; for they also were members 
of the fallen race. After the Mediator has made this satisfaction
, the ancient worthies will be the first to be blessed by 
the New Covenant, and will be raised from the dead as perfect 
men, in the image of God, as Adam was originally created. In 
their resurrection they will receive complete restitution to 
human perfection; for during their previous lifetime "they 
had this testimony, that they pleased God." — Hebrews 11:5. 

Soon after the awakening of their faithful prophets of old, 
the Jews then living who still retain their faith in the New 
Covenant promises made to them (Jeremiah 31:31-34; Hebrews
 8:7-32), and who have waited for their Messiah, will 
begin to see clearly, and will join themselves to these ancient 
worthies. Then the world will gradually come to see, and will 
also come under the terms of Israel's New Law Covenant by 
becoming a part of Israel, a part of Abraham's earthly seed.— 
Romans 4:17, 18; Isaiah 49:6-12. 

Covenant relationship with God means perfection, either 
actual or reckoned. During the thousand years of Messiah's 
kingdom, mankind will be approaching actual perfection. But 
they will not enter into it as a race until the close of the 
thousand years. Then the Mediator will turn them over to 
God; and they will be privileged to enter into covenant relationship
 with him, and must stand or fall individually. As we 
read, at that time Satan shall be "loosed for a little* season"; 
and all who love unrighteousness in their hearts, whatever 


[6326] 


has been their outward course during their trial time, will be 
manifested. They will be deceived by the adversary. 'These 
shall go away into everlasting punishment I Greek, kolasis, 
cutting off or cutting short], and the righteous into life 
eternal." (Matthew 25:46) The one class passes into life; 
while the other class is cut off, restrained, from life. The reward
 of the righteous will be everlasting life; the reward of 
the wicked — "the devil and his angels," his messengers, all who 
are of his spirit — -will be everlasting death — destruction. Those 
who are of the Millennial "sheep" class, who go to the King's 
right hand of favor, will, after the final testing at the hands of 
God, enter upon the ages of glory beyond, the blessings of 
which are not revealed in the Scriptures. 

THE OHXTRCH NOT TJNDEB NEW COVENANT 

The church of Christ is not under the New Covenant. 
Therefore it is not proper to speak of the church as being 
blessed by this covenant, although the church receives a great 
blessing and privilege in respect to it. If there were to be no 
New Covenant, there would then be no need of a Mediator, and 
no need of the "better sacrifices" whereby it is to be instituted. 

St. Paul's statement that God has made the churoh "able 
ministers of the New Covenant" indicates that the Lord's people
 have something to do with its preparation. (2 Corinthians 
3:6) Unless there were the "better sacrifices," there would be 
no basis for that New Covenant. The sufferings which the 
church undergo at this present time are a blessed privilege 
to us ; for we are ministers of that New Covenant in the sense 
that we are serving it by training for future service, for service
»after it shall have been inaugurated. 

While a great building is in process of erection, the men 
working upon its construction might be said to be greatly 
benefited bv that building. That would not mean that they 
would be benefited ,bv the use of it in the future, but that 
they were being benefited during its construction. So now the 
church receives certain rioh blessings and privileges in connection
 with the New Covenant. Later, the entire world will be 
blest by it, in a different way. 

During this Gospel age, God is dealing merely with the 
church, not with the world. There is, however, some resemblance
 between the divine blessings now coming upon the 
church and those coming upon the world by and by. Then, 
the Lord will rewrite his law in the hearts of mankind, as it 
was originally written in Adam's heart; and men will have 
new hearts. At the end of the thousand years all mankind 
will be fleshly images of God, and ready for their final testing
; for those who have refused to make progress to perfection
 will have been destroyed during the Messianic reign. But 
the church have new hearts now, right views of things, right 
sentiments. In the case of the church, however, there is not 
a taking away of the stoniness of heart and a making of it a 
heart of flesh; but there is an entirely new nature. This new 
nature of course has something to do with the flesh; for the 
flesh is now the servant of the new creature. The law of God 
is recognized in the flesh, under the compulsion of the new 
creature. GIFT OF THE CHRIST TO THE WORLD 

The New Covenant, with all that goes with it, is the blessing
 w T hich the Christ gives to mankind. It is God's Covenant; 
and he has arranged that it shall go to the world through this 
Christ class, Head and body. If, then, the church are to give 
these blessings, they must first have had them. No man can 
give away what he does not first possess. This thought that 
the New Covenant is a testament, or gift, of Christ to the 
world is made very prominent in the Scriptures. It is a gift 
in which the church shares; for every member has relinquished 
his restitution rights with Christ. "If we suffer with him, 
we shall also reign with him; if we be dead with him, we shall 
live with him," and all things are ours because we are his. — 2 
Timothy 2:11, 12. 

These glorious things are clearly set forth in various types 
in the Old Testament, as well as plainly stated in the New 
Testament. For instance, St. Paul explains that Isaac, the heir 
of Abraham, was a type of the Christ, Head and body. Isaac 
did not receive his inheritance by a new covenant, but by the 
original covenant with Abraham, as does the church. — 
Galatians 3:8, 16, 29; 4:22-28. 

In Micah 4:1-4, we read that "in the last days, the mountain
 Tkingdom] of the house of the Lord shall be established 
in the top of the mountains [kingdoms of earth], and many 
people shall flow unto it. And many nations shall come and 
say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, 
and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of 
his ways, and we will walk in his paths." The succeeding 
verses of the chapter depict the influence that will be exerted. 
The blessings and prosperity will then be with those who will 
be in harmony with God. 

Now it is different. "All that will live godly in Christ 


SsrntMBSR 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(279-280) 


Jesus shall suffer persecution." (2 Timothy 3:12) They 
"shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake." 
(Matthew 5:11) These things indicate that all who are faithful
 to God during the present age will have more hardship 
than do those who are unfaithful. Many of the worldly, even 
the wicked of the world, have great prosperity in the present 
time. The world think that Christians, true followers of 
Jesus, are making their lives miserable by the course which 
they pursue. But the world is greatly mistaken in this matter
. On the contrary, we are enjoying ourselves greatly; we 
are having a good time ! We have much advantage every way, 
in spite of our afflictions; for we know that in a very little 
while our trials and afflictions will all be over, that the glorious
 Kingdom of Messiah in which, if faithful, we are to share, 
is about to be set up in the earth. 

In the future dispensation, God tells us, the tables will be 
turned. None of the wicked will prosper. Then whoever is 
unrighteous shall suffer, and whoever does righteously shall 
receive a blessing. (Psalm 37:1, 2, 7-17, 22) Very often now 
the wicked prosper, and the poor and needy and the good of 
earth are oppressed. When the times of restitution come to 
the world, all will be changed. The blessing will be of God; 
and the only way to gain that blessing will be by coming 
into harmony with the new order of things in the kingdom of 
Messiah. 


PERSECUTION AN AID TO CHRISTIAN CHARACTER CRYSTALLIZATION 


"All that will live godly in Christ Jesus 

Persecution is a word that primarily means the infliction 
of an injury as a punishment for adherence to some opinion 
or course of conduct which cannot properly be regarded as 
criminal; such as a religious creed or mode of worship. Not 
all who have been persecuted have been hanged or crucified or 
burned at the stake, however. Some have been persecuted by 
being put into prison; others have been persecuted by bitter 
words, which the Scriptures liken to arrows shot out by the 
wicked. (Psalm 64:2-4) Although with the advance of 
civilization matters have changed considerably, nevertheless 
the statement of our text is still true. Adventists, Baptists, 
Methodists, Presbyterians and others have in turn been persecuted
 for their religious beliefs. These persecutions have taken 
various forms; sometimes they were public whippings, etc. 

We are now living in a day when gross, vile persecution is 
not so popular as in olden times. Today public sentiment is 
too high for any one to attempt such persecutions as Nero 
practised; such as throwing to the lions or other wild beasts 
those who incurred his ill-will. Nor will it permit the putting 
to death of those who differ from popular creeds as to the interpretation
 of the Scriptures, or who hold different opinions 
along other lines of thought or practise. But nevertheless 
persecution continues to be practised in various more refined 
forms. There is a kind of social boycott which is popular. People
 will separate from their company those who think differently
 from themselves along religious lines, and will have 
nothing to do with all such. They will cast out the names of 
such as being evil, and will speak lightly of even their best 
endeavors to live as consistent Christians. 

In our text the Apostle declares that some form of persecution
 will attach to any one who would live a godly life. He 
explains that the infliction of injury might come directly upon 
an individual, or he might suffer indirectly by being associated 
with those who are persecuted. (Hebrews 10:32-34} Here he 
shows that those who become companions of those who Are 
persecuted for righteousness* sake are themselves also suffering
 persecution. Other Scriptures indicate the same thought. 
"Whether one menuber [of the body of Christ] suffer, all the 
members suffer with it." (1 Corinthians 12:26) Whatever 
injury is done to one will affect all who are of the same class, 
not only in the way of arousing their sympathies and causing 
them mental pain, but also in their being associated with the 
class thus treated and sharing in the contumely to which they 
are subject. 

Having seen what persecution includes, and knowing that 
all who would 'be acceptable to God must endure it in some 
measure, we remember that St. John said, "Marvel not, my 
brethren, if the world hate you," and that the Master assured 
his disciples of what they would have to share as his disciples, 
saying, "Ye shall be hated of all men for my sake." (1 John 
3:13; Mathew 10:22) In a general way everybody belonging 
to the world is in opposition to the Lord's people — everybody 
who might be included in the world, everybody who might be 
worth anything, everybody whose opinion is valued by the 
world, everbody who is honorable in the eyes of the world. 
WHAT COKST1TUTES GODXiY IJVIHO 

To live godly means to live after the manner which God 
would approve, to live in opposition to sin and in harmony 
with righteousness, endeavoring to do that which is right, that 
which is in accord with the divine law — practising the Golden 
Rule, doing unto our neighbor as we would wish done unto 
ourselves. 

In the world there are two companies; one under the banner
 of Satan, and the other under the banner of God. The first 
class is of darkness, of sin, over whom the prince of darkness 
has an influence. The other class serve the right. Whoever 
walks in the light of the Word of God will find that the darkness
 opposes the light. Nevertheless, we who are under the 
Lord's banner are to walk in the light. Our Lord exhorted 


shall suffer 'persecution" — 2 Timothy 3:12. 

us to let our light so shine before men that they may see our 
good works and glorify our Father in heaven. In other words, 
we are to let the world see what godly living means. 

In some respects the world has attained to a very good 
standard. The laws of the civilized world have been just. We 
are glad that we are living in a time when the laws are so 
just; we are glad to have these special favors that belong, 
we believe, to our day more than to any previous day. At the 
same time there is on the part of many an endeavor to avoid 
the spirit of the divine law. Because of the selfishness which 
prevails in the world, there is a disposition to take advantage 
of a neighbor, to cheat him, to take from him more than is 
right, to give him less than is just. In a general way, therefore
, whoever stands for what is right will find himself in 
conflict with the majority of people. If he adheres closely 
to principle the greater number will be against him, will 
esteem him to be a mean man, hard to get along with, etc. 
Those who are of the darkness hate those who are of the light. 
There is a feeling of condemnation which the world experiences 
when in the presence of the godly. They are never comfortable 
when such persons are present. This is not because the godly 
ever do to them wrong, but because they recognize the fact 
that the godly maintain a higher standard of living than do 
they. 

LIVING GODLY Iff OHEIST JESUS 

To live godly in Christ Jesus means much more than merely 
the keeping of the Ten Commandments. Not to blaspheme, 
not to do harm to another, etc., is to be on the right side. But 
to live godly in Christ Jesus is something far beyond this. 
The Leader, the Head, of the church laid down his life in selfsacrifice
 ; and those who are seeking to follow his example are 
also sacrificing their earthly interests, they are ambassadors 
for God, and therefore will proclaim his kingdom which is soon 
to be established — set up — in the earth. The message of the 
kingdom will necessarily be out of harmony with all others. 

Those who proclaim God's message of the coming kingdom 
will be opposed by those who claim that the kingdom is already 
here. They will also be opposed by those who say, "Why do 
you not get out and do slum work? The present Bocial order 
is very well established. We are trying to make the people 
see that God's kingdom is already in power. We are trying to 
lift the churches to a higher level and to do those things which 
will make a greater outward show, and which will deeply impress
 the people. But if you continue to talk about higher 
conditions, etc., you will put us in a bad light before the world, 
and will gain nothing by so doing; for they will merely think 
that you are unbalanced." 

So those who would live godly in Christ Jesus have a narrow
 path to travel, a difficult way. This is because they are 
going contrary to nominalism, contrary to all the things of 
the world, contrary to the devil. Those who faithfully pursue 
this course bring tribulation upon themselves — the persecution 
to which our text refers. But all who are loyal to God and 
to the truth must thus suffer. They must expect persecution; 
for doubtless they will receive it until the last member of the 
church shall have finished his course in death. Whoever submits
 patiently to this opposition must not only sacrifice his 
natural preferences for the friendship of the world and for 
the pleasures of the present life, but he must learn to endure 
hardness in whatever shape it may come, while he is endeavoring
 to do the Lord's will and his work of advancing the interests
 of his kingdom. 

In order to be really in the service of the Lord we must 
study carefully and continually his plan of the ages, in order 
to imbibe its spirit of loving self-sacrifice and to possess an 
enthusiastic zeal for its accomplishment. Moreover, we must 
be active to the extent of our ability, in its service, at whatever 
cost that activity may require. This course will bring persecution
 upon us, as the Apostle has foretold in our text. Our 


[6327] 


(280-281) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Lord Jesus Christ suffered on this account; and as the Scriptures
 explain, his people are called upon to suffer with him, m 
order that after a while they shall reign with him in glory. 
WHY PERSECUTION IS PERMITTED 

The word suffer as used in our text has the significance 
of experience. That is, those who will live godly in Christ 
Jesus shall experience persecution as a part of their lot. This 
persecution may be of one kind or of another kind, according 
to circumstances. Sometimes it will result in mental suffering
; at other times it will produce physical pain. Sometimes 
it will cause very severe suffering, protracted anguish; at other 
times the anguish will be less agonizing. But the persecution 
will be there in either case. Those who have come into Christ 
are enabled to live above the conditions, however. Those who 
have become members of the .body of Christ have become such 
by full consecration to God and by the begetting of his holy 
(Spirit. On this account they belong to this special class that 
"will live godly in Christ Jesus.' p For them to live godly 
meana to live according to the standard which God has set for 
his people in his Word. 

There are others than Christians who may be said to live a 
pious life. Even among the heathen there are people who devote
 their lives to some lines which they consider to be pious ; 
and they are morally good people. Likewise in civilized lands 
there are people who live moral, upright lives, and to that 
extent godly lives — lives of which God would approve. Some 
Of the human race are less fallen than are others; and this 
clas3 find it natural bo live better lives than would those who 
are more injured by the Adamic fall. Therefore aanongst the 
worldly there are worthy men and women who are highly 
esteemed. For instance, Stephen Girard, of Philadelphia, is 
reputed to have been a very just man and to have given much 
alms to the poor. He provided Girard College, an institution 
for the support and education of poor fatherless white boys, 
where they were admitted between the ages of six to ten years, 
and received an education and learned a trade, that they might 
support themselves honestly. 

History affords many examples of upright men and women 
who have done much 'for 4he betterment of humanity. All 
these were godly in that they avoided the practise of sin and 
that they had an appreciation for truth, honesty and the character
 of God. But we do not hear that these people were persecuted
 for their morality. The world can appreciate that 
condition of things. But those who come into the body of 
Christ are permitted of the Lord to have a certain amount of 
persecution in order for their development. The apostles were 
noble characters; yet they suffered persecution, even as did 
our Lord himself. Evidently, therefore, it is the will of God 
that those in Christ should thus suffer, in order that their 
characters may he developed and that they may be prepared 
for the great work of the future, when all who endure faithfully
 shall reign with Christ Jesus their Lord. 

THE BLESSING FOB THOSE WHO OVEBOOME 

We would naturally expect that those who came into relationship
 with God under the special covenant arrangement of 
this Gospel age would be immune from suffering and persecution
 — that all such would be well thought of by the world. 


But the Scriptures inform ua that this would be a wrong 
expectation. For thousands of years the world has held in 
eateem a religious class of worldly people and has not persecuted
 them. Even back in the days of the Babylonian Empire
 the priestly class were regarded as very sacred. In our 
own day there are priests and preachers in the nominal church 
who are highly esteemed amongst men and who are not persecuted
. But everywhere the Scriptures call our attention 
to the fact that those who belong to the royal priesthood 
will suffer persecution if they live godly, and that whoever 
amongst this class does not thus suffer has evidence that he 
is not living godly. 

The conditions imposed upon the church are designed by 
the Lord to be crucial tests of loyalty to him and to the 
principles of righteousness. Trials, difficulties and persecutions
 are useful in demonstrating whether our covenant of consecration
 is really from the heart. Those who have made 
merely a lip covenant will in due time be sifted out, manifested
, separated from those who have covenanted from the 
heart to be dead with Christ. These the Lord purposes to 
make joint-heirs in the kingdom with his well-beloved Son. 
our Lord Jesus. It is for this reason that the call of the 
church takes place during this present age, while evil is still 
permitted to reign in the world, and while the majority of 
mankind are under the blinding influences of the adversary, 
who is not yet bound. 

As our Lord Jesus explained, the darkness of sin and error 
is in direct antagonism to the light of truth; and consequently
, when his people let their light shine, the effect upon 
the darkened world is that opposition is aroused, for the light. 
makes manifest the evils of darkness which otherwise would 
not appear, and thus disturbs those who are in sympathy 
with darkness. As a consequence, this latter class hate the 
light, and either publicly or privately oppose the children of 
the light, the light-bearers. Even those who have gotten out 
of the extreme darkness of moral pollution into the twilight 
of moral reformation cannot endure the clear, searching light 
of the true Gospel, but such prefer a measure of darkness. — 
John 3:19-21; 2 Corinthians 4:4-6. 

We can sympathize with those who see nothing of the light 
of the glorious character of' our God. Wie can also sympathize 
with those who see a little and who strive toward moral and 
other reforms, striving in various ways for sectarian prosperity
 Tather than for the upbuilding of the saints, "the 
church of the living God," those whose names are written 
in heaven. We should have patience with all such who give 
evidence that they are laboring in harmony with their convictions
; for whoever is engaged in good work of any kind 
will surely obtain a blessing as a result. But the true church 
is laboring, not merely for A blessing, but for the blessing — 
"the prize of our high calling of God in Christ Jesus." 
(Philippians 3:14) Let all, then, who see the prize, and who 
see the light of the glory of God as it shines in the face of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, be faithful to the terms, conditions, 
of their covenant of sacrifice; for all who are faithful unto 
death have the glorious promise that they shall receive the 
crown of life — immortality. — Revelation 2:10. 


THE CHRIST— "THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF JEHOVAH* 


"Thou ftkalt he called hy a new name; 


. . thou shalt also be a crown of a fort/ in the hand of the LORD, <\nd a royal diadem 
in the hand of thy God: 7 — Isaiah 62^2, 3, 


The context seems to refer this statement to Jerusalem. 
But we realize that the old Jerusalem was merely a type of 
rhe New Jerusalem; the old Zion was a type of the new Zion. 
The New Jerusalem, the new Zion, will be the church in glory. 
This church is pictured in Revelation as "the New Jerusalem 
coming down from Cod out of heaven, prepared as a bride 
adorned for her husband" — gloriously arrayed. This is one 
picture of the church, representing her queenly position. 
(Psalm 45:0) The New Jerusalem is spoken of as "the bride, 
the Lamb's wife." (Revelation 21:2, 9-11 ^ The power and 
the glory of <the Lamb are to be manifested in the Messianic 
kingdom. 

The Scriptures indicate that the name Jerusalem is to take 
on a new meaning; that the type is to give place to the antitype
. This does not mean that the literal Jerusalem will no 
longer exist; for we understand that it is to be greater in the 
future than it ever was in the past, that it is indeed to be the 
world's capital when the new age is inaugurated. But there 
is to })e a far greater and grander Jerusalem — the heavenly 
Jerusalem, the New Jerusalem. The New Jerusalem is to be 
the City of Peace, which signifies the blessed or peaceful government
. As Jesus is spoken of as the Prince of Peace, as he 
is the antitypical King of Salem. King of ppace (Hebrews 7:2) . 
his kingdom is very properly spoken of as the kingdom of peace. 


"This is the name whereby he [Christ] shall be called: The 
Lord our righteousness." The same statement is made in respect
 to the church: "The Lord our righteousness." (Jeremiah
 23:5, 6; 33:15, 16} But this expression, "The Lord our 
righteousness/' does not give us the proper thought of the original
, which would be better translated, "Our righteousness of 
Jehovah. J ' See Scbipttjbe Studies, Vol. 5, p. 42. The Christ. 
Head and body, will be called the Righteousness of God, the 
One from whom the world will receive their righteousness, their 
deliverance from sin and death, the one whom God will approve 
as being the standard of righteousness. 

THE CHURCH'S FUTURE GLORY 

We must not forget that Christ Jeflus is the Head of the 
churchy the most important member in the body, just as the 
head is the most important member in the human body. The 
church beyond the vail will be a special manifestation of the 
glory of God — something which the angels will behold and 
will see is especially approved of God ; something for mankind
 to take note of, as the ones whom God delights to honor. 
God will make known his church to the world. "Kvery knee 
shall bow and every tongue confess" to this standard of righteousness
 which Jehovah will set up. 

"Thou shalt also he a crown of glory in the hand of Jehovah
, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God*' — not in the 


[6328] 


September 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(282-28S1 


hand of our Lord Jeans, but in the hand of the Father. 
(Isaiah 62:3) Jesus and the church together, in this picture
, will be the "crown of glory." The word crown signifies 
the top, whether it be the crown of a building or of the bead 
or whatever. Upon their crowns the kings of the earth have 
-pent much wealth. All the great monarchs of Europe have 
the finest of diamonds in their crowns. On state occasions 
these jewels are brought forth, as representing the wealth of 
the sovereign who wears the crown. 

We are not to think, however, that Jehovah is to bring 
forth the crown in order to wear it himself, as though he 
would do himself honor in this way. The crown, the diadem, 
is said to be in the hand of Jehovah. Nothing is to be a crown 
to Jehovah. He himself is the abundance of that which filleth 
fill things. Nothing could add to his glory of person or to his 
riches. He is the great One, the almighty One. from whom 
proceeds all good — all perfection, all blessing. Instead of 
wearing* this diadem upon his head, he holds it in his hand, 
exhibiting it. In this way the glory and beauty of it are displayed
. It is not to bo hidden away, but is to be brought forth 
to the world, and held up to their view. 

GLOBY TO LAST THKOTJGHOUT ALL AGES 

To hold a crown in one's hand would be to show it, to let 
the Tight shine upon it — to move it about so that its beauty, 


its colors and its lustre will be discerned by all. The hand 
represents power. This diadem in God's hand will be exhibited 
throughout all eternity, and will be shown to all the different 
worlds of the great Universe. These countless millions of 
worlds are to be inhabited. Grid's Word declares of the earth: 
"He created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited." 
(Isaiah 45:18) Here the thought is implied that just as surely 
as worlds are created they are created to be inhabited. God 
would not create a world or a sun unless he had use for it; 
for he never does anything in vain. 

As the Father has used the Son always, in all of his 
mighty works, so he still purposes to all eternity to use the 
Son, Ee has exalted Jesus to the very highest plane, the place 
next to himself. He has also been gathering out through this 
Gospel age a church, to be associated with Christ in all his 
great and honored work. He is choosing those who have Jesus' 
spirit, who have been glad to lay down their lives with him, 
in devotion to righteousness, to truth. God is pleased with 
these. This will be the new name whereby she, the glorified 
church, shall be known hereafter — "The Righteousness of Jehovah
" — the illustration of what he most highly approves. The 
name of the bridegroom is given to the bride. And all who 
get Christ's new name, we may be sure, will be called upon to 
demonstrate that they are overcomere. They must all meet the 
approval of the Lord our God. 


ABRAHAM GIVING ISAAC TO GOD 

This article was a reprint of that published in issue of February 1. 1913, under title "Abraham's Faith Tested." which please 

seej 


ISAAC AND REBECCA 

[The first four paragraphs of this article were reprinted from the article entitled, "Isaac's Peaceful Career," published in 
issue of March 1, 1907. The remainder was a reprint of the article entitled, "A Peculiar Marriage," published in issue of 
February 15, 1913. Please see the articles named,] 

A little while! Tis ever drawing nearer — A little while, blessed expectation! 

The brighter dawning of that glorious day. For strength to run with patience. Lord, we cry. 

TCI est Savior, make our spirits' vision clearer, Our hearts up-leap in fond anticipation ; 

And guide. O guide us in the shining way! Our union with the Bridegroom draweth nigh. 


GOD'S GUIDANCE OF THE 

mi My times ore in thy 

In the above words the Psalmist no doubt spoke in a primary
 sense, for himself. He had consecrated his life to Godnot
 in the same way as does the Christian, but nevertheless as 
fully as was possible for any one in his time. All of bis interests
 he placed in the bands of the lord; and in the many 
and varied experiences of his eventful life his confidence in Jehovah
 never failed. David had strong faith, and the many 
beautiful and touching expressions of his faith have through ail 
the centuries since his day been an inspiration and blessing to 
the saints of Cod. In times of his greatest trials and afflictions 
— and he had many — his tnut in the "Lord remained steadfast 
and firm. He was one of God's heroes, and his name appears 
on the roll of honor read to us by the Apostle Paul in Hebrews 
11. 

But we may assume that in a special way King David spoke 
prophetically for the Christ, Head and body: for "holy men 
of old spake as they were moved by the holy Spirit": and we 
know that their utterances were especially "for our *»d monition
, upnn whom the ends of the ages are come," and more 
or less for the saints throughout the Gospel aire. The Psilm 
from which our text is taken is a very precious one. and seems 
to be peculiarly applicable to the spirit-begotten children of the 
Lord. Verse 5, we remember, gives the dying words of our 
dear Redeemer. The saints of this age are a particularly consecrated
 class, with clear knowledge of the purpose of their consecration
, this being the time during which Christ and the 
church have been called out to prepare for a glorious work yet 
to be inaugurated by Jehovah. 

The word "times" has here the sense of years. The Scriptures
 "speak of the times of restitution- the times of the Gentiles
, and the seven times of Israel's chastisement under the 
Gentile kingdoms. The term ,( my times'* would mean all my 
years, including the thought of all my interests, the use of all 
my talents, my opportunities for service, during these yearsall
 that might be mine to use for the Lord during the period 
of my consecrated life. As children of the heavenly King 
we have placed in his hands our every interest, in trust, in 
faith, in obedience, in consecration. 

THE SCOPE OF OUR TEXT 

Invited of Jehovah to become members of his family, we 
have gladly accepted his invitation, counting all the things of 
this life as loss and dross that we might gain the glorious 

[63 


AFFAIRS OF HIS SAINTS 

hand."— Psalm 31:15. 
prize held out to us by our God. He has made us new creatures
 in Christ Jesus — beings of an entirely new order. He has 
called us with his Son to a plane of life, the capacities, the 
powers and the glories of which far outrank those of all others 
of God's creation. We may thus have the assurance that since 
we have accepted his marvelous offer, and have placed ourselves 
fully in his hands, he will give the most careful attention to 
our training, development and preparation for the high exaltation
 to which he has called us in Christ. This he has pledged 
himself to do. He assures us that "all things are ours," because
 we nrc his, in this peculiar and pre-eminent sense. 

So "our times are in his hands," — our Father's hands— and 
he will overrule all the affairs of our life for our good and 
our unbuilding, so as to prepare us for the glorious conditions 
to which he has invited us. This does not mean, however, that 
our times are so entirely out of our own hands as to be beyond 
our control. We are made very largely controllers of our own 
destiny. The Lord neither compels nor coerces our will. He 
leaves it to us to will and to do according to his good pleasure, 
although he works in us to that end, after we have become 
his. Our times are in his hands to the extent that we are 
faith hi 1 to our covenant, to the extent that our trust is in 
him. 

If at any time, however, we allow self-will to actuate us, 
and are not entirely obedient and in cheerful harmony with his 
will, if we ever desire our own will or way and yield in the 
slightest degree to a spirit of rebellion, to that extent we are 
taking ourselves out of his hands; and the result will be our 
spiritual loss and the hiding from us to the same extent the 
smile of the Father's face. And we shall be permitted to do 
this if we choose, though his loving hand will follow us and 
administer necessary stripes to bring us back, that we stray 
not out of the fold. The true child of God should exercise 
great care and watchfulness that he may keep in closest touch 
with the Lord, that no earth-born cloud shall separate him 
from the Father's favor to any extent; for any wandering 
from God endangers the life of the new creature, and every 
yielding to the impulses of the old nature makes easier a 
further yielding. 

The having of our times in God's hands, under his protection
, began with us when we made our full surrender to him in 
consecration. There wc gave him our all, there we submitted 

29] 


(2S5-286) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


ourselves and became dead to the will of the flesh and alive 
to the will of God. There the new life in Christ 'began. 

THE CHILDREN Or THE SAINTS 

While, as we have said, the time of our consecration was 
particularly the time when we came into the Lord's hands, 
there is a sense in which some of us were in the Lord's hands 
before we made a personal consecration to him. Some had 
consecrated parents; and because of this our times, our interests
, while we were children, were in God's hands, in his 
care and keeping, under his protection and guidance, in a sense 
that the interests of the children of unbelievers would not 
be. The Apostle Paul tells us that iff either one of the child's 
parents is consecrated, that child is under the special care of 
the Father. 

This care of the child on account of the parent would seem 
to last only so long as the child is a minor. If, when he comes 
to years of discretion of mind, he should fail to make a personal
 consecration of himself to the Lord, he would no longer 
be counted as justified, and hence would no longer he under 
this special guidance and care. As he failed to place himself 
in the hands of God, failed to choose God for his guide, he 
would not wish the Lord to be his caretaker and instructor. 


GOD'S "HAND* 

The word "hand" 
The hand is one of the most skilful and beautiful members of 


A TEEM OF DEEP SIGNIFICANCE 

has here a very beautiful significance. 


our body. Our hands can he used in an almost infinite variety 
of ways. With our fingers we can handle, touch most deftly, 
most delicately, most artistically.- The hand is related to all 
the services we render. So when the Scriptures apeak of 
God's hand, the expression is very full of meaning. Jehova.li 
is represented as "holding the seas in the hollow of his hand." 
"The heavens are the work of his hands." These expressions 
represent the great skill, power and majesty of the Almighty 
God. He tells us, his children, "I have graven thee upon the 
palms of my hands." — Isaiah 49:16. 

So the assurance of the Word that all our times, our interests
, all that concerns us, are in our Father's hand — that his 
power, his skill, is continually exercised on our behalf — is full 
of comfort and of deep significance to the saint of God, and 
shows how fully he controls every circumstance, every experience
, for our welfare as new creatures, warding off all that 
would be harmful or injurious, overruling so as to bring us 
all the needed experiences and blessings. How blessed the assurance
 that no detail of our lives can fail to aid in the outworking
 of the glorious purposes of our God for us, if we are 
trustful and obedient children, and if his will is ever our will! 
A3 consecrated children of God, let us ever look for his leading 
in all the affairs of life. Let us never undertake anything, 
whether temporal or spiritual, without first seeking to discern 
the divine will in the matter. Thus we shall increase our 
confidence in his goodness and faithfulness. 


THE HOST OF FAITHFUL WARRIORS 


"Ten thousand times ten thousand 

In sparkling raiment bright, 
The army of the ransom'd saints 

Throngs up the steps of light: 
Tis finished! all is finished, 

Their fight with death and sin: 
Fling open wide the golden gates, 

And let the victors in. 

"What rush of hallelujahs 

Fills all the earth and sky! 
What ringing of a thousand harps 

Bespeaks the triumphs nigh! 
day for which creation 

And all her plans were laid ; 
joy for all its former woes, 

A thousand-fold repaid! 


"Oh, then what raptur'd greetings 

On Canaan's happy shore; 
What knitting severed friendships up 

Where partings are no more! 
Then eyes with joy shall sparkle 

That brrmm'd with tears of late; 
No orphans there, nor fatherless, 

Nor widows desolate. 

"Bring near thy great salvation, 

Thou Lamb for sinners slain; 
Fill up the roll of thine elect. 

Then take thy power, and reign: 
Appear, Desire of Nations, 

Thy people long for home : 
Lo, in the heav'ns thy promised sign! 

Thou, Savior, Prince, art come!" 


LETTERS FROM BRETHREN 


DESIEE TO UPHOLD QUE HANDS 
Dear Brethren: — 

The church at Lynn voted to extend to the dear Bethel 
friends, through those brethren whom the Lord has placed in 
control of the affairs of the Society, their sympathy and love. 
We wish to assure you of our loyalty to the Lord and the Society
. We desire to uphold your hands. May the Lord comfort
 and bless you as you seek to carry on the work which remains
 this side of the vail, and may he give us all an abundant
 entrance into his heavenly kingdom! 

With much Christian love, The Lynn Ecclesia. — Mass. 
LOVING WOEDS FROM AN ASSEMBLY OP GOD'S PEOPLE 
Dear Brethren: — • 

On July 4 the Louisville church and surrounding classes 
met for a one day convention at JofFcrsontown. We had a 
glorious day, thinking and talking about what the heavenly 
Father has in store for them that love him supremely. By 
unanimous vote I was requested to convey to you our love and 
to assure you that our prayers never cease to ascend on your 
behalf. You will be glad to know that we are continuing to 
do with our might whatever our hands finds to do. Perfect 
harmony prevails among the brethren, and our meetings are 
going on as usual. 

In conclusion, dear Brethren, remember that thousands of 
prayers ascend daily on your behalf, and that all power in 
heaven and on earth is in the hands of our Father, and that 
nothing can happen to his children without hia permission. 
Oh, what a consolation this is! Courage for a little while 
longer: for we are nearing home. 

Faithfully vour brethren in the Lord, 

Per W. H. D. f Sec'v. 
NEARING THE END OF THE WAT 
Dear Brethren in Christ: 

Grace l>e to you, and peace, from God our Father and from 
the Lord Jesus Christ. In the special trials and tribulations 
through which you are passing we wish to assure you of the 
continued prayers of the St. Louis Ecclesia on your behalf. We 


rejoice also on account of the inspiring example of love and 
patience you have set for all of the Lord's people. 

Seeing now with our natural eyes so many of the things 
which we have long discerned by the eyes of faith, betokening
 the final features of the work on this side of the vail, we 
cannot fully express our gratitude to our dear heavenly 
Father for all his goodness to us. May he continue to keep 
you, dear Brethren, and to guide you along the remainder 
of the way. We wish that we might be nearer to you, so 
that we could minister to your physical needs somewhat, if 
'possible. We ask an interest in your prayers, that we too 
may remain faithful unto the end. 

The St. Louis Ecclesia, bv unanimous vote. 
A LETTER TO THE BETHEL FAMILY 
Dearly Beloved in Chbist: — 

I take great pleasure in writing these few lines to you, 
to assure you, dear Brethren, that I am rejoicing in the Lord, 
in tlie truth and in all the experiences that I am having at 
this time. They are all great blessings to me. I know that 
you have been praying for me; and the Lord has answered 
your prayers on my behalf. I thank you all for your loving 
interest in me. What a blessed thought it is to know that 
our dear heavenly Father is taking care of us. He comforts 
us through his \Vord and by his dear people. Blessed be 
his holy name. 

I cannot find words to express my gratitude to my dear 
heavenly Father for all his rich blessings toward me. It w T as 
about September, 1905, that the dear Lord sent a colporteur 
(Sister Mary L. Cobb) to Riverside, Conn., with Volume 1, 
Scripture Studies, in Italian. Dh, what a blessing that was! 
For many years I had been a member of the nominal church 
(Baptist) ; but like all the rest I" did not know anything 
about the wonderful plan of salvation of our dear heavenly 
Father for the world of mankind. But when my blind eyes 
were opened, then I saw the glorious truth of the goodness 
of God as it is presented by our beloved Brother Russell in the 
Scripture Studies ; and of course I wanted to tell it to others, 


[6330J 


^EPrSMBKR 15, 1913 


THE WATCH TOWER 


U\S6^8D 


80 that they might also be blest. And so for more than 
twelve years I have been privileged to proclaim the glorious 
message of salvation to my poor countrymen (the Italians) ; 
and by the Lord's grace a good many hearts have been made 
glad, and are now rejoicing in the Lord in the truth and in the 
trials also. 

And now, my dear Brethren, the Lord has permitted my 
liberty to be restrained for a while, or maybe altogether on 
this side of the vail. I an: rejoicing, however, for the glorious 
prospect of the blessed work in our future estate, in the 
kingdom of our glorious Lord, for the restitution of the poor 
world of mankind who for more than six thousand years have 
been under the taskmaster Satan, and under his faithful coworkers
, the clergy, who have made the world as a wilderness. 
— Isaiah 14:16, 17. 

My association with you as a meiwber of the Bethel for 
many" years has been a very great blessing to me, for which 
1 am truly thankful to the dear Lord. In a few day-s 1 e.\ 
pect to be taken to my new abiding place, the Federal Prison 
at Atlanta, for ten years. May the dear Lord's blessings be 
with you all, as you endeavor to serve him and his people in 
this trying time, ''Let not your heart be troubled," dearly 
beloved. The Lord is our helper, and he will never forsake 
us. Remember me in your prayers, as 1 also remember you 
all. 

With best wishes and love to you 1 remain 

Your brother in Christ. Giovanni De Cecca. 

AN INTERESTING VISIT 
Dear Bethel Family: — 

Love and greetings in the name of Him who does indeed 
make rich all who put their trust in Him! We have learned 
to put our trust in Him as never before, and never has he 
failed us. Every day he grows nearer and dearer to me! 

Strenuous indeed has been each day since we came here ; 
and not until now has there been time for messages, although 
our thoughts have been with you daily, our prayers also. I 
confess that you have been missed very keenly. I did not 
realize how closely our hearts had twined about dear Bethel 
and the loving family of God centered there. 

We had a quiet, uneventful trip South, being very, very 
tired. On the way down I slept much of the time. Sister 

R rested, but could not sleep during the daytime. At 

the station we were met by two of the brethren with their 
autos, and were taken to the home of the brother where we 
had engaged rooms. Here we were greeted by his family, and 
then ate an appetizing breakfast prepared for us in true Southern
 style. What a pleasant place the Lord had in readiness 
for us) We raised our hearts in thanksgiving. Best of all, 
we are with the Lord's own people, 

In the afternoon we went out to see the brethren. The 
rules for visiting the Federal Prison are very strict, and necessarily
 so. Only the immediate relatives are permitted to 
visit prisoners, and then only once in two weeks. But being 
newcomers, and having just arrived from New York, we were 
privileged to see them for three successive days, having one 
hour's talk with them each time. Upon our arrival we were 
shown into a good-sized private room, where we greeted our 
dear ones and then were seated with a table between us, the 
guard meanwhile seated at the head of the table. We delivered
 all the good messages you dear ones had sent; and told 
them how they were loved and missed. Then we laughed at 
our husbands in their blue suits, broad-brimmed hats, etc,, 
until they were cheered and rested by the little change. Both 
are looking and feeling well. 

During our second interview we were granted more privileges
 than during the first. Of course we did not take advantage
 of these privileges. The Lord's people are law-abiding 
under all circumstances ; else we could not truly be his people. 

Some of the brethren have ibeen assigned to the tailoring 
department. One of them made such good buttonholes that he 
was complimented by the head tailor. Some of the brethren 
room in pairs, together. This privilege is very much appreciated
 by them. The time goes very quickly. They are asking 
for no favors whatever, but quietly trying to obey every rule 
and trusting the Lord through every experience. Thus they 
are being greatly blessed. Everything is scrupulously clean. 
The food is plain, but plentiful. 

The brethren all send love, and we join with them. May 
the Lord bless you and keep you under the shadow of his 
wing! The friends all send love to the Bethel family. "God 
be with you till we meet again." 

Your sister in the Lord, L. T. Van Amburgh. 

DIVINE GRACE EVER SUFFICIENT 
T>early Beloved Brethren: — 

Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father and 
from the Lord Jesus Christ. We wish to use this opportunity 

f63 


to express our heart-felt Christian love and sympathy, and to 
assure you of our appreciation of your loving service not 
only to us, but to all the dear saints still this -*iue of the vail. 

We do indeed thank our dear heavenly Father for the 
angel of Revelation 8:3, which came and stood at the altar 
and had a golden censer; and we wish by his grace to assure 
you of our loyal support and co-operation, and to encourage 
your hearts by calling to mind the loving words that divint 
grace is sufficient in every time of need, "and that our LorL 
Jesus Christ is with us always, even unto the end of the age. 

It is a comfort to us that even though we are separated 
in the flesh, yet wo are all gathered together in "the secret 
place of the Most High," and are abiding under the shadow 
of him in v\hom is everlasting strength, and are trusting in 
the covert of lm wings. We pray daily for you all, and" for 
our brethren in bonds, two of whom it was our privilege 
to know and love personally for many years. May we all ba 
faithful, waiting patiently on the Lord, "that we may be ready 
when by his grace the door uf service opens. 

With much Christian love in all, 

The Cmmcn at Scraxton. 
ALL THINGS WORKING FOR OTJR HIGHEST GOOD 
Dear Brethren: — 

At our regular meeting a vote was taken, and carried unanimously
, that the church send to the Bible House our love and 
greetings, and that we assure them of our continued support. 
We believe that the Lord is with you, arid that all things will 
result in our highest good. We continue to pray for the dear 
ones at the Bible House every day. 

Yours in Christian love, 

The Binokamton Church, — N. Y, 
DAILY REJOICING IN THE LIGHT OF TRUTH 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

After having keen fifteen years in the truth, and thirteen 
years an Elder, having taken the Vow soon after it first came 
out, (but now for the first time informing you of that fact), 
a little explanation may !be needful now. when I arn sending 
in my answers to the V. IX M. questions. These questions I 
considered unnecessary, as the church, who elect their own 
elders, should ask and know what those about to be elected 
believe — especially as the questions do not include the covenants
, the sin -offerings, etc. 

Recently we thought, as Elders in Manchester, that it would 
help some members of our class to answer the questions, as a 
personal examination of belief, etc. This we could scarcely 
recommend, unless we all had ourselves so done, Ho 1 gladly 
fall in line, and I have been blessed in the answering. I trust 
that they are to your complete satisfaction. 

Daily I rejoice in the beautiful rays of liirht that stream 
forth from the Word of God, through the Studies, Towers, 
etc, I am fully determined, hy the grace of God, to hold 
fast; for I can see nothing better, look where I will. To 
my judgment no views of the Scriptures so beautifully exalt 
the Creator and so humble the creatures as the "Ransom for 
all" does. Having proved then for some fifteen years the 
power of the knowledge of the truth to be a magnet, drawing 
me nearer to God, the weaning influence from the world, 
giving victory over inbred sin, and an ever-deepening desire 
to be more Christ-like in spirit, T consider that I should be 
committing spiritual suicide were I to neglect the channel 
which God, by his holy Spirit, has so graciously used! 

With warm Christian love and tender sympathy to you all 
at Bethel, and with the hope that we all may meet "at Home" 
in the morning, I am 

Your brother under Christ Jesus, our Head, 

J. W. V?.— England. 
PROMPTNESS AN ELEMENT OF OHAEAOTEB 
Dear Brethren: — 

There is a matter of which I wish to speak, yet hesitate 
to do so lest I should seem to be speaking evil of one of the 
Lord's people. Yet I feel that the matter is of grave importance
; for it has to do with character development, and 
we are so near the goal of the church that we cannot afford 
even to seem to come short in any respect. It is this: 

Our leader is a very fine brother in many respects, but 
he has the serious fault of seldom being on time at meetings. 
On some occasions he arrives as late as a whole hour after 
the time set for the meeting to begin. We love this brother 
dearly, and do not wish to offend him in the least. But we 
know of nothing else to do to awaken him to a sense of his 
deficiency in this respect. Will you kindly suggest something 
which may help him and us as well? 

With Christian love, I remain 

Yours in the Master's service. 

OTJB KEPLT 

The criticism in the aibove letter is one which .has come 
to us from various classes. We hardjv know just what sug- 
31] 


(_T4-29n 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


gestion to make in such cases ; for there are two ways of 
looking at the matter. One of these is the fact that the elder 
may be unable to meet at the hour set by the church. In 
that case the spirit of a sound mind would suggest the change 
of the hour of meeting to one which would be convenient 
for the leader. On the other hand, if the tardiness be the 
result of thoughtlessness, lack of character development or 
some similar reason, the spirit of a sound mind would prompt 


us to elect a leader who had the interests of the church so 
much at heart that he would keep his engagements witli the 
same degree of carefulness that he would exercise in the matter
 of any other business arrangement. In The Watch 
Tower of Dec. 1 ; 1016, there is an article which deals wish 
this very matter of punctuality — "Decorum in the House of 
God." It would be well for all who are habitually unpunctual 
to consider earefullv its contents. 


IMPORTANT NOTICE 


The circulation of the following books and papera is completely
 suspended during the period of the war: 
The Finished Mystery 

Special Edition, March 1st, Watch Tower (ZG) 
All Bible Students' Monthlies 


All Kingdom News 
Any classes or individuals holding any of the above literature
 belonging to The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society
 are hereby instructed to hold the same, subject to outorders
;. This is a confirmation of notice sent you last March. 


Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., OCTOBER 1, 1918 


No. 10 


REMOVAL NOTICE 

Please address of communications in future to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIEY 

FEDERAL AND RELIANCE STREETS 

N. S. PITTSBURGH, PENNSYLVANIA. 


The removal will delay about thirty days all orders received 
after August 26; but we know the friends will bear patiently 
with us for that length of time or even longer. 

After prayerful consideration, and counsel with brethren in 
otiier places, it was decided by the Board of Directors of the 
Watch Toweb Bible and Tract Society, the Executive Committee
 and the Board of Directors of the Peoples Pulpit Association
, to move the ofiices of our Society from Brooklyn, N. 
Y., to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, North Side. Large and commodious
 quarters have been secured in the Martin Building, 
third floor, corner of Federal and Reliance streets. A beautiful
 reception and fellowship room has been provided for visiting
 friends; and all friends are cordially invited to pay us a 
visit. The Bethel home has been discontinued for the present. 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


For nearly forty years this journal has sought from time to 
time to forewarn its readers against the peculiar trials and 
temptations of the period marking the closing years of tJie 
Gospel age. Especially has it endeavored to warn the Lord's 
people against the increasing activities of the demons, evil 
spirits, the "angels which kept not their first estate." During 
this period we have been much encouraged by the many letters 
received from a number of our readers, showing us that our 
efforts have not been in vain, but that their influence for good 
has been widely felt, not only in restraining the Lord's people 
from curious and dangerous investigation of occultism and 
various forms of spiritism, but also in opening the eyes of 
some — including a few mediums- — who had been partially overcome
 by the wiles of the devil and his associated fallen 
spirits. — Ephesians 6:12. 

Once more we would remind our readers that "the days 
are at hand, and the effect of every vision" ; that the restraints 
under which the fallen angels have been held ever since the 
days of Noaih were gradually to be relaxed during the closing 
years of the Gospel age, the time now present. The Biblical 
record is that the evil spirits, the demons, were "restrained 
[in Tartarus, the atmosphere of earth] in lasting chains of 
darkness unto the great day" of judgment for the world. ( Jude 
6; 2 Peter 2:4) As that great day drew near, the Watchers 
have noted many evidences that the chains have been gradually 
loosened, that evil spirits have greater liberty than ever before
. FALLEN HUMANITY EASILY DECEIVED 

We are well aware that many intelligent people laugh to 
scorn the Scripture teaching along these lines. But God's 
Word forewarns us that those persons are in great danger 
w<ho refuse to believe in the existence and the activity of the 
demons, and who regard as superstitious the Bible narratives 
of how our Lord and his apostles cast out -demons, and who 
sneer at the Mosaic laws which strictly prohibited the Israelites
 from any dealings with witches, wizards, necromancers
 and others who held intercourse with unseen intelligences 
purporting to be the spirits of the dead. As a result of present
 day skepticism along these lines many of the self-confident
 have been easily caught in the demon trap, which is baited 
with curiosity. A visit to a medium, a seance with friends, a 
planchette or ouija board at a neighbor's home, etc., entrap 
the unwary to their destruction. At first their curiosity is 
aroused. Then they are gradually given what seems to them 
indubitable proofs of the existence of their beloved dead. Experiment
 follows experiment until finally they are fully convinced
 that they actually hold conversations with "those who 
have gone before." Thus little by little they are brought under 
the influence of the demons. 

Hie Word of God repeatedly warns us that mankind are 
no match intellectually for the unseen intelligences that masquerade
 as the spirits of dead human beings. It declares that 
these are evil spirits, "angels that kept not their first estate," 
and that we need the protection afforded us in the counsels of 
the divine Word. In the end of the Jewish age many Israelites 
were afflicted with evil spirits; and a considerable part of 
tJhe work accomplished by our Lord and his apostles was the 
freeing of the afflicted from the merciless persecutions of these 
fallen angels or demons. So preeminent is this subject that 
the four Gospels contain no less than forty -two references to 
the demons — mistranslated devils. 

SATAN'S OEIGINAL LIE STILL BELIEVED 

A similar influx of evil intelligences is predicted to occur 
in the end of the Gospel age. St. Paul points out that at 
this time the Lord will send, or permit, a strong delusion 
to come upon professed Christians, to try them. He says: 
"For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they 
should believe the lie [Greek], that they all migiht be condemned
 who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness
." {2 Thessalonians 2:11, 12.) Thank God that 
we see that this condemnation is not to be everlasting torture
! The blasphemous misrepresentation of God's Word is 
one of tine devices with which these wicked spirits have 
driven many honest men away from God, by w*hich they have 
blinded men to the true character of Jehovah God, But now 
in the closing hours of the age these strong delusions are being
 permitted in order to differentiate between those who ha\e 
really loved and obeyed the divine counsel and those who have 
failed thus to do and are about to be judged unworthy of the 
high reward soon to be given to the faithful overcomer. 

In the context the Apostle points out that these strong 
delusions which will characterize the close of the old order of 
things will ensnare mankind because "they received not the 
truth in the love of it." The truth here referred to is the 
statement which God made to father Adam in Eden: "In the 
day thou eatest thereof, dying thou sihalt die." (Genesis 2:17, 
margin) In other words, it is the fact that tie dead are dead, 
and cannot re- live except by the exercise of divine power for 
their awakening from the death-sleep. This plain truth, 
abundantly set forth in the Scriptures, is not relished by any 
except the truth-h.ungry. The majority of mankind do not 
like to believe thus. On the contrary, they prefer to think that 
the dead are really more alive than they were before they died. 
Rejecting the plain statement which God made to Adam in 
Eden, they prefer the monstrous, lie which Satan there do 
clared to mother Eve: "Ye shall not surely die." (Genesis 
M:4) All who thus reject the foundation truth are easy marks 
for the demons, who have continued to repeat the original 
lie told in Eden. Indeed, so thoroughly have they succeeded 
that all mankind except a few followers of Jesus arc thoroughly
 indoctrinated with this fundamental untruth. All 


[63321 


OcroBi-R 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(292 -293) 


literature, whether historical or mythological, perpetuates 
this egrrgioua falsehood; and throughout the centuries since its 
first inception the demons have used every means within their 
power to impersonate the dead and thus to give an appearance 
of truth to Satan's original lie — the lie. See John 8:44, 
Diaglott. 

BELIEF IN SPIRITS WOKLD-WIDE 

"Missionaries in heathen lands tell ua that the demons are 
working today as they did of old, and that the New Testament
 description of demoniacs would be equally applicable to 
cases under their observation in heathen lands. 

"The old traditionary ideas and belief in demonism are intensively
 reproduced in the great civilized nations of modern 
times. It is not called 'demonism/ now, but 'spiritualism/ 
'psychic science/ 'spiritism/ etc. But call it by what name 
we will, it bears the same stamp, the same earmarks, the 
saine brands, as uhe old demonism. The wonders performed by 
the ancient wizards, necromancers, sorcerers, magicians, are 
in these days repeated a hundredfold in the seances that are 
held continually throughout Christendom. 

"It is impossible to tell the number who are avowed spiritualists
 or are its adherents. The organization is as loose and 
consistent as its teaching. Algernon Pollock says that there 
are 60,000,000 spiritualists in the world, with 200 journals 
devoted to its propaganda. ... In the United States the 
number is estimated all the way from 2,000,000 to 16,000,000. 

"The great war, with its millions of dead, the intense 
anxiety of relatives for their beloved ones, the strong advocacy 
of the belief by men like Sir Oliver Lodge, who has recently 
embodied in a book long communications from a spirit which 
he believes to be his son Raymond, who was killed in this 
war in France — all have tremendous influence in making converts
. Now if we add to these the countless heathen hordes 
in China, India, Japan, Africa and the islands of the sea, we 
get a faint idea of the extent of spiritualism, and the reason 
for its consideration here. 

"During the last twenty years spiritualism has spread 
apace. The planohette, or ouija board, has had tremendous 
sales. Private and amateur circles have been formed. Scientists
 of the highest repute and many others 'under every test 
condition that expert scientific knowledge and trained detective
 ingenuity could devise' to eliminate fraud, prevent deception
, and shut out tihe invisible human element, have come 
to the conclusion that there are intelligences behind the manifestations
." — World Problems. 

PERISHING FOB LAOS OP DIVINE WISDOM 

There is a reason for this increased activity on the 
part of the demons. As the world has approached "the judgment
 of the great day," the chains of darkness which have restrained
 the demons throughout the centuries since the Deluge 
liave gradually been unloosed ; and as a consequence they have 
more liberty than they have had for many centuries. So successfully
 are they able to impersonate the dead that they 
are able more and more to deceive the whole civilized world 
except those who 'have heeded the warnings of the Word of God 
along these lines. Even the wisest among mankind are being 
deceived into thinking that they can hold communion with the 
dead, for they have rejected the divine Word as unreliable and 
as a collection of old wives' fables which no intelligent mind 
can believe. — 1 Corinthians 3:19. 

Rejecting the Scriptural teaching that the dead are dead 
under the sentence pronounced upon Adam for his disobedience 
in Eden, and accepting in its stead the monumental lie which 
Satan there foisted upori their first parents, men have unwittingly
 aided the demons in their age-long deception of the 
professed church of Christ. When the tide turns — and turn 
it surely will — Christian people will examine the teachings of 
the Word of God, and will realize that, despite all the advantages
 of Bible study which characterize our day, they have not 
understood the first principles of the Scriptures, but have igjiorantly
 taught ana believed "the doctrines of demons." — 1 
Timothy 4:1; 2 Timothy 3:1-9. 

During the uast forty years a marked change has taken 
place in the attitude of scientific men toward the subject of 
religion. At one time perhaps the majority were purely 
materialistic in their views. While some believed in the existence
 of God, perhaps none had faith in Christ as the Redeemer
 of the world, ox in life on anv other plane than the 
material. In 1882 a number of eminent British scholars 
founded the Society of Psychical Research, for the purpose of 
making an organized aid systematic attempt to investigate all 
spiritual phenomena. The members were some of the most 
noted statesmen and scholars of our day. In 1884 an American
 society was established for the same purpose; and in 1890 
it was incorporated with the British society. Similar societies
 have since been established in other countries. The 


VII— 33 


growth of these societies has been so rapid the past few years 
that hundreds of cities have flourishing branches. 
SCIENTISTS ALSO MISLED 

As a result of the work of these organizations the subject 
of spirit phenomena has attracted many of the brightest minds 
of our time; and many who were once skeptical materialists 
have now swung to the opposite extreme and are credulous 
spiritists. Ignorant of the Bible teachings in regard to the 
work of the evil spirits these wise men and women have 
fallen prey to the demons, who have played all manner of 
tricks upon them. But instead of realizing that men have 
been duped by evil spirits, poor humanity thinks that it has 
proved the existence of life beyond the grave, and that the 
spirits of dead human beings really communicate with mankind
. So far has this work of deception been carried that 
books have been written to describe life in what is called 
Spiritland. There the dead are said to live much the same as 
they did on this side the grave. Music, the arts, intellectual 
and spiritual (?) knowledge and progress are said to have 
increased. People build, plant, carry on business, etc., much 
as before death. In fact, life beyond the grave is merely a 
repetition of present day conditions on this mundane sphere. 
Very different indeed are the Scriptural descriptions of the 
joy and peace which will obtain during the "times of restitution
," under the beneficent rule of the Messianic Kingdom. 

A careful scrutiny of various communications from these 
spirits show us that the fallen angels are shrewd enough not 
to reveal anything concerning conditions beyond the human 
plane of existence, but that they do all in their power to 
impress upon the minds of their dupes the original lie which 
Satan told in Eden. To those who do not know the truth as 
it is set forth in the Word of God, however, these communications
 give something tangible, something with which to 
mitigate their sorrow of heart at the death of their loved 
ones. As a result many who have lost friends and relatives 
on the battlefield are becoming spiritists or theosophists in 
the vain hope of coming into touch with their dead, so the 
daily press informs us. It is said that in London lectures on 
occult subjects are crowded with women, including royalty. 
Doubtless a similar condition prevails elsewhere. 
APPEALS TO THE HUMAN SENSES 

To illustrate the insidious nature of the attempts made 
to entrap the unwary, we give an excerpt from a book purporting
 to be the work of a young physician who died a short 
time ago: 

"Listen I Son speaks to you. He is not far away today; 
he is close by you. Did he enter as you turned away to hide 
your tears? You did not hear his footstep, but he came and 
stood close beside you. Doors do not keep him from entering
." 

Such words as these could not fail to appeal very strongly 
to a mother who is grief -stricken at the death of her 
boy. But to those who are well versed in the Scriptures relating
 to the subject of death the deception is easily seen. 
But while the Bible is explicit in regard to the present state 
of the dead, yet remarkably few people know anything about 
the real teachings of the Word of God. Hence when death 
enters the family circle they know not which way to turn 
in order to get comfort. Under such circumstances they fall 
an easy prey to such appeals as the above excerpt; for these 
give the natural mind something on which to build hope, 
MODERN FICTION PERMEATED WITH OCCULTISM 

Since the beginning of the Gospel harvest the reading public
 has multiplied four or five times, as a result of the impetus
 given to education during this period; and cheap editions
 of popular novels have brought them within the reach 
of all classes. Meantime the demons have not been slow to 
take advantage of these conditions, as the following excerpt 
shows : 

"The application of modern science to supernatural ism or 
of the supernatural to modern science is one of the distinctive 
features of recent literature. . . , Each advance in science 
has had its reflection in supernatural fiction, and each phase 
of research contributes plot material, while some of the elements
 once considered wholly of the devil are now scientific. 
The transition from the sorcerer, the wizard, of older fiction, 
to the scientist in the present has been gradual. . . . Hypnotism
 enters largely into the fiction of modern times. It 
borders so closely on the realm of the uncanny, and is so related
 to the science of today as well as to the sorcery of the 
past, that in its earlier stages it was considered as distinctly 
diabolic, used only for unlawful purposes, being associated 
with witchcraft. Only in more recent times has it been rehabilitated
 in the public mind, and thought of as a science 
which may be used for helpful ends. . t . 

"That there is at present a definite revival of interest in the 


[6333] 


(293-294) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Rrookt.yn, X. Y. 


supernatural appearing in the drama, in poetry and in fiction, 
is evident to any one wiho has carefully studied recent publications
 and magazines. Within the last few years, especially 
in the last two years, an astonishing amount of ghostly 
material has appeared. I hesitate to. suggest a reason for this 
sudden rising tide of occultism at this particular time, but it 
seems clear to me that the war has had much to do with it. 
. . . But whatever may be the reason for this revival of 
the ghostly, the fact remains. . . . Now the weird and the 
ghostly have regained a popularity which they never surpassed
 even in the heyday of medieval fiction. . . . The rising
 tide of the unearthly in art shows itself in all literary 
forms, such as dramatic, narrative and lyric poetry." — The 
Supernatural and Modern English Fiction. 

ANTAGONISTIC TO SCBI7TUBB 

That psychic research must greatly modify the teachings 
of the church is the firm belief of Sir Oonan Doyle, the noted 
writer, who is deeply interested in occult phenomena. In the 
January Metropolitan he says: 

'^Christianity must change or perish. That is the law of 
liife — that things must adapt themselves or perish. Christianity
 'has deferred the change . . . until her churches are half 
empty, until women are her chief supporters, and until the 
learned part of the community on the one side and the poorest
 class on tihe other, both in town and in country, are 
largely alienated from her." 

The reason for this condition is then given. To those 
who know nothing of the philosophy of the Ransom, but who 
have been indoctrinated in Evolution theories, the explanation 
may seem to be very logical. But to those who know tine 
Word of God it is a poor substitute for the soul-satisfying nortion
 on which the Lord's people are fed. The noted writer 
continues : 

"One can see no justice in a vicarious sacrifice, nor in the 
God who could be placated by such means. Above all, many 
cannot understand such expressions as 'the redemption from 
sin,' 'cleansed by tthe blood of the Lamb,' and so forth. As 
long as there was any question of the fall of man there was 
at least some sort of explanation of sueh phrases; but when 
it became certain that man had never fallen — when with fuller 
knowledge we could trace our ancestral course down through 
th« cave-man and the drift-man, back to that shadowy and 
far-off time wfhen the manlike ape slowly evolved into the 
apelike man — looking back on all this vast succession of life, 
we knew that it had always been rising from step to step. 
Never was there any evidence of a fall. But if there was no 
fall, then what became of the atonement, the redemption, of 
original sin, of a large 'part of Christian mystical philosophy? 
. . . Too much seemed to be made of Christ's death. It 
is no uncommon thing to die for an idea. Men die continually
 for their convictions." 

How true it is that the wisdom of this world is foolishness
 to God! Of a similar class in his day the great Apostle 
to the Gentiles said: "Professing themselves to be wise, they 
became fools, and changed the glory of the incorruptible God 
into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and 
to four-footed beasts, and creeping things." {Romans 1:22, 
23) His clear, cold logic deals a mortal blow to all evolutionary
 theories. He fully believed in the fall of man. His 
masterly presentation of the philosophy of the Ransom Sacrifice
 offered on Calvary has never been surpassed. 

DEVICES FOB EKTBAPPING THE TJNWABY 
That a great wave of mysticism is breaking over the civilized
 portion of tlie world is claimed by many. The demand 
for planchettes and ouija boards is said to he beyond the 
ability of the manufacturers and jobbers to supply. The ouija 
board consists of a little table with three wooden legs, which 
moves about on a polished plank bearing the letters of the 
alphabet, the basic numbers and usually the words, "Yes" 
and "No" and "Good-by" Two or three" persons sit around 
the board with their finger tips resting lightly on the table; 
and the ''messages from the dead" are spelled out as the triangular
 table moves about on the board, pointing out the letters
 with the table leg at the top of the triangle. The causes 
of the movement and the origin of the messages are still much 
in dispute among spiritists. But the Lord's people can easily 
trace these phenomena to the demons, who seek to destroy 
mankind by breaking down the barrier of the will. 

Professor Olin, of Akron University, is quoted by the 
Akron Beacon Journal (Marrti 1, 1918), as warning people 
not to take the ouija board too seriously. "Many people, falling
 victims to its lure, have been mentally unbalanced," said 
the gentleman, who has made the ouija board the subject 
of careful study. A similar warning has come from Sir Godfrey
 Raupert, who has investigated psychical subjects both in 
America and in Europe. The end of the study of occultism 


and of various experiments connected therewith, Sir Godfrey 
declares, is in many cases the sanitarium or the insane asylum. 
Often what seemed to be a simple means of amusement has 
led to the loss of reason. 

Everywhere about us the signs deepen that the evil spirits 
are invading the human mind as never before. Our literature 
is steeped with occultism. Our psychological laboratories are 
given over to experiments in hypnotism. Our periodicals are 
filled with advertisements of books which show people how 
to use hypnotism and spiritism to take advantage of tiheir 
fellow men. Not in vain do the Scriptures warn us that "as it 
was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the- days of the Son 
of Man" — at the time of our Lord's second advent. Truly "we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities
, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this 
world, against the wicked spirits in heavenly places.'* 

"The devil and his angels are old. They are masters of 
craft and cunning. With satanic ingenuity they have been 
practising upon the mortal human race for millenniums. They 
have been studying the art of impersonation and deception for 
thousands of years. They have been adapting the beliefs, the 
customs and the inventions of the humans to their own deceptions
. They know all the details of the man's life history 
that his own relatives could know; and in the secret cabinet
 and the seance they recall them, and counterfeit dress, 
voice and manner." — World Problems. 

A WASHING TO THE CHURCH 

Our beloved Pastor Russell, the Messenger to the Laodicean
 stage of the church, has written much upon the subject
 of Spiritism. Those who have heeded his warning along 
the lines of occultism have been enabled to escape these 
snares of the adversary. We quote from his well-known 
sermon on "Spiritism Is fiemonism": 

"On the basis of human credulity — the supposition that 
the dead become more alive when they appear to die — the demons
 have advanced their deceptions and sought to enthrall 
Ehumjanity. Invisible to men, yet fully informed respecting all 
human affairs, thev can readily personate the dead. The fallen 
angels, since the Deluge depnved of the power to materialize, 
use as channels of communication such individuals as they 
can deceive into being their servants — mediums. Many of 
these are noble characters, and many of them the reverse ; but 
vicious or ignorant or good, iJhc demons use such as they can 
control, none being too debased for their service. 

THE BASIS OF BBBOB 

"Working on the credulity of their dupes, they use the lipw 
or the pencil of the medium to describe the dead one, who 
is supposed to be very anxious to communicate with the living
. And the description generally fits well to the dupe's last 
knowledge of the person — age, sex, clothing, all. So deluded 
do people become that they fail to remember that the children 
of two or ten years would, ten years later, if alive, be twelve 
or twenty years of age, and proportionately larger, and certainly
 not content to wear in a spirit land the same clothing 
they wore when last seen by the dupe. The demons* power to 
discuss matters known only to the dupe and the deceased carries
 conviction. 

"And all the teachings of all the denominations, that the 
dead are not dead, are helping on with the deception. The 
venerable minister, deceived by the doctrines of the dark ages. 
tells his hearers at the funeral that their deceased is hovering 
over them; and that if he could speak, he would say, 'Weep 
not for me/ The medium and the clairvoyant announce that 
they are under spirit control and that the departed one can 
speak through them. Is it any wonder that the deception is 
a powerful one with many? The antidote for all the doctrines
 of demons is the message of the Word of God : 

(1) That the dead are really dead; 

(2) That Christ died on our behalf; 

(3) That at his second coming and kingdom, 'there fIikII 
be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the 
unjust/ — Acts 24:15. 

"Let those who deny that there are invisible evil spirits 
explain what Jesus meant when he gave his disciples power 
over all manner of disease, and over unclean spirits. Let 
them explain wfhat the apostles meant when they returned 
with joy, saying, 'Lord, even the demons are subject unto us 
in thy name/ It is for them to explain, too, what really took 
place at Gadara, where the Scriptures declare Jesiw oast a 
legion of these evil spirits out of one man. That legion, permitted
 to go into the swine, were sufficient in number to craze 
the entire herd. 

"Let us also have an explanation of what St. Paul meant 
when he turned to rebuke the young woman who had the 
power of divination, and commanded the evil spirits to come 
out of her. (Acts 16:16-18) Let theim explain why her 


[6334] 


October 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(294-295) 


soothsaying prognostications were at an end, when once the 
evil spirit was gone forth. Let us also remember that there 
ia not a suggestion anywhere in the Bible that these evil 
spirits were even human beings in any sense of the word, or 
at any time. Let us all remember that these are the same 
evil spirits dealt with at the time of the Deluge. 

"Immediately after the Flood, they began their attack 
upon humanity, their attack upon the truti, their endeavor 
to make humanity believe the lie — that the dead are not 
dead. To whatever extent they succeeded in so deceiving humanity
 they prepared mankind proportionately to he their 
dupes. The goal of their ambition is possession, everything 
else being merely accessory to this end. 

"Spirit mediums recognize the demon character of the 
spirits communicating through them; and they dread thean 
and warn each other against the danger of allowing their 
wills to come completely under spirit influence, knowing that 
surely the result will be possession, demonization. And this 
in our day is palled insanity, although many physicians realize
 the difference, and candidly say that not one-half the 
cases in an insane asylum are due to functional disorder. The 
majority are cases of possession by evil spirits. 

SUGGESTION, DIVERSION, IMPEESSION, POSSESSION 

"These are the four steps along which those who do not 
put themselves under the guidance of the Lord are in danger 
of being led by the demons. And every step of the wav should 
be fought with a determination of the will, if the r wiles of 
the adversary' would be escaped. The vacant, unoccupied 
mind is the most open to suggestions of the demons. The purposeful
, earnest, energetic, have a protection in their activity
- 

"But if suggestions, or imaginations, have been entertained, 
the second step will soon foltow — diversions, Tlie mind will 
be diverted from the lines of thought — study, prayer, or what 
not. The poweT of suggestion becomes so strong as to interfere
 with proper thinking and reasoning. 

"This leads on to the third step — impression. Some are 
naturally more impressionable than are others, and can receive
 promptings, or suggestions, frcwn the evil spirits with 
so little difficulty that they do not realize the source of the 
impression, but rather wonder if it is a power of their own. 
Really it is the outside power impressing them, and more 
and more bringing them under occult influence. 

"Finally comes the last stage — possession — and tihe evil 
spirit gets full power and control of the will, and ignores 
the human will entirely. This is not always accomplished 
without more or less <A a struggle — sometimes covering years. 
Tn the struggle, sometimes by ciairaudient powers, sometimes 


through mediums, the spirits will seek more and more the 
•confidence of the dupe. If he be inclined toward evil, the 
leadings will be that way. If he have a religious tendency, 
he will be counseled to pray or read the Bible, then be chided, 
the object always being to bring him into full submission of 
his mind, in a manner that none should yield himself, except 
to the Almighty, whom the evil spirits sometimes even da-re 
to impersonate in their- speech. 

WITCHES, WIZARDS AND NECROMANCERS 

"Many today laugh at the stories of witchcraft handed 
down from the past. Quite probably some executed as witches 
may have been good people, misunderstood by their neighbors. 
This does not, however, alter the fact that witches, wizards 
and necromancers are not mere myths. The Bible tells us 
of them as realities, and explains the demon power operating 
through them. 

"In olden times, the divine law forbade any witch, wizard, 
or necromancer (one claiming to have communications from 
the dead) to live in the land of Israel, or to practise their 
black arts. (Deuteronomy 18:9-14) Through the prophet 
the Lord asks the people why the living should seek unto 
those who peep and mutter and claim to have communication
 with the dead [for wisdom, knowledge, guidance, etc.], 
and not unto the living God? 'Should not a people seek unto 
their God?'— Isaiah 8:19, 20. 

"We all remember the story of the witch of Endor, and 
how King Saul, when he could not have communication with 
the Lord, sought communication with Samuel the prophet, who 
was dead. Saul saw nothing and heard nothing. The witch 
described to him <an old man with a mantle, and Saul recognized
 the description as corresponding with that of the Prophet
 Samuel. The witch was guided by the demons, however 
much she might have supposed that the visions she saw and 
the words she heard were from the dead prophet. Her prophecies
 were all from the evil spirits, the demons. (1 Samuel 
28:7-19; 1 Chronicles 10:13, 14) So in all heathen lands, the 
demons have had to do with the people. 

"The lesson to God's people is full loyalty to God, strict 
attention to his inspired words through the prophets and 
the apostles. These are the only sure protection against the 
wiles of the adversary. How glad we are that the lessons to 
angels and to men, built upon God's permission of a reign 
of sin and death for the paj3t six thousand years, will soon 
be finished! How glad we are to know of a surety that the 
end will justify the permission of all the evil which has come 
to pass! How glad we are to know that eventually all the 
blinded ones will be enlightened and that eventually all the 
wilfully evil shall be destroyed, and that without remedy!*' 


THE HEAVEN-CENTERED MIND 


"Center your mvnd on things 

One thing is certain: we cannot have everything. If we 
let our minds go wandering off down the pleasant by-paths of 
human interest we shall never reach the Celestial City. Even 
in the world choice between things must constantly be made. 
A young man approaching life's responsibilities must choose 
his vocation. He cannot hope to become highly proficient in 
more than one field; at best he may have an avocation, or field 
of secondary interest. 

The Apostle's words are perfectly plain: "Center your mind 
on things above/' or, as the King James' version states it: 
"Set your affections on things above." The same thought of 
■concentration is expressed by the Master when he said: "If 
thine eye be single, thy whole body will be full of light." 

The" first chapter of Paul's letter to the Church at Colosse 
deals with Christ the Head ; the second admonishes the church 
not to be led away from Christ the Head, either into false 
Greek speculations or into ascetic Jewish practises; chapter 
three urges those who have risen with Christ to live as they 
should live — in fellowship with their exalted Head. 
RISEN WITH OHBIST 

Of the first seventeen verses of chapter three the first 
four contain general exhortation, placing before the mind 
the glorious privilege, the manifest ideal of the new creature
; verses five to eleven suggest the things to be discarded; 
and verses twelve to seventeen enumerate the things to be 
acquired. 

Our motives for action are drawn from the past, present
 and future. We were raised from that burial with Christ 
in baptism (2:12) ; we do seek for the heavenly things; and 
our Lord is represented as at God's right hand in assurance 
of rest after conflict and victory. 

"Seek" points but vaguely to the outward conduct. One 
might seek after the rainbow; but the exhortation, "Center 
your mind," is subjective and definite. It tells how we can 


5 above." — Colossians 3:2. 

most effectively accomplish what we need. Seeing then that 

at our conversion we shared not Christ's death only but his 

resurrection also, let us go where he sits at God's right hand* 

Let our whole thought be set on heavenly, not on earthly 

things. 

Again, in the third and fourth verses the Apostle's consecrated
 mind sweeps the past, present and future of our experiences
. We died the death to self; our new life is hid with 
Christ in God; and when Christ, our life, shall appear then 
shall we also appear with him in glorv. 

NEW CAPACITIES OF HIND 

When we were raised from our consecration burial to walk 
in newness of life, the new life which we there began was not 
new from the standpoint of outward environs, but rather new 
because a new dominating force was in control, a new standard 
for thought and conduct — the will of God. This change is 
perhaps feebly illustrated by the taking off of colored glasses. 
The scenery is the same as it was before; but it looks different
, the perspective has changed, the color relationships are 
altered. Again, the newness of life may be pictured by & 
change of presidents in the White House. The chairs, the 
tables, the pictures on the wall are the same, but the president 
is different; foe has different policies of government to carry 
out. TTius the new will comes into the same mind that existed 
before ; it uses the same mental machinery, so to speak ; but its 
aims are different. 

From another standpoint, it may be said that we receive 
new capacities for every organ of our brain. By our spirit 
hegettal we receive the capacity to consider and work upon, 
spiritual things instead of merely natural matters. But this 
new capacity does not operate with ease. It requires the exertion
 of force on the part of the new will to set or center 
our attention on heavenly things when all our natural desires 
and proclivities cling to things on the earth. Then when the 


[6335] 


'295-296) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


bhookiyn, n\ y. 


attention grows lax it requires the exertion of more energy 
to redirect the mind to spiritual thoughts. The Apoatle speaks 
fif this new capacity of mind when he says: "Eye hath, not 
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into tlhe h *art of mant 
the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. 
But God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit, for the 
spirit soarcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God." — 
1 Corinthians 2:9, 10. 

We died with Christ and our union with him is a hidden, 
life in God. It ia not always to remain hidden. At Christ's 
second coming, it will be revealed; for Christ is our very life, 
so that hiB manifestation involves ours. 

MOBTUTT THESE THINGS 

To whatever we give our heart's devotion, that we make 
our God. A story is told of an old minister and a youthful 
one. The young man was perplexed because he found it impossible
 to get the young people to listen to his earnest preaching
. The old man said, "That is easily explained: they worship
 elsewhere." One may pay homage to various desires of 
his own flesh, be they sinful or proper in themselves. 

We should realise the experiences already ideally ours, by 
putting our sins to death, impurity and covetousness, those 
hidden vices which draw down God's wrath, and which we 
once practised, or the tendency to practise which we find in 
our flesh. God's wrath is the expression of his disapproval, tlhe 
attitude which he must bear toward sin and unrighteousness. 
It should be kept separate in our minds from the manifestations
 of man's puny wrath, which are, as likely as not, mere 
acknowledgments of impotence. 

The Apostle exhorts us to put away anger, wrath, malice, 
blasphemy, abusive speech, lying; for the old self has been 
discarded and the new self has been put on, whioh is being 
renewed by a deeper knowledge into conformity witfh. the Creator
's image. 

Blasphemy may be committed unknowingly. It consists 

(1) in ascribing to God what should not be ascribed to him; 

(2) in not ascribing to God things which should be ascribed 
to him; (3) in ascribing to another what should be ascribed 
to God. It will he seen, therefore, that the worst form of 
blasphemy is not that thoughtless profanity which one may 
hear on the street, but such misascriptions of divine power 
or purpose as may be made by intelligent men in responsible 
positions. 

RENEWED BY KNOWLEDGE 

The Apostle tells us that the new man is renewed, refreshed
, invigorated by knowledge. But can he mean knowledge
 of a general character? No; for such knowledge is a 
mere array of facts, the possession of which may only encourage
 a spirit of pride of self-sufficiency. The kind of 
knowledge which is here referred to is mentioned in the ninth 
verse of the first chapter of this same epistle of the Colossians
. 

There the loving and faithful Paul expressed his joy at 
hearing of the progress in the truth which the Colossian 
brethren had made. He expressed his desire that they might 
be filled with a knowledge (epignosis, exact or accurate knowledge
) of God's will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. 
A knowledge of God's will means more than the knowledge that 
he has a will. It indicates an intimate acquaintanceship with, 
a deep appreciation of the motives of the Almighty. It 
means such an acquaintanceship with God's holy will which 
would lead us, if we had the power, position and authority of 
God, to do exactly the same things that he does, and which 
knowledge or acquaintanceship does lead us to do the same 
things that he does, in the measure that we have power, position
 and authority of any kind. 

Such knowledge as this is surely refreshing and invigorating
 to the new creature. This new creature iB God's creature
, God's child, though the creative work is not yet complete
. Every influence which tends to perfect this new man 
brings him iato closer and closer conformity to Christ, the 
image of the invisible, the express image of the Father's person
. — 2 Corinthians 3:18. 

Wttiere there is such a new nature, and to the extent that 
it is ascendant, all previous distinctions of race, religion, 
civilization and social position are annulled, and Christ is all 
and in all the relationships of life. 

ACQXTIEE THESE THINGS 

As probationary members of the body of Christ our characters
 should be graced with sympathetic deeds of mercy, with 
kindness, with humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, 
forbearance, love, peace, thankfulness, AU of these are 
heavenly qualities in the sense that they emanate from God 
arid have his approval. If our minds are centered upon these 
graces and our attention turned to their admiration and their 
development, we are fulfilling the Apostle's command in the 


only feasible way. He does not wish us to be gazing at the 
clouds by day and the stars by night. 

Surely the world is in need of sympathetic deeds I Our 
opportunities for practical assistance may be very limited 
now, but the sympathy can well be shown for the poor world 
in its distressed condition. In this matter we have need of 
wisdom that our attitude be not patronizing. 

The word here translated kindness means to supply what 
is needful. It therefore suggests tact, suavity, and goodness 
of heart. To be truly kind we must have the welfare of others 
at heart. Their happiness must occupy a place in our hearts 
at least as great as our own happiness, so that we 'shall have 
the tendency to share what we have, if other people's supply 
of happifying medium falls below the average. 

Humbleness of mind, or humility, suggests a willingness to 
occupy our appropriate position in respect to the Lord and his 
providences. If the Lord's providence leads us into the limelight
 and our natural preference is for the quiet shadows, it 
is not humility but self-will, if we resist Mb leadings and Btay 
in the shadow. If we love the limelight, but find ourselves 
in the shadow of social obscurity and the Lord does not lead 
us out, we would be on very dangerous ground indeed to 
take matters into our own hand and seek to bring ourselves 
forward. We may have, in fact very likely will have, our own 
preferences, prejudices or judgments concerning a matter; but 
if the Lord's Word or the Lord's leading indicates another 
path than that we would naturally tread, the only humble way 
is to say: "Not my will, but thine be done." 

Meekness is teachableness of mind and traetablenesa of 
heart. It is closely identified with submissiveness. Meekness 
is the kind of conduct which a humble heart inspires. It is 
possible to think of being meek for policy'3 sake, without 
being truly humble ; but it would seldom, if ever, occur unless 
for purposes of deception. 

Longsuffering is a quiet carriage in the midst of exasperating
 circumstances. It implies the control of natural combativeness
. Forbearance comes from a proper regulation of the 
organ of destructiVeness. We have plenty of things to destroy 
— the spirit of tihe world, the deceitfulness of the flesh and the 
wiles of the devil— ias these influences operate against our 
Christian progress. 

Forgiveness means a complete dispensing with a charge 
against a person, without regaru to what brought about the 
satisfaction. The Anglo-Saxon prefix for suggests a completeness
 of the action described in the verb. The word 
therefore means literally to give completely away — to rid 
one's self entirely of something, and, by custom, of something 
objectionable or unpleasant* especially an unpleasant or unfavorable
 attitude of mind which we may hold toward a person
 who has. done us wrong. 

Jehovah holds sinners in disfavor because, wittingly or 
unwittingly, they have transgressed the laws which his justice 
framed. He can forgive or Change his attitude toward the 
sinner only when some kind of satisfaction is made for hia 
outraged laws. Since man was unable to make this satisfaction
 for his cardinal sin, God in his goodness sent his own 
Son to die for us, that we might live. On the basis of this 
redemptive work the prophet long ago foretold: "He will forgive
 your transgressions and remember them no more." When 
an account is once settled, God is too courteous ever to refer to 
it again. It is completely dismissed from his calendar. 

The Apostle continues, in substance: And let love, which 
binds Christians in one, do its perfect work. Let the peace 
of God control your life; do nothing to ruffle it, and be 
thankful. 

Love is that good will which, apart from obligation, delights
 to give. It appreciates the privilege of sacrifice. It delights
 in every good principle. Peace of mind is a condition 
which is made possible by the operation of justice in our conduct
. When we have done justly, then we have peace of mind, 
we have a good conscience. 

Thankfulness is repeatedly urged upon us by the Apostle 
Paul. In his first epistle to the Thessalonians he says: "In 
everything give thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ 
Jesus concerning you." Thankfulness is the habitual expressing
, by word or demeanor, of the spirit of gratitude in the 
heart. Gratitude is appreciation for boons and blessings 
which we did not expect or which we had no right to demand. 

Wisdom is the discreet application of God's word to our 
own hearts and to our own life problems. It should dwell jn 
us richly; for the discernment, the discretion which enables us 
to apply the Word to ourselves and ourselves to the Word, may 
l>e had for the trustful asking. 

IN WORD OR IN DEED 

Divine power is called forth by the admonition: "Whatsoever
 we do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord 


[6336] 


October 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(297-298) 


Jesus." Love prompts, wisdom devises, justice directs, but 
power performs. 

If we habitually and persistently set our thoughts on things 
above, surely we shall have accomplished in us that which 
the Master desired to see. No matter how improbable the 
outlook may seem, it is not our power but hia that is pledged 
to the fulfillment of all that which he has purposed in Christ 
Jesus. He shall change this body, now so humiliated, and 


fashion it unto his glorious body, according to the working 
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himBelf. 

The lotus bulb' finds itself in the mud and slime of the 
river bed. The sun shines through the water upon it. Figuratively
 speaking, it sets its heart to respond to the light. 
It reaches up, disregarding the slime of its native rooting, 
and finally bursts, a pure and lovely flower, to glorify its 
Maker. 


THE WORK OF THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM 

"The creature itself shall be delivered from the bondage of sm and death into the glorious liberty of the 

sons of God." — Romans 8:21. 


Death, not eternal torment, was the penalty which God 
placed upon Father Adam. (Genesis 2:17) Over four thousand
 years after the fall of man, our Lord Jesus came into 
the world to pay that penalty; and thereby with his own 
life he made arrangements for the ultimate purchase of all 
mankind. He has laid down the price, and eventually will 
take over the purchase. He has not yet completed his work, 
but thus far has merely made an imputation of the merit of 
his sacrificial death on behalf of the church class. As soon 
as the church shall have been completed, they will be glorified
 as the body of Christ, his associates in the heavenly nature
, glory, honor and immortality. Then will come the time 
for the Christ — Jesus the Head and the church his body — tot 
inaugurate the great Messianic Kingdom, which God has long 
promised, and for which we pray, 'Thy kingdom come; thy 
will be done on earth, as it is in heaven." 

Attentively considering the transaction by which Jehovah 
is to turn over the world to become responsible to his Son 
Jesus Christ, we perceive that it is pictured in the Jewish 
day of Atonement. When the high priest had completed 
his work of making satisfaction, for the sins of the Israelites, 
he forthwith had the divine authority to begin to bless the people
. So when Christ, the great antitypical High Priest, shall 
have finished tthe work of offering the "better sacrifices," and 
when the last member of the body of Christ shall have been 
glorified, then the merit of those "better sacrifices" will be 
made applicable to the whole world. (Hebrews 9:23} As in 
the one man Adaon all mankind were constituted sinners, bo in, 
the one Man Jesus Christ both Adam and all of his children 
will be justified from the original condemnation, that which 
came upon the human race because of Adam's disobedience. 
TRANSFER OF ADAM'S ACCOUNT 

This squaring off .of accounts will be accomplished by the 
transfer of Adam's account to the account of Christ. The death 
of Christ will be found to be the full equivalent for the 
sin of the whole world; and as far as the divine judgment 
is upon the world, mankind will be set free from the sentence 
which came upon father Adam in Eden. Forthwith Christ will 
take possession of the whole world. His Millennial Kingdom 
is for the very purpose of lifting the Adamic race out of 
sin, degradation and death, and of restoring them to human 
perfection. But he does not purpose, nor is it the Father's 
plan, that any one be forced to receive the divine blessing. 
"Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely." — 
Revelation 22:17. 

Under the beneficent rule of the Messianic Kingdom 
the light of the glory of the goodness of God will be manifest
 to all mankind. They will be made to know that restitution
 to all lost in Eden is God J s provision for the world. 
When they shall have come to the knowledge of the divine goodness
, it will be their part to conform their lives to purity and 
righteousness. They will retain their own individual will, 
however; and if any one should will to do otherwise than 
what is right, he will have the opportunity to do so. But he 
will not be permitted to do that which is injurious to others; 
for the power of Messiah will be exercised at such a time, 
and will not permit any one to work injury. Under the full 
light and opportunity of that blessed time, a sinner who makes 
no progress towards perfection will be cut off from life at 
the end of a hundred years of trial. Having had every possible
 incentive to do right under that glorious Messianic reign, 
he will have no excuse for wrong-doing. If he does not yield 
to the regulations of that righteous rule, he will thereby 
demonstrate that he loves iniquity. — Isaiah 11:9; 65:20. 
WORK OP THE MILLENNIUM OUTLINED 

God purposes to give life everlasting to those only who 
manifest a disposition to become loyal and obedient to him, 
and who by patient perseverance will develop -a character 
worthy of being raised up to perfection of life. Those who 
manifest the right disposition will be lifted up out of their 
fallen condition to the full standard of human perfection as 
it was originally in father Adam. This work of human uplift
 will be the work of Christ and the church through the 


various agencies of that time. The world will then be free 
from the condemnation which came upon Adam because of 
his disobedience in Eden. God is willing to give them everlasting
 life upon condition of obedience to his righteous law. 
But they will bo expected to cooperate in this matter; and in 
their endeavor to rise out of sin and degradation they will 
have everlasting life; but the unwilling and disobedient will be 
cut off from life — in the second death. 

Manifestly, then, there will be an interim between the 
time when mankind are legally forgiven and the time when 
they will either reach perfection or die the second death. During
" this interim they will still be of the Adamic race. So 
when the hosts of sleeping dead are awakened, they will not 
come forth from the tomb as children of Christ, but as children
 of Adam. Under the arrangements of the Messianic 
Kingdom they will be given the opportunity of renouncing 
their allegiance to Adam and of accepting the life everlasting
 that Christ will give those who demonstrate their loyalty 
to God and to tfhe principles of righteousness. So far as the 
world is concerned, this work of Christ will continue until 
the end of the thousand years of the Messianic reign. Then 
mankind will be perfect, ready to be turned over to the Father, 
as the Apostle Paul points out. — 1 Corinthians 15:21-28. 

During those thousand years the Father will ignore humanity
 altogether. He will have turned the whole Adamic 
race over to the Christ, who will have full charge of mankind
. While the Messianic Kingdom is in power, neither 
the Father himself nor any one else except the Christ will 
have anything to do with humanity. But when at the end of 
the Millennium, Christ will present the perfected race to the 
Father, it will then be for God to receive them, 
ALL CONDEMNATION SET ASIDE 

Speaking of the human family, the Apostle Paul says, 
"The creature himself was made subject to vanity [frailty!, 
not willingly." (Romans 8:20) That is to say, the Adamic 
race did not become imperfect through any will of their 
own. Father Adam got out of touch with his Creator. Sin 
invaded his domain, and he was led astray. Condemnation 
to death came upon him; and through the law of heredity all 
of his posterity were involved in his condemnation. But "God 
so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that 
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
 life." (John 3:16) Our Lord Jesus is ready to redeem
 these who have come unwillingly into sin, if they will 
accept his terms and conditions. The first-fruits of his work 
form the church of the Gospel age. (James 1:18) The expression
 "first-fruits" suggests others — after-fruits. In other 
words, the church are not the only ones who are to be saved, 
but a first gathering only. It is theirs to share with their 
Lord in his kingdom of glory, honor and immortality. Then 
all mankind will have their opportunity — the creature itself 
which was made subject to frailty, and which is to he delivered 
from the bondage of corruption. — 1 John 2:2. 

Eventually the whole world will have the opportunity of 
getting away from the bondage of death. First, there is tljte 
legal phase of the condemnation upon the race. This legal 
condemnation will be set aside at the beginning of the Millennium
, Then there is the actual condemnation^ — death and. all 
of its concomitants. Mankind have become so infected with 
the virus of death that their bodies have become diseased. 
"There is none righteous, no, not one." Everybody is wrong, 
imperfect, out of the way; and the race will still be in this 
condition of imperfection after the legal phase of the condemnation
 has been set aside. 

When at the beginning of the Millennium Christ presents 
the merit of his sacrificial death on behalf of the world, 
forthwith the race will be turned over to him. But, on being 
raised from the dead, the world would soon come into condemnation
 again, were they not in the hands of the Mediator 
between God and man. (1 Timothy 2:5, 6) If any one had 
his sins forgiven and then stood forth in his own strength 
before God for even one day, by nightfall he would again be 
under condemnation unless he could live sinless for that one 


[6337] 


(298-299) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


day. Because of their inability to stand before him, God will 
pass the world over to the ministry of Messiah, and will ignore
 mankind until the end of the Millennium, 

SONS OF OOP OH THB HUMAN FLAJTE 
The work of the Christ will be to effect the deliverance 
of humanity from the bondage of corruption, from which 
they are unable to deliver themselves. Christ will set the 
groaning creation free from the power of sin and death, and 
will bring the willing and obedient back into the full liberty 
of the sons of God. Whoever will then may become a son of 
God on the human plane, perfect as was Adam before he fell 
from divine favon When Adam was a son of God, he was not 
**sold under sin"; but, on the contrary, he was perfect, the 


image and likeness of his Creator — "very good." And so it is 
with the holy angels. They are the sons of God on the spirit 
plane. Thus does God design that it shall be with his human 
sons. Tthey shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption
 into the full liberty of the sons of God. — Romans 8:19-21. 
Father Adam was originally called the son of God. (Luke 
3:38) So when humanity shall have been restored to perfection
, "then shall the Son deliver up the kingdom to God, even 
the Father," when he shall have put down all insubordination
. Then all those wfoom God will receive will enter into 
the glorious freedom of the children of God. They will be 
perfect, in the image and likeness of their heavenly Father. 


HOW TO PLEASE OUR NEIGHBOR 


"Let every one of us please his neighbor 
Suavity, or the quality of being gracious and pleasing to 
others, is a good trait, especially when properly used, as the 
Apostle here suggests. There are some people naturally so 
constituted that they desire to please others. This may at 
times, however, become a trap and a snare to them. There is 
too great a willingness to please. In order to please, one 
might do things that would not be wise or right. There are 
some, for instance, who indulge in joking, seeking thus to 
please and entertain others. There may be harmless jokes, 
but there are some that are not harmless. Those who are thus 
constituted are in danger of carrying the thinjj too far or of 
being frivolous and thus greatly injuring their influence for 
good. The Lord's children .are instructed to be sober-minded. 
Others are naturally inclined to be crusty and taciturn. 
Some are fault-finding, naturally inclined to be combative. 
Both classes need to curb their dispositions in these directions. 
They need to learn to be more suave and kindly in manner, 
to have a greater desire to please others and to make themselves
 agreeable, to be gentle and considerate, to avoid strife. 
Our text addresses the Lord's people— "Let every one of us 
please his neighbor for his good." The neighbor may be a 
brother in the church, those with whom we are particularly 
identified. We are to seek to be pleasing to them, that our 
company maty be desirable, that we may be a comfort to the 
brethren, helpful to them. The same principle, however, will 
apply to our intercourse with our worldly neighbor. To whatever
 extent we have opportunity we should seek to do the 
things pleasing to our neighbor rather than the things displeasing
 to him. There are plenty of things in this world that 
are irritating. We should desire to do what will give pleasure 
to others, bo far as is wise and proper. We must not deny 
toor compromise the truth nor do what is wrong to please our 
neighbor. We must not go to places fcbat are contrary to the 


for his good to edification," — Romans 15:2. 

spirit of the Lord, in order to please man. Principle is always
 to rule with the church. But we should have a loving, 
kindly sentiment, which desires, so far as loyalty to God will 
dictate, to give happiness to all. 

This principle is referred to in the latter part of the text. 
We are to please our neighbor for his good, for his edification
. We might tell him something that would be very disadvantageous
, very ill-advised. It might be pleasing to him to 
hear the thing, yet it might be sowing seeds of discontent or 
pride or evil-surmising. We are to endeavor to please by politeness
, by kindness and neighborliness — seeking to be helpful
. We are to remiemiber the standards of the Lord — justice, 
purity, truth. We are to do only those things that would be 
for the real good and edification of our neighbor. 

The word edification has in it the thought of instruction, 
benefit. In our relationships with each other as the Lord's 
children, we are exhorted by the Apostle to build one another 
up on the most holy faith. It is so easy to tear down faith 
by some suggestion of error or doubt. The children of God 
should do only good works* The adversary has plenty of devices
 for tearing them down. We all need to be constructive, 
building each other up and helping to be strong in the faith. 

The church of God are not to be scandal-anongers, not 
to do or say things that would be destructive to character, 
but the very reverse. We are to assist one another in the 
upward way, which is toilsome and often very difficult. Those 
who are seeking to upbuild others of the Lord's flock are sure 
to be upbuilding themselves at the same time. Thus we are 
coming nearer and nearer to the perfect standard. St. Paul 
also exhorts in another place, "Let no evil communication proceed
 out of your mouth, but that which is good, to the use of 
edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers". — Ephesians
 4:29. 


APPETITE AND GREED 

November 3. — Genesis 25:27-34. 
a marked illustration of divine foreknowledge— twin brothers who were very unlike in disposition — the attitude of 
each toward the great abrahamic covenant — different views regarding the sex-ling of the birthright — a 
reasonable question and the reply — how spiritual israelites may sell their birthright — esau a type of careless
 christians — why this incident is recorded in scripture. 
"Every man that striveth in the games ecterciseth self-control in all things. Now they do it to receive a 
corruptible crown; but we an tncorruptible" — 1 Corinthians 9:25. 


Isaac and Rebecca had two sons, Esau and Jacob, twins, 
Esau being the elder by a moment or so. These sons became in, 
due time the heads or fathers of two nations nearly as dissimilar
 as were the twins themselves. Jacob's family became
 known as Israel, the peculiar people of God, inheritors of 
the great Abrahamic Covenant, through their father. Esau's 
posterity were subsequently known as Edomites, and are well 
represented today in the Bedouin tribes of the Arabian desert. 
At the birth of the twins the divine prophecy was that the 
elder should serve the younger. The Apostle Paul called attention
 to this prophecy as an indication of God's foreknowledge
 of the difference in the characters of the two children 
and of the divine choice as to the one through whom the 
Abrahamic promise would descend. — Romans 9:12, 

When the twins were about thirty-two years of age, an 
incident occurred which had a most important bearing upon 
the interests of both for all future time. Esau had been away 
on a hunting expedition, and had returned ravenously hungry 
at a time when Jacob had prepared for himself a dinner of red 
lentils, of which both brothers were very fond. Alexander 
White thus graphically relates the incident: 

"Esau was a sportsman, boisterous, wild, clumsy, full of 
the manliest interests and purposes. He was a proverb of 
courage and endurance, a success in the chase. His eye was 
like that of the eagle. His ear never slept; his arrow never 
missed the mark. A prince among men, a prime favorite with 


men, women and children, he was all the time more animal 
than man." 

SELLING THE BIRTHBIOHT 

Esau's tastes and appetites, his desires and pleasures, were 
surely of an earthly kind. He had little interest in his father's 
God and in the great Abrahamic promise that through Abraham
's posterity all the families of the earth would one day 
be blessed. Being naturally of a less religious turn of mind 
than was his brother Jacob, he set more store by his inheritance
 of his father's possessions than in his rights as the 
firstborn to the divine covenants and mercies pertaining to 
the future. Jacob on the contrary, had an opposite estimate 
of values. He was quite willing that his brother should have 
every earthly advantage; but he coveted the special blessing of 
God, whdch had been promised to his grandfather Abraham and 
in which his father Isaac trusted. 

From this viewpoint Esau had already sold his birthright, 
in that it had already in his estimation lost all of its great 
value, that it was not comparable with the sensuous pleasures 
in which he delighted. On the contrary, Jacob inherited more 
of his father's disposition of steadfastness and earnestness, and 
had great respect for the Abrahamic Covenant, deploring the 
fact that by the apparent accident of birth he had lost the 
birthright which his brother did not appreciate. Doubtless, 
too, through his mother he had heard the prophecy that the 
elder should serve the younger, which implied that in some 

[6338] 


October I, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(299-300) 


sense of the word it might be God's will that he should eventually
 become the heir of the promise. 

The incident related in today's lesson, which should be 
considered together with chapters 27 and 28, is one which 
is generally viewed as casting great reproach upon Jacob, while* 
Esau is regarded with sympathy and pity. Jacob is supposed 
to have been an unprincipled deceiver, and Esau an innocent 
dupe, overpowered by unfortunate circumstances and by his 
brother's ambitious cunning. But since the special favor of 
God attended the transaction, it is evidently wise to reconsider 
the matter, lest haply our conclusions may be found to be 
against God as well as against Jacob. And so we do. We 
find that which God could commend and reward, and which 
when properly viewed was entirely right. 

BIGHT OF PRIMOGENITURE 

In patriarchal times, the birthright, the chief inheritance 
in estate and authority, belonged naturally to the eldest son 
of a family. In the case of Isaac, the father of Jacob and 
Esau, it included not only personal possessions, but also covenant
 blessing which God had especially promised to Abraham 
and which had been inherited by Isaac. As Isaac reached advanced
 age, he began to realize that this great covenant blessing
 was not to be fulfilled in himself personally, but was to be 
transmitted to his posterity. This was also indicated to Rebecca
, Isaac's wife, when she was told that "the elder should 
serve the younger." Thus Jacob was shown to be the divinely 
chosen line through which the covenant blessing should be 
realized. 

How Jacob's heart must have dwelt upon the possibilities 
of so great an inheritance, the blessing of God, ,and of the 
blessing of all the families of the earth through his own 
posterity I Doubtless for years he had Bought opportunity to 
purchase from Esau the birthright which the latter evidently 
did not appreciate. Now, when Esau was hungry and desired 
the mess of pottage, was not this Jacob's opportunity for 
giving Esau what the latter preferred and for getting from 
him what he did not appreciate — the birthright which Jacob 
esteemed beyond all things of earthly value? 

On this point Mr. WJiite says: "Everybody knew that 
Esau's birtihright was for sale. Isaac knew, Rebecca knew, 
and Jacob knew. Jacob had for a long time been watching 
his brother for a fit opportunity." At last this canne when 
Esau returned hungry from tiie chase just at the time w*hen 
Jacob's dinner was ready. So when Esau said in substance: 
'Jacob, I am ravenously hungry. Figuratively speaking, I 
am famishing for some of those delicious red lentils of your 
cooking/ Jacob's answer was in effect: *Yes, you may have 
them, and I will go hungry, but on one condition: You are 
the elder, and therefore will have the right to inherit the 
birthright and blessing. But what do you care for Grandfather
 Abraham's covenant? If now you want this pottage 
more than the blessing, say so; and it shall be yours.' 

In effect Esau's reply was: Take it, Jacob, It may be 
good some day, although I confess that I do not have much 
faith in it. To me these people round about, whom our 
father calls heathen, seem to be good neighbors; and I might 
say without prejudice that your doting over that promise 
has made you too sober, almost morose. Why do you not 
come out and (have a good time with tine rest of us ? However, 
if you want my share in the Abrahams promise in exchange 
for that soup, you are welcome to it. I prefer tiie soup.' 

'Wait a moment,' said Jacob. *Let us do this thing 
properly. Make an oath to the effect that this is a bona 
fide transaction for all time.' 'I will do it!' cried Esau. 'Now 
give me the soup.' Thus was bartered the great oath-bound; 
covenant of God and the wonderful blessings which it embraces
, present and future. Neither man knew fully what 
he was doing ; for not until this Gospel age has the mystery 
of God in respect to that covenant been disclosed. Even now, 
as the Apostle tells us, it is made known only to the saints, 
to those who receive the holy Spirit of adoption. 
A EEASONABLE QTJBSTION 

Some one may ask: 'Why did Jacob take from his brother 
the birthright and the blessing? Why did he not give Esau 
the pottage, since the latter was hungry?' 

We think it fair to infer that both Jacob and Esau were 
hungry; for if Jacob were not so, he would not have prepared
 the pottage. Since we have bo evidence to show that 
one was hungrier than the other, let us suppose that they 
were equally so, and that there was not pottage enough to 


furnish a meal for them both. After Esau had made it known 
that he desired something to eat, Jacob evidently thought this 
a proper time for him to secure something which Esau had, but 
which he did not really appreciate, did not value. 

Ihe transaction was a fair one. If one buys a house at 
a bargain, and if botflh buyer and seller are satisfied with the 
transaction, we would not say that it was cheating or robbery. 
And so it was with Jacob. St. Paul calls our attention to the 
matter and declares that Esau was profane. That is, Esau did 
not account tine promise which God made to Abraham as 
worth anything. He was willing to sell it for a mess of pottage
, as though he were getting the better of the bargain. 
Probably he reasoned thus with himself: 'This poor brother 
of mine does not know what life is. If only he would take 
a few lessons from me, he would begin to live. He actually 
believes something which God said to our grandfather, and 
he thinks that some day he will get something wonderful out 
of it. For m3 T part I do not think it worth considering.' And 
so he probably thought that he was the gainer in getting the 
savory meal. 

ESAU OARED ONLY FOB EARTHLY THINGS 

Jacob knew that lie would get into trouble if he would try 
to get the blessing; and yet lie was so desirous of obtaining 
it that he was willing to forego everything else. As a matter 
of fact Esau did not value the birthrignt except from the 
earthly standpoint. He had no confidence in the promise. Of 
course it is possible that there is something not written in 
the record that might give a different view of the matter, one 
more easy to comprehend. The Apostle Paul commends Jacob
's faith, but counts Esau's act of selling the birthright as 
reprehensible, and warns the church not to be like the "profane
 person who sold his birthright." In this statement the 
Apostle seems to intimate that there may be some who 
will desire to sell their birthright, and others who may wish 
to buy. — Hebrews 12:16. 

In our Lord's day the Jews who failed to accept the invitation
 of the Lord, and who were not Israelites indeed, sold 
tlheir spiritual opportunities for the mess of pottage of earthly 
blessings and earthly favor. As a result we who are Gentiles 
by birth, and to wlhom this right did not appertain by nature
, have been invited in to see whether we shall appreciate 
the privileges and win the prize. Those who have the right 
appreciation of the heavenly favor will he more than conquerors
, and will get the birthright. But the Esau class will 
not "so run as to obtain." 

ESAU A TYPE OF C ABE LESS CHRISTIANS 

It will be remembered that after Esau had sold his birthright
, the name Edom was given to him* This name was also 
subsequently applied both to the people descended from him 
and to the country in which they lived. Consequently the 
name Edom is an appropriate symbol of a class who during 
this Gospel age have similarly sold their birthright for a consideration
 as trifling as was the mess of pottage wfhich influenced
 Esau. The name Edom is frequently used by the 
prophets in reference to that great company of professed 
Christians sometimes called the Christian world, or Christendom
. 

Like Esau, the masses of Christendom have sold their 
birthright of special and peculiar- advantage. By the term 
masses we mean the great majority of worldly professors of 
the religion of Christ, who are Christians in name only, but 
who lack the life of Christ in them. These have preferred 
the mean morsels of present earthly advantage to all the 
blessings of communion and fellowship with God and Christ, 
and the glorious inheritance with our Redeemer promised 
to those who faithfully follow in his steps of sacrifice even 
unto death. 

The Lord made types of these twin children of Isaac and 
Rebecca in order to illustrate what he foreknew would be the 
condition among his professed people hundreds of years after 
Jacob and Esau had died. The election of Jacob to be a type 
of the overcoming class was certainly a blessing to him, even 
though it cost him considerable. But the election of Esau 
to be a type of tine earthly-minded was nothing to his disadvantage
. It did not mean that he would go to eternal torment
; nor did it mean that he would suffer anything as a result
 during the present life. On the contrary he was blessed, 
even as worldly, natural men today have blessings of a kind 
which the Lord graciously withholds from the New Creation, 
as being less favorable to their spiritual interests. 


"COULD YE NOT WATCH WITH ME ONE HOUR?" 

Gethsemane! Gethsemane! the Savior's last dark hours I For some sweet word of comfort from the lips of those he 
In agony of soul he sought to know his Father's will; loved. 

Three times he prayed, and thrice he came unto his Chosen Alas ! with weariness their eyes vere heavy and they slept, 

three Ah, me! did e'er the Man of Sorrows utter sadder words 

[6339] 


(300-301) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Than these: "Could ye not watch with me one hour?" And 

then in tones 
Of tenderest sympathetic love, "Sleep on and take your rest," 
He knew their frame, remembered they were dust, and. hushed 

tthe cry 
Of longing in his breaking heart. But he who never sleeps 
Nor slumbers heard his well-beloved Son in that he feared, 
And sent his holy angel to assure him all was well. 


Dear Lord, oh, let me ne'er grow weairy or lie down to sleep 
While thy dear "feet" are glowing like fine brass in crucible! 
Oil! help me watch with them "one hour" — this last sad 

darksome one. 
Oh ! touch my lips with coals of fire from off thine altar, 

Lord, 
That I may strengthen, calm, inspire and bless thy faithful 

ones, 
Until together we shall hear, "It is enougn, come home!" 


JACOB DECEIVES HIS FATHER 


November 10. — Genes-is 27:18-29. 

obtaining thu blessing esau's angeb at his brother — was jacob's course justifiable? — evidences of divine approval 

of his acts — hi8 faith not then as strong as later in life? — esau's die honesty and violation of his oath — 
st. paul's application of this incident — provision for the spxbrtttally blind. 
u Speak ye truth each one Uftth his neighbor" — Ephesians 4:25. 
Many years rolled around after tihe transactions recorded to have still clearer views of the Lord's will in such matters, 


in our last lesson. Esau, still a hunter, still fraternizing with 
the heathen peoples about, had married by this time two Canaanitish
 women, and despite his profligacy, was his father's 
favorite. Jacob was still a God-fearing man, hoping for the 
realization eventually of his purchase, so highly prized. Isaac 
was old and had become Mind, and considered that it was the 
right time to put the management of the estate into the hands 
of the elder son. Accordingly he made it known that he was 
about to bestow the patriarchal blessing; and under his instruction
 Esau had gone forth to prepare ^ome savory venison 
as a feast for his father before the formal pronouncement of 
t(he blessing. 

Bebecca remembered the prophecy that the elder should 
serve the younger, and Jacob confided to her the fact that 
he had purchased the blessing of his brother and had taken the 
latter's oath. They watched to see whether or not Esau would 
regard this oath and the sale of the blessing; but finding 
that he was disposed to disregard it and to violate all of his 
obligations, both mother and son determined to use their 
every power to secure the fulfillment of -Esau's engagement 
respecting the blessing. But knowing that Isaac would not 
accede to this, they conspired to deceive him. 

As Esau's name indicates, he was a hairy man: so they 
arranged that Jacob should put on Esau's fine raiment, speak 
as much as possible in his tone of voice, and present kid's 
flesh to his father and receive the blessing while Esau was 
still absent hunting. Lest Isaac should mistrust the deception
, Jacob's neck and arms were covered with the fine hairy 
skin of a new-born kid. The deception was carried out. After 
Isaac had said: "The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands 
are the hands of Esau," he gave the blessing to bis younger 
eon. JACOB A FUGITIVE BECAUSE OF HIS FAITH 

Of course the unprincipled Esau, who, after selling the 
birthright and confirming the sale with an oatih, was about 
to take it himself, was angry that his brother should have 
outwitted him and obtained the blessing — not apparently that 
he cared so much, for the Ahrahamic promise and blessing thus 
entailed, but he feared, that in some way his prominence in 
the family would be jeopardized and that he might perhaps 
lose the major part of the inheritance, the two-thirds, and get 
only Jacob's portion, namely, one-third. Anger, malice, hatred, 
strife, envy, murder, were in his heart; and he said to himself, 
'It will not be very long until father dies. Then I will slay my 
brother Jacob, and the entire inheritance will be mine.' 

Esau's murderous intentions reached the ears of Jacob's 
mother, who informed Jacob and advised that he go for a 
time at least and live with her father. Jacob, then over 
fifty-seven years of age, following this counsel, started out to 
carve his own fortune, leaving the entire estate in the hands 
of Esau, holding on only to the covenant promise. Here was 
another demonstration of his faith in God. He might have regretted
 his bargain, he might have renounced the blessing in 
Esau's favor. But no; he would hold to this, cost him what it 
might — possessions, a home, family association. He would go 
out in the fear of the Lord; he would attest his devotion to 
God and his faith in the promise. Is it with any wonder 
that we read that in this journey the Lord appeared to him at 
Bethel and assured him that the Almighty would be his exceeding
 great reward? Jacob's faith and zeal were of the 
kind which God approves, the kind which he has blessed 
from Abraham's day until the present time. 

THE DIVINE STANDARD— FEEFECTIOK 

Do we excuse Jacob and his mother, and approve of their 
telling lies to Isaac both by word and act? No, we cannot 
approve this course; and yet it seems evident to us that 
we must not judge Jacob's actions according to the standards 
which we would apply to ourselves. As new creatures in 
Christ Jesus, begotten of the holy Spirit, we have and ought 


still clearer faith than Jacob exercised. But what more coftld 
we expect of a natural man than we find in Jacob's conduct? 
We must gauge our conceptions of right and wrong by the divine
 standard; and while we cannot suppose that God approved 
the course adopted by Jacob and Rebecca, we must check ourselves
 and others from too rabid denunciation of Jacob's 
proceeding by noting the fact that, according to the record, 
at no time did God charge up this matter against Jacob or 
reprove or punish him for it. On the contrary, we find the 
Lord appearing to him and manifesting favor in visions, revelations
 and assurances of divine protection and care, without 
mention of the deception by which the ends were gained. Where 
God keeps silent, is it wise for us to say very much in the way 
of reproof? 

What better course could Jacob have taken? We answer 
that had be possessed greater faith he might have waited on 
the Lord and permitted divine providence to bring to him the 
blessing which he craved, and which God had foretold should 
be his, and which he had purchased at more than its value according
 to the estimation of Esau, though at far less than its 
value according to Jacob's estimation. 

Some point us to the difficulties, trials and perplexities 
which came to Jacob as a result of fleeing from his brother 
declaring that these were God's punishments upon him. But 
we reply that Jacob did not so regard these; that the Scriptures
 remind us that whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and 
that God particularly told Jacob of his love for him. So it 
is with the best and truest of the Lord's people today. The 
fact that they have trials, difficulties, disappointments and 
persecutions, so that sometimes they must flee for their lives, 
by no means proves that the Lord s favor is not with them. 
Rather these experiences, as the Apostle assures us, are working
 out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory. Similarly, Jacob's trials, difficulties and sorrowful experiences
 worked out for him a blessing of heart and character
. A LESSON FOB SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES 

Jacob was not one of those who made the outside of the 
cup clean while within it was impure. He was at heart of 
the character which the Lord approves. Neither can we say 
that he was graspingly selfish with his brother ; for we find 
in his general character a breadth of liberality rarely anet 
with. Wie recall that he never asked for even the younger 
son's one-third interest in the estate, but that returning later 
he instead proffered Esau a present of cattle, sheep, etc. If 
we must charge Jacob with lying lips, we can at least credit 
him with honesty of heart. He lied in order to secure justice 
and because his faith was not sufficiently strong to permit 
him to trust the Lord implicitly respecting a matter which 
he so highly esteemed and was willing to give everything to 
possess. 

A lesson for the spiritual Israelite is that we not only 
esteem, as Jacob did, the value of the divine promise and 
favor and blessing, but that to a similar zeal we should add 
still more faith, so that we could trust the Lord to give 
us the blessings he nas promised. This was the example 
which Abraham set, but which Jacob evidently had not fully 
appreciated. Abraham was called upon to sacrifice his son 
Isaac, the heir of the promise, through whom, the Lord had 
declared the promise should be fulfilled. Abraham's faith was 
sufficient, and in due time God settled the matter in that 
Isaac was received from the dead in a figure. {Hebrews 11:19) 
We cannot doubt that if Jacob had possessed a similar degree 
of faith God in some manner would have given him the blessing
, despite his father's intentions to the contrary and Esau's 
dishonesty and violation of his oath. 

The Apostle refers to the main incident of this lesson, 
the sale of the birthright, and in very round terms denounces 
the spirit of Esau — the spirit that is not appreciative of 


[63401 


October 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(302-303) 


Cod's mercy and of the blessing which he has in reservation 
for them that love him. He speaks of Esau as that "profane 
person who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright/' (Hebrews
 12:16) He was profane in the sense that all the Gentiles
 or heathen were recognized as profane — godless, not reverent
, unbelieving, preferring the things of this present time, 
the good and the bad, to the better portion of the future, which. 
they have not the faith to realize nor the appreciation to 
enjby. 

DIFFERENCES IN HEREDITY 
The fact that Esau was evidently birth-marked and by 
heredity a wild man, loving the more animal and natural 
things, so far from being to his condemnation is rather in, 
his favor. If his failure to appreciate the spiritual things 
was the result of an inherited depravity of taste, then we can 
say that the redemption provided in Jesus' sacrifice covers 
the entire blemish and guarantees eventually to Esau an opening
 of the eyes of his understanding and an enlightenment of 
his mind to appreciate the better things — when in due time, 
during the Millennial age, the Redeemer shall be the Restorer
. (Acts 3:19-21) For Jacob to nave taken the course 
whicih Esau had taken would have been a much, more heinous 
matter; for by. nature he had a loftier mind, a more reasonable
 soul, less impaired by the Adamic fall. 

So, too, when we apply this principle today we find that 
there are many natural men of the Esau type who have no 
interest in or appreciation of spiritual things. We sympathize
 with them rather than blame them, and look forward 
with pleasure to the time when the Lord's mercy shall be 
extended toward them in measure projJortionate to the degree
 of their share in the fall — to assist them by the judgment 
of the Millennial age (its rewards and punishments) to see the 
right way and to learn righteousness therein, and eventually 
(if they will) to attain perfection and eternal life. On the 
other hand, if by the grace of God we have been favored in 
being born the children of believers, how great is this blessing
, especially if by the grace of God our eyes have been 
opened to an appreciation of the heavenly spiritual promises I 
What advantage we have every way over* the others of the 
Esau type! What manner of persons ought we to be in all 
holy conversation and godliness! Surely the Lord may expect
 much more of us, and we should expect much more of 
ourselves than of our Esau neighbors. 

APPRECIATING OUR SPIRITUAL BIRTHRIGHT 

Examining the Apostle's argument still more closely we 
find that he especially addresses the church, not the world, 
in this exhortation that we appreciate God's grace and do not 
sell our birthright. The world has no birthright to sell at 
the present time; for as children of Adam they were themselves
 "sold under sin." The Lord addresses those who have 
by his grace escaped from this slavery, being justified by faith 
in the precious blood of Christ. We were in bondage, but are 
now made free; and whom the Son makes free is free indeed. 
(John 8:36) After being made free we received, as a further 
grace of God, an invitation to be heirs of the Abrahamic Covenant
 — the very one for which Jacob was willing to sacrifice 
everything. We come into this relationship, as the Apostle 
points out, by our acceptance of our Lord Jesus and our full 
consecration unto death with him. The point of the Apostle's 
argument is that all of the consecrated followers of Christ are 
in the position of these two sons of Isaac. The inheritance of 
that Abrahamic Covenant lies between us somewhere; some 
will get it and some will not. 

The Apostle wishes us to see the character of this class that 
will inherit the promise. They must not be, like Esau, careless
, worldly-minded, thoughtless of God and unbelieving respecting
 the future provision. If they are thus disposed, they 
will be sure to find opportunities for bartering their inheritance
. It would surely slip from them, and be given 
to others who have a higher appreciation of its value, as the 
inheritance of this covenant slipped from Esau and was secured
 by Jacob. 


FAITHFULNESS IN WELL-DOING 


The law of Christ is one of service and of self-sacrifice 
until death. All who wish to do right, to live according to the 
lines marked out by the holy Spirit through the words of Jesus 
and his apostles, should not only start out well by making a 
full consecration to God. but should continue faithful, and not 
grow weary of the battle against sin and unrighteousness. 
God is seeking to develop and to crystallize character in his 
people. Therefore in due time, after they shall have suffered 
awhile, battling against the weaknesses of their flesh, they 
will reap the reward. They will get the new bodies which 
God has promised them, the resurrection bodies. Then their 
trials will be ended; for the new bodies will be in perfect accord
 with the new will, and there will be no cause of conflict 
between them. Then the work of grace will go grandly on, 
for the blessing of all the world. 

For this reason, the Apostle says, let us not merely 


avoid harshness toward those who have been overtaken in 
a fault; let us not merely guard ourselves that we shall sow 
to the spirit and not to the. flesh; let us not merely avoid 
weariness in this good way; but let us additionally, "as we 
have opportunity, do good unto all men, especially to those of 
the household of faith." In so doing, we shall be copying 
the character of our heavenly Father. He is the Fountain of 
Blessing. From him come the blessings of the present life, 
the sunshine and the rain, upon both just and unjust. 

4.9 our heavenly Father is continually giving blessings, 
rather than seeking favors, so we as his developed children 
are to have the same character likeness, the same disposition
, the same mind. Let tis endeavor always to do good to 
everybody, but especially let us earnestly desire to do good 
unto all who are the children of God, members of the household
 of faith. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


AN EXHORTATION TO "WALK IN THE LIGHT' 1 

T>kab Friends: — 

I have been deeply impressed by several sentences in 
Volume 3, Studies in the Scriptures, lately brought to my 
attention. In the light of recent events these words of our 
beloved Brother Russell seem almost prophetic. Speaking of 
the Reformation, he says on page 23: 

"Many faithful souls in the days of the Reformation walked 
in the light, as far as it was then shining. But eince their 
dav Protestants have made little progress because, instead 
of walking in the light, they have halted around their favorite 
leaders, willing to see much as they saw, hut nothing more." 

Again, on page 25, we read: 

"Nor is it sufficient that we find ourselves now in the path 
of light ; we must 'walk in the light,' continue to make progress
; else the light, which will not stop, will pass on and 
leave us in darkness. The difficulty with many is that they 
will sit down, and do not follow on in the path of light." 

Moreover, it is a fact that repeatedly our beloved Pastor 
declared: "Perfection of knowledge is not yet here; we are 
not yet in the fullest light of the perfect day." He never 
claimed to have all the truth, or all the light, but simply such 
light and such truth as were due to be revealed at this time 
to the faithful student of the Word of God. 

The foregoing seems to apply to many of those who once 
walked with us, in that they declare their willingness to accept
 and believe whatever Brother Russell wrote, but decidedly
 reject the later truths which are most evidently a 
part of the light now due to the household of faith. My desire
, my prayer, is that I "may walk in the light, may continue
 to make progress and to be daily more and more prepared
 to appreciate and expect still further un foldings of our 
Father's plan, With continued confidence and unceasing prayers
 that you may be guided by His eye, I remain 

Yours in His service. Sister G. W. 8. 

LOSING EARTHLY THINGS, GAINING HEAVENLY ONES 
Dear Brethren: — 

Have just returned home after one of the most blessed 
and happy tours of my life. The blessing of the Lord surpasses
 all our expectations. Inclosed find the usual reports. 
The classes are doing splendidly. Many of them surprise me 
with the number, growth in grace and the keenness of their 
interest. Much of this, no doubt, is because of the very helpful
 character of The Watch Tower articles recently. Surety 
the Lord is gracious and has abundantly supplied all our need 
through this most wonderful medium. The brethren are reading
 and studying it as never before. 

All seem to greatly appreciate the example of our beloved 
brethren along the lines of cheerful submission; and this 
spirit is more and more taking complete control of the church* 
They seem to be fully grasping the thought that, seemingly 
in losing all things, they gain all things, and that they in 
reality do not lose anything. God's name be praised and his 
will be 'done! In much love to you, every one, I am 

Your fellow servant* 0, L. 8. — N. J. 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM THE SOUTH 

Beix)ve3> Brethren; — 

Greetings in our blessed Redeemer's name! It would cheer 


[6S41] 


(303-307) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


your hearts no little to hear the fervent prayers that ascend 
in your behalf at each time of our assembling together for 
worship. 

The last Toweb has been another sup from the Lord's cup 
containing the new wine of our Father's kingdom; and we 
are rejoicing in the blessedness of the "hope set before us." 
Also there seems to be a deep humility and sense of gratitude 
pervading the hearts and minds of the Lord's faithful children
 in our city. 

All seem to be buckling on the armors still closer; and 
with facial expression of peace and joy they group themselves 
together before and after each study hour, discussing these 
wonderful, glorious things now being brought out from the 
storehouse of our Father's Word by those "set" in the body 
for that very purpose. 

Truly do our hearts burn within us as we talk together, 
recognizing our Lord's continued leading through the one 
faithful channel. Praise his holy name! May we each and 
every one be more and more filled with his holy Spirit from 
day to day that we may increasingly honor him now, and be 
fitted for a place in the rapidly approaching kingdom for which 
we have so ardently hoped and prayed. 

With exceeding joy may we now lift up our heads, knowing 
that our deliverance draweth nigih. With renewal of assurance
 of my continued endorsement and my earnest desire to cooperate
 in every way possible in what there may remain to be 
done before we go home, I earnestly entreat an interest in 
your prayers for a fuller measure of the holy Spirit of promise
. 

For many years the friends here have been so handicapped 
by poverty that all we had to give was given to our local expenses
 — hiring halls for public meetings, etc., but now that 
there may be nothing more along that line we hope to send in 
all we can to headquarters in order to cooperate with you. 

The Lord is indeed pouring out upon us spiritual blessings 
and our desire is to show our appreciation in the near future. 
Our Father's abounding grace be with you, beloved fellow-pilgrims
, and grant you always his peace that passeth understanding
, and courage to press forward all along the line. Your 
sister by his favor and goodness, 

Mrs. C. E. K.— Texas, 
CHRISTIAN LOVE TO ALL WHO SUITER 
MY VERY DEAR BRETHREN: — 

"Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and 
from our Lord Jesus Christ." 

I wish to write you just a few lines to assure you of my 
hearty cooperation to the best of my ability and opportunity 
in all of the work of the Society, no matter who may hold 
the position of visible head. If it is possible to be more convinced
, I am more and more convinced every day that the 
Lord is using that channel, and will continue to use it; and 


therefore that whoever he is permitting to manage the work 
is doing his will. 

Is this all the reason I can have for confidence in you — 
just that I believe that God is using that channel, and that 
therefore it must be all right? No, indeed! Besides this, we 
have abundant evidence that the Lord is with you, and that 
the Society continually lias his approval, not only in what the 
dear friends are permitted to bear for his sake, but also in 
the rich spiritual food they are dealing out to us in conventions
 and in The Watch Tower. I have long been wishing that 
I had the proper words to convey my love and approbation to 
the dear ones here and elsewhere. 

The Lord opened the windows of heaven and poured out 
on the St. Joseph convention a blessing that there was not 
room to contain. He also richly blessed me in permitting me 
to be there throughout the entire four days. Oh, what a 
blessed feast we had! It cannot help but bear rich fruit in 
the Kingdom; and I trust that part of it will be in my own 
heart; for I am sure that I received not only sweet joy there, 
but needed strength as well. 

Feeling that I must not take more of your time, I will 
close now, hoping that in the Kingdom I shall be able to tell 
your more perfectly how much I love you all. 

Your Sister by "his grace, L. W. — Mo. 

THE CONSOLATION OF THE KINGDOM 
Dear Brethren: — 

Being blessed by the ministries of yourself and your colaborers
, whom the Lord has ordained to serve his church 
after the departure of dear Brother Russell, the special messenger
 of the last epoch of the church, we take the opportunity
 of sending you this note, which we hope will help to impart
 a word of comfort in this hour of trial which is upon 
the church, as well as upon the world, and which the Scriptures
 call "the hour of temptation." 

We pray for you always, that in the hour of stress you 
may remember that this is the condition of our consecration. 
(Rom. 8:17) We know, dear Brethren, that in all our experiences
 the Lord has a purpose to be served, even as it was 
in the case of St. Paul and the other faithful apostles. So 
may you take comfort and courage from the examples of our 
Master and those gone before. Tthe glorious Messianic Kingdom
, which shall furnish the desire of all nations, will soon 
be here, and its honors will more than repay for all our 
trials. So we are consoled. 

"For God has marked each sorrowing day, 

And numbered every secret tear; 
And blissful ages yet shall pay 
For all his children suffer here." 

With much Christian love to you and all the dear Bethel 
Family, I remain 

Your brother in Christ, G. W. T. — Canal Zone. 


Vol. XXXIX 


PITTSBURGH, PA. ? OCTOBER 15, 1918 


No. 20 


THE PURPOSE SERVED BY THE LAW COVENANT 


'Wherefore the law was our pedagogue to bring us unto Christ, that we might he justified by faith.' 

of good things to come" — Galatians 3:24; Hebrews 10:1. 


"The law had a shadow 


In coming into the family of God as sons, we are not to 
get the impression that we are thenceforth freed from all 
divine law. On the contrary, we may say that, so surely as 
God himself had no beginning, just so surely had law no 
beginning. But from the time that God's intelligent creatures
 began to be created, law began to operate; for his 
righteous will has always been the law incumbent upon those 
of his creatures who were mode in his own image. 

Since the government of Jehovah is universal and eternal, 
it follows that there never has been and never can be a time 
or a place without law, nor a being not subject to Jehovah's 
law, or under its control. God's will is the standard of 
righteousness; and this will be true throughout the eternity 
of the future, as it has been throughout the eternity of the 
past. 

In the creation of angels, God gave them intelligence to 
distinguish between right and wrong. Their minds are so 
perfectly balanced that right is always seen to be right and 
wrong seen to be wrong. Those in heart-harmony with their 
Creator never mistake wrong for right. This capability of 
moral discernment on the part of the creature is said to be 
God's "image" which, when possessed, obviates the necessity 
for the written law. The "image" was possessed not only 
by all on the spirit planes of life, but likewise by our father 
Adam in his creation. 

With the law of God — briefly comprehended in the one 
word love — written in their very being, how strange it would 

[4342] 


have seemed to the angels if Jehovah had set up in heaven 
the tables of the law afterwards given to Israel! Of what 
service could such a statement of the law of God be to beings 
who had a much higher conception of it? Such a presentation 
of the law of Adam in the garden of Eden would have been 
similarly inappropriate; and none was given. 

LAW IN MAN'S HEART BLUBBED BY SIN 

After Adam had violated the law of God written in his 
being, he passed under the sentence of death, which, working 
in his members, affected him mentally and morally as well as 
physically. Thus began the effacement from his heart of that 
power of discernment, or knowing right from wrong instinctively
. This fallen condition and the state of the unprepared 
earth into which Adam was driven, where he was compelled 
to labor in sweat of face for daily sustenance, were all conducive
 to the cultivation of selfishness; and hence selfishness 
soon became the rule of life, instead of love, as in God's 
original creation. 

As selfishness gradually gained control, the law of God 
became proportionately erased from man's heart. The effects 
of the fall continuing naturally from parent to child as the 
years rolled on, it is safe to say that in Moses' day the 
original law of God was almost obliterated with the vast 
majority. ,A general picture of the race aside from Israel is 
given by the Apostle Paul in the first chapter of the Epistle 
to the Romans, with an account of just what led to so dreadful
 a condition. 


October 15. 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(307-308) 


God chose, or elected, to give the law on tables of stone 
to the seed, or descendants, of his friend Abraham, according 
to a promise made to him, that Qod would especially use 
and bless his posterity, and make them a blessing to the 
remainder of the world. But as if to assure mankind that 
the Hebrews were not naturally superior to other men, God 
permitted them to go for centuries into slavery to the Egyptians
, then the greatest nation on earth. That law given at 
Mount Sinai was given, doubtless, because the law originally 
expressed in Adam's nature had become unintelligible; and it 
was given to a chosen people, at the hands of an especially 
chosen leader. 

God's law could not have been re-written in the hearts of 
the people of Israel; for that would have implied the restoration
 of that nation to Edenic perfection; and such restoration 
was then impossible, because the penalty of death rested 
upon Israel as well as all others of mankind, and would continue
 until a ransom for Adam was found and made effective* 
THE TWO CLASSES OF ELECT 

But the question naturally arises, Why did God give the 
law upon tables of stone to Israel? Why did he not wait 
until the "due time" to send his Son to be the ransom price 
for all mankind, and until that price had been applied for 
all, and then begin the work of "restitution of all things' 1 
(Acts 3:19-21) — the rewriting of the original law in the 
human heart? The Apostle Paul answers this important 
question. He declares that when God promised to bless all 
nations and families of the earth through Abraham's seed, 
he referred not to the patriarch's offspring as a people, but 
to Christ Jesus, who according to the flesh would be born 
of Abraham's descendants; and that for this Son the Father 
would select a "bride," a companion, of many members, but 
all of one spirit with the Son to be joined with him in his 
sacrificial sufferings, and later to be perfected with hjm 
in glory, to share in his great work of salvation and blessing 
for the whole world. — Galatians 3:16, 29; Romans 8:17, 18. 

The Apostle points out that the "due time" for the Lord 
Jesus to come to the earth to die as a sacrifice for sin must 
be before the selection and preparation of his bride; for the 
bride class must be redeemed before its members could be 
called and chosen. He shows that it was the Father's purpose
 that the merit of Jesus' sacrifice should be applied for 
this elect class before it would be applied for the world; that 
in the Father's purpose the sacrifice of these was to be joined 
to that of their Head as a part of the great Sin-offering 
for the world. Jesus, then, must first "appear in the presence 
of God" for this class. 

Moreover, it was a part of the Father's purpose that, 
before the age in which the bride should be chosen, another 
elect class should be prepared by testings and disciplinings 
during the interval between the fall of man and the coming 
of Jesus to die, but for the most part during the period 
when God dealt with Israel tinder the Law Covenant. Hence 
the greater number were chosen from Israel. 

UCPOETANT OFFICE OT THE LAW COVEKAMT 

This covenant which the Lord made with Israel, Abraham's 
children according to the flesh, would do them great good, 
even though they might thereby pass through some very 
severe experiences. It would keep them from sinking lower 
into degradation in proportion as they would endeavor to 
keep God's law, thus preventing their losing the image of 
God as completely as did other nations, and thus making 
the original law of God so much the more discernible. And 
not only so, but this law given to Israel would be to some 
extent a standard before the world; and in this way Abraham
's natural seed might "lift up a standard for the people," 
and to a slight extent bless all nations even in the present 
life, by calling a halt in the downward course and by reviving
 in all to some degree the dying influence of the original 
law of conscience. 

Of this covenant with Israel St. Paul declares, "The Law 
[Covenant] was added [to the Abrahamic Covenant] because 
of transgressions [because sin was spreading and men were 
becoming degraded very rapidly], tilt the promised seed should 
come [not only Christ Jesus the Head, but also the church, 
which is his body, to do the real work] to whom the promise 
[Abrahamic Covenant] was made." "For the Law [Covenant] 
made nothing perfect"; moreover, "the Law [Covenant], 
which was [given] 430 years after [the Covenant made with 
Abraham], cannot disannul [or in any manner change the 
terms or conditions of that covenant], that it should make 
the promise of none effect." — Galatians 3:19, 17; Hebrews 
7:19. 

There was more done at Sinai tihan is generally supposed. 
Not only was the law written upon tables of stone given 
there, but a covenant based upon the law was there entered 


into, between God on the one part and Israel on the other 
part, Moses being the mediator of that Law Covenant. The 
covenant was the important thing! With hearts leaping for 
joy Israel accepted the proposal to become God's covenant 
people. It seems not to have occurred to them, however, that 
theirs was a different covenant from the one made by God with 
Abraham. 

Great confusion of thought has resulted from a failure to 
notice the point just made; namely, that the transaction at 
Sinai was important, not because God there began to have 
a law over his creatures — for we have seen that God's empire 
never was without law — but because God there made a covenant
 with Israel according to the terms of which they were 
no longer to be treated as sinners, but to he accepted aB 
God's servants, if faithful to the requirements of that covenant
. The law written upon tables of stone was the basis 
of that covenant; for every blessing under their covenant 
was made dependent upon absolute obedience to the law. — 
Exodus 19:7, 8; 34:27, 28. 

Hence in speaking of their covenant, it became customary 
to think and speak of the law, upon which everything depended
. Thus in the New Testament, when speaking of the 
Law Covenant, the Apostle calls it "the law," leaving the 
word "covenant" to be understood. Yet in every instance 
a glance at the language and the context shows unquestionably 
that the Law Covenant is meant, and not merely the written 
Law of the Ten Commandments. For instance, the expression
, "the law made nothing perfect," could not refer to the 
law alone; for laws never make anything perfect. They merely 
show the perfect requirements. 

The law on tables of stone showed Israel God's requirements
, but it remained for the covenant to try to make the 
people perfect by promising blessings for obedience and curses 
for disobedience to the law. And this the Law Covenant 
failed to do; for it made nothing perfect. It served, however, 
to restrain sin in a measure, with those who endeavored to 
obey the law; but it could not lift any out of the mire of 
sin and out of the horrible pit of death. It could not give 
life. It left Israel under the same death penalty as they 
were under before the law was given. Additionally, as they 
were bound to it by a contract with God, it brought them 
under the additional penalty of their broken law. And this 
God knew when he made the covenant with them. 
THE LAW A OOVENAHT OTTO DEATH 

God's covenant with Abraham was not hampered by a 
law. It was unconditional, and was made as soon as Abraham
 entered Canaan — "In thy seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed." The seed was promised and was sure, 
and so was the blessing. But not so with the Law Covenant. 
It said, "The man that doeth these things shall live by 
them." — Leviticus 18:5; Romans 10:5. 

Israel did not seem to consider that they might be unable 
to keep the law perfectly. They promptly accepted the terms 
of the covenant, little realizing that it was a covenant "unto 
death," and not unto life. ' Its promise of life was on terms 
easy enough for perfect men, although impossible for fallen 
men; but having agreed to the terms, they were bound by 
them. Thus the Law Covenant "slew them," or took away 
from them the very hope of life it had helped to enkindle. 
It left them in a condition of despair. The Apostle Paul 
voices this hopelessness when he explains: "I was alive without
 the law once, but when the commandment came, sin 
revived, and I died! .... WTetched man that I am! Who 
shall deliver me from this body of death?" — Romans 7:7, 24. 

Is it asked, "In what way was the Apostle Paul or any 
Jew alive without the law covenant? Were the Israelites not 
under Adamic condemnation like the remainder of the world?" 
We understand the thought here to be that in his promise 
made just after the fall, that the seed of the woman should 
bruise (crush) the serpent's head, and in his promise to 
Abraham that in his seed all the families of the earth should 
be blessed, God had given clear intimation that mankind 
should in some manner be delivered from the penalty of death 
resting upon them. Before the children of Israel came under 
the Law Covenant, they had a share in that general hope 
of life. But now, having made a covenant with God that 
promised life if kept, but death if broken, they had lost 
the hope of the world in general and had come under an 
additional penalty of death. 

But God, in his infinite wisdom and mercy, purposed that 
the One who should redeem the world from the curse resting 
upon them as a whole, should at the same time redeem 
Israel, both from the Adamic penalty and from the curse of 
their Law Covenant; for "Cursed 'is every one that continueth
 not in all the words of the law to do them." This he 
would accomplish by dying upon a tree — a cross, thus be- 


[6343] 


(309-310) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


1»ITTSBURGH, Pa 


coming a curse for Israel. "Cursed is every one that hangeth 
on a tree." {Galatians 3:13; Deuteronomy 21:23) This 
"curse" of the Law Covenant, es well as its "blessings/' 
belonged only to the nation of Israel; for no other nations 
werte under that covenant. This fact needs to be clearly 
seen, ih order to understand why our Lord could not have 
redeemed Israel if he had not beeni a Jew. That the "one 
man/' Christ Jesus, could justly give the redemption price 
for our race is "stated positively by the Apostle Paul, and 
the reason is given ; namely, that all mankind died in the 
"one man" Adam. But how could one man redeem the entire 
nation of Israel from the curse of their Law Covenant? 
HOW MOSES COULD MEDIATE FOB ISRAEL 

We answer that in connection with Israel's covenant there 
is a point that few seem to have noticed. It is that God 
dealt with only one man in connection with the making of 
that Law Covenant; and that man was Moses, who stood in 
the position of a father to the whole nation, the nation being 
regarded and treated as children under age. (Numbers 11:11- 
15) The Lord talked with Moses in the- mount. He gave the 
tables of the law to Moses, and Moses gave the law to the 
people. Moses mediated between Israel and God in the establishment
 of the Law Covenant. (Exodus 24:1-8) All 
Israel were "baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the 
sea." "He that despised Moses* law died without mercy." — ■ 
2 Cor. 10:2; Heb. 10;28. 

So thoroughly was the one man, Moses, the representative 
and typical father of the nation of Israel, that because of 
Israels rebellion, God could purpose its destruction and the 
fulfillment of all his engagements with Moses' family instead. 
(Exodus 32:10, 31, 32) It was thus, as God's representative 
on the one hand and as Israel's representative on the other, 
that Moses could be the mediator of the Law Covenant between
 God and that nation. 

When the Man Christ Jesus, by full obedience to that Law 
Covenant, became entitled to life everlasting under its provisions
, he had the right to "Moses' seat" — the right to 
supersede Moses as the law-giver and representative of that 
nation. Moses, being a sinner like the remainder of Israel, 
could not give the Israelites life, nor gain it himself, under 
the law. But Jesus, by fulfilling its requirements, became 
the heir of the promise of life, and could bring them to perfection
, where they could keep Goo"s perfect law. And this 
same Jesus could redeem them from the curse of their Law 
by becoming a curse for them in his death on the cross, thus 
giving the redemption price for Mosee and all in him, at the 
same time that he was laying down his life for the world. 

The law given to Israel was to accomplish various purposes
. While they could not have perfectly kept the law, 
yet as a nation they did not make earnest effort to obey 
the requirements of their covenant. They did not do what they 
might have done. The humbling experiences which have come 
to them as a result of their experience under their Law 
Covenant will prove eventually a blessing to many of this 
people. Through the Prophet Ezdkiel, God declares of Israel: 
"Because they had not executed my judgments, but had 
despised my statutes, and had polluted my sabbaths, and 
their eyes were after their fathers' idols, wherefore I gave 
them also statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby 
they should live."— Ezekiel 20:24, 25. 

THE LAW A PEDAGOGUE 

From the beginning God designed that the Law Covenant 
should prove "a pedagogue fa servant who in olden days 
led children to school] to lead them [Israel] to Christ," as 
our first text declares. It has 'done a good work in convincing
 them that they are sinners and unable to save themselves
 by their good works; for they have never gained life 
through their law, but have continued to die; and for many 
centuries they have realized the Lord's disfavor. 

At the time that Jesus came there was quite a goodly 
number of Jews who Were in a holy condition of heart. When 
the number of Israelites then in Palestine and the surrounding
 territory is compared with the number of Gentiles throughout
 the world, it is remarkable that so many Jews were 
found to respond to the Gospel call. In the same length 
of time we believe that but a small proportion of that number 
from the Gentiles would have been ready to give a hearing 
ear. While only something over five hundred were found 
to become Jesus* disciples up to the time of his death, yet 
within' a comparatively few days thereafter many thousands 
accepted him as the Messiah and were baptized, as the result
 of the preaching of the Apostles on Pentecost and the 
days following. 

the full scope or the law 

Many Israelites, however, "were in the condition of the 
young ruler who came to Jesu3 asking. "Good Master, what 


good thing shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" The 
Master told him that if he would enter into life he must 
keep the commandments, must obey the law. Then Jesus 
enumerated the commands, ending with the comprehensive one, 
"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." The young ruler 
replied, "All these things have I kept from my youth up; 
what lack I yet?" Jesus looking upon him loved him, as 
any noble person would love a character of that kind. Then 
the Lord pointed out to the young ruler that he had not 
comprehended the full essence of the law, that there was a 
degree of consecration to which he had not attained. If he 
loved God with all his heart, he would wish to serve God 
with all that he had, whatever the cost. If he loved his 
neighbor as himself, he would wish to use his means for 
the blessing of others. 

Evidently the young man had not previously realized his 
responsibility. He was very rich and inclined to be selfish. 
Jesus struck right at' the root of his trouble: "Go, sell all 
that thou hast, and give to the poor; and thou shalt have 
treasure in heaven; and come, take up thy cross and follow 
me." (Matthew 19:16-22; Mark 10:17-22) Ah, this was 
too much! The relinquishing of his great fortune was requiring
 more than he was willing to give. He went away 
sorrowful. Never before had he surmised his real heart 
attitude. He had been merely keeping the letter of the law, 
while missing its spirit. 

MORE JEWS THAN GENTILES WERE BEADY 

When we turn to the Gentiles to see how the Gospel prospered
 amongst them, we perceive that it progressed very 
slowly. In every new city the first convert was a Jew, one 
who had been under . the law. Evidently the Jews had the 
basis for faith in God. After the door of favor had been 
opened to the Gentiles, the Apostle Paul went to Athens, 
the center of Greek culture and learning, and preached the 
message of the kingdom there. But apparently he did not 
make even one convert to Christianity. It has required more 
than eighteen hundred years to gather a sufficiency from 
among the Gentiles to complete the 144,000 which God has 
designed as the full number of the Gospel Church. — Revelation 
7:4; 14:3. 

So we can see that while the Law Covenant was not one 
that could give to the Jews everlasting life because of their 
own imperfections and the imperfections of their mediator, 
nevertheless it was not a curse to them, but a blessing — not 
only to those Jews who were living at the time when Jesus 
came, but to many previously; namely, the prophets and all 
the faithful ones who by their faith and heart obedience had 
won the favor of God. (Hebrews 11) AH other Israelites 
we understand, will come up in the Millennial age as Gentiles
; "for they are not all Israel who are of Israel/' as the 
Apostle declares, but only those who exercise the proper faith 
and render full obedience. 

METHOD 07 DEALING WITH THE GOSPEL OHT/BOH 

God's dealings with the church of Christ differ widely 
from his dealings with natuml Israel. The sanctified in Christ 
Jesus, spiritual Israel, need no such law of commands as 
was given to Abraham's natural seed. Love to God and to 
man, and sacrificial love for the brethren, is all that is enjoined
 upon the new creature in Christ. Love is the very 
essence of his new mind; for it is the spirit, or mind, of 
his Master. As we examine the commands of "Thou shalt" 
and "Thou shalt not," given to natural Israel, we realize how 
unfitting these would be for spiritual Israel. What saint 
would even think of being guilty of the sinB enumerated in 
the Ten Commandments! 

The preface to these Ten Commandments (Exodus 20:2) 
shows that these commands were given only to Israel after 
the flesh: "I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out 
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage." Moses 
also declares (Deuteronomy 5:1-15): "Hear, Israel, the 
statutes and judgments which I speak in your ears this day, 
that ye may learn them and observe to do them. The Lord 
our God made not this covenant with our fathers, but with 
us. even us who are all of us here alive this day." (See 
also Ezekiel ^0:10-13; Nehemiah 9:4-37) All God's commands
 to the Hebrew people are proper and suitable for any 
fallen man. But they are surely quite inappropriate to any 
new creature in Christ Jesus, whose very nature as a child 
of God is to do right and to please the Lord. 

Under our Lord's teachings we can see that to keep the 
law means more than its surface indicates ; that he who hates 
his brother has the murder spirit, and is a murderer; that 
he who desires to commit adultery lacking only a favorable 
opportunity, is in heart an adulterer (.Matthew 5:28) ; that 
he who loves and serves money, and spends time and talents 
in seeking earthly riches of any kind, is an idolator. Indeed, 


[6344] 


October 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(310-311) 


the full complement of the law is this: "Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy Cod with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with all 
thy soul, and with all thy strength; and thou shalt love 
thy neighbor as thyself." So broad and deep is this injunction
, so all embracing, that even new creatures in Christ 
cannot measure up fully to it in spirit. Because of the 
hindering weaknesses of our imperfect human body, Ave need 
the covering robe of righteousness furnished by our dear 
Redeemer. How thankful we are that we have been assured 
by the Lord through the Apostle that we are not under the 
law but under grace! — Romans 6:14. 

THE SUM OF THE MATTER 
We see, then, the blessing that the Law Covenant was 
designed to be to those to whom it was given — Israel after 
the flesh. It was indeed a pedagogue to lead them all to 
Christ — not only those who then became united to him; for 
it will prove a blessing in the time now near at hand, when 
the blindness which has afflicted Israel for nearly nineteen 
centuries shall be removed, and when the Jews shall recognize 
their long-looked- for Messiah. Their schooling under their law 
will be a great assistance to them, when the "time of their 
visitation*' as a nation shall again have come. 


As spiritual Israelites, we should exercise care that our 
liberty in Christ is not made an occasion of stumbling to 
others who do not see the Christian's liberty, who do not 
realize that Israel's law is not binding upon those who are 
in Christ. Our law of love demands this, as St. Paul forcefully
 points out. (1 Corinthians 8:9-13) But while thus 
seeking to exercise forbearing love toward the weak, we may 
rejoice indeed in our glorious liberty as sons of God. Let 
us stand fast in it; Let us enjoy to the full our rest of 
faith — the Christian's Sabbath! 

Our Sabbath abides seven days in the week, and twentyfour
 hours of the day. It is not broken by physical labor, nor 
is it dependent upon physical ease. It is a deep abiding rest 
of faith, and can be broken only by doubt, by unbelief, by 
disobedience to our God. We now see that Israel's Law Covenant
 was a foreshadowing of the good things which the Christian
 church enjoys. (Hebrew 10:1) We realize that Israel's 
Law Covenant was as far inferior to our covenant of sacrifice 
as their sacrifices are to the "better sacrifices" of the Gospel 
age, as their altar is to our altar, and as their candlestick and 
their table of shew-bread are to ours. In all these things the 
realities are far greater than were their shadows* 


For love of thee, for love of thee, with every friend I'd part, 
If only thou, my blessed Lord, wilt dwell within my heart. 

I'm willing, Lord, for love of thee, to be misunderstood, 
Accept whate'er thou dost permit of evil or of good. 

For love of thee, for love of thee, I'll dread no scorn nor shame, 

But seek each d«y, for love of thee, to honor thy dear name. 


FOR LOVE OF THEE, O LORD 

Content, my Lord, for love of thee, to be ignored, unknown, 
No joy to know in any love save only thine alone. 

For love of thee I'll strive, dear Lord, to keep the narrow way. 
For love of thee, I'll watch and pray and trust thee, come what 
may. 

For love of thee, of thee, dear Lord, the heaviest cross I'll bear, 
Assured that, through -thy love for -me, thy glory I shall share. 


GOD THE HELPER OF THE NEW CREATURE 

"The Lord is my helper, omd I will not fear what man shall do unto me." — Hebrews 13:6. 


Whoever would come to God finds that in order to do so he 
must possess a certain amount of knowledge of him and of his 
glorious character. The heathen, for instance, cannot come 
to him; for they do not know him, nor do thev know of the 
arrangements which he has made for human salvation. Quite 
a large number of those living in America and Europe have 
very little opportunity for knowing God; for during the dark 
ages "the faith once delivered to the saints" became contaminated
 with the teachings of pagan philosophy, and the resulting
 mixture brought a measurable degree of darkness. As a 
consequence, there is a great difference in the teachings of the 
different denominations which purport to be Christian, although
 they agree to some extent. But so little ie known of the 
fundamental truths of Christianity that many who accept our 
Lord Jesus as their Savior have not the remotest idea of the 
divine plan for the salvation of the children of Adam. 

Coming to the Bible teaching upon the subject, we perceive
 that God created man a glorious being, a human being, 
a little lower than the angels. In his perfect condition man 
had fellowship with God. He had the divine parental care, together
 with all the rigihts and privileges of a son of God. 
( Luke 3 :38 ) But when Adam became disobedient to the divine 
law, he forfeited his right to be a son of God; and because 
of his disobedience he w^as condemned to death. Because of the 
laws of heredity, all of Adam's posterity share with him in 
this alienation from God. 

For more than two thousand years the matter continued. 
The race of Adam were without God and having no hope in 
the world. True, God made slight manifestations of favor 
toward a few men, such a* Enoch, Noah and Abraham. He did 
not receive these few 'back into eonship, however. Then the 
children of Israel were accepted ae & nation, and had certain 
promises made to them on condition that they would keep 
the Law of God. But although they were granted an opportunity
 of demonstrating whether tliey could keep that Law, 
yet not one of them could dk> so perfectly. Therefore they could 
not come back into harmony with God and receive the divine 
blessing. They must remain under the curse pronounced in 
Eden. 

THE HIGH CALLING OF THE GOSPEL AGE 

Now we see that the six thousand years which have passed 
since Adam disobeyed the divine law were six great thousandyear
 days, man's work week, during which he has labored 
with sweat of face; and that now we are living in the great 
seventh day, earth's Sabbath Day. The six great thousandyear
 days of man's labor and sweat of face under the curse 
are ended ; and the great seventh day is God's time for blessing
 all the families of the earth, for rolling away the curse 
and rolling in the blessing. The Scriptures show us that God 


has a basis for the blessing of the world. That basis of restitution
 to all that was lost in E|den is the fact that Christ died 
for the sin of the whole world, that in due time he will make 
an application of the merit of his sacrifice on behalf of the 
whole world. This glorious message is the Gospel — the glad 
tidings that God is willing to be reconciled to mankind, that 
he has appointed our Lord Jesus as the One through whom he 
may be reached, and through whom the world may come back 
to God. 

Meantime, God sent word through the apostles that he was 
willing to make a covenant with those who would desire, during
 this Gospel age, to be in fellowship with him. Those who 
could exercise the faith he invited to become sons of God — 
not on the human plane, as Adam was, but on the spirit plane 
— and promised that in the resurrection they should hare a 
change to the spirit nature, the divine nature. This invitation
 went forth. Whoever heard of it was privileged to avail 
himself of it, if he wished to do so. 

When first we heard that God was willing to permit us 
to be his children, we inquired whether there were any conditions
 attached to the invitation; and we were told that there 
were very stringent ones. Our Lord Jesus declared that no 
man can come unto the Father except through him. In eome 
way all of God's niercv and love is hidden in Christ. "He that 
hath the Son hath life." We wished to get away from the 
death penalty, to be free from sin and death, and to return 
to God's favor. Those who heard the words of our Lord 
Jesus or of his twelve apostles, those who read the epistles 
written by those apostles or those who read, hymns containing 
the message — no matter how they received it— -had the terms 
and conditions in their minds; namely, that God was willing 
to receive us through Christ, and that to become Christ's wo 
must become his disciples. 

JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH 

A disciple is one who follows, one who imitates, one who 
seeks to do as his master does. So we had before us the 
proposition that whoever would come to God must believe that 
he is, and that -he is the rewarded of those who diligently seek 
him. We believed that our Lord Jesus Christ had given his 
life for the sins of the whole world, and that we must become 
disciples or followers of him. We learned that if we would 
reign with him we must also suffer with him. Our Lord himself
 said: "If any man will be my disciple, let him take up 
his cross and follow me." That is, let him practise self-denial 
and put it into effect; and then, as a reward, he will share 
with Christ in his kingdom. 

Aa we sought for further information, the Bible told us 
that the first thing for us to do was to take the step of justification
, to be made right, made just. By nature we were 


[6345] 


(312-315) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


sinners. Not only had we transgressed in the past, but we were 
imperfect and did not know how to do perfectly. To be justified
 is to be made right, not only as respects past sins, bu/t 
also as to further sins, so that God would be willing to receive
 us back into relationship with himself. The Bible shows 
us thai God's plan for the world in the future is that then 
whosoever will shall be made right actually. As mankind aceept
 the divine terms, they will grow stronger mentally, morally
 and physically, until finally at the end of Christ's Millennial
 reign they will be perfect human beings, ready to be approved
 of God and accepted to life everlasting, made fully 
right in the sense that Adam was right in the beginning. 

With the Church, however, it has been different. God did 
not justify them actually, but reckonedly — "justified by 
faith." Should any one ask, "Wihat do you mean by justification
 by faith ?" we reply : The Bible explains that in those 
who become the church God operates along the lines of their 
minds; that is to say, when we gave our hearts to him he 
henceforth reckoned our flesh as dead — not to be restored with 
the world by and by, but as consecrated to death. Our Lord 
Jesus Christ consecrated his human life to death; and whoever
 follows in his steps must do likewise. 

After we had agreed to consecrate our life unto death, God 
accounted it as done. He accounted us dead as human beings
, but alive as embryonic new creatures — not perfectly alive 
as spirit beings, however, In order that he might test our 
loyalty to himself and to the principles of righteousness, he 
permitted the new will, the new creature, the newly begotten 
spirit being, to use the old body and thus to demonstrate what 
we would like to do, to manifest whether we really wished to 
keep the covenant into which we had entered with him, whether
 we would use our time, our strength, our energy — all that 
fwe had — in the doing of the divine will. If our testing revealed
 the fact that we merely made a lip agreement instead 
of a heart consecration, then our covenant meant nothing; for 
God is not seeking those who worship him in a formal manner, 
but those who worship him in spirit and in truth. 

IMPORTANCE OF COOTBOLLZNCt THE TONGUE 

In testing us, the Lord was willing to take us according to 
our intentions. If we found that we had done something for 
which an apology should be made, he expected us to demonstrate
 thai our intention was right by going to the injured person
 and niaking the proper amends. Whoever is able to conquer
 his tongue is able to rule his entire body. While the 
tongue is a little member, yet it is very unruly. Therewith 
bless we God, and therewith curse we men (James 3:1-12) 
But the Scriptures give us the proper thought — "Speak evil 
of no man/* How many Christians there are who are continually
 stirring up strife with their tongues! The adversary 
controls many in this manner long after they have escaped 
from his domination in many other respects. This is largely 
due to the fact that they do not detect that they are doing 
Satan service, do not even detect that they are stirrers up of 
strife, hatred, envy, malice and are planters of roots of bitterness
 whereby many are defiled. — 'Hebrews 12:15. 

So by these various means we are demonstrating to God 
our obedience to his will. All this is because we have been 
justified by faith. Until we were justified by faith, we had no 
dealings with God. One who is not in justified relationship 
with God might be doing very good work ; and yet he could get 
no credit whatever as a new creature. The only way to obtain 
such credit is, first of all, to become a new creature, by taking
 the necessary steps. We are not actually justified now, 


but are justified by faith in the blood of Jeeus Christ. 
By faith we accepted the divine invitation to become followers
 of the Lord Jesus Christ. By faith we presented our 
bodies a living sacrifice, recognizing that these bodies were not 
actually justified, <but that God was willing to accept them 
through the merit of our Lord's sacrificial death. By faith we 
go on to fulfil the terms of our Covenant of Sacrifice, and to 
lay down our lives in the service of God and of the brethren. 
By faith we live in the world, although not of the world. By 
faith we live a life of resurrection; for we are reckoned dead 
as human beings, but alive as new creatures. While we are 
actually walking about in our old bodies, we are "risen with 
Christ'* to "walk in newness of life." If we finish our course 
faithfully to the end, we shall be granted a .share in the first 
resurrection. — Romans 6:4; 8:1-4; Colossians 3:1-4. 
THOSE WHOM GOD HELPS 

All this is by faith. Everything is of faith in the time of 
faith — the Gospel age. But after our Lord has brought actual
 salvation to us, it will no longer be of faith. It will 
then be actual. (1 Peter 1:3-9) Whoever will not walk by 
faith now cannot be of this class; for God is now seeking a 
class who are walking by faith, not by sight. To this class he 
has given promises and many strong evidences of his love; and 
yet it is all by faith, so that with the Psalmist we can say: 
"The Lord is my helper/' 

As children of God the church have a special reason for 
having faith that he is guiding- all their affairs. As St, 
Paul says : "We know that all things work together for good 
to them that love God, to them who are the called according to 
his purposed (Romans 8:28) Whoever would apply this 
promise to himself must first have come into personal relationship
 to God, under the special covenant of this Gospel age. 
(Psalm 50:5) Christ Jesus and his body members have entered
 into this covenant relationship with the heavenly Father, 
who has 'become their helper, their ■care-taker. But since our 
flesh has been laid on the altar of sacrifice, God is not to be 
expected to be the helper of our flesh. In some instances it may 
be to the advantage of his cause that our flesh should be 
spared ; hut as a rule the flesh is to be offered up. 

What then does God help? The answer is that the new 
creature is represented as saying, "The Lord is my helper." All 
things will work together for the good of the new creature and 
for the good of the Father *s work, which we have been invited 
to share through Jesus Christ. In other words, our spiritual 
interests will be forwarded, cared for. God being thus our 
helper, we need not fear what man might be able to do unto 
us. Although man might be able to do many things to hinder 
us and to cause trouble for us, yet we may be content that, 
since all our interests are in the Father's care, his grace will 
he sufficient for us, according to his promise. He will not permit
 us to be tempted above what we are able to stand, but 
with every temptation will provide a way of escape. 

God's people need not fear. It is the fear of man that 
bringeth a snare. (Proverbs 29:25). New creatures are to be 
free from this fear of man. They are to use the beat judgment
 they have; they are to use the spirit of a sound mind. 
Thus doing, they are not to fear what man shall do unto them. 
On the contrary, they are to be perfectly restful in God's 
(hands; for he will not permit anything to occur to them that 
will not be overruled for good. He will not permit us to endure
 any sufferings which we cannot bear. Therefore we are 
to trust him, and thus we shall receive a great blessing of mind, 
a rest of heart in Jehovah God. 


ENTIRE 

Haste thou on from grace to glory, 
Armed by faith and winged by prayer; 

Heaven's eternal day before thee, 

God's own hand shall guide thee there. 


SUBMISSION 

Soon shall close thine earhhly mission, 
Soen shall pass thy pilgrim days; 

Hope shall change to glad fruition, 
Faith to sight and prayer to praise. 


JACOB FLEEING FROM HIS ANGRY BROTHER 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "Responding to Divine Promise," published in issue of March 15, 1907, which 

please see.} 


JACOB WINS ESAU 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "Making Friends With Mammon," published in issue of March 15, 1913, which 

please see.] 


CHARTS OF EZEKIEL'S TEMPLE 


We are preparing a very fine chart of Ezekiel's Temple, in 
eight colors, size 33x36 in c lies, on white tax cloth, printed on 
both sides. The measurements of the various parts of the 


Temple are as accurate as we knew how to make them. These 
charts will be found to be very helpful in conjunction with the 
study of the vision of Ezekiel. Price $2.00 prepaid. 

[6846] 


PUTTING OFF ADAM AND PUTTING ON CHRIST 


"Yc )\avc put off the old man with his deeds, and have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of 

Kim that created him" — Colossians 3:9, 10. 


In the above text tire Apostle does not say: "Ye are intending
 to put off the old man, and intend to put on the new" ; 
i;or does he say: "Ye are putting off the old man, and putting 
on the new man/' lie says very definitely that the thing has 
been done: "Ye have put off the old man, and ye have put on 
the new man." What does he mean? Who is "the old man" 
to be put off? Who is "the new man" to be put on? When 
did we put off the one, and put on the other ? 

Apparently the Apostle is considering the whole human 
family as being part and parcel of Adam, who is the old man. 
God created the old man perfect, "in his own image and likeness
"; but sin wrought great havoc and alienated Adam and 
his race from God and from perfection. We are all therefore 
steeped in sin ; we have become slaves of sin, under the dominion
 of Satan, the Bible says. Thus the old man is in a 
very bad condition, and his Creator refuses to acknowledge 
him. But God has made preparation for the old man through 
the groat Messiah, so that in due time restitution may come 
to him. Those "times of restitution" have been deferred for 
6,000 years and are only now at the door. 

When the Apostle wrote these words, the restitution times 
were nearly 2,000 years in the future. We see that he did not 
mean that*the natural man, the world, had put off Adam. He 
was speaking of the church. TM3 class have put off relationship
 with father Adam. They have disowned that relationship. 
They have separated themselves from him. They have become 
united to another, a new man. 

FOBGETTING OTJB "FATHER'S HOUSE" 
We inquire, Who is this new man? The Bible answers that 
the Head of this new man, this person we have joined, is 
Christ; the church are members of his body. The Apostle 
says that some of the early members of this body were taken 
from the Jews, and that then the call went to the Gentiles, to 
complete the foreordained number. So this new man has now 
been in process of creation for eighteen hundred years and 
more. This man is the new Adam, the second Adam; the old 
man was the first Adam. The first Adam and his race having 
become enslaved, his works are bad. Anger, malice, hatred, 
envy and strife are represented in his children, because they 
have deflected from the heavenly Father and have been led 
astray by the sophistries of Satan. But nearly nineteen hundred
 years ago the Father began to take some out of the world 
who with our Lord are in a sense to take the place of the first 
Adam; and he gives them this name — the new man — showing
 that this class is in some respects the antitype of Adam. 
"The first man was of the earth, earthy; the second man is 
the Lord from heaven." Here we have what the Scriptures 
style "the old man*' and "the new man." 

When we consecrated ourselves to God we renounced Father 
Adam and all the things pertaining to him, all hope from that 
source. This i3 not something we are doing now, but something
 we have done, not by the flesh, but by the spirit, the 
mind, the will. In our minds we have renounced sin, renounced
 self, renounced Satan; we have forgotten our "father
's house," the human hopes; we have completely turned 
over a new leaf. We have given ourselves to God, having 
learned of his arrangement whereby he is able to accept us, 
without violating the principles of his own government; and 
this acceptance, we see, is through our Lord Jesus Christ. Our 
Lord Jesus by giving himself a ransom thus provided a way 
by which we might become associated with him, and he himself
 has been glorified to become the spiritual Head of this 
new spiritual body, of this new spiritual man—the Messiah. 
We heard this heavenly invitation, that we might step out 
of the old condition and into the new. The Lord's people have 
made this consecration of themselves, this renouncement of 
sin, renouncement of all hope of restitution. They gave up 
all earthly rights and privileges when they became members 
of the new man, when they became associated with Christ as 
members of his body. 

THE WILL THE NEW CREATURE 
This whole proceeding is in our minds, our human bodies 
being reckoned dead from the moment when we made this renouncement
; for the body is a part of the old man. Yet this 
body is not actually dead. Hence our wills as new creatures 
have the work of operating for a time in the old body. This 
body belongs to the old nature; it was formerly under the 
control of the old will, which is now dead. The new will, 
having taken the place of the old will, is controlling and directing
 our bodies, and should do so, the Apostle tells us. Our 
human bodies are now owned by the new creature, who is the 
master, and they have become quickened to serve the Lord. — 
Romans 8:11. 


This new man is "renewed in knowledge." The Lord does 
not give us new bodies when we come into membership in the 
body of Christ, He has promised that he will give us new 
bodies by and by, in the glorious change of the first resurrection
. The new creature will then receive the spirit body 
which God has designed for it. But now he wishes us to use 
the old bodies and to bring them under control, thus developing
 and crystallizing, through discipline, the character of the 
new creature. It is of God's provision that we have come to 
know of these glorious heavenly things through his message, 
his word; and it is this Word of God that has worked so powerfully
 thus far. 

By faith we accepted these wonderful provisions, and now, 
since we have come into God's family, his holy Spirit, which 
he gives through his Word, is working in us "to will and to 
do of his good pleasure." This is the message of God which 
St. Peter speaks of when he says that God "hath given unto 
us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these we 
might become partakers of the divine nature." (2 Peter 1:4) 
The promises of God reached us at the time when we were 
begotten of the holy Spirit. Then we began to grow ; and 
we continue to grow in knowledge and in grace more and 
more in proportion as we feed upon the truth which God's 
Word supplies. 

THE BBIDE OF THE "SECOND ADAM" 
But this knowledge, this transforming power, has had 
more effect upon some than upon others. If it has had its 
legitimate and proper effect upon us, and has done a thoroughly
 transforming work, so that it has quickened us to earnest
 zeal and love, then we shall become in due time partakers
 of the divine nature in the resurrection. So whoever of 
God's children will not permit the heavenly message and the 
Spirit of God to work in them unhindered, will receive less of 
divine favor. Such will not be accounted worthy of that 
4iigh position of membership in the foody of Christ, but must 
take a lower position, as members of the great company class. 
Such will have failed to make their calling and election sure 
to membership in the new man, the Christ. 

in contrasting the first Adaan and the second Adam the 
Apostle indicates that it is not Jesus in the flesh who is the 
second Adam, but that "The Lord of glory" is the second 
Adam. "The first Adam was of the earth, earthy." Jesus also 
was of the earth, earthy, when he was the man Jesus; but he 
was begotten of the holy Spirit at the time of his consecration 
of his earthly being to death, at Jordan, and the new creature 
there begun was developed to perfection. Finally, when he was 
"put to death in the flesh," it was that he might subsequently 
be "quickened in spirit," in the resurrection. Having become 
thus quickened and made perfect, as a new creature, as a 
spirit being, he became the glorified head of that class who 
will also become spirit beings of the divine order. He became
 "the Lord from heaven"— ^the One to be expected at the 
second advent. 

Our Lord's footstep followers are sometimes called his 
members, and sometimes called his bride. Either of these two 
pictures fits well the circumstances and conditions. In the 
case of the natural man, Adam, Eve was his mate, his bride, 
and was also a member of his body; for she was taken from 
his side. Similarly the church is a part of her Lord's body; 
and it was through him that life was made possible to her. 
She is to be the bride of the second Adam, who is to be the 
Life-giver to the world. 

The new man is "renewed in knowledge after the image of 
him that created him." God is creating this new man; and 
so the Scriptures tell us that we "are God's workmanship, 
created of God in Christ Jesus unto good works," This image 
of himself which God is working in us, he is not working by 
arbitrary power. He is not compelling us to become like himself
. He is merely working by his promises, with our hearty 
co-operation. There is no compulsion in any sense of the 
word. He is working in us first to will, and then after we have 
willed, after we have become Jesus* disciples, he works in "us 
to do. But all this work is through his word, through his 
promises. His providences, of course, co-operate with these 
promises ; and their influences upon us is that of transformation
. 

"We are changed into the same image from glory to glory" 
— the image of our Lord, {2 Corinthians 3:18} That is to 
say, in proportion as we are faithful to the Lord and are led 
by his -Spirit, guided by his Word, in that proportion we come 
to understand our heavenly Father better; and a* we seek to 
do those things which we see to be his -will, we are develop- 

[6347] (317-318) 


f.iJ8 319) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


ing in ourselves his glorious likeness, his character. Thus we 
are being transformed day by day; and we can readily see 
that unless we become thus developed spiritually we shaft 
not be ready for the glorious resurrection change, which St, 
Paul tells us will come in an instant — "changed in a moment
, in the twinkling of an eye"; for "flesh and blood cannot
 inherit the kingdom of God." So long as. we are in the 
flesh we are not perfect as new creatures. We are waiting, 
therefore, for the grand consummation, when we shall be perfected
 with the Lord and sharers of his glory. 


INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


1. Question: — Does a fear of death indicate a want of 
faith or a low grade of spiritual health or what? 

Answer: — We are to remember that our physical condition 
has much to do with our feelings, and that therefore these are 
not a trustworthy guide as to our spiritual condition. One 
might be in bo nervous a condition that erven a slight noise 
would make him very uncomfortable. Any one thus supersensitive
 might even have a fear* of death. But that physical condition
 would by no means prove that he was not a true child of 
God. Some people have the organ of vivativeness, love of life, 
much larger than do others. All such would naturally have a 
greater dread of death than would one in whom this organ was 
relatively small. Our Lord Jesus seemed to have this natural 
dread of death, which did not leave him until God had assured
 him that he had made his calling and election sure, and 
would have a resurrection from the death condition. — Hebrews
 5:7. 

If one of the Lord's children should have a dread of death, 
it would be welt for him to seek the Father's face in prayer, to 
seek the assurance that he had divine approval. God's Word 
enables us to know when we arc acceptable children; and as 
Christians we should endeavor to drive away our feara by 
giving heed to that Word, keeping' it before our minds and 
meditating upon the precious promises of divine love and care, 
and asking for the promised grace to help in time of need. If 
we do this faithfully, we shall find in our hearts more and 
more a loyalty and a willingness to walk in the footsteps of 
Jesus unto the end, cost what it may. Then we can say: "I 
will fear no evil; for thou art with me." 


2. Question: — What is included in the nime "Church of 
the First-born"? 

Answer: — To our understanding this term includes both 
the little flock and the great company. In the type the tribe 
of Levi was in two parts, the priests and the Levites. By divine
 arrangement this tribe represented all the first-born of 
the children of Israel. {Numbers 8:5-18) In the antitype 
the Church of the First-iborn is a name U9ed to include all the 
spirit-begotten of the Gospel age, whether of the priestly little 
flock or of the great company. 

3. Question: — What is the difference between the soul 
and the body? 

Answer: — There is a marked difference between soul and 
body. A body might lie here before us, but have no intelligence
. Thus it was in the creation of father Adam. God 
formed him out of the dust of the ground ; but the inanimate 
body thus formed had not yet become a soul. The second step 
was to "breathe into his nostrils the breath of life,*' to vitalize 
the inanimate body. As soon as the breath of life was given, 
the eyes began to see, the ears to hear, the brain to think. In 
other words, intelligence began. From that time on, Adam 
was called "a living soul." (Genesis 2:7) When he died, 
however, the process was reversed. The body was there, but 
bereft of life. A<lam was no longer a soul. Indeed, in one 
sense the soul might be said to have perished. But the Bible 
tells us that in his great plan for human salvation God has 
arranged for the revival of that soul in the resurrection. 
Therefore we are privileged to speak of that soul as not dead, 
but asleep, inanimate, to be awakened in the Millennium. 


CONVENTION REPORTS 


Four general conventions were planned by the Society for 
August 30, 31 — September 1 and 2, -so located as to serve the 
friends to the best advantage across the continent, the cities of 
Boston, Cleveland, Milwaukee and Oakland being chosen for 
this purpose. These conventions are now matters of history; 
and with one accord those who were privileged to attend them 
are agreed that they were "the best yet." We subjoin brief 
reports by brethren who attended. 

THE BOSTON CONVENTION 

Those who attended the Boston Convention realized "how 
good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in 
unity"; for there the dear Lord poured out such blessings 
that we could not contain them all. The Boston friends did 
all in their power to make the visiting brethren comfortable, 
and succeeded .to a remarkable degree. That the Lord blessed 
their efforts, and their loving hearts as well, was evidenced by 
their beaming, happy faces, and testified to by all. 

At this convention thirty-four were immersed; and the 
earnestness, the determination shown, as well as the spirit 
of the occasion, told us that great blessings still follow the 
consecration of our wills to God. Every discourse was 
pregnant with helpful thoughts; and these covered such a 
wide range that all present found just what their souls could 
feast upon. Surely it was the Master himself who guided and 
who came forth to serve us! If this convention was a foretaste
 of what the "General Assembly of the Church of the 
First-born," will be, th.n we should all strive with all that 
in us lies to be found worthy ef a share therein. 

The closing love feast was especially enjoyable; and not 
a few tear-stained faces were seen. How our hearts yearned 
for the grand feast of love beyond the vail, where no parting 
hand-shakings will cause us heartaches, but where we shall 
be forever with the Lord and be satisfied, yes really satisfied! 
Oh, what a hope! All our tears and trials will then be past; 
but their memory will be as pearls. 

At the closing session the audience voted thanks to the 
•Society for providing the convention and its speakers and to 
the Boston Churrh for its loving efforts to serve them so efficiently
. The chairman then called upon all to rise who desired
 to exnre*^ if possible, a more complete consecration to 
m T r TieavpTilv Father and a more cheerful sacrifice henceforth 
in his sprvipp. Forthwith tho audien/v* arr>se en masse. 
BRIEF REPORT OP CLEVELAND CONVENTION 

At Cleveland Cod's kind providence had arranged all essentials
 for a joyful time of fellowship and spiritual uplift. 
The attendance ranged from 800 to 1200. The stress of present 


conditions, together with the realization that the hour is very 
near for the great convention in glory, had developed in our 
hearts a deep desire for a special manifestation of God's power 
to strengthen and encourage. From the start the spirit of 
sweet fellowship and joy often witnessed toward the close of a 
convention seemed to pervade. 

On the first day of the convention inspiring messages on 
"Fellowship" were delivered by Brothers Bridges, Spring and 
Herr. On the second day the testimonials and discourses were 
in accord with the topic "Examination." The earnest searehings
 of hearts seemed to produce in those present a deep longing
 that the work of self-subjugation might be hastened to 
completion at whatever cost, and that our Lord's glorious 
image might shine where hideous Self once stood in the foreground
. Brother Bohnet, Hooper and Barker gave excellent 
discourses. 

Sunday was scheduled as "Our Lord's Day." Discourses 
were given by Brothers Crist, Nash and Baeuerlein. Many 
were the expressions of regret that but one day of the convention
 remained. Monday was "Kingdom Day" on the program
. Following a discourse on Baptism forty-two symbolized 
their full consecration to God. Among these was a boy seemingly
 about nine years old t but with an appreciation of God 
and of consecration which would put to shame many of mature
 years. By unanimous vote of the convention a love feast 
followed the afternoon discourse by Brother Baker, to permit 
participation by those whom necessity compelled to leave before
 the closing session. Later in the day, after an inspiring 
sermon by Brother Boyd, with lovelit countenances and expressions
 of deep joy evidenced by voice, by smiles and by tears 
the convention closed with the singing of "God be with yoti 
till we meet again." 

ECHOES FROM MILWAUKEE CONVENTION 

The convention at Milwaukee was acknowledged by all in 
attendance to be one of the best ever held. The sweet spirit 
of the Master seemed to pervade the whole atmosphere; and 
all were determined to be a blessing to one another. It was 
estimated that about 850 attended. Peace, joy and contentment
 seemed to shine out from each face; and the determination
 to be loyal to the Lord, the truth and the brethren was 
the keynote of all remarks. To realize that we are three and 
a half years into the great time of trouble and then to note 
the smiling faces of all present was a most wonderful evidence
 of our precious Master's promise: "Lo, I am with you 
alwav"; and again, the assurance: "I will never leave thee 
nor forsake thee." 


[6348] 


October 15. 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(306-323) 


The convention concluded with a love feast; and many 
eyes were tear-dimmed with the sorrow of parting and also 
with the joy of anticipation of the great convention when we 
shall be forever with the Lord. 

AT OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 

One unusual feature in connection with the Oakland Convention
 was that four brethren were sent there from the East, 
traveling together, serving the friends at Chicago, Denver 
and Los Angeles en route. At these cities two-day conventions
 had been arranged, and an average of 500 attended *t 
each place. 

About 650 were present at the Oakland Convention, which 
proved to be a most helpful and enjoyable concourse. It was 
remarkable for the sweet spirit manifested ; and as those present
 eagerly listened to the discourses or gave their testimony 
to the Lord's grace, their radiant faces outwardly attested the 
inward heart-condition. Many and fervent were the expressions
 of mutual Christian love among the conventioners. 
Twenty-three were immersed at Oakland. 

At all the conventions resolutions were passed expressing 
love and sympathy for the brethren at headquarters, and pledging
 co-operation with the Society and its work. 
OTHER CONVENTIONS 

Other two-day and four- day conventions were held at New 
Oastle, Pa,, Portland, Oregon, Seattle and Spokane, Boise, 
Omaha, Kansas City, St. Louis and Toledo, while still others 
are proposed. Altogether the year 1918 will be the banner 
year for conventions. It is expected that the Pastor Russell
 Memorial Convention at Pittsburgh Oct. 31 — -Nov, 1-3, 
will be the principal one of the year. The public activities of 
the Society being somewhat curtailed at present, these gatherings
 seem to supply the needed stimulus and encouragements 
for the friends. Evidently the Lord has wonderfully bleat the 
conventions. 


THE WATCH TOWER OFFICE 


The Society's removal to new headquarters in Pittsburgh is 
now completed, and all departments are now in operation, although
 it will take two or three weeks more to get fully 
settled. We have beautiful quarters on the third floor of the 
Martin Building, with plenty of room, well lighted and well 
ventilated. We are confident that the removal is providential ; 
for the Lord's hand has been continually manifested in connection
 therewith. In another column we print an up-to-date 


price list of our stock on hand. Please do not order anything 
not listed, until you see notice of replenished stock* in THE 
WATCH TOWER, Address all letters to th« Watch Tower 
Bible <S Tract Society, Room 310, Martin Building, N. S. 
Pittsburgh, Pa. 

To secure uniformity we suggest that our new headquarters 
be referred to as "The Watch Tower Office," and that paragraph
 two of the Vow be changed to harmonize therewith. 


Vol. XXXIX 


PITTSBURGH, PA., NOVEMBER 1, 1918 


No. 21 


VIEWS FROM THE TOWER 

"For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your toays my ways y saith the Lord, For as tiie heavens are higher than 
the earth, 90 are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts" — Isaiah 55:8, 9. 


The grand truth so succinctly stated in this text is not 
appreciated by any except the mature Christian; and it takes 
years of experience in the school of Christ to learn this lesson
 well. Very few learn the lesson properly; but as a re* 
suit these enjoy a calm and a peace in their daily life which 
others do not. These also have a greater confidence than 
others possibly can have. In the words of the Apostle, "We 
know that all things work together for good to them that 
love God." Such have learned that the failure of their own 
plans, the thwarting of their own purposes, is not an evil 
nor an evidence of divine disfavor. They have learned that 
this is the very way which God uses to teach them the lesson
 that divine wisdom is superior to human wisdom; and 
what confidence, what hope, what joy fill the hearts of these! 

With such mature Christians every trial is but "light 
affliction/' "not worthy to be compared with the glory which 
shall be revealed." When seeming calamities come into their 
lives, they "sorrow not as those who have no hope" ; for' they 
recognize the Father's loving hand in every experience, assigning
 to them needed lessons, in order that they may be "made 
meet for the Master's use." This lesson of full submission to the 
divine will must be learned by us all, ere we can hope to share 
with our Lord in his kingdom. 

The past two years of the church's experience have been 
fraught with many such lessons. How often the Heavenly 
Father has seemingly hindered the accomplishment of our 
plans, and afterwards shown us his own grand designs, which 
we have always found to be higher, grander in every sense, 
than our own! 

A SUCCESSION OF STOPBISES 

It would seem well at this season, the memorial of the 
translation of "that faithful and wise steward" from earthly 
to heavenly activities (Revelation 14:13), to review the Lord's 
dealings with his people, both individually and collectively, 
and learn lessons thereby. Two years ago the Lord's people 
were all engaged in harvest activities, with no thought of 
any sudden change. Brother Russell had gone on an extended 
trip. Few realized how near he was to his journey's end. 
On the morning of November 1, 1916, word had gone all 
around the world that Pastor R usse H had died on the afternoon
 of October 31. How little did the masses realize earth's 
loss! How few realized that his work was continuing! None 
realized hi3 gain. 

From that time on, apparently the Lord has been giving 
to the church a aeries of experiences different from what we 
had had before, a succession of surprises, every one of which 
was needed, that we might learn the lesson of our text. The 
report of Brother Russell's death came as a shock to us all, 
and proved a trial of our faith. Most of us had planned his 
demise at a different time and in a different way. Now our 
minds were more or less bewildered; and we began to question
: "Has the harvest ended? Is the door closed? Are 
we of the great company class? Who will carry on the work 
now ?" 

At first we were inclined to mourn our loss unduly, to 
grieve over Brother Russell's departure. But soon our sorrow
 was turned to joy; for it speedily became manifest that 
the Lord had simply exalted Brother Russell, and had given 
him greater powers and grander opportunities of service than 
were ever his before. Furthermore, when, we realized that his 
interest in the members of the church remaining in the flesh, 
and his ability to assist them, had been increased manifold, our 
joy increased proportionately. 

THE TEST WOW UPON THE CHURCH 

Slowly the rnajority regained their equilibrium, as the 
Lord manifested his ability to carry on the work. How much 
we all needed to learn that lesson in order to stabilize our 
faith! How grandly the Lord fulfilled his promise to raise 
up shepherds to care for the flock! How marvelously the 
work progressed for a time! How strenuous was the activity, 
and how we did enjoy it for a time ! 

Suddenly, however, divine providence so overruled that 
the work should come almost to a standstill. How the Lord's 
providences seemed to change! How differently events were 
occurring from what we had expected! Another needed trial 
was upon the church. While engaged in the activities of the 
harvest work and while smiting Jordan, we had learned lessons
 of confidence, humility and patience; but the dear Lord 
saw that we needed to learn these same lessons from another 
angle. Would we continue to have confidence, to be humble 
and patient, when all our activities had practically ceased? 

The Lord is still permitting this test to 'be upon us. Would 
we lose our confidence now, and conclude that the Lord had 
deserted his work and his people, when he has told us: "I 
will never leave thee nor forsake thee"? Would we lose our 
humility to the extent that we would assert that the Lord 
had cast off the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, and was 
no longer using it as his agency for comforting and blessing 
his people? Would we become so impatient with the Lord 
and nis ways that we would take things into our own hands 
and cease to recognize the church as a Scripturally organized 
body, and consider ourselves at liberty to "draw away disciples
 after" ourselves? Would we so far lose the Master's 
spirit and forget his injunction not to judge, not to condemn, 
that we would thus injure our brother ? How could the work 
possibly contimue now?' Who could be found with ability to 
carry it on? 

An early demise of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society 
was predicted by some; and all the dear sheep wondered what 
would be the outcome. Quietly and grandly the Lord impressed
 the lesson again, that his work was not dependent 
upon the ability of man, but that the Father was able to 


VII— 34 


[6349] 


(323-333) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


perfect praise out of the mouth of babes and sucklings. During
 the past few months the grand old ship, which has weathered
 the storms of centuries, has passed through some terrific 
gales. The powers of the air have done their worst to destroy
 it; but the fact that it is still afloat is due to the other 
fact that "the Lord is in the ship/' Some, fearing the storm, 
have deserted the ship, forgetful that our safety lies in remaining
 in it. We pity them, and rejoice that the majority 
have stood the test. 

ANOTHER WEEDED TEST 

How we needed this lesson, also! A few have been entrapped
 by the adversary, but we are glad to say that every 
day's mail brings to the office the assurance that some of them 
have recovered their balance; and for this we rejoice. It is 
plainly evident that the friends are gradually learning the 
lesson that "man proposes, but God disposes"; that God's 
thoughts, ways and plans are not ours. In this connection 
we might add that the removal of the Society's headquarters 
to Pittsburgh is proving to be another test to some ol the 
Lord's dear ones. Very evidently still further lessons of 
confidence* in the Lord are needed. Human wisdom and sentimentality
 would have dictated our stay in Brooklyn; but 
divine providence forced us to move; and we wish to say that 
there aTe so many evidences of the Lord's providences in the 
removal that we cannot enumerate them. This work has not 
been accomplished without severe trials; but we have invariably
 found that these proved to be blessings in disguise. The 
Lord has permitted us to 'be confronted with almost insurmountable
 obstacles, only to brush them quickly aside at the 
proper time. 

How fitting it seems that the great work begun by our dear 
Pastor at Allegheny, under the Lord's providence, forty years 
ago should be finished here! There is every evidence, however, 
that there is a further work ahead, after a brief resting season
 ; and we counsel all the Lord's people to be patient, courageous
 and humble. The Scriptures clearly point out a second 
smiting of Jordan, and some texts seem to imply still further 
unfoldings of God's Word. In Romans 15:4 we are told that 
everything written in the Old Testament was for the instruction
 of the church, while she is in the hoping time — -written 
for her comfort and to help her to learn lessons of patience. 

This thought suggests an understanding of all the prophecies
 before the church shall be glorified. May not the "many 
like words" "added" to the book which was burned and which 
Jeremiah rewrote (Jeremiah 36:32) be the corroborative testimony
 of all the prophets — Isaiah and all the minor prophets? 
It would not surprise us if this were the case. We believe that 
The Watch Toweb will be used as the Lord's official organ 
to disseminate his truth until that work shall have been finished
. But however this may be, time alone will tell. 

During this little resting time let us practise "washing one 
another's feet," rendering to the various fellow members of 
the body those loving little services which are "an odor of a 


sweet Hlcense' , to God. And let us not forget to grow in grace 
and in knowledge ourselves. Now is the time to put on the finishing
 touches to our own character and to help the brethren 
to do the same. 

A SPECIAL MEMORIAL 
This issue of The Watoh Towee contains a supplement 
which should awaken in every loyal heart the blessed memory 
of the faithful loyalty and loving zeal of that noble man of 
God, Charles Taze Russell. How grandly his message and his 
example have encouraged us in the past! How the memory 
of these encourages us still! How beautifully he always acquiesced
 to all the divine providences which came into his own 
life and into the work which he loved so well! 

"Deep in unfathomable mines 

Of never failing skill 
God treasures up his bright designs 
And works his sovereign will. J ' 

And now, dear friends, we warn you that the trials are not 
ended. W e shall need to gird on the whole armor of God that 
we may be able to stand in the still more evil days to come. 
The prophet forewarns us, saying, "Who shall be able to 
stand?" The apostles declare that every man's faith shall 
be "tried so as by fire." (Malachi 3:2; 1 Corinthians 3:13; 1 
Peter 4:12; Revelation 6:16, 17) All the "wood, hay and 
stubble" will be "burned." If we would be disloyal under any 
trial, God will surely permit that trial. If our faith will fail 
at any point, the Lord will surely give us that test. If we can 
be induced to injure or to condemn our brother, our test will 
be along that line. If we are disposed to substitute our plans, 
our ways, our thoughts for God's plans, ways and thoughts, we 
are ^ot yet ready for the Messianic kingdom; and God will 
surely give us opportunities to manifest our true disposition 
and the intents of our hearts, 

A WOBD OF EXHOBTATION 

Not in vain did the prophet say: "He shall be like a refiner
's fire and like fuller's soap," when he shall "purify the 
sons of Levi" This surely indicates the thoroughness of the 
test at this time The Revelator adds : "They that are with 
him are the called, the chosen and the faithful"." Let us leave 
the disposing of our individual affairs in the Lord's hands, as 
well as the disposing of the church's affairs, and the Society's 
affairs, also. The Lord will never desert his people. "O thou 
of little faith, wherefore dost thou doubt?" 

When we shall have learned well the lesson that "God is 
able to save to the uttermost," that "he who has begun a good 
work will finish it," and that he chooses his own times and 
ways for the accomplishment of all his plans, then we shall 
have learned to distrust our own wisdom, our own plans ; and 
we will submit joyfully to every experience which our Father 
permits to come into our lives. Then, and not until then, do 
"we know that all things work together" for our good, individually
 and collectively. 


Beloved one! 
Beyond earth's sunshine and its rain, 
Beyond all weariness and pain, 

Thou art at rest. 
E'en though we mourn our loss, we joy to feel 

Thou art so blest. 

faithful one! 
Now privileged to see unfold 
God's purpose in the scroll unrolled 

By Christ's own hand; 
And thou host made report: "I've done as thou, 

Lord, didst command." 


SPECIAL DIVINE PROVIDENCE 

[Reprint from August 1, 1893, issue which please see.] 

"IN MEMORIAM" 


radiant one! 
Along the dark and narrow way 
Thy faithfulness casts back a ray 

Of hope and cheer; 
For thou so joyously thy cross didst bear, 

With scarce a tear, 

blessed one! 
We pray for strength to do God's will, 
To wait and suffer and be still, 

As thou hast done, 
Nor faint nor fear, but still run on until 

The prize is won. 


"THY SAINTS SHALL GLORIFY THEE" 

[Reprint from October 15, 1900, issue which please see.] 

PURITY A QUALIFICATION OF THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD 

"Be ye clean, that hear the vessels of the Lord."— Iaaiah 52:11. 


This unjunction of the Prophet Isaiah was addressed primarily
, no doubt, to those who were connected with the Jewish 
priesthood or identified with the Lord's house, the Jewish Temple
. The law required that the priesthood should be clean. 


There was an outward cleansing provided for, we remember, 
both in the Tabernacle and in the Temple service. The priests 
had the laver of water at which they were to wash before handling
 the vessels of the Lord's house. Doubtless also the in- 


[6350] 


November 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(334-235) 


struction included the thought that they should be clean in 
their lives, in their conduct before the people; for they represented
 the Lord. 

We believe that in a larger and broader sense, in a prophetic
 sense, this text has application bo the church of Christ, 
the royal priesthood, of which Jesus is the great High Priest, 
identified with the true temple of God. The vessels of the 
Lord's house might represent the various truths of the Lord's 
Word — a variety of truths on a variety of subjects. To a 
certain extent the term "vessels" might apply to the different 
books of the Bible. In a way still different the term might be 
made applicable to the Lord's people themselves, represented 
as 'being the vessels of the Lord in that we contain and give 
forth his word. The Apostle says, for instance (2 Timothy 
2:20, 21): "In a great house there are not only vessels of 
gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth and some to 
honor and some to less honor." He exhorted that these vessels 
should be kept clean, ready for the Master's use. 

In our text, the vessels would seem to represent the truths 
of God's Word, and those who bear them the priests. The application
 is quite clear to us who are followers of the Lord 
Jesus, the antitypical priesthood, the royal priesthood, which 
St. Peter mentioned. (1 Peter 2:1!) We should all be clean. 
This cleansing began with us before we have 'become priests. 
When we purposed to become priests, to accept the Lord's 
invitation, a certain cleansing of heart and life took place. But 
in addition to this cleansing from individual shortcomings, we 
need cleansing from the defilement of original sin, which can 
be effected only through the merit of the blood of Christ. This 
cleansing took place after we had presented ourselves to God 
in -consecration. Having thus been cleansed and accepted of 
the Father to membership in the royal priesthood, it is necessary
 that we keep cleansed; so the Scriptures again exhort: 
"Cleanse yourselves from all filthinees of the flesh and spirit.*' 
— 2 Corinthians 7:1; 1 John 1:7. 


This cleansing work is one that may well be considered 
continual; for despite our very best endeavors we find that 
weaknesses of the flesh still cling to us more or less. It is impossible
 to put away absolutely every imperfection of thought, 
word and deed while we are in the mortal body. Our personal 
cleansing work, therefore, as well as the cleansing of the blood 
of Christ, must continue as long as we live; and a constant 
watchfulness to avoid sin and all the defilements of the fallen 
earthly nature is necessary. 

The thought given in this text is to be continually before 
our minds — that all who attempt to bear the message of the 
Lord, to be his servants, to speak his truth, should be, first of 
all, clean, pure of heart. "Blessed are the pure in heart; for 
they shall see God." Those who are impure of heart will not 
be permitted to see God, either in the literal or in the figurative
 sense. The seeing of God now, the discerning of his character
, the understanding of his plan, diligence in copying him 
— all this comes to us through a purity of heart. The more 
pure in heart we become, the more our intentions are honest, 
true and clean, the more we may understand and appreciate 
our great heavenly Father; for he reveals himself to such, 
and to no others. Hence the work of cleansing and keeping 
clean is of the greatest importance. 

We must attain absolute purity of heart, of intention ; and 
then so far as possible we must keep our words and conduct 
free from sin, free from defilement of any kind. If any regard
 sin in hia heart, God will not hear him. This is the positive
 declaration of his word. (Psalm 66:18) If therefore, 
any neglect to keep himself in the love of God, he will soon 
go into outer darkness, the darkness of the world, the darkness
 of the nominal church. Hence our abiding in the Lord's 
favor and in the light of his truth is made dependent upon 
our keeping ourselves in his love, upon our keeping ourselves 
in this cleansed condition, in purity of heart, and so far as 
possible in purity of word, thought and deed. 


INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


Question: — Explain that Scripture which declares thai 
God repented that he (had made man, and that it grieved him 
at hi9 heart. 

Answer: — 'This question is based upon Genesis 6:6. The 
matter is plain when we see that the word repent may mean 
a change of either conduct or mind, and often refers to a 
change of course as a result of change of conduct or of mind. 
In God'a case it would not mean a change of mind; for the 
Scriptures assure us that he knows the end from the bogfinning
. (Acts 15:18) Hence it means only a change of conduct, 
a change in the divine method of dealing. Up to the time of 
the I>eluge God had pursued but one course with the human 
family; and then he changed from that course to another. The 
wickedness upon the earth grieved our heavenly -Father in the 
sense that he is sympathetic, and therefore would appreciate 
very keenly the troubles coming upon mankind as a result of 
departure from a right course. 


Question: — In Luke 13:24 is there a difference between the 
door and the gate? 

Answer: — The gate ia the way of faith. Our Lord said: 
"Few there foe that find it" Apparently still fewer would care 
to enter it. Those who have gone in have been misunderstood. 
Jesus himself was misunderstood. His motives were impugned
. So also are those of his followers. The Master was 
called Beelzebub; and his followers have been called devils. 
But the time will come when the narrow way to life will be 
done away with, when the door to the high calling will be 
entirely closed; for all who will go into the kingdom will then 
have entered. After that door has closed, people will begin 
to realize much more clearly just what it has meant to be a 
foot-step follower of our Lord, just what the election of the 
church signifies. Then many will ibe anxious to enter. But 
the way of sacrifice will be closed, and a new dispensation 
ushered in. 


JOSEPH SOLD BY HIS BROTHERS 

[The first sixteen paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Hated of Hia Brethren," published in 
issue of April 1, 1907. * The remainder was reprinted from the article, "Hated Without a Cause," published in issue of September
 15, 1901. Please see the articles named.] 


"AND THERE WAS A 

As the green waves bear on their crest 

The foam, and ever shoreward come, 
So, moving surely to our rest, 

Slowly we all like bits of foam 
Oome drifting home. 

He whom we loved has reached the shore 

In peace; and all the ibillows vast — 
The stormy waves of life that bore 

Him on — have ceased their strife at last. 
The storm is past! 

We thought, because the waves of life 
Were high and rough, the end would be 


GREAT CALM" 

'Mid scenes of tumult and of strife, 
As mighty billows of the sea 
Break loud and free. 

But there was calm instead! The waves 
Of life were stilled, and up the strand 

Slipped noiselessly, as ocean laves 
In quietness the silver sand. 
An ending grand! 

How sweet to know his weary life 
At last to rest and quiet wore! 

Oh, may we all through peace or strife 
Be gathered on that silver shore 
For evermore! 


THE VALUE OF DISCIPLINE 


"In the still air music lies unheard; 

In the rough marble beauty lies unseen; 
To wake the music and the beauty needs 
The master's touch, the sculptor's chisel keen. 

"Great Master; touch us with thy skilful hand; 
Let not the music that is in us die. 


Great Sculptor! hew and polish us; nor let, 
Hidden and lost, thy form within us lie. 

"Spare not the stroke; do with us as thou wilt; 

Let there be naught unfinished, broken, marred ; 
Complete thy purpose, that we may become 
Thy perfect image, O our God and Lord!" 


[6351] 


Vol. XXXIX 


PITTSBURGH, PA., NOVEMBER 15, 1918 


No. 22 


SELF^DENIAl^-ITS PURPOSE AND ITS IMPORTANCE 


"Whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that 
Denying one's self is self- denial. In considering what 
is meant by the phrase, "denying one's self," we, must distinguish
 as to what self is and what are the self -rights. Upon 
mature reflection we perceive that our personality, our ego, 
is represented by our will. Evidently, then, our Lord requires 
that every one who becomes his disciple shall surrender his 
own will — "all that he hath"; for elsewhere the Master says: 
"If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, take 
up his cross and follow me." (Matthew 16:24) Whether 
our will be good or bad, strong or weak, it must be given up 
when we consecrate ourselves to do the will of God; and when 
once we have surrendered our own will to do the divine will, 
it follows that henceforth we are to do God's will to the best 
of our ability in every matter. 

After our consecration to do the will of God, and the subsequent
 acceptance on the part of our heavenly Father through 
Jesus Christ our Lord, we were begotten of the holy Spirit as 
sons of God, new creatures in Christ. This transaction meant 
that we gave up self-will and accepted God's will instead of 
our own on all subjects. This matter of giving up one's 
own will in order to do the will of anothsr is a moat radical 
proposition. Indeed, the yielding up of the will to any one 
except the heavenly Father is the most dangerous thing we 
can do. Very grave mistakes have been made in this way. 
In various cults, in denominational bodies and in political 
circles the surrender of the individual will, the failure to 
maintain a personal responsibility, has resulted in many 
serious mistakes and in much evil practise. 

THE STABT OF THE HEW 0KMTXO1T 
In the case of those who have surrendered their will to 
God the matter is altogether different, however. God has 
given our Lord Jesus Christ to be the Head over the church 
which is his body, and of which the consecrated, spirit-hegotten
 children of God are the members in particular. No 
one could properly be a member of the body of Christ if he 
retained his own individual human will. This fact is well 
illustrated in the human 'body, every member of which is 
fully under the control of the head, unless the body is seriously
 diseased. The hands, the feet, etc., have no volition of their 
own, but respond to the will of the brain. And bo it is with 
the members of the body of Christ; they are subject to the 
will of the Head, our Lord Jesus. 

At first the new creature seems to have been nothing but 
a wilL Originally as a human being he 'had a body, a mind, 
and a will which represented his personality, his ego, his 
being. But while he was still a natural man a proposition 
came to him: If he would heartily comply with certain 
terms and conditions, God would give him a change of nature 
from human to spirit. This change evidently would mean a 
new body, a new mind and a new will, in order that the new 
creature could adapt himself to his new environment. But 
in the divine arrangement for the Gospel age those who accepted
 this proposition received neither a new body nor a new 
mind first, but a new will, with the promise that the other 
two requirements would be given in the resurrection, as a result
 of cheerful compliance with all the terms of the covenant 
entered into with God at the time of consecration. 

Thus the first step on the part of those who accepted the 
divine proposition to become members of the new creation 
was that of giving up the human will. Whoever took this 
step contracted to become dead as a human being—not that 
his human body or his human brain died, not that he lost 
the power to think, but that he promised to forgo his human 
personality and experience in order to be ruled thereafter 
by a new will, the will of God. Those who have taken this 
step of full consecration are accepted of the Father through 
our Lord Jesus Christ, and have been begotten of the holy 
Spirit as new creatures in Christ, 

NEW WILL THE NEW CBEATTJRE 
At the present time this new will is all that there is of 
the new creature. At the time of his spirit^begetting this 
new will had not yet attained control of the mind or of the 
body; but it is expected to conquer them, to bring them into 
obedience to the new standard of living. The new will should 
control the brain as to what things may be proper subjects 
of thought and what things may not be so considered. This 
new creature is exhorted to put away from his mind all selfish 
lines of thought, and to put far away from him all anger, 
wrath, malice, hatred, strife, works of the flesh, and to put 
on meekness, gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness and love. 
From the Word of God the new creature learns that the 
former spirit, mind or disposition of anger, malice, hatred, 


he hath, cannot be my disciple." — Luke 14:33. 
is of the flesh and of the devil, but that the spirit of meekness
, gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness, love, is the 
spirit, mind or disposition of Christ, and is in accord with 
God. He also learns that since he has heen begotten of the 
holy Spirit of God, his human will must be kept dead, that 
his new will is to be God's will, and that it must not operate 
except in line with the divine arrangements. As the new 
creature develops, he gains more and more control over the 
mind, the body, the acts, the thoughts. It is the new will 
which is thus gaining control of the human body — the will of 
the new creature. This divine new will is entirely upon 
God's side, and hopes to receive some day the things promised 
in the Word of God to the overcomers of the Gospel age. 
When we characterize this new will as being divine, we do 
not mean to imply that there is no individuality about the 
new creature, however; for our Lord Jesus still maintains his 
individuality, and it is written that the church, the new 
creation, shall be like him. — 1 John 3:1, 2; 2 Peter 1:4; 
Philippians 2:8-11. 

The holy Spirit i3 the same disposition or mind, whether 
the Father or the Son or the church possesses it. When at 
the moment of spirit-begetting we received the impartation 
of this holy Spirit, we began to take on the divine spirit, or 
disposition. In other words, we have been making the divine
 mind ,ours. As the Apostle Paul intimates, we are being 
transformed, formed over, by the renewing of our minds, in 
order that we may prove more and more the good, the acceptable
, the perfect will of God. (Romans 12:1, 2) As 
gradually our minds expand to grasp that will, we are enabled
 more and more to appreciate the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the divine mind; and we say to 
ourselves: "This is what I am aiming to reach." Thus our 
will is endeavoring continually to do the divine will, the diTinfe
 purpose; for we have taken over to ourselves the mind 
of Christ, who delighted to do the Father's will. 

DESIBE TO DO BIGHT NOT SUFFICIENT 
"If any man will come after me, let him deny himself 
and take up his cross," setting aside his own will, disposing 
of it forever. If at any future time a will which is contrary 
to God's will should develop, then the whole transaction would 
be at an end; for the covenant o£ sacrifice into which we 
entered at consecration involves the death of the old mind 
and the old will. The new creature must never permit the 
will of the flesh to come into control again. So it is the new 
will that is^ working out the victory for the new creature; 
and every victory won over the flesh leads to the consummation
, the death of the human nature. 

In Philippians 2:12 the Apostle Paul exhorts the new 
creature in Christ to work out his own salvation with fear 
and trembling. How necessary it is for us to battle against 
the adverse conditions of the human body, as well as against 
those of the world and of the devil! God has started his 
spirit-begotten children in this narrow way of giving up their 
own will and taking the divine will instead, of determining 
to live in harmony with God's will. # VVe are to do his will 
even to the extent of sacrificing the" human body. God is 
looking on to see whether or not we are overcoming self in 
this respect; for only the more than overcomers shall receive
 the promised glory, honor and immortality — the divine 
nature. 

It is God who is working in us, the Apostle declares, as 
new creatures. He began that work when he drew us to 
himself through the knowledge of his provision through Christ 
Jesus for our salvation, and when he accepted us in the Beloved
 and begat us of his holy Spirit, Continually he gives 
us fresh beauties in his Word. But while God is working 
upon our wilte, we must see to it that we go further than 
merely having the desire to do right. We must make strenuous
 efforts to put our desire into operation. 

OTO WILLS NOT OUB THOUGHTS 
We must make sure that we do not mistake our thoughts 
for our will. The will ia the decision, the determination of 
the majority of those faculties of the brain which constitute 
the mentality. The will of the flesh actually dies at the moment
 of consecration; and we receive the will of God instead, 
thenceforth to be our will. But we retain our human bodies, 
with the old brain, which has the same tendencies after consecration
 as before. When we accepted the will of God instead 
of our own will we did not fully understand that new will; 
but as time went on, the divine will became more and more 
apparent to us. 

This determination to accept the will of God as our will 


(339-340) 


{6362] 


November 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(340-341) 


was not made for a day or a week or even a year, but for 
eternity. We are resolved to have no other will than that 
which God gives, that which he approves, that which is in 
harmony with him. Yet as we go on from day to day, new 
scenes arise before us. Sometimes our earthly senses seem 
to sidetrack us, and in many things we may feel that we are 
at liberty to ehoose what we shall do. But as we progress, we 
may learn that God has expressed himself in these very 
matters about which we had thought we might exercise our 
own preference. 

If, for instance, we should say: "It is God's will that I 
should be his ambassador. What kind of coat shall I wear? 
What style of tie would be appropriate?" we have come to 
realize that the interests of God and of his cause are linked 
up with ours. Thus we have new thoughts upon the matter 
of our personal appearance. As soon as we perceive this 
point, we say to ourselves: "I bad thought that my former 
course was the right one; but now I see that the divine interests
 are linked up with this matter; and God's will must 
rule in all the affairs of my life." 

Each new circumstance surrounding us "is a test of our 
loyalty to God. Therefore just as surely as we are loyal to 
him we shall choose his way; and the promptness with which 
we do whatever we see to be the Father's will becomes a test 
of our loyalty to him. On the other hand, we might hold 
to a thing that was contrary to the divipe will, saying, "What 
difference will it make to the Father whether I do this thing 
or that?" Thus every circumstance of life forms a test 
of our devotion to God and to tlie principles of righteousness. 
We can have only one will. It we have truly presented ourselves
 to God in consecration and have been accepted by him 
and begotten as new creatures in Christ, then old things have 
passed away and all things have become new. 
HYPNOTIC INPHTBNCB OF SIN 

As a matter of fact, however, the only thing that has 
actually become new is the will; for although we have new 
hopes, new aims, new aspirations, new desires, they are only 
the outworkings of that new will. If at any time we should 
return to a love of sin intentionally, wilfully, this act on our 
part would mean that the new will had died, had ceased to 
be, and that a human will had come into existence. Since the 
Father does not purpose to beget any one of the holy Spirit 
the second time, whoever had become an old creature again 
would have no opportunity of ever getting out of that state. 
He would be ""twice dead, plucked up by the roots," as the 
Apostle declares. — Jude 12, 13. 

But there are those who, while possessing the new will 
and still clinging to it, are brought into subjection to the 
flesh in some measure. For a time such might seem to be 
willing to do wrong and to have changed their will from a 
right one to a wrong one; whereas in reality they may not 
have done so at all. On the contrary they have been temporarily
 overcome by the fleshly appetites and desires common
 to the natural man. As new creatures in Christ God's 
people wish to bring every thought into captivity to the divine
 will. This ia the earnest endeavor of the new will, the 
new creature. But sometimes the flesh advances such plausible
 theories, such false reasonings, that the new will seems 
to be beguiled (2 Corinthians 11:3) by the fleshly mind, just 
as a little bird 13 said to be hypnotized by a serpent. While 
every now and then the bird might try to fly away from the 
serpent, yet the latter watches it, allures it, draws it nearer 
and nearer, until finally it loses all power to get away. 

This illustration well represents the overpowering effects 
of sin. (Hebrews 3:12, 13) Under the influence of the flesh, 
the new will may 'become more or less hypnotized, more or 
less under a spell. For this reason the Scriptures urge all 
new creatures to make no provision for the flesh. We are 
ever to remember that the. flesli wars against the spirit continually
. Therefore we are to be circumspect, to look aH 
around us, and to note what conditions are about us. Before
 we undertake any project, we should ask ourselves: 
"Did I ever get into trouble by following this course heretofore
? Am I in danger of 'being misled by such a course?" 
And so the Apostle urges new creatures to make straight 
paths for their feet, lest that which in themselves has been 
blemished by sin should turn them away from righteousness. 
— Heb. 12:11-15. 

We are to do our very best to make our path as smooth 
as possible. But if despite our earnest efforts we get into 
a quagmire, we are not to be overwhelmed with discouragement
; for the promise is that God will not suffer his loyalhearted
 children to be tempted above that which they are able 
to bear, but with every trial will provide a way of escape. 
(1 Corinthians 10:13) " In every circumstance of life we are 
to look to our heavenly Father' knowing that he is the one 


to help us. If we find ourselves involved in difficulties, ■ we 
are to endeavor to extricate ourselves from them, remembering
 that God has made provision for our escape from what 
otherwise might prove to be too much for us. This course 
on our part implies that the new creature does not consent 
to the deeds of the flesh, but is seeking to take another course, 
is striving for the right way, even though for the time being 
it may have been hypnotized, lulled to sleep, on* guard. 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN MIND AND WILL 
Of necessity the mind and the will are very closely related. 
Yet they are evidently not the same; for the mind can entertain
, consider and discuss a variety of contradictory propositions
, while the will is the determination in respect to a certain
 clearly defined course. The will may, however, direct 
the mind to discuss both sides of any proposition. In thus 
calling upon the faculties of the mind to consider any subject 
and to set forth the reasons pro and con, the new will has to 
do with the mind of the fallen flesh. From experience along 
this line the new will becomes conscious of the fact that it 
is dealing with a treacherous opponent, that certain elements 
of the mind are sure to be hostile to the new will. Consequently
 the new will should always restrict the mind as to 
the nature of the subjects to be considered and as to how 
far the discussion should be permitted to proceed. 

From this we see that the new will must limit the operation
 of the mind, and that consequently various complications
 may result. If the will is weak, if it lacks experience, 
it may not be critical enough; and those faculties of the mind 
which are not in harmony with the new will may come forward
 with their strong arguments on the wrong side of the 
subject under consideration. Thus the whole being might be 
led into a wrong attitude, or even into actual sin of word, 
deed or thought. The new will has accepted the divine standard
, which is superior to the fleshly brain which the new 
creature must use. This divine standard, which is the highest 
possible, and which cannot be changed, is revealed to us in 
the words of our Lord and the apostles. It is not to be 
swayed by the prejudices of the fallen flesh, but is to rule 
both body and mind. Hence the battle waged by the new 
creature is a conflict between the fleshly mind and the new will. 
The two are contrary. 

But since the new creature has accepted the will of God, 
the mind of God, the purpose of God, he must rule his mortal 
body according to that standard, until finally the experiences 
which he undergoes in the school of Christ shall have developed
 him and prepared him for the new foody which is to 
be given him in the resurrection. 

A soul, a sentient being, is the result of the union of the 
life principle with an organism. (Genesis 2:7) When an 
organism and the life principle are united they produce a 
soul. Such are the human souls all about us. In the case 
of the church of Christ, to each one of us individually there 
came A time when we ceased to be human souls, and became
 new creatures In Christ. (2 Corinthians 5; 17) But 
while we reckon ourselves dead indeed as human beings, yet 
we have only the human body in which to operate, as the 
Apostle declares. — Romans 6:3-8, 16-19; Ool. 3:1-3. 
HOW TO BECOME AN OVERCOMES 
St. Paul also tells us that the power of God is able to 
quicken the mortal body in which the new creature sojourns, 
and that these new souls will not be without proper opportunity
 for service. More and more the fleshly body is to be 
brought into subjection to the new will; for the new creature 
dwells in an earthly tabernacle. If faithful, he will be by 
and by given a new body, a spiritual body. This combination 
of the new life imparted at spirit-begetting and the human 
body is the soul which God counts as a new creature. But 
it is not a perfect new creature, and will not be until God's 
properly arranged time. 

From the foregoing argument we perceive that the value 
which we attach to words has. much to do with our understanding
 of a^y matter. There is more or less of a philosophy 
about all oUi* conversation; Taking man as the Bible does — 
in his fallen, sinful condition — and inquiring about the human
 will, we find that under present unfavorable conditions 
it is selfish, self-seeking. In all fallen beings there is more 
or less of selfishness, of the desire to look out for one's own 
interests, to please self and to take whatever course one prefers
. This condition may continue for years. Thus the person
 may have heard of God's great proposition that whoever 
will set aside his own will and take the will of God instead 
shall in the resurrection have a change of nature from human 
to spiritual. This full consecration to do the will of God 
means the making void the human will in order to do the divine
 will. Those believers in the ransom sacrifice of Jesus 
Christ who accepted this proposition were accepted of the 


[6353] 


(342-343) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


Father through our Lord Jesus, and begotten of t the holy 
Spirit. Thus they were started in the narrow way of life 
eternal. Immediately they entered the school of Christ, there 
to .be fitted for the high position to which they were called. 

In this school our Lord's true followers have made progress 
toward the full overcoming of the spirit of the world. This 
progress can be achieved only by faith, by that implicit confidence
 in the Master's teaching and training which will keep 
them continually as earnest, diligent pupils under his guidance
 and instruction. "This is the victory which overcometh 
the world, even our faith." (1 John 5:4) This text is very 


suggestive of what it is to be an overcomer, to be one of those 
to whom pertain all the great and precious promises of the 
Word of God. The suggestion is simply this: Day by day 
we are to heed attentively and carry out patiently the instructions
 of our infallible Teacher and Guide in full, unquestioning
 faith in hia wisdom and his love, no matter how 
heavy the daily cross may be or how severe the discipline. 

The process is indeed tedious; but the end will be glorious. 
Even the daily discipline will, if borne patiently and meekly,, 
bring the present reward of conscious progress in the great 
work of attaining the goal of ripened Christian character. 


INCORRUPTION AND IMMORTALITY— DISTINCTION BETWEEN 

THESE TERMS 

"This corruption must put on incorrupVion, and this mortal must put on immortality" — 1 Corinthians 15:53. 


Through his word God declares that those who become 
his people during this Gospel age, become new creatures in 
Christ, to whom old things pass away and all things become 
new. {2 Corinthians 5:17) To those who are spirituallyminded
 there is very great evidence indeed that this is true; 
and yet this doctrine of spirit-begetting might be unrecognized 
by those who have not taken the step of full consecration to 
God. "Here a little and there a little" is the method we must 
pursue in order to see the deep things of God's Word; for this 
seems to be the one general principle upon which these "deep 
things" were recorded; and they will be revealed only in this 
manner. Those who study the Bible superficially overlook 
everything of importance; and as a result they find only a 
part of the truth. But those who search the Scriptures diligently
 axe enabled to discern a wonderful plan whieh others 
have failed to perceive; for those who are not of the right 
class cannot see the truth in its clearness, beauty and harmonv
 ' IMMORTALITY AKB INOORRUFTION 

Those who have the right spirit will desire to know what 
the Lord ha3 in reservation for his people; and this desire 
gives opportunity for the operation of the spirit of truth, and 
leads them to come together for Bible study. Thus, as they 
are searching to know the divine plan, the Lord reveals it 
more and more to them, "here a little and there a little"; and 
these littles make a great aggregate. In this way many doctrines
 long lost eight of have been brought to light. Among 
these is that of the resurrection of the dead. 

The words "mortar' and "immortal" are not generally understood
. The ordinary definition of mortal is dying, and of 
immortal, everlasting. Both of these definitions are wrong. 
Bible students have learned that in the study of God's Word 
confusion is unavoidable unless the true meaning of these 
words is clearly recognized. Mortal is a word which means 
liable to death; mortality, a state or condition in which death 
is possible, but not necessarily a dying condition unless a 
death sentence has been incurred. Immortal means not liable 
to death; immortality signifies the state or condition in which 
death is an impossibility- — a death -proof condition. 

To those who think that the Bible contains many such 
phrases as "immortal soul," "never-dying soul," etc., we can 
do nothing better than suggest that they take a Bible concordance
 and look for such expressions. They will find none; 
and thus those who are really seeking to know the truth on 
these subjects will readily perceive that Christian people in 
general have for centuries been mentally adding to the Word 
of God, much to their own confusion. 

According to the Scriptures the angels have life everlasting
, but are mortal; that is, their life continues everlastingly
 not because they are immortal, or death-proof, and so 
could not be developed by their Creator, but because he purposes
 that they shall live as long as they will use their lives 
in harmony with his just and loving arrangement. That this 
is true is demonstrated by the fact that Satan is eventually 
to be destroyed. — Hebrews 2:14; Psalm 145:20; 2 Thessalonians
 1 :9. 

Before Adam's disobedience, his life condition was similar 
to that now enjoyed by the holy angels. He had life in full 
measure — lasting life — which he might have retained forever 
if he had remained obedient to God. But because Adam was 
not death-proof, because he did not have "life in himself," because
 he was dependent upon conditions subject to his Creator
's pleasure, therefore God's warning that disobedience 
would result in death meant something. {Genesis 2:17; 
Ezekiel 18:4, 20; Romans 6:23) It meant the loss of the 
spark of life given Adam when he was created — "the breath 
of life." without which his body would moulder into dust, and 
the living soul, the sentient being, would cease to exist. If 


father Adam had been immortal, death-proof, God's sentence 
would have been an empty threat, as Satan has made it appear 
to be through hia lie to mother Eve. — Genesis 3:1-5; 2 Corinthians
 11:3; Revelation 20 : 2. 

But while the Scriptures speak of man's mortality, and indeed
 in nearly all particulars confine themselves to man's 
relationship to God, yet they no less positively teach in another
 way the mortality of angels; for they declare that Christ 
"only hath immortality" (1 Timothy 6:16) — the Father, as 
always, excepted. (I Corinthians 15:27) Immortality is a 
quality of the divine nature, and was given to our Lord after 
his resurrection as a reward for his faithful obedience to the 
Father's will even to the extent of self-sacrifice. This exaltation
 raised him, as the Apostle declares, far above angels, 
principalities and powers, and every name that is named in 
heaven and in earth. — Philippians " 2 : 9 ; Epheaians 1:21; 1 
John 3:2; 2 Peter 1:4. 

RESURRECTION THE ONLY HOPE OF THE WORLD 

As the result of Adam's trial in Eden, the death sentence 
passed upon him, and by the laws of heredity has -been inherited
 by all his posterity. But as the result of the ransom
 price laid down at Calvary, the opportunity for a new 
trial is to be granted in due time to each member of the 
human family; and only a favored minority get such opportunity
 and trial during this Gospel age, appointed for the 
church class. This means the rolling back of the original 
sentence of death, and the bringing of all mankind into a 
condition of judgment, or trial, for everlasting life, on the 
basis of their individual obedience or disobedience. This fact 
necessitates the awakening of the dead. Therefore we find 
that the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead has a very 
prominent place in the Scriptures. — Acta 24:14-16; 26:6-8; 
John 5:25, 28, 29. 

The Scriptures teach that at the proper time all mankind 
will be granted a full trial, or judgment, to determine their 
worthiness or unworthiness of life everlasting. Not only 
those living at that time will be granted this opportunity, 
but those who have gone into the tomb will be awakened from 
the death sleep to be judged. This judgment day for all mankind
 is located in the Millennial age, even as the Gospel age 
is the day of judgment for the church. In ita highest and 
ultimate sense restitution will be the bringing of mankind not 
only out of the tomb, but out of the various degrees of death, 
represented in sickness and imperfection, up, up, up, to lasting
 life, such as father Adam enjoyed before his disobedience. 
Full opportunity to attain this blessing of life everlasting will 
be granted to all who are willing and obedient under the 
reasonable terms of the New Covenant which is to be made 
with Israel in due time. — Jeremiah 31:31-34. 

THE RESURRECTION OF THE CHURCH 

The phrase "first resurrection" is applied in Scripture to 
the resurrection of our Lord Jesus and the church which is 
his body. (Revelation 20:4-6; Philippians 3:10) This expression
 has the thought of chief resurrection, resurrection to 
the highest, chief position. All who share in it will have divine
 nature — glory, honor and immortality. But if we were 
to mention time and order in connection with it, we would 
speak of our Lord's resurrection as the Head of the Christ 
nineteen centuries ago — in the year 33 A. D. — and the resurrection
 of the church in 1878. Since then, each member of the 
church receives his resurrection "change" as he passes beyond
 the vail. Hence we believe that the first resurrection 
is still in progress, 

St. Paul mentions his intense desire to be made a sharer 
in our Lord's resurrection — the great first resurrection, the 
resurrection to the spirit plane — a partaker of the divine 
nature. In order to attain this distinction, he was anxious 


[6354] 


November 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(343-344) 


to make his calling and election sure by being made conformable
 unto our Lord's death, by being a, living sacrifice; for he 
realized that only thus could he attain membership in the 
glorified body of Christ. 

TWO CLASSES IN THE BESTJSBECTION 

In the context from which our text is taken, the Apostle 
is discussing this first resurrection. He says, "Behold, I 
show you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all 
bo changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the 
last trump; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall 
be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this 
corruption must put on incorruption, and this mortal must 
put on immortality." Here he mentions two classes — those 
who had died in Clirist during the Gospel age and those who 
remained alive at his second coming. These classes are also 
pointed out in 1 Thes&alonians 4:13-17. 

In this connection the Apostle seems to use the words 
mortal and immortality, corruptible and incorruption, in 
such a way as to imply a distinction between them. Apparently
 he applies the words corruptible and incorruption 
when he speaks of those who would have gone into the tomb, 
and mortal and immortality when he mentions those who 
would not yet have passed into death when our Lord returns. 
Those who had gone into the tomb, into corruption, would 
put on incorruption ; but those who were still alive would 
put on immortality. Those who are mortal are liable to 
death; those of the church who remained alive at the time of 
the second advent would in their resurrection "change" receive
 the body that is not liable to death. The terms corruptible
 and incorruption seemingly refer to those o«f the body 
of Christ who were dead at the time of our Lord's return, and 
the words mortal and immortality to those who remained alive 
at that time onward until the last member had experienced 
his resurrection "change/* 

PRESENT CONDITION OF THE OHUBOH IN THE FLESH 

Addressing the new creatures in Christ, and informing 
us that we are spirit-begotten, the Apostle tells ub that this 
new creature has its residence in the old human body. (2 
Corinthians 4:7; 5:1) We are no longer old creatures, because
 the old will is gone. The new will has come in, and 
taken possession of what was once the old person. The "old 
man" and his works are cast off; and the "new man" begins 
to use the mortal body in the service of God. The Apostle 
Peter speaks of us aa in times past having done the will of 
the flesh, and reminds us that henceforth we are to serve the 
will of God, the will of Christ. (1 Peter 4:1-5) This new 
will has no body of its own as yet, and for the time being 
uses the old body. 

In discussing this subject, St. Paul declares that the new 
creature is to put off forever those things which are associated 
with the fallen flesh — the works of the flesh and the devil; 
such as anger, wrath, malice, hatred, strife, etc. Some have 
by nature more of these weaknesses than have others; but 
all have some of them. As a result, the new creature has a 
continual work of putting off the things pertaining to the 
fallen flesh. Meanwhile, the flesh is not counted the new 
creature; but it is his body in the sense that he owns or controls
 it. In other words, it is his property, and he is responsible
 'for it. 

The new body of the new creature is to-be a spirit body. 
The Lord has promised that if we are faithful while we have 
the treasure of the new mind in these earthen vessels he will 
give us a new body of the kind which he has arranged for 
us. This will be a spirit body of the divine nature, and will 
have the quality of life in itself — immortality. But as long 
as the new creature has the old body, there will be a constant
 conflict between the new will and the flesh; for the new 
will seeks to control it. Nevertheless, we as new creatures 
are to maintain a good fight, recognizing that the things of 
the spirit are contrary to the things of the flesh. The two 
are contrary, irreconcilable; they can never come into harmony
. Therefore the new creature is to maintain a severe 
attack of opposition until Anally he shall have won a complete
 victory and the flesh shall be entirely overthrown. — 
Romans 8:13, 14; Galatians 5:15-25. 

The conquest of the fallen human nature will not be fully 
accomplished until the flesh is fully dead. While the body is 
counted dead at consecration, yet it is not actually dead until 
it parts with life. The new creature uses this old body, but 


is promised a new one at the resurrection of the just* This 
change will be instantaneous, not gradual; as the Apostle declares
, "in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye." — 1 Corinthians
 15:52. 

RESURRECTION BEGUN IN THE SAINTLY 

The development of the new creature is a work of time. 
It is a matter of the soul, the mind and the will, coming into 
harmony with God and losing all harmony with sin. After 
both mind and will have been tested and fully developed, the 
new creature will be accounted worthy of the resurrection. 
The Apostle tells us that it is sown in weakness, raised in 
power; it 13 sown in dishonor, raised in glory; it is sown an 
animal body; raised a spiritual body. We do not understand 
this to mean that the body is sown, and that the body is 
raised; but that what is sown is the ego, the individual, the 
person who was once a fleshly or earthly being, but who has 
become a new creature. 

In this same connection the Apostle declares in our text 
that this mortal must put on immortality. He seems to be 
speaking of those who would be alive when our Lord returned. 
He says that while we shall not all fall asleep in death, nevertheless
 we shall all experience a change — from the earthly to 
the heavenly nature; and that we who are in a mortal condition
 will put on immortality. In other words, the resurrection
 change of the church will complete the work which has 
been going on for years. This work began when at our consecration
 our wills were buried or immersed into the will of 
Christ, immediately after which we were begotten of the holy 
Spirit as new creatures in Christ, and raised to walk in newness
 of life. But unless this resurection continues, we shall 
not be ready for the consummation of the resurrection in the 
end of the age, "at the last trump." 

Meantime the faithful overcomers are continually putting 
off the deeds of the old nature — anger, malice, hatred — and 
putting on meekness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness
, love. Whoever is growing in truth is growing in all 
these fruits and graces of the holy Spirit; and as he puts on 
these qualities, he becomes strong as a new creature. Finally 
he completes the matter by putting on his new body; for at 
the time of bis "change" he ceases to have further use for 
his human organism, and then he receives the spirit body 
which God has promised. When this has been received, he 
will have been perfected as a new creature in Christ. 

Elseiwhere in this same chapter from which our text is 
taken, the Apostle indicates that in the resurrection there 
will be different orders, or classes of those who come forth 
from the tomb. (Verses 22, 23) First will come the church 
of Christ, in the first resurrection. Next in order will be the 
great company, those spirit-begotten ones who have failed to 
make their calling and election sure. While this class, or 
order, will have a glorious portion upon the spirit plane, yet 
it will not be so high as that attained by the church, the 
body of Christ. Another order to come forth in the resurrection
 will be the ancient worthies, who have the testimony 
that during their lifetime they had pleased God. (Hebrews 
11:39-40) As to the orders to follow, we have no Scriptural 
information. 

Here it may be well to point out that the title "Church of 
the Firstborn" (Hebrews 12:23) was evidently designed to 
include all who would be born of the Spirit — not only the 
little flock who attain the chief resurrection, but also the 
great company who come up out of the great tribulation. In 
the type the entire tribe of Levi was taken as representative 
of all the firstborns of Israel, those who were spared when 
the firstborns of Egypt perished. (Exodus 12:12, 13; Numbers
 3:40-45) This tribe consisted of the priestly family, 
high priest and under priests representing the little flock, 
and the Levites representing the great company. 

In a general way the Scriptures seem to pass by the great 
company class, whatever is stated of them being done in an 
inferential manner. If the Lord had made special promises 
to them, it would imply that they had been called to occupy 
that position; whereas the Scriptures plainly state that all 
of the church are called in the one nope of their calling. 
(Ephesians 4:4) -God did not call any one to the great company
. Those who are finally assigned to that position receive 
it as a kind" of secondary reward, inferior to that which was 
originally offered them. 


THE BINDING OF THE STRONG MAN 

"And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent which is the devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years" 

— Revelation 20:2. 
[Reprint of article published in issue of May I, 1910, which please see.] 

[6S55] 


JOSEPH MADE RULER OF EGYPT 

[The first ten paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "In the School of Adversity," published in 
issue of October 1, 1901. Paragraphs 11 to 18 were reprinted from article entitled, "Far God Was With Him/' published 
in the same issue. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Them That Honor Me I Will Honor," published in 
issue of April 15, 1907. Please see the articles named,] 


A PRAYER OF THANKSGIVING 


We thank thee, Father, for this day; 

We thank thee for the narrow way, 

For love and joy and peace of heart, 

Foiling the tempter's cunning art. 

We thank thee for the mind to do 

Thy sovereign will the whole day through, 

To take each moment as a gift 

Divinely sent us, to uplift 

Some fellow pilgrim on the way, 

Or check the thought that fain would stray 

Afar from thee and speed its way 

To earth's dull care or revels gay. 


We thank thee for a mind intent 
On counting tests as blessings sent 
Straight from the courts of heavenly love 
To bind our souls to things above. 
We thank thee for faith's anchorage, 
That doth our every power engage 
To reach that land where 5s no night, 
Where d.wells the Lamb, thereof the Light. 
With grateful hearts thy love we own; 
We thank thee for the gracious loan, 
Through Christ, of merit for each hour 
Till we shall waken, "raised in power." 


JOSEPH FORGIVES HIS BROTHERS 

{The first fifteen paragraphs and the last paragraph of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Blessed are the 
Merciful," published in issue of April 15, 1907. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Joseph the Merciful/' 
published in issue of October 15, 1901. Please see the articles named.] 

OUR LORD JESUS' PRE-HUMAN EXISTENCE 

Question. — Before his consecration, had Jesus any knowledge
 of his pre-human existence! 

Answer. — There is nothing in the Scriptures to the effect 
that up to the time when Jesus made his consecration and 
was begotten of the holy Spirit he had a definite knowledge 
respecting his pre-human existence. The fact that nothing of 
that kind is stated, however, would not prove that hti.did not 
have some information regarding the matter. We read that 
as a boy he grew in wisdom, in -stature and in favor with God 
and men. We know that in boyhood he was studying the 
Word of God, the prophecies, the law. Even as a child he 
had come to a sufficiency of knowledge to enable him to think 
out quite clearly the meaning of some of the prophecies, to 
see that he had a great work to do, and to conjecture as to 
the nature of that work. 

This is shown in his meeting with the doctors of the law 
at the age of twelve, hearing them and asking them questions 
respecting the prophecies, seeking to know to what extent he 
might be eligible for some kind of service to God as a boy, 
or what would be the starting point at which he would begin 
his ministery. Having ascertained that he could not begin his 
work until he reached the age of thirty, he returned home, 
content to wait until that time. There is no indication of any 
special knowledge or impartation of the Spirit of God until 
he consecrated himself and was baptized at Jordan. 

From his mother Jesus must have gained some knowledge 
of his origin — of how he came into the world. His mother 
did not know of his pre-human existence; but she had been, 
informed by the angel that her son would not be born after 
the manner of men. He had said to Mary: "The holy Spirit 
shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall 


overshadow thee; therefore that holy thing which shall he 
born of thee shall be called the Son of God." And to Joseph 
the angel said: "That which is conceived in her is of the holy 
Spirit. So Mary undoubtedly told her son that he had not a 
human father, but that hi<s Father was God. All our knowledge
 of our Lord's pre-existent condition comes to us from 
Scriptures written later, and from the Master's own words 
after he was begotten of the holy Spirit. 

Just how and when Jesus came to know of his pre-existence 
with the Father we do not know. It seems doubtful that he 
knew <xf this before his spirit-begetting. After he was begotten
 of the Spirit, the deep things of God were opened up 
to him. He then saw from the Scriptures of the Old Testament
 that he was to be the slain lamb; that he would later be 
restored to the heavenly plane of life, and that he was to be 
honored of the Father after his sacrificial work for man. 

We know that his pre-existence was made very plain and 
clear to Jesua; for he declared this on various occasions. 
He said: "What and if the Son of Man shall ascend up where 
he was before?" Again, "Before Abraham was, I am." (John 
6r62; 8:58) In his last prayer with his disciples before 
his crucifixion, he prayed : "And now, Father, glorify thou 
me with the glory which I had with thee before the world 
was; Thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world." 
He spoke of himself as the "bread which cometh down from 
heaven." Again he said: 'The bread of God is he which 
cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world." 
St. John calls him the Word, the Logos, which was "in the 
beginning with the God," and declares that "all things were 
made by him, and without him was nothing made that was 
made." — John 1:1-3. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


BESOLVED TO * 'ABIDE IN THE SHIP" 
Dear Brethren: — 

I desire to express my continued appreciation of The 
Watch Tower, and my complete confidence that the same 
loving Providence which guided our Pastor in founding the 
Tower (Z '16, page 173) continues to guide and direct the 
Editorial Committee in their labors of love through its 
columns. How short is the memory which forgete the oft 
repeated assurances of Brother Russell that The Watch 
Tower is the Lord's channel for the truth and that he was 
its servant? What a loyal "faithful servant" he proved himself
 to be, even to the very last! And now, though passed 
from the busy scenes of his earthly labors, he still ministers; 
for his "works do follow" him. 

The Word says that "hope deferred maketh the heart 
sick." The spring of 1918, like the fall of 1914, brought disappointment
 to many hearts. Nevertheless we can, and do, 
look up and lift up our heads as we behold the multiplied 
evidences of "the effect of every vision." As in the past, 
so now each disappointment brings its trials and siftinga ; 
but when the clouds have gone, greatest opportunities come 
for service. (Z '16, page 170) "They that wait upon the 
Lord shall renew their strength," and we have found it bo. 
I am glad that according to the will of God I am still here 
and pressing toward the mark for the prize. 


But it is sad to note that many once loyal and obedient 
no longer walk with us, some even opposing the way of the 
truth. Can it be that such were heedless of repeated warnings
 to "resist everything akin to occultism," and have given 
ear to evil suggestions, have become victims of abbreviation 
and so have made shipwreck of their faith? Such foolish 
and subversive suggestions as: "The Watch Tower is no 
longer the channel," 'The manna ceased at Passover," "The 
present executive committee are usurpers," etc., are finding 
free circulation in some quarters. Are these brethren going 
Mind? Even a superficial examination of Brother Russell's 
writings would reveal the folly of such suggestions. In the 
Tower of 1909, page 234, the Pastor says: "Truth tests 
character." Yet these brethren argue that error has crept 
into its columns to teat the church. Whither are they drifting
? A careful reading of the Tower for 1909, top of page 
287; that of 1910, page 391; and that of 191S, page 85, may 
serve to open the eyes of some to their danger. See also 
Proverbs 26:17-28. 

I fully ibelieve that the Lord is still at the helm, guiding
 the Society's affairs as of old, even as he promised: 
"Awake, O sword . . . against the man that is my fellow, 
. . . and I will turn my hand over the little [humble] 
ones." As far as I am concerned, through the grace of him 
that never faileth, I am resolved to "abide in the ship." 


(346-350) 


[6356] 


November 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(350-351) 


The Pastor's words are true: "Whatever may 'be the difficulties
 of the Lord's children in the near future, there will 
be special comfort in remembering that the Lord i<s able to 
make full provision for all his truehearted ones, and that 
he will do so. Ho will continue to use these agencies; and 
there will be the strengthening of his people to the end of the 
way. If there be any who will not be thus led, it must be 
because there is something wrong in themselves," — Z 1915, 
page 370. 

If I read my Bible aright and understand the Pastor's 
thought, much remains to be done before the kingdom of 
Christ assumes full control; and surely ;the faithful, loyal 
disciples will be honored, as in the past, with further opportunities
 for service. Yes; the church will emerge from its 
"dungeon." (Jeremiah 38) May we all be found faithful! 

YVith assurances of love toward the Bethel family, and 
praying the Lord's rich blessing upon you in your new quarters
, I am 

Your fellow servant, W. A. B. — Oregon. 

GREETINGS FROM AFAB 
Dear Brethren: — 

The Rockdale church of the I. B. S. A. all unite in sending 
love and greetings to all their brethren in Chri-st. We realize 
that all the ways of God are good; yea, all the paths of the 
Lord are mercy and truth unto such as love him. The Lord 
deals graciously with his people. Though he puts them into 
the furnace, he will not suffer it to be heated one degree more 
than is needful. He presides over it himself. In the midst 
of all their trials, he never leaves nor forsakes them. It ia 
delightful to consider that the sufferings which the footstep followers
 of our Master are now called upon to endure are the only 
sufferings which they shall ever experience. God is a sovereign 
good and wise. Who can harm us if we be followers of that 
which is good? Suffering we may endure, but real injury we 
shall not sustain; for Sternal Truth has declared that ajl 
things shall work together for good to them that love God, 
to the called according to his purpose. 

May we all make the glory of God our first and chief 
concern : If Jesus be precious to us, and all else esteemed 
as nothing when compared with him, we shall be able to walk 
before God with a perfect heart, upright and sincere, setting 
the Lord always before us and doing all things to the glory 
of his name. Let our whole desire be that Christ may be 
magnified in our bodies, whether it be by life or death. 

The church here numbers about thirty, and was formed 
about twenty months ago, the Lord having sent his messenger, 
Brother Gates, to this district, to sow this field. We are in 
full accord with the studies in the scriptures; and the 
watoh towebs are much appreciated by all and are eagerly 
read and, being "meat in due season," bring comfort and 
hope, and give us greater zeal in our Master's work. 

Praying that God will bless and sustain you all in every 
trial, and at the end grant you victory through our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and with the assurance of our deepest love and constant
 prayers, we are 

Your brethren in Christ, 

The Rockdale Church. — N. S. W. 
BLESSED ONES THAT DIE IK THE LOBJD 
Mr. Walter Thomas, Vandergrift, Pa. 
Dear Sir: — 

I presume you have doubtless received the sad news of your 
brother, Marks R. Thomas' death; but I am writing to assure 
that he was prepared fully to meet his Master. 

I had a few minutes conversation with him just about one 
hour before he passed away, and he impressed me as being 
the sweetest character I have ever met in the Army in my 
seventeen years of service. He remarked that if he should 
pass away he would show the men around him "how easy a 
Christian could die"; and it was reported that his death was 
a happv one, if such could he. 

I wish to extend to you my sincere sympathy in your 
bereavement, and hope you will nave strength to bear the sad 
news. Faithfully yours, 

S. J. "Smith, Major-Chaplain, Field Artillery, 

Fort Leavenworth, KansaB. 
FINDS GREAT PLEASURE IK BIBLE STUDY 
Deab Bkethren: — 

Grace and peace be unto you! We note the return of the 
Society to its birthplace as of the Lord; and the hope of still 
sharing in the service on behalf of the multitude yet to be 
drawn into contact with the truth is thrilling. If we read the 
signs of the times correctly in conjunction with the prophecies, 
we can see a gigantic federation of religious and civil interests
 soon. At any rate, present conditions are causing an 
immense amount of thinking and of investigation leading to 
causes. On the other hand Jewish themes are threading the 


shuttle for a new garment as the nations approach the nnaie 
of the present conflict. 

1 wish also to say that the study of the Ezekiel Temple is 
surely a fruitful theme to Bible students. How wonderful is 
the thought of restitution for every wrong done, with the 
addition of 20 per cent interest, to" be rendered by all who 
come forth from the tomb! Again, how marvelous it is that 
the east gate is to be closed forever when the church has 
entered it; and that the ancient -worthies will guard the entrance
 all through the Millennium. Also, how just is the 
Jewish system of weights and measures and of symbolism of 
numbers ! 

Some signs and Scriptures indicate that the watch tower 
will continue right through the time of trouble, and that 
through it the divine power will be exhibited in preserving 
the fruits of our Pastor's great labors. Be this as it may, we 
look for a move to the glory of the Lord shortly, through 
the watch TOWEE, using the treasures laid up by our Pastor. 
We would be glad to hear more about the prophecies of Jeremiah
, as they seem so full of interest at this time, especially 
to the church. 

The Lord bless and keep you all, loving and faithfully doing
 his will. 

Yours in the most loving of bonds, J. (J. — Colp. 

LOVING GBEETINGS FROM THE NORTHWEST 
Deab BKETHREX: — 

Greetings in the name of God our Father and of our Lord 
Jesu3 Christ. Grace and peace be multiplied unto you. The 
Everett Church have voted to send their Christian love and 
support to you all in this our time of special trial and of trying
 experiences. Do not forget to keep us on the list when 
Pilgrims are routed this way. 

There seem to be some who have taken a stand against 
the watch tower because of certain articles published therein
. They say that the tower is not used of the Lord any 
more. Yet some of the articles thus criticized were from the 
pen of our beloved Pastor. Here we know that we have 
arrived at a time when every one must stand for himself, or 
in other words, "when every tub must stand on its own bottom
/' Let every one read prayerfully and carefully Romans 
14:4, 22, 23. 

We have learned well the lesson that there are two tables: 
one, the table of Babylon, full of error and uncleanness; the 
other, the table of the Lord, spread with heavenly bounties, 
a feast of fat things. (Psalm 23:5) We also know that 
God has used the watch tower ever since its dedication, 
to proclaim our Lord's presence and to do the harvest work. 
Then why should he cast it off at this time above all others, 
just when we need its help as never before? We remember 
his promise that he will never leave nor forsake us. We also 
believe that through the tower the Lord is fulfilling the statement
 of Isaiah 21:5: "Prepare the table, watch in the watchtower
, eat, drink; arise, ye princes, anoint the shield." 

Have not our prayers been answered as we have asked 
God's guidance of the dear brethren at the Watch Tower 
office? Dear ones, let us keep together, provoking one another
 unto love and good works, building each other up in 
the most holy faith. Laying aside all malice and jealousy, 
let us pray for one another always, remembering our standard
, the mark of the prize — perfect love. God bless the 
watch toweb! 

With much Christian love and prayer, 

The Everett Ecclesia. — Wash. 
"NATIONS SHALL COME TO THY LIGHT*' 

Gentlemen : — 

By accident I got the loan of a copy of one of the publications
 of your Society. I read the most of it carefully and, 
I must admit, was very favorably impressed. I am an Episcopalian
, but have not attended services to any great extent
. The many quotations and your interpretations from the 
Bible have led me to doubt my position as a believer in the 
doctrines of that church. Now, there is one important point 
that must be clearly and satisfactorily answered before I 
separate from the Episcopalian Society: In your Finale of 
this book in question I read thus: "Are you aware that he or 
she who denies or denounces the sayings of this little booklet 
is not denouncing the compiler, but the Word of God?" By 
this, I presume, you hold the Bible as your only authority. 
In other words the Bible, and the Bible only, is your guide 
and the guide of every teacher in your church. 

Now I have long -been doubtful as to the confidence I should 
possess before taking the Bible as the Word of God. If. the 
Bible is your guide, and your only guide, satisfy me that it is 
indeed the Word of God; and I will become a member of 
your church immediately. I am sincere in this matter, but 
need convincing. Do not presume that I am a prayer less 


[6357] 


(351-35S) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


man. On the contrary I have been praying for light, and 1 
think my prayers have been heard; for I feel that there is 
something in your church worth while considering. 

I beg to remain moat sincerely yours, E. B. — Md. 

FAITH IJT GOD'S OVERRULING PROVIDENCE 
Dearly Beloved Brethren in Chbist: — 

Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father and 
from the Lord Jesus Christ. The church at Dallas has voted 
to extend to you our love and sympathy in this hour of final 
trial and testing, and to assure you of our prayers and cooperation
. We believe the Lord will uphold and guide you 
in your efforts at service as long as there is any work for 
the angel of Revelation 8:3 j and for this we pray daily. We 
appreciate your services to us, and we rejoice in the blessings 
that each issue of the watch tower ibrings. 

We do not know just what awaits us; but we do know 
that "all things work together for good to them that love 
God, to them who are the called according to his purpose"; 
and that no weapon formed against hia children can prosper 
in the sense of injuring them as new creatures. 

Remembering you daily at the throne of grace, and with 
much Christian love, we are 

Your brethren in Christ, The Dallas Ecclesia. — Texas. 
THE EXPRESSION OF A NOBLE HEART 
Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings in the Lord's name; and may grace and peace 
be multiplied unto you. I am writing you at this time to 
advise you of my regret at having taken any part in causing 
to be circulated a certain letter in which surprise was expressed
 re articles on pages 152, 168 and 174 of the 1918 
watch toweb. 

Because of certain conditions that have arisen in local 
classes, the conviction has been growing in my mind that 
perhaps, after all, the above mentioned articles were right, 
and that I along with a number of others was wrong. So I 
determined to reread them with a mind as unbiased as possible
. This I did last night and again this morning; and, 
thank God! I can say from the bottom of my heart: "I find 
no fault with them." I found that I could unreservedly 
accept them for what they say, but not for what others think 
they say. So I haste to write you my apology for having 
opposed in any sense the words which have come forth from 
the channel the Lord has so abundantly used in the past. 

Your brother in the one hope, J. T. B. — B. C. 

"THERE IS NO SCHISM IN THE BODY" 
Deab BRETHRFlN in the LOBD:— 

We would like the dear Bethel family to know that they 


are daily remembered in our prayers. We are grateful for 
the continued help given us through the towers, which are 
still coming through regularly. We ask the Lord's guidance 
and help for you in these times of difficulty, knowing that we 
shall be heard, as we believe he will continue to use you as 
he has done in the past if you remain steadfast and faithful 
unto the end. 

With fervent love in our dear Redeemer, 

Sec'y London Tabernacle. — Eng. 
DAILY PRAYERS FOE HEAVENLY WISDOM 
Beloved Brethben: — 

The Associated - Bible Students of Bristol and vicinity held 
a two-days' convention here Sept. 21, 22, in which the spirit 
of the Lord was manifested in a most noticeable manner by 
all who attended; and we were blest beyond measure. Praise 
his name! 

A motion was made, which carried unanimously, to draft 
a resolution to send to you, which read substantially: 

"Resolved, That we conventioners here assembled at Bristol, 
Tenn., hereby repledge our loyalty and* undivided support to 
our brethren at the headquarters* of the Watch Tower Bible 
& Tract Society, and most especially to those in direct charge 
of the work; that our prayers continue to ascend daily for 
them to exercise the spirit of a sound mind at all times and 
to be guided by the unerring counsel of the Lord, until our 
heavenly Father is pleased to place his everlasting arms about 
us and welcome us to the Great Convention, our eternal 
home." 

Bristol, Tenn., Convention. 

SECOND THOUGHTS ABE BEST 
Bear Brethren: — 

I am writing this letter to make clear my attitude toward 
the Society. When I read Brother Johnson's paper, "Harvest 
Sittings Reviewed," last November, I was so moved to sympathy
 for him that I resigned from my position at the Tabernacle
 office force. 

Two months later, however, I wrote that I had made a mistake
, that I had had the opportunity of thinking the entire 
matter over calmly, and that I realized that I had permitted 
my sympathies to get the better of me. Ever since that time 
my heart has been with the Society; and I am happy to say 
that, at the present time, in spite of the many influences that 
have been exercised to swerve me from my position, I find 
myself in fullest harmony with the Society. 

With much Christian love, 

Yours in the Crucified One N. Y. 


Vol. XXXIX 


PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER 1, 1918 


No. 23 


VIEW FROM THE TOWER 

GATHERING WHEAT — BURNING TARES 

"In the time of the harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them; 

but gather the wheat into my barn'" — Matthew 13:30. 

MUCH WOKS YET TO BE ACCOMPLISHED 

Many of the dear friends think that "the door is shut," 
and that opportunities for service are at an end, or nearly so. 
The tendency of such an opinion is to make us lax in our efforts
 and to cause us to cease watching for opportunities of 
service. The Society does not share this opinion. It is quite 
probable that the harvest, in the sense that no more will be 
spirit-ibegotten, ended in the spring of 1918, except as some will 
fall out or be rejected, and others take their places. As suggested
 by Brother Russell: 

"We have every reason at present to 'believe that the number
 of the elect is not yet completed, because of many crowns 
having been forfeited. We see coming in, day by day and week 
by week, some who give evidence of the Lord's acceptance, who 
give evidence that the Lord is permitting them to lay down 
their lives in his service. But the time will undoubtedly come 
in the near future when the number of the elect will be complete
. Then only such vacancies as might still occur by some 
falling out would remain. In that case there might be a number
 in the consecrated attitude whom God would accept to 
take the place of some who would drop out. These would receive
 fhe begetting of the holy Spirit, and would find opportunities
 for serving the truth and for suffering for the truth's 
sake."— Z '14, p. 68. 

We remind our readers that the Lord is using the truth, 
the word which goeth forth out of his mouth (Isaiah 65:11), 
to accomplish a variety of works. It has been used (1) to 
gather the wheat, (2) "to bind the tares, (3) to gather the 
clusters of "the vine of the earth/' and (4). to smite Jordan. 


Thus does our Lord call to our attention the two parts 
of the harvest work, both of which are to be accomplished 
by the same reapers. The plain intimation of this text is that 
the latter part of the harvest work is to be the burning of 
the tares. If at one time we had the thought that the burning 
of the tares was no part of the harvest work, and that the saints 
would have no part in the work of "burning" them, a careful 
study of the above text will convince us to the contrary. 

A clear understanding of these two parts of the harvest 
work is necessary at this time ; for the Lord's people are more 
or less puzzled and perplexed as to what to do and how to do 
it. How true is the saying, "Man's extremity is God's opportunity
"! How many times have we seen this principle 
illustrated during the past forty or more years of the harvest 
work! 

Tabernacle shadows came to the church in a time of extremity
. The various volumes of studies in scriptures also 
came just as they were needed. Again, the sermons in the 
newspapers, and the photo-drama as well, were given just at 
opportune times. In 1914 we thought that all the work had 
ended ; but just at the opportune time again the Lord brought 
to our attention another work, that of gathering the clusters 
of the vine of the earth. At the present time another "extremity
" is upon the church; and from every part of the field 
come the queries: ,f What remains to be done? How can I 
do more to serve the truth?" We hope that each toweb reader 
will ask himself these questions, and then act according to 
the answers. Furthermore, we wish to assist any and all to 
the extent of our ability. 


[6358] 


December J, 1918 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


(355 356) 


All of this work we believe is an accomplished fact; and it 
is our thought that very soon the Lord will use the truth to 
awaken and enlighten a great company of consecrated believers 
yet in the nominal systems. On this point we quote "that 
servant" : 

"We are not to understand that the harvest is yet wholly 
finished; for there are two parts to the work — the gathering of 
the wheat and the burning of the tares. We might have 
thought that the gathering of the wheat has been accomplished; 
that if our expectations are true, with the end of the Gentile 
Times the number of the very elect would be complete, so that 
no more could enter. We are not positive of this, and we must 
not go by guessing. The latter part of the harvest work is to 
he the burning of the tares, and the waking up of the great 
company and preparing them to go out and purchase the oil 
for their lamps." — 'Matthew 25:8, 9. 

THE PLOWMAN OVERTAKING THE REAPER 

In the above quotation two points should be noticed ; namely 
that the burning of the tarea and the awakening of the great 
company are a part of the harvest work, and that the church 
will do both these works. We continue to quote: 

"In the text of Scripture which speaks of the plowman 
overtaking the reaper, we are to remember that the reaper is 
the Lord, and that the plowman is the great time of trouble. 
This time of trouble will overtake the reaping work and bring 
it to a close. But the time of trouble will go on, the plowman 
will keep on plowing, after all our efforts have ended in respect
 to the reaping. But meantime, before this dark night 
fully sets in, we are to go right on with the work which the 
Lord has put into our hands. The truth is designed, not only 
to perfect the bride of Christ, but to develope the great company
 class and also to be a witness to- the whole world. Any 
carelessness on our part, or any cessation of activity in the 
service of the truth while opportunity yet remains, would in 
our estimation be a great mistake. If we are loyal, the Lord 
will give us far greater opportunities in the future — the blessing
 of all the nations, all the families of the earth. — Gal. 3:8, 
16, 29. TH0SB CONSECRATED BETWEEN THE AGES 

"It is our thought that with the closing of the 'door' of this 
Gospel age there will be no more begetting of the holy Spirit 
to the spirit nature. Any coming afterward to God through 
consecration, before the inauguration of the restitution work, 
will be accepted by him, not to the spirit plane of being^ but 
to the earthly plane. Such would come in under the same 
conditions as the ancient worthies who were accepted of God. 
The ancient worthies came in, no call being opened to them — 
the high calling not being yet open, and the restitution opportunities
 not open. But they freely gave themselves up to God 
without knowing what blessings their consecration would 
bring, except that they had the intimation that they would, in 
the future life, have a 'better resurrection* than would the 
remainder of the world. 

"Our thought is that whoever under Buch conditions as 
these will make a full consecration to the Lord, to leave all 
to follow in his ways, and will faithfully and loyally live up 
to that consecration, may be privileged to be counted as a 
similar class to those who preceded the Gospel asre. We know 
of no reason why the Lord would refuse to receive those who 
make a consecration after the close of the Gospel age and its 
high calling, and before the full opening of the Millennial age. 

THE BURNING OF THE TARES 

"Whether the overcoming saints will have a part in the 
burning of the tare class, is a thought that is not very clear 
at this time. 'This honor have air his saints, to execute the 
judgments written.' All the saints would include, then, those 
who would be living in the world when the judgments would 
be executed, as well as the resurrected saints. Just how any 
living here would have a share in executing the judgments 
written we do not see ; but we are keeping our eyes open, with 
the thought that this may be so. 

"It would seem that the burning of the tares has now been 
going on for some time. That is, some who have professed 
that they were Christians, and who have thought that they 
were Christians, but who have never entered into true fellowship
 with the Lord and become of the wheat class, are to be 
destroyed as tares — shown in their true light. If questioned 
now as to their consecration these will say: 'I am no saint, 
but I wish to be right and just in my dealings as far as possible
,' Thus such will demonstrate that they have not understood
 what it is to be a real Christian. This great war in 
Europe is waking people up to think in a way they have never 
thought before; and now is the time when the real Christianity 
and the counterfeit will be differentiated. Many people will 
come more or less rapidly to recognize this; but there is a 
large proportion of tares that have not yet been burned, and 


the burning will progress to a completion and the true and 

the false will be completely manifested." — Z *15, pp. 269, 270. 

THE WORK CONFRONTING THE CHURCH 

Clearly Brother Russell's thought is this: When professing 
Christians cease to profess to be Christians, and come to 
recognize and acknowledge themselves to be "worldings," they 
will then have been destroyed (burned) as tares. Surely nothing
 can bring their false position to their attention but the 
truth; and just as surely this work is in the future, and the 
church is to do it. And not only this, but another future 
work, which is to beours, is the bringing of the truth to the 
attention of a modern worthy class, who consecrate too late 
to obtain "the prize of the high calling," but who will be 
counted in with the ancient worthies, and as a reward for faithful
 service during the Millennium will get the spirit nature 
at the end of that age. (Z '13, pp. 52, 53) Many are asking 
why it is, if the harvest ended last spring, that since that 
time numbers are consecrating themselves and giving every 
evidence of appreciating the truth and the privilege of sacrifice
. The above thoughts in re the second part of the harvest 
work and the quotation from Brother Russell (Z '14, p. 68), 
will clearly explain the matter. 

It would be entirely proper for all who will constitute 
the great company class to come to an appreciation of the truth 
and to symbolize their consecration. The ancient worthies also 
appreciated the privileges of sacrifice, and jlid sacrifice equally 
as much as do the church. So these modern worthies must also 
sacrifice, if they would share with the ancient worthies in the 
grand Millennial work, and at its close reap the glorious reward
 of the spirit nature. 

Brethren, if these things are true, there is a great work 
just ahead of us — a work in behalf of the great company, a 
work in behalf of the modern worthies, a work in behalf of 
the tare class, and one of witnessing to the world, sowing the 
seed of the new dispensation. It is apparent that all this work 
will properly and logically be done after the full number of the 
little flock is made up. What a wonderful incentive to activity, 
and how thankful we should be for the privilege! Surely the 
present is not the time to hesitate nor to argue over nonessentials
, but for earnest endeavor. 

PRESENT OPPORTUNITIES OF SERVICE 
For some time the opportunities of service have been considerably
 restricted, and may continue to remain under these 
restrictions for a time. While awaiting the Lord's "due time" 
for these great future services, let us not overlook the fact 
that there are still some present opportunities. It is still possible
 to sell the six volumes of studies in the scriptures. 
Many are doing this successfully. There are still many opportunities
 for persona] work, in a conversational way; and 
this can be supplemented with some literature. The Society 
is preparing some neat little tracts in booklet form, suitable 
for mailing or for handing to people. These will be reprints, 
and will as a rule contain but one article each. 

There are multitudes of parents who have lost loved ones 
in battle or by disease, whose hearts can be made glad bv 
"Where are the Dead?" "The Resurrection of the Dead," "Refrain
 thy Voice from Weeping," etc. Many letters inquiring 
about spiritism are coming into the office now. Some tracts 
are being prepared on this subject. What a grand privilege 
it will be to give to those inquiring just the information they 
need respecting the great "scourge" which is soon to "overflow
" in the earth. The time used for tract distribution in the 
past, and the money formerly spent for public meetings, may 
be profitably used in mailing literature. Telephone directories 
will furnish the names of thrifty intelligent people in city, 
town and county. Then again, we are of the opinion that 
meetings for the public can be held in many places, especially 
in rural districts — country schoolhouses, etc. 

Orders for the above mentioned booklet-tracts may be sent 
in at once. Please do not order more than you can and will 
use. These will be forwarded prepaid, and you can refund the 
carriage charges. Here are our opportunities. Let us, dear 
brethren and sisters, by the Lord's help take fresh hold of the 
work. The people never needed the truth more than they do 
now. It is the only thing that will keep them from despair 
and infidelity! People were never more ready to receive the 
truth! People realize that some great changes are at hand, 
and many wish to understand them. 

THE LOBD'g JUDGMENT 8 

"Wben the judgments of the Lord are abroad in the earth, 
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness [truth, 
justice]." The effect of the Lord's judgments on the human 
heart is disciplinary, breaking down pride, arrogance and rebellion
. When the divine judgments are in the earth, his dealings
 with mankind will be entirely changed. In the past God 


[6359] 


(357-358) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


has permitted man to succeed measurably in his aims and 
plans ; and so the prophet wrote: "Now we call the proud 
happy; yea, they that work, wickedness are set up; yea, they 
that tempt God are even delivered." (Malachi 3:15) But 
in this judgment time "the righteous will be exalted," and 
the wicked abased. 

Under these retributive disciplines, thwarting their plans 
and punishing their evil deeds, men's hearts wi5 speedily be 
mellowed, humbled; and they will begin to inquire the reason 
why these things are so. Their reason will return, as did that 
of Nebuchadnezzar, after his seven years of insanity. Even 
now, the Lord's judgments are operating thus. Never before 
have people been inquiring as now. The opportunity is ripe, 
and the people are hungry. For a long time there has been a 
famine in the land (Amos 8:11) ; and now the Lord is saying 
to us in no uncertain tones, "Give ye them to eat." 

It is the desireof the Watch Tower office to do everything 
possible, not only to encourage the friends everywhere to 
greater zeal and activity, but to bring the entire work of the 
Society up to the highest point of efficiency. T>o Colporteur 


sisters are averaging the sale of over 400 volumes per month. 
They sell chiefly Vols. 1 and 4. Their experience gives an estimation
 of what can be done. In all, there are about two hundred
 Oolporteuns in the service. Some are having excellent 
success by specializing on the Scenario; and some, by grouping 
Vols. 1 and 4. 

In order that the Pilgrims might render more effective 
service, and might more accurately represent the Society and 
its attitude toward religious and secular questions, a four-day 
conference of all the Pilgrims was held recently in Pittsburgh. 
Everybody present pronounced it a wonderful event, probably 
the first of its kind. A great number of questions came up for 
discussion; and unanimous concurring conclusions were arrived 
at. We think that great and permanent good will result from 
this conference. The suggestion was made that a similar conference
 be at least an annual event. The Society feels sure that 
as a result the Pilgrims can render a better service, and give 
a better answer to all questions re the Society and its work. 
May the Lord bless the work and "labor of love" of his saints 
everywhere! 


VARIATION IN THE APPLICATION OF CHRIST'S MERIT 

"He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our$ only, but also for the sins of the whole world." — 

1 John 2:2. 


Adam, the father of the human race, came under sentence of 
death because of his wilful disobedience to God, his transgression
 of the divine command. He alone was tried; he alone 
was sentenced ; for his posterity were as yet unborn. But hie 
children, the whole human family, came into the world under 
this death sentence. By heredity they partook of father Adam's 
imperfections, and thus shared his. penalty. Hence they could 
have no relationship with God 1 , except as in his providence he 
might make some arrangement by which the death penalty 
could be lifted from the human race. 

Immediately after the fall of our first parents, God gave 
a vague intimation that such an arrangement had been made. 
In pronouncing the curse upon the serpent that had beguiled 
mother Eve, the Almighty declared that the seed of the woman 
should yet bruise the serpent's head. (Genesis 3:15) Two 
thousand years after man's fall into sin and death conditions 
God made a covenant with Abraham in which he gave hope of 
the ultimate blessing of all mankind. Still later, he accepted 
the children of Israel as his chosen people because they were 
the natural seed of Abraham (Deuteronomy 9:5,6; Genesis 
22:15-18) ; and by the Law Covenant instituted through Moses 
at Mt. Sinai he arranged that the nation of Israel should enter 
into relationship with him as a house of servants. 
MEBIT TO BE GIVEN TO THE WORLD 

At the beginning of the Gospel age God declared his arrangement
 whereby a certain class, children of Abraham by 
faith, might come into special relationship with him through 
Christ Jesus. Then the divine purpose ae to the seed of Abraham
 was made clear. (Galatians 3:8,16 t 29) All along it had 
been God's purpose that this seed should be composite — 144,000 
in all ; and as but a remnant of the natural seed of Ahraham 
had proven worthy, the remainder of the spiritual seed were 
to be chosen from among the Gentiles, hitherto aliens from the 
covenant of promise. The choosing and the fitting of this class 
to be the future blessera of the world has been the purpose of 
the Gospel age. 

God has also arranged for the whole world to come into 
covenant relationship with himself during the age to follow 
this Gospel dispensation. By the acceptance of the merit of 
him who "by the grace of God. tasted death for every man," -all 
may be recovered, if they will, from the curse of death reBting 
upon the human family. (Hebrews 2:9) These facts are 
recognized by all who are careful students of the Word of God. 
The question is: "How is it all to be done? In other words, 
How can Christ utilize his merit on behaH of the church class 
in the Gospel age and also apply the same merit on behalf of 
the world in the Millennial age?" 

We answer: No member of the human family could be 
brought hack into harmony with God except through the payment
 of the ransom price for hia sins. Neither Adam nor any 
of his children could return to relationship with God save as 
a satisfaction had been made that would cover the sins of the 
one seeking fellowship with God. But it was just as easy for 
the Lord Jesus to redeem the whole world as to redeem one 
man; for all died in Adam. (1 Corinthians 15:21,22) Hence 
all will be redeemed from that Adamic death and awakened 
from the tomb because of the sacrificia.1 death of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. All mankind are to have a full opportunity for 
being raised to perfection of life. The death of Jesus is to 
offset the sentence of death that came upon all mankind 
through Adam's disobedience. But the benefit of the death of 


Christ is not to be made effective to^all of the human race in 
the same way or during the same period of time. — Rom. 
5:15-21; 1 Tim. 2:4-7. 

God's dealings with the church class, taken out from among 
mankind and returned to himself in advance of the remainder 
of the world, is distinctly different from his dealings with mankind
 at large. For a wise purpose he has chosen to impute 
the merit of the sacrificial death of Christ Jesus for this part 
of the race before it is applied for the residue of men or for 
Adam himself. The purchase price in the hands of Justice is 
sufllcient for all, but as yet it is not applied for all. To the 
church at the present time there is merely a temporary imputation
 of the merit, to be effective during the period of the 
church's imperfection through the fallen flesh; whereas to the 
world there will be a giving of the merit of Christ's sacrifice 
of his humanity. 

THE MERIT IK JESUS ALONE 

The church of Christ, as members of his body, are to be 
granted the great favor of being with Christ Jesus a part of the 
world's sin-offering; hence the necessity of their being first 
dealt with by God, The merit of the sacrificial death of the 
body of Christ, which is to 'be applied for the world, is the 
merit of Jesus, imputed to the church for this purpose. The 
blood of the antitypical goat is to be applied for "all the people
" (Leviticus 1(1:33) ; "but the blood of the antitypical bullock
 gives it virtue. Consequently all the merit is the merit 
of Jesus alone. Some see this matter in part; but some see 
it not at all. We wish to make the subject clear to all who 
are sincerely seeking to be guided by the counsel of the Lord. 

When our Lord Jesus ascended on high, he presented to 
the Father the full merit of his sacrifice. Tt was all-sufficient 
for the sins of the whole world; for "he is the propitation 
(satisfaction] for our sins, and not for ours only [the 
church's], but also for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 
2:2) But his merit was not applied for the whole world then; 
for God's "due time" for dealing with the world as a whole had 
not yet come. Hence to have applied the merit of Christ Jesus' 
sacrificial death for mankind at that time would have been 
to start the whole world on a new basis. Then from that time 
onward all their sins would have been extraordinary— beyond 
what had been atoned for; and because mankind had no mediator
, God's justice would have cut them off from all hope of 
future life; for "Christ dieth no more." (Romans 0:9-) Having
 had their share of the merit of Christ, they could have 
no further opportunity, and would have been without hope of 
future salvation. 

NOT GIVEK, BUT IMPUTED. TO THE CHURCH 

For this reason the whole world has been left up to the 
present time without actual atonement for their sins. But 
after the church shall have passed beyond the vail^and their 
sacrifice shall have been finished, our Lord Jesus will make a 
permanent application of this merit, which is all his own, on 
behalf of all men. Then God will turn the whole world over 
to Redeemer, the New Covenant will go into effect, and our 
Ix>rd will take unto himself his great power and reign for a 
thousand years for the restoration of the world which he purchased
. When this great work shall haw been accomplished, 
and mankind shall have been restored to the original perfection
 of Adam, then the Redeemer will have given to mankind 
everything which he bought for them by hia death on Calvary. 


[6360J 


December I, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(358-559) 


Let us reiterate: Before giving the blessings of restitution 
to the world of mankind, the Savior uses the merit of his sacrifice
 in a special way in the interest of the small proportion of 
the race which become his church. When he ascended to the 
Father after his resurrection, his merit was used for this class. 
(Hebrews 9:24) The church, like the remainder of mankind, 
were born under the death sentence. But on learning of God's 
provision for such, this class indicated their desire to come 
into covenant relationship with the Father, to follow Christ 
Jesus in the way of sacrifice, to lay down their lives as he had 
done. They declared their desire to walk in Christ's footsteps. 

The Father could not, however, accept them in their natural 
fallen condition. But as they presented themselves in sacrifice
, they came under the arrangement made especially for the 
Gospel age, when our Lord "appeared in the presence of God 
for us," the church. Thus they came individually under the 
merit of Christ's righteousness, imputed to the church in this 
age, covering their unavoidable weaknesses and imperfections, 
and canceling all their sins of the past. Then they were accepted
 of the Father through the Advocate (1 John 2:1) and 
begotten of the holy Spirit as new creatures in Christ. — 2 
Corinthians 5:17. 

Our Lord did not give his merit to this class, but only 
imputed it to them. He placed to thpir credit whatever each 
one needed ; and throughout their earthly sojourn his imputed 
merit covers all their daily transgressions, their trespasses 
which are unwittingly committed, if they confess their shortcomings
 and apply for this cleansing. 

NO RESTITUTION FOB THE SPIRIT-BEGOTTEN 

Jesus does not give the church restitution. If he were to do 
so, it would make us perfect human beings, as he was when on 
earth. But this is not the Father's plan. Our Lord merely 
imputed restitution to us at our consecration, in order that it 
might at once be sacrificed. Thereafter the imputation of hi3 
merit is sufficient for us day by day, so that justice is satisfied 
at all times, as far as the church is concerned, if this merit 
is daily applied for. Otherwise our trespasses remain charged 
up against us. 

What we consecrate, if we do it intelligently, is all that we 
have"; first, our will, then our time, our strength, our influence
, our mind, our body, our means — all that we have and 
are. All things pertaining to the present life are to be sacrificed
 on the altar of consecration with our Lord Jesus; and 
thereafter we are to walk faithfully in his steps. In other 
words, we are to give up, relinquish, that which our Lord's 
merit imputed, or aocoumed to us; that is, perfect human nature
 and all of those restitution blessings which would otherwise
 have been ours with the remainder of the world. Therefore
 as men we have nothing left. In this sense of the word 
we give ourselves up in the same way that our Lord Jesus 
gave himself up. The only difference is that he was a perfect 
man, while we are imperfect. But he covers us with the robe 
of hi3 righteousness, bo that we are able to stand before God 
as though we had received full restitution. Our Redeemer 
covers us as members of the Adamic race who have laid down 
all earthly hopes for the more glorious hopes held out to us 
as members of the ibody of Christ. 

Thereafter we are wholly in the hands of our Lord Jesus. 
He is our Head, and the One who ia to bring us off conquerors, 
yea, more than conquerors. Day by day we yield ourselves 
into his hands, that he may give us such experiences as are 
necessary in order that we may be enabled to fulfil our covenant 
of sacrifice — (Psalm 50:5) He stands bound on our account; 
and his merit cannot be diverted from the purpose for which it 
lias been appropriated — for the church, 

THE GREAT COMPANY'S POSITION 

The great company are also included in the class for whom 
Christ utilized his merit when he ascended on high after his 
resurrection ; for all of the church class are called "in one 
hope of their calling," But since this large portion of the 
church which is to constitute the great company do not sacrifice
 their earthly interests faithfully, as they covenanted to do, 
their flesh must be put to destruction. The great time of 
trouble which is due at the close of this Gospel age is the 
"great tribulation" through whieh this large class must pass 
in order to "wash their robes and make them white in the 
blood of the Lamb." (Revelation 7:14) These fail to keep 
their record clean before the Lord day by day. They fail to 
examine themselves properly and to perform dairy their vows 
to the Lord. They are lacking in the spirit of sacrifice and are 
fearful of the reproach of tiie cross. 

But if this great company whom no man can number will 
submit sympathetically to the destruction of the flesh according
 to the divine provision granted them in mercy, they will 
be purified and will come up to a place of service before the 
throne. If, however, they do not submit, then the second 


death will be their portion. But in either case they will have 
lost their place in the throne; for thi3 position of special 
honor is reserved for those who faithfully "follow the Lamb 
whithersoever he goeth." (Revelation 14:1-5) The great 
company's future work for the world will be as servants of the 
royal priesthood, the body of Christ. 

SUMMABY OF THE MAT TEE 

Ihiring the present time, then, God's favor to the church is 
through and on account of the virtue of the imputed merit of 
Christ's sacrifice. Ours is a justification by faith, which in the 
divine arrangement serves every purpose for us. But with the 
world it will be different. God's arrangement for the world^is, 
we see, a justification by works. Nevertheless, this justification
 is through the merit of Christ; for mankind can never 
attain to perfection through their own works alone, but only 
through the assistance which Christ will give them. Neither 
could they atone for their sins of the past. These must be 
canceled through the merit of their Savior Jesus Christ. The 
application of his merit in the beginning of the Millennium will 
make satisfaction for the sins of the world, for every child 
of Adam. 

This satisfaction for the sins of the world corresponds to 
the church's experience. Our sins are forgiven; the slate is 
wiped clean for us when our Lord Jesus imputes to us his merit. 
At the beginning of the Millennium the slate will be wiped 
clean for the world as a whole. Nevertheless, there will be an 
individuality of dealing; for except by personal co-operation no 
one will- come to perfection. With the church in the present 
time, it is not sufficient that our sins are forgiven, and that 
we have Christ's merit imputed to us at the start. We need 
the continual covering of our blemishes by the merit of his 
righteousness. And so it will foe with the world. Their sins 
will be forgiven by means of the application of the merit of the 
itedeemer at the beginning of the age; but they will need the 
merit throughout the Millennium, until perfected and able to 
live up to the requirements of the divine law. 

The merit of Christ was used aB the ground, or basis, on 
which the church is justified by faith. This same merit will 
be used by the Father as the means through which the world 
will attain to actual justification. It will be through the merit 
of Jesus that they will be enabled to reach perfection. That 
merit will be applied for the forgiveness of sins that are past; 
and through the sealing of the New Covenant by his blood, 
mankind will be covered while they are emerging from the 
bondage of sin and death. 

The Almighty was under no obligation to do this for the 
children of Adam. It is all of divine (mercy, which is not 
exercised apart from the principles of justice, but in harmony 
with them, so that justice and mercy are linked together in 
God's wonderful plan of redemption for mankind. 

We should not use the word impute in respect to the world ; 
for the Bible does not so use it. The world will have life as the 
result of Christ's merit, not by imputation, but by direct 
application. The merit of Christ secures the human nature; 
and the human nature secured by the merit of Christ, is to 
be given to the world. In the case of the church, however, 
the merit is merely imputed to cover our blemishes up to the 
time of our glorification, when we shall have our new body, in 
the likeness of our Lord. — 1 John 3:2. 

WOBE OF THE OHEIST TWOrOLD 

The world will have an awakening, and the assistance of 
the royal priesthood in the resurrection process. Their resurrection
 will mean much more than the mere awakening from 
the tomb. To awaken the world, to bring them back to conscious
 being and to leave them there, would be merely to brin£ 
back the conditions which prevail now. Men would soon go to 
striving and fighting again. Even if the devil were chained, 
there is enough of the Satanic spirit entrenched in fallen mankind
 to make this a world of strife. So the work of our Lord 
Jesus will be not merely an awakening of men to life, but also 
a work of uplifting, of helping them out of the weakened condition
 and the evil environment in which they now are through 
the Adamie fall from divine favor. 

The work of. the Christ will not be finished, therefore, until 
at the end of the Millennium he will have sriven all mankind 
full opportunity of rising to perfection; This blessing is to 
come first of all through the kingdom of Messiah, which is to 
direct the affairs of the world. This kingdom will be in the 
hands of the Christ, Jesus the Head and the church which is 
the .body. The Lord has promised, however, a secondary blessing
; namely, that these kings shall also be priests, to instruct 
and help mankind, to heal all the weaknesses and sicknesses 
of humanity. So in the establishment of the kingdom the 
work of the Christ will have only begun. Tt will reach its perfection
 in the work of the royal priesthood, which will bring 
mankind back to the image of God, lost through Adam's disobedience
, but redeemed at Calvary. 


[6361] 


LOVE ANEW 


OJi, how oft we lack the Spirit 
In the little things we tell, 

And how oft we lose the import 
Of the lessons conned eo well ! 

It is good to grow the graces 
Of the Spirit in our head; 

But 'tis grievous if our actions 
Prove the fruit thereof is dead. 

Love exults to see another 
Being honored at her side, 

And delights to be the agent 
If the Lord be glorified. 


Love prefers whatever method 
God may use, nor questions why; 

And for brethren of the Master 
Love would even dare to die! 

Love will suffer inconvenience 
And will have no time to rue; 

But with power and prompt obedience 
Love will seek to serve anew. 

Love, thou bond of our completeness, 
Love of God and Christ our King, 

I^ad us heavenward, to our homeland, 
There of love anew to sing! 


THE DRAWING OF GOD NOT THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 


"As many as are led by the Spirit of Qod, they are the sons o 

hath sent me draw him."- 

Very careful scrutiny, very close study, is needful In 
order that we may be able to rightly divide the Word of 
Truth. The statement of our first text is quite restricted in 
its application. The term "as many" implies that only those 
who are led by the Spirit of God are God's sons. This being 
so, how few are the sons of God! This declaration of the 
Apostle Paul makes the matter of sonship a very limited 
one. And this is in harmony with the entire Bible, which 
points out that the number of the sons of God in the world 
is only a "little flock." 

Throughout the Jewish age, God was the Instructor and 
Guide of his people through Moses and the prophets ; but they 
were not sons of God, and none of them hud the Spirit of 
God in the begetting sense. The Spirit was not yet given in 
this sense, nor could it be until our Lord had provided the 
ransom price, had been raised from the dead, and had ascended 
to the Father. During the Master's earthly ministry it could 
not come, as the Scriptures say, "because Jesus was not yet 
glorified." (John 7:39) In other words, the Spirit of God, 
as referred to in the New Testament as the possession of the 
consecrated believer in Christ, is, primarily, a special in* 
ftuence, a power, coming from God upon a special class in a 
special manner Bince a particular events— not before that event. 
The holy Spirit came, was manifested on the day of Pentecost
, so that it might stand out in our minds as separate 
and distinct from anything that had occurred before that very 
remarkable event. 

WHY SO FEW UNDERSTAND THE BIBLE 

Secondly, the Spirit of God is the mind, the disposition, 
which the holy influence or power of God operating in the 
child of God produces in the individual. This spirit, dieposi* 
tion, of God, grows and developes as it feeds upon the Word. 
The Spirit of God is variously called the holy Spirit of God, 
the spirit of Christ, the spirit of truth, the Bpirit of love, the 
spirit of a sound mind, the spirit of sonship. These terms all 
represent the one possession of the saints of the present age. 
These are a special company who have taken up their cross to 
become followers of Christ, and who, on this account, are recognized
 of the Father and begotten of the holy Spirit. This 
Spirit of God, the Spirit of truth, so illuminates and permeates 
the Bible that the revelation of God may be properly understood 
only by those who have the holy Spirit. They only are able to 
comprehend the deep things of God, which cannot be understood
 save by a supernatural illumination of the mind. While 
others not having this Spirit might get some light from the 
Bible, only the spirit-begotten can get the real essence of the 
truth; for they have this spiritual illumination. Thus, these 
can understand things that are hidden from all others. 

We call to mind Scriptures which speak of a leading of 
God's servants prior to the Gospel age, and hence prior to the 
begetting of the holy Spirit. In ages preceding the present 
age, there were a few faithful servants of the Lord who were 
guided by the holy Spirit ; that is, they obeyed God as he made 
his will known to them. They had the spirit, the disposition, 
of righteousness. God's Spirit, his power, operated, too, in a 
mechanical way upon the holy prophets, causing them to utter 
not only words from God to natural Israel and to certain individuals
 to whom they were sent, but especially to declare prophetically
 messages designed of God for the Church of Christ, 
which was to be called out centuries after their time. See 1 
Peter 1:10-12. 

But the leading of the Spirit spoken of in the text under 
consideration is a leading which is not the result of personal 
revelations from God, visions and dreams, visible ministrations
 and messages from angels, etc., as with God's servants of 
old, but is the inspiration of the holy mind to which the sainta 
of the present age have been begotten by God's power within* 


/ God." "No man can come unto me except the Father which 
Romans 8:14; John 6:44. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES THE FATHER'S DRAWING 

During our lord's ministry on earth he made a statement 
which we think has been misunderstood by many. It reads: 
"No man can come to me except the Father which hath sent 
me draw him." Let us remember that these words were 
spoken by our Master before his death, before the holy Spirit, 
therefore, had come upon any. Some, not having noticed the 
Scriptural teaching that the holy Spirit did not come until 
Pentecost, and then only upon consecrated believers in Christ, 
have asked, "Was it not the drawing of the holy Spirit that 
Jesus spoke of? Does not the holy Spirit operate upon the 
heart previous to one's acceptance of Christ, and is it not this 
that draws him to Christ?" We answer, No. It is not the 
holy Spirit in the sense of our text. The holy Spirit is given 
only to believers. It comes only after they have accepted 
Christ, when God receives them as sons — not before. 

What, then, shall we call that which went before? We 
reply : We should call it what the Bible calls it — the drawing 
of God. A« the Scriptures speak in a specific manner of some 
being led of the Spirit, we would not be wis© to confuse ourselves
 or others by speaking of it in a different way, but 
should bear in mind that none can be led of the Spirit until 
after he is begotten of the Spirit. But the Bible speaks of 
this desire to come to the Father as the drawing of God ; and 
we would best speak of it in just this way. The drawing 
whieh the Father gives, and which many nave experienced, 
seems to be a natural drawing of our human hearts along the 
lines which belong to the natural man, and is something which 
wo possessed before we were begotten of the holy Spirit. It 
is nothing supernatural. There is no Scripture for such a 
thought. It is our own mind that draws us. 
HOW MEN ARE DRAWN TO GOD 

To explain : When God created Adam, naturally he would 
love his Creator. Naturally he would desire to be obedient to 
God, to worship and serve him. These impulses were all natural
 to him because -he was in a natural condition, a pure 
condition. It is sin that has made man unnatural. But although
 sin has entered in and perverted the original character 
which God had given Adam, yet we find in the human heart 
certain longings for God, even among the depraved. They 
would prefer to be in perfect harmony with him. 

All men have degenerated from the likeness of God; but 
the desire for worship, the desire for righteousness, the desire 
to be in accord with God, is much stronger in some than in 
others. When the message of salvation is presented, some feel 
an inward response. This is the impulse of a heart from whieh 
the original likeness of the Father has been less obliterated 
than it has been in many other hearts. This natural impulse 
was God's original gift to man, a heart sentiment which 
naturally drew men to their Maker. Hence this drawing which 
still remains is properly called a drawing of the Father. 

Among mankind there are some who have not lost their 
reverence, whatever else they may have lost in Adam. Or perhaps
 they may have the organ of conscientiousness or appreciation
 of justice well developed. These qualities draw or incline
 their possessors toward God; and they feel that they 
cannot be happy without him. This is the drawing influence. 
This, influence may be illustrated by the effect of a magnet. If 
a quantity of steel filings were scattered throughout a box 
of sawdust, and a magnet were held close to the surface, the 
steel filings would immediately respond to the attraction of 
the magnet. On the other hand, the Bawdust would not be 
affected; nor would the steel filings respond to any other influence
 than that of a magnet, exercised either directly or indirectly
 upon them. 

Man was created in the image of God. The fall into sin 
has greatly marred that image, but no human being is totally 
depraved. AH have unbalanced brains, however, some iu one 


(360-361) 


[6362] 


December 1, 191$ 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(361 363) 


direction and others in another. When the truth comes into 
contact with those whose organ of veneration or of conscientiousness
 is less impaired, they are drawn to investigate it, 
with the hope of being brought closer to God. But those whose 
organs of conscientiousness and veneration are more impaired 
do not have this experience. Such are not drawn" unto God, if 
haply they may find him. Those who are without this drawing influence
 are not to be blamed, however; for they were born 
under these unfavorable conditions. Those who are reverential 
by nature are favored in that whoever would come to God 
must exercise faith in Christ as their Redeemer; and without 
this faith there can be no blessing. 

HOW TO COME TO THE FATHER 

God does not draw any one by any other means than this 
original power of the human heart which he implanted at man's 
creation, and which has not been wholly lost by the fall. This 
is the drawing which each one of us has realized who has come 
to Christ. In proportion as one desires righteousness and has 
the natural ability to exercise faith, in that same proportion 
he is drawn to Goa\ He feels after God, if haply he might find 
him. (Acts 17:27) We who have responded to "the Gospel call 
had the desire to come before we did so. That desire was something
 which awoke in us; but it was there before it was awakened
. Perhaps some great sorrow or calamity aroused in the 
heart a feeling that we might take our grief 'to God, brought 
us to realize our need of him. 

Then perhaps the thought earner "God will not hear me." 
This would be a very proper conclusion for one who is a 
stranger to God. This soul, feeling after God, learns* that 
there is no way of approach to God except through the Redeemer
 whom he has provided. From the Word he receives 
instruction, learns how to come to the Lord. Just as Cornelius 
the centurion needed instruction and St. Peter was sent to him, 
so we need help. We need to learn the terms upon which God 
will receive us. As we ponder over the Word of God, we hear 
our Savior say: "I am the way, the truth and the life, No 
man cometh unto the Father but by me." — John 14:6. 

We truly believe that thousands upon thousands of honest 
souls have been turned away from God on account of the 
creedal misrepresentations of his character. Some have been 
drawn to him in various ways, however; such as the PhotoDrama
 of Creation, etc. Not long ago we learned of a lawyer 
who had felt that he had lost his hold upon God entirely; but 
as the result of seeing and hearing the Photo-Drama he drew 
nigh to God and made a consecration of himself. The hearing 
of the true message of salvation as presented in the Bible has 
led to the Ix>rd and to an earnest Christian life many who 
had previously been repelled through false teachings. 

Not until one has the desire to come back to the heavenly 
Father is he ready to be directed to the great Advocate or to 


be directed by him; for when we come to this Advocate he 
very plainly tells us: "I can receive you upon only one condition
. Take up your cross and follow me." It would not 
be worth while to explain about the narrow pathway to any 
one who manifests that he has no drawing toward God. 
DRAWING OF GOD NOT WORK OF HOLT SPIRIT 

We see, then, quite a marked distinction between the drawing
 of the Father, that drawing which comes from the remnant
 of the original image of God not so far obliterated as to 
find no response to the Gospel message, and that which in the 
Bible is called the Spirit of God, The life and the testimony of 
a consecrated child of God often cause a drawing toward God 
or a feeling of reproof in one who is not a believer. The effect 
of the holy Spirit in this Christian life thus acts indirectly 
uipon others who are sufficiently honest and sincere to be affected
 by this testimony; but it never acts from within, in the 
case of the unconsecrated. 

Reverting to our first text, we repeat that only those who 
have made a definite covenant of sacrifice with the Lord have 
the spirit of God, only those are the sons of God. And even 
these are not yet sons in the fullest sense of the word; but 
they shall be when they receive their resurrection change. 
Those who are of thi3 class shall be sons of God on the divine 
plane, if they remain faithful unto death. 

During the incoming Milennial age the world of mankind, 
as they come into harmony with God's arrangements, will be 
coming nearer and nearer to the standard of sonship, human 
sonship. Christ will then do the drawing, and will draw all 
men to himself. (John 12:32. See also Scripture Studies, 
Vol. 5, p. 414, last par., and p. 415, par. 1) In the end of 
that age those who have met the conditions fully, who have 
come wholly into harmony with the laws of the kingdom of 
Messiah, will have attained full sonship. They will then 
have the Spirit of God which was lost in Adam, not in the 
sense that the Gospel church has it, however — a begetting and 
birth to a new nature— but in the sense that they will be in 
full accord with God's disposition of justice, of righteousness, 
of love. 

A THOUSAND YEARS HENCE 

This will then be the disposition of all of mankind who 
come into harmony with the laws of the Messianic kingdom. 
They will be earthly images of God. They will have fully 
regained the condition of perfect mentality and morality, of 
God-likeness, which Adam possessed when he was perfect, plus 
the crystallized character for righteousness which Adam failed 
to develop. All this great blessing the world will receive 
through Christ. In the Scriptures our Lord Jesus is called 
"the Everlasting Father" (Isaiah 9:6) — the Father who gives 
life everlasting to the world, but not to the church, however. 
The church receive their life as new creatures from the Father. 


JOSEPH CARES FOR HIS KINDRED 

[The last paragraph of this article was reprinted from article entitled, "Joseph's Last Days," published in issue of April 
15, 1894. Paragraphs 2 to 4 inclusive were reprinted from article entitled, "All Things Work for Good to Them," published 
in issue of May 15, 1913. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "The Close of a Noble Life " published in issue 
of October 15, 1901. Please see the articles named.] 


FAITH VICTORIES 

December 29. — Hebrews 11:8-22. 


FAITH BEFORE CHRIST CAME GOD'S DEALINGS WITH THE ANCIENT WORTHIES PROVIDENTIAL CARE OF THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL— 

THEIR EXPERIENCES OBJECT LESSONS FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAEL FAITH SINCE CHRIST CAME! — ANTITYPES OF JEWISH TYPES. 


"This 'is the victory that overcometh the 
We are living in a day when faith is greatly discounted, in 
a day when people seem disposed to declare: "I do not care 
what a man believes, if only his life be honorable." Practically
 this means that faith is of no consequence. Those who 
thus hold usually put honor of men as the highest goal. Their 
sentiment, translated into plain English, would be: "With all 
your getting get money and prosperity; for without these, no 
matter what you believe or whom you worship, you will never 
prosper in the present life, where success is the only goal now 
recognized by an increasing number of people." This argument 
appeals to the majority of our race. 

The Bible standpoint, however, is the very reverse of this. 
God's Word puts faith first, and builds character upon that 
foundation. God declares that no human being can do perfect 
works. Hence he has not made works the standard. Faith 
is the divine standard; and God assures us that whoever has 
the proper faith must of necessity have works which will 
correspond with his faith. In line with this principle, we note 
that God's favorites of the Bible have all been men of faith. 
Their faith did not make them perfect, nor were their works 
always acceptable in God's sight; but he punished them for 


world, even our faith." — 1 John 5:4. 

evil works and rewarded them for their great faith. Thus we 

find in the Bible record that some of God'3 favorites committed 

grievous sins and made serious mistakes; yet nevertheless 

they maintained themselves in God's favor by reason of their 

faith. 

Of all religious books ever written or read, the Bible is 
perhaps the most candid. It tells of the mistakes and the sins 
of the very characters which it holds up as models and examples
 of men after God's own heart. Yet the Bible leaves no 
room for any one to assume that God loves wickedness or that 
the friends of God are the depraved of mankind. Quite to the 
contrary, the highest possible standards of righteousness in 
word, in deed and in thought are inculcated; and we are 
distinctly told that full acceptance with God can be only along 
the lines of truth and righteousness. 

God tells us that all mankind are sinners by nature. He 
declares that we could do nothing to clear away our own guilt 
and the sentence which stands against us as members of the 
fallen raoe of Aidam. But he also tells us that he purposes to 
adjust the matter satisfactorily for us; and hence that our 
responsibility is not for what we cannot do } but for what we 


[6363] 


(363-364) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


can do. He assures us that the foundation for our noblest endeavors
 will lie along the lines of confidence in him. This confidence
 -ho calls faith. He assures us that without faith it is 
impossible to please him; And this lie has shown us in all the 
lessons of the Bible. 

Let us look into the past, and vote the method by which 
God sought his peculiar people. The first proclamation of the 
divine purpose respecting humanity was made to Abraham. 
After Abraham had manifested some faith, God gave him 
further tests. When in obedience to these tests Abraham left 
his native land and went to Canaan, he manifested so much 
faith that God called him friend, and made to him the very 
first revelation of the divine purposes in respeot to mankind. 

Abraham knew that there was a curse upon the entire race, 
under which the whole creation was groaning, going down to 
the tomb; and God's declaration to him was that the time 
would come when the curse would be removed and a blessing 
come instead. To Abraham this meant that instead of wasting
 away in death men would be restored from their dying 
condition and brought back from the tomb. 

THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT 
This was a wonderful proposition, even for God to make. 
Yet with childlike faith Abraham believed the message. God 
declared to him that because of his faith he and his posterity 
would be greatly blest, so that through him as a father would 
eventually come children who would accomplish the great 
work of rescuing all mankind from the power of Satan, sin 
and death. The briefly epitomized statement of all this was 
in the words: "In thy seed shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed." — Genesis "12:3. 

What did it mean for Abraham to have faith in that promise
? Assuredly it meant that henceforth his mind would take 
in a large horizon, the world of [humanity instead of merely 
his own immediate family, his flocks and herds and his nearest
 neighbors. It meant that if God would so honor his posterity
 Abraham would seek in everything to co-operate with 
God and that great promise. 

For many years God tested Abraham's faith. Yet he still 
believed. After Isaac was born and as yet had no child, God 
directed that this son of the promise, the one in whom the 
covenant centered, should be sacrificed. What a test of faith! 
What a grand development of faith Abraham had acquired 
when he was ready to obey the divine voice, accounting that 
God was able to raise Isaac from tlhe dead! Oh, for such a 
trust in God! Oh, for such appreciation of divine power! 
What could not be accomplished in the world through the 
divine message if such faitn prevailed among God's children! 
What would God not do for all who would thus trust him ! 

It was the same with Isaac and Jacob. They trusted that 
same promise, and it influenced the whole course of their 
lives. It made thorn more like God. It shaped their every 
interest. Although they understood practically nothing of 
how God would accomplish so great a blessing, nevertheless 
their faith laid bold upon that fact. From their posterity 
God would raise up a holy people to be his agency, his channel, 
for instructing the world, ruling the world, uplifting the 
world, resurrecting the dead and bringing mankind hack to 
all that was lost through Adam's disobedience. 

If their faith had been weaker, they might have had plenty 
of opportunities for stumbling. If they had been more worldly
-wise, they might have said: "How can God do this thing 
and yet be just? Having once pronounced a sentence, how 
can he clear the guilty?" But their faith wavered not. In 
their hearts they said: "God has promised; and what he has 
promised he will do; and he will have his own way of accomplishing
 it." 

ANOTHER COVENANT MADE 
By and by the nation of Israel as a whole was called the 
people of God. The nation as a whole entered into a covenant
 with God through Moses, the mediator of the Law Covenant
. Israel was impulsed by faith — faith in the promise made 
to Abraham that God would use his posterity in the blessing 
of all of Adam's race, both living and dead. 

The covenant made at Sinai pledged the people of Israel to 
be a holy nation, to keep God's law blamelessly. God covenanted
 that in that event he would fulfill in them the promise 
made to Abraham. But he knew that imperfect human beings 
could not keep ihis perfect law. Nevertheless he would let 
them try; he would let them learn that lesson; and through 
it he would give instruction to the angels respecting his own 
righteousness. Through it he would also give instruction to 
spiritual Israel, whom he would develop later, and through 
whom the blessings would actually come. This is explained 
by the Apostle Paul, who says: "The Law Covenant was 
added because of transgressions until the promised seed should 
come." — Galatians 3:19. 


In other words God started this work with Israel in a 
typical manner long centuries before the real spiritual Israel 
would be developed. But he did not thereby do injury to the 
people who had covenanted to keep the law, but who were 
unable to do so. On the contrary they as a people were blest 
by their endeavors to keep the law, as well as by the chastisements
' which came upon them because of their failures and 
their lack of faith. But God especially blest all of that nation 
who shared Abraham's faith. In addition to Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob the Apostle Paul could enumerate a large number 
who pleased God because of their faith long before Christ, 
the spiritual seed of Abraham, came. Those ancient worthies, 
although they will not be the seed of Abraham in the highest 
sense, on the spirit plane, will be the seed of blessing on the 
earthly plane, the channel through which the heavenly blessings
 will ultimately be extended to all the nations of earth. 

What was it that impulsed the Jewish people during all 
those centuries past? W T as it not faith that God would fulfil 
the promise made to Abraham? It surely was! Moreover, 
that promise still actuates Buch of the Jews as have not lost 
their faith j that is, such of Abraham's descendants through 
Jacob as are still Jews. Those who have lost the faith of 
Abraham are no longer related to the promise in any sense 
of the word; for the promise was according to faith, 

St. Paul speaks sympathetically of the Jewish nation, in 
respect to that promise which God originally made to Abraham
. He says: "Unto which promise our twelve tribes, 
instantly serving God day and night, hope to come." (Acts 
26:7) And all Jews, in proportion as they still maintain that 
hope, may continue to expect a realization of all and more than 
they have dreamed of, in God's due time. 

THE LONG-PROMISED SEED OF ABRAHAM 

The coming of Christ did not change the divine purpose, 
and therefore did not change the faith of God's people. Jesus 
and the apostles believed and taugbt the very Gospel which, 
according to St. Paul, God preached in the beginning to Abraham
. (Galatians 3:8) The apostolic message also was that 
all the families of the earth were to be blest through Abraham
's seed. But there was an additional feature then due to 
be proclaimed and to be believed ; namely, that God had begun 
to provide this seed of Abraham, the Messi&h ; that God had 
sent the Logos, his Son, into the world to become the seed 
of Abraham on the spirit plane and eventually to fulfil every 
feature of the original promise. 

All the Jews were in expectation of the Messiah, but they 
did not ail have the proper faith. ^ Therefore God preferred 
to permit some of them to remain in a measure of blindness 
on this subject, while others were granted a special anointing 
of their eyes of understanding, their eyes of faith. To this 
class Jesus said: "To you it is given to know the mysteries 
of the kingdom of heaven," the Messianic kingdom, through 
which the seed of Abraham is to bless all the families of the 
earth. Then came another step of faitih. Instead of reigning 
in triumph to dispense blessings to the world aaa result of 
hi3 sacrifice, he ascended to heaven. How was this to be understood
? 

God's answer through the apostles was that "the faith once 
delivered to the saints" was the same still, but that now under 
the guidance of the holy Spirit they were to understand that 
the Messiah would not be one person, but many; that not 
Jesus alone would be the seed of Abraham ; but that Jesus as 
the Head and the church as his members, or body, would be 
that seed. St. Paul says : "Ye brethren, as Isaac was, are the 
children of promise." In this figure Jesus was represented 
by Isaac's head, while the church was represented by Isaac's 
body. It has taken the entire Gospel age to develop the body 
of Christ, which is the church. 

Under another figure Jesus was represented in Isaac, and 
the church in Rebecca, Isaac's bride. According to this figure 
the antitypical Isaac has entered into glory, but awaits the 
development of the antitypical Rebecca. At the appointed 
and appropriate time our Lord will come, the seed of Abraham
, and receive his bride unto bimself ; and they twain will 
be made one. Then through the one, the Christ, will come 
through the Messianic reign the blessing promised to Abraham
 nearly four thousand years ago: "In thy seed shall all 
the families of the earth be blessed." 

This is "the faith once delivered to the saints," "the hope 
set before us in the Gospel," the faith that God will use the 
seed of Abraham to bless all humanity, and the hope that by 
faithful perseverance and trust we may become joint-heirs 
with Jesus, the Redeemer, in all the glorious inheritance of 
the Messianic kingdom, for which God's people long have 
prayed: "Thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth even 
as it is done in heaven." 


[63G4J 


QUESTIONS OF GENERAL INTEREST 


IN RE-APPOINTMENT OF ELDERS 

Question: — What should be the attitude of a competent 
elder who fails of re-election? 

Answer; — The appointment to the office of elder ia by vote 
of the ecclesia, the company of the Lord's people, and is to 
be the voice of the church. We believe that the proper attitude
 for each one should be that of willingness to accept the 
voice of the ecclesia, the church, implicitly. Whoever has 
become a member of the congregation by casting in his lot 
with the others has thus become subject to the rules that 
represent the controlling majority, whether it be a majority* 
of one or a larger per cent. Having done this, he should 
seek to continue in this attitude, whether chosen as elder or 
whether another is chosen. 

Very frequently a congregation makes the mistake of selecting
 for elder a brother who does not have the proper qualifications
. This sometimes means dissatisfaction on the part 
of some of* the congregation, and often leads to the breaking 
away of some to form another class. We think that this is 
not the wise course; for if the original class made a mistake, 
the Lord is able to overrule it for good. Therefore those who 
withdraw lose some experiences which would be invaluable. 

We are not always sure, however, that in such cases the 
congregation has made a mistake. How can we know but 
that the Lord has some lesson to teach in this matter? If we 
have asked the divine blessing on whoever would be the 
choice, we should abide by that choice. Tf the one not chosen 
has the ability to present the truth properly and knows a 
number of places where he can be used and useful, we think 
the brother should take advantage of whatever opportunities 
may present themselves. He need not leave the class, however
, but could perform whatever service came to his hand. 
Perhaps he could use his time and talent in class extension 
work, not feeling restricted in this direction because he was 
not elected elder. He might go out and find opportunities for 
service. So to the brother not elected or not re-elected the 
change in elders might mean that the Lord was thus pointing 
out another field of usefulness. The Lord's providences might 
be leading him out for wider usefulness and influence. 


ADAMIC DEATH TO CEASE GRADUALLY 

Question; — When the Millennial kingdom of Christ begins, 
will the Adamic death be at an end? 

Answer; — While the reign of Christ will be one of righteousness
 unto life, we are not to understand that Adamic 
death will be at an end as Boon as Messiah begins his rule; 
for the Scriptures declare that "he must reign until he hath 
put all enemies under his feet." (1 Corinthians 15:25, 26) 
It is understood that during the thousand years of the Messianic
 kingdom the people will be more or less in the Adamic 
death condition, and will rise gradually out of Adamic imperfection
 and death to the perfection of human nature. 

In Isaiah 35:8 we read: "A highway shall be there, and a 
way, and it shall be called the way of holiness; the unclean 
shall not pass [all the way] over it; but it shall be for these" 
[i, e., for the unclean, those under Adamic condemnation.] 
The evident thought is that a way of escape is opened up for 
the unclean, whereby "the ransomed of the Lord shall return, 
and come back to Zion," and "obtain joy and gladness," and 
"sorrow and sighing shall flee away." Again, in Zechariah 
13:1 we read: "In that day [the Millennial dayj there shall 
be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants
 of Jerusalem for sin and unclean n ess," The thought 
in these texts is that of a gradual cleansing away of the 
Adamic condemnation, See also John 3:36: "He that believeth
 on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth 
not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth 
[remainethj on him." 

WHY THE CHURCH MUST SACRIFICE 

Question :~~S'mce our Lord's sacrifice was sufficient for 
the sin of the whole world, why should the church be asked. 
to present their bodies a living sacrifice also? 

Answer; — During the Gospel age an invitation has gone 
forth from the Father asking those who so desire to become 
partakers with our Lord Jesus, first in his sufferings, and then 
in the glory to follow. As our Lord was called to sacrifice, 
so those who accept the divine invitation to follow his steps 
are also called to sacrifice. "If we suffer with him we shall 
also reign with him." This is the only way that we can be 
with him on the spirit plane. If we retain the human nature, 
we can never get to heaven. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


ENCOURAGING TO COLPORTEURS 

Dear Sirs: — 

Being at home for a few days, while my ship was unloading 
and loading, and looking through the family bookcase I came 
upon one of your works, entitled "The Divine Plan of the 
Ages/' and found it very interesting, about the best book I 
have seen. I want to ask the present price of the rest of the 
Volumes 'mentioned in .the fly leaf. They are there quoted at 
two dollars; but I notice that the book is dated 1912, and the 
price may have advanced since. 

I do not know whether your Association is in the habit of 
answering questions ; but if so, do you think that I, a young 
man of twenty-two years, would, if I mend my ways and lead 
a good Christian life, have a chance of becoming one of the 
"little flock'* your great book mentions? Or does this "little 
flock" refer to the ministry or to the monastic form of life ? I 
would be very thankful to you for solving this question for 
me. One of my favorite Psalms is the ninety-first; and I 
carry a copy of it at all times. It sure is comforting when 
a fellow doesn't know when he is going to find a watery grave. 
Thanking you in advance, I am 

Yours truly, D. L. E. — Mass. 

THE REJOICING FAR EXCEEDS THE SUFFERING 

Dear Friends: — 

Greetings in the name of our dear Lord! 

Just a few lines to refresh your memories of our continued 
love and interest in you all and the work at the Bible House, 
which work we think the Lord is still supervising, while the 
world is rocking to and fro as a drunken man. How blessed 
it is to be on the mountain top viewing the things below, still 
hiding in the Rook of Ages, safe in the arms of Jesus, still 
feeding at the Lord's table! This is still bountifully supplied 
with nourishing food for the hungry. How the Lord is causing
 all things to work together for good to all his little nock! 
And while we suffer with his people in a way, yet we rejoice 
with them in that they are accounted worthy to suffer for his 
dear name; for we are persuaded the rejoicing far exceeds 
the suffering. 

May the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ be with 
you all unto the end. Pray for me. 

Your sister by his grace, Mrs. J. H. I. — N. G. 

VII— 35 


APPRECIATIVE HEARTS IN THE SOUTHLAND 
Deab Brethren; — 

The New Orleans Ecclesia wish to extend to you their 
heartfelt love and Christian greetings and to assure you of 
their appreciation of your labor of love, not only in their 
behalf which was manifested recently in the visit of our dear 
Brother Pickering, but also in behali of all the body members 
still in the narrow way. To be sure, the ministries of our 
brother were appreciated by the brethren whose minds were 
stirred up by way of remembrance and inspired to run the 
race with renewed energy, "looking unto Jesus, the author 
and finisher of our faith." 

Truly are the saints here appropriating to themselves the 
present truths which enable one to appreciate increasingly the 
work of the angel of Revelation 8:3, and to thank the Father 
daily that the Towebs are still in harmony with the glorious 
plan of the ages which was so beautifully told us oji many 
occasions by "that servant." Prayers continually ascend to 
the throne of grace that you, too, may report: "I have done 
as thou hast commanded me." 

Faithfully yours in Christ, Miss P. L. — La. 
WOULD RATHER DEPEND ON THE PROMISES 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

I have been a Bible Student now eight months. Living in 
very poor circumstances, and with very poor .health, I could 
not spare a dollar for The Watch Tower until now. But 
thanks to a dear sister I have had the privilege of reading 
it most of the time. I consecrated last New Year's day and 
symbolized February 10, and realizing that I was getting in 
late and the time short, I have tried to improve every minute 
I could; besides I have not missed a study or service of any 
kind. Oh, how I enjoyed the convention!* I truly can say 
that I never enjoyed anything so much in my life. 

I have an acquaintance who is a Portuguese ; and as I have 
explained the truth to her, she is quite anxious to buy the 
volumes- But they must be in Portuguese; so I wish to ask 
and urge that you try to furnish me with all the volumes. I 
have tried to induce our librarian to get them for me, but he 
is quite busy. I have also tried to answer the V. D. M. questions
, which you will find enclosed. I hope they may be satisfactory
 ; but as I have not been in the school of Christ long, 
I may not have answered them correctly. Please let me know. 

[6365] (366-3671 


(367-354) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh. Pa. 


We are having our meetings in a park now on account of 
the Spanish influenza; but nevertheless we enjoy them, and 
the Lord is protecting the friends pretty well so far from the 
plague. How grand to be under his protecting care and understand
 God's plan while the world is so blind! I can not 
be thankful enough to our heavenly Father for what he has 
done for me. I would rather depend on the promises to the 
"little flock" than gain the whole world. 

Hope that you are settled in your new quarters and that 
everything is going on according to the Father's will. We 
think of you often and remember you in our prayers. 

Your sister in Christ, . 

A VEEY GOOD SUGGESTION 
Dear Brethren: — 

Recently there came to me such a blessing, and at such a 
small cost, that I feel it my duty to tell you the circumstance 
and to inquire whether you do not think it a wise course for 
those to follow who live in sections where "the door is shut'* 
and the night fast settling down. A friend of mine lost a 
dear boy right in the flower of his young manhood. These 
good people are staunch Catholics; and the death of their son 
grieved them very much. I wrote the parents the most 
sympathetic letter I could, giving them an outline of God's 
wonderful plan, not only for the "little flock," but for all the 
world of mankind; and I quoted passage after passage from 
a Catholic Bible, giving reference in each instance, to prove 
the resurrection and the blessing of the dead. 

A few days after mailing this letter, I met my friend; and 
he took me by the hand, his eyes filling with tears, and B&id: 
"I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart for the 
kind and sympathetic letter you wrote our family. We all 
cried for joy to think our boy would be back with us some 
day and we would all be so happy." And my joy came when 
he said: "I looked up those references you gave; and my eyes 
were opened." I replied; "PraiseHhe Lord!" 

May it not be that during the dark, sad hours ahead of 
those who know not of this wonderful plan we can do a 
work of real witness for the truth, when the hearts of our 
friends, and sometimes of our enemies, are touched by the 
hand of death? May the Lord's blessings continue upon you, 


dear brethren, who continue in the work of feeding the sheep 
through The Watch Tower, is the prayer of 

Yours in the Master's service, W. D. A — Miss. 

PEOPLE ABE WAKING UP 
Dear Brethren: — 

Grace, peace and mercy be multiplied unto you; and greetings
 in the name of our dear Redeemer and Savior. 

Throughout the west many scores of dear people have symbolized
 their consecration to the Lord in water baptism since 
April of this year. Many of them seem to appreciate fully 
the covenant of sacrifice, and grasp and appreciate the hidden 
mystery. Indeed they enter into the spirit of the truth, and 
are ready to die for the truth, just like Bible students of 
years of study and blessing. 

Some say the harvest is ended; that the work of spiritbegetting
 has ceased; that those in are in forever, etc.; and 
that no more can enter. What is your thought about this 
phase of the work? Do you recommend the fllgrims to say 
from the platform that the harvest has ended? My heart has 
been made glad to see ao many take a definite -stand for the 
Lord within the last few months. Surely we would not be 
justified in -saying, "You are wrong to have such hopes ; for 
the harvest is ended." Neither would we be justified in saying
, "You are of the great company," 

Several of the Pilgrim brethren have stated definitely from 
the platform that the harvest is ended; and it causes one to 
wonder. I would like your thoughts upon these matters. My 
great joy in -serving the brethren is to encourage and comfort 
from the Word of God. In the west (Alberta, Saskatchewan 
and Manitoba) they have been greatly blest of the Lord. 
Since January 1, about three hundred or more have symbolized 
their consecration to the Lord. Many may have been called 
long ago; others have only heard lately and have come in 
promptly. 

Your loving brother in the one hope, 

G. Y.— Pilgrim. 

Our reply to the above will be found in article entitled, 
"Gathering Wiheat — Burning Tares," in this issue. 

Editorial Committee. 


IN RE ELECTION AND PROXIES 


DEAR FRIENDS: 

The question of an annual election has afforded discussion 
without end, and there is quite a diversity of opinion about 
the matter. The Acting Secretary and the Board of Directors 
desire to do the Lord's will. Recently a letter waa sent tr> 
all the class secretaries, announcing that there would be no 
election. At the time this course seemed to be the Lord's will ; 
but on looking into the matter more thoroughly we have come 
to the conclusion that such a course would not be pleasing 
to the Lord; and we herewith give our reasons: 

(1) The failure to hold an election would be a violation 
of the statute of the State of Pennsylvania which makes an 
annual election necessary. 

(2) The failure to hold an election would be a fraud upon 
the corporation. 

(3) If no election were held there would be no officers who 
could act in a legal capacity for the corporation ; for the statute 
says that an election must be held annually, and by the Shareholders
. Again, if it were possible that the officers elected by 
the Shareholders could hold over, the Charter of the Society 
makes it impossible for those elected by the Board of Directors 
to hold over. Therefore, since two of the present Board were 
elected by the Board, and not by the Shareholders, they could 
not legally hold over; and hence there could be no quorum. 

The legal authority for these statements will be found in 
"Harvest Sif tings," of Aug. 1, 1917, page 15, column 2, first five 
paragraphs. This legal opinion Avas given by the firm of 
lawyers whom Brother Rutherford himself consulted upon the 


matter; and precedents are cited for their decision. We quote 
a part of this opinion: 

"Section 17 of the Pennsylvania statute expressly provides 
that the Board shall be chosen annually by the shareholder* or 
members. This provision of the act is mandatory. , . . Again, 
where the statute authorizes the election of the Board of Directors
, any scheme or organization which dispenses with the 
statute may be regarded as a fraud upon the corporation. . . . 
Paragraph 8 of the Charter will be construed to mean what it 
says; namely, that where a vacancy occurs in the Board of Directors
 then the remaining members of the Board may, within 
twenty days, meet and fill such vacancy; but the person so selected
 could hold office only until the next annual election held 
by the shareholders. This is the only construction in harmony 
with the statute." 

This is the legal phase of the situation; and we understand 
that it would be pleasing to the Lord to have us comply with 
the law. Again, we find that quite a majority of the Shareholders
 desire such an election; and this seems to us to be another
 indication pointing to the advisability of having one. 
Therefore we are sending thiB letter, stating that in connection 
with the General Convention at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. January
 2-5, the regular annual election will be held Saturday, 
(January 4th, 1019. Proxies will be enclosed in the December 
1st, 1918, TOWER. Please properly sign and return proxies 
at the earliest possible moment to the WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
& TRACT SOCIETY, 310 Martin Building, Federal St., N. S., 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 


TELEGRAM SELF-EXPLANATORY 


Baltimore, Md., Nov. 21, 2:25 p. m. 
Messrs. Bohnet, Spill and Barber: 

Convinced error has been made in postponing the election. 
Now decide definitely election must be held. Carry out first 


plans. Get Proxies ready. State in December 1st TOWER 
that election will be held on January 4th. This action is final. 

C. H. ANDERSON. 


NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING 


NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the annual meeting of 
the Shareholders of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT 
SOCIETY will be held at Soldiers Memorial Hall, Bigelow 
Boulevard and Fifth Avenue, in the City of Pittsburgh, County 
of Allegheny and State of Pennsylvania, on the 4th day of 


January, 1919, at ten o'clock in the forenoon, for the purpose 
of electing Directors and Officers and for the transaction of 
such other business as may properly come before said meetJ
. F. STFJ>HENSON, Acting Secretary. 


[6366] 


Vol. XXXIX 


PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER 15, 1918 


No. 24 


WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
ANNUAL REPORT FOR FISCAL YEAR— 1918 

Although we cannot report as great activities in the pro- oate this; and the reports of the Pilgrim brethren agree with 

mulgation of the truth during the past year as in previous this. It is apparent that those classes which are /^-operating 

years, we are neither dismayed nor discouraged; and we do most heartily with the Society in its work are in the best 

not feel that any of the Lord's people have reason to be thus spiritual condition, and show a larger degree of spiritual growth. 

cast down. On the contrary, we are happy and are rejoicing in The evidences of divine favor upon our work are too 

the Lord. We rejoice in the privileges and opportunities which numerous and too positive to admit of the thought that the 

have been ours. We rejoice in the trials and hard experiences Lord is no longer recognizing or using the Watch Tower Biwhich
 have fallen to our lot. We remember the Apostle's ble & Tract Society, A few, taking this view of the matter, 

words that a "good soldier will endure hardness." (2 Timothy are not cooperating with us. It is not our mission to judge 

2:3) We rejoice yet more because we realize that in all these or condemn them; but it is our mission to continue our endeaexperiences
 and trials we are able to recognize the Lord's vor to strengthen the weak hands and confirm the feeble knees, 

hand, meting out to his faithul ones needed experiences, to and to say to them of a fearful heart: "Look up!" Instead 

teach them necessary lessons. of separating ourselves from the Lord's people and from the 

We rejoice still further because we have seen fulfilled work, we should heed the Apostle's exhortation not to neglect 

before our eyes the various things which "many prophets and to assemble ourselves together, but thus to do more and more 

righteous men" have foretold and have "desired to see" ful- as we see the day approaching. — Hebrews 10:25. 

filled, and which the "angels have desired to look into." (Mat- We remember that the service of the six messengers to the 

thew 13:17; 1 Peter 1:12) Again, we rejoice because we are church continued for long periods after they had finished their 

one year's march nearer to "Mount Zion, the city of the living earthly course. Undoubtedly this is true also of the work of 

God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company the seventh and last messenger. We are convinced that the 

of angels, to the general assembly and church of the first- Laodicean messenger will finish the Laodicean work, which we 

born, which are written in heaven, and to God, the Judge are aware is a judgment work upon all who profess the name 

of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to of Christ. The Apostle assures us that the judgment begins at 

Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant and to the blood the house of God (1 Peter 4:17) ; and it will not end until all 

of sprinkling, which speaketh better things than that of the "judgments written" are executed. The Psalmist tells us 

Abel." — Hebrews 12:18-24. that the honor of executing these judgments will be given to 

THE PBET MEMBERS OP CHRIST all the saints. (Psalm 149:5-9) The Seventh Messenger inIt
 is a grand privilege to be in this army which has terpreted this to include the living and the resurrected saints, 

been marching upward to Zion for nearly thirteen hundred WHAT THE WATCHES SEE 

years; and although we are in the rear guard of this great Surely the most interesting year of the harvest period 

army, we are not to assume that we are less necessary and our is the year just past. It is almost exciting to watch the 

work any less essential than those who have gone before. On the fulfilments of prophecy as they crowd one upon another, 

contrary, ours is a glorious part. Hear the prophet of the Lord, and to realize that we are witnessing the setting up of Mesin
 beautiful, poetic language, portray the part which these last siah's kingdom in the earth. Many wonderful events are 

faithful marchers have in the service ot their King: "How yet to occur ere this kingdom is fully set up; and so we look 

beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bring- forward to other and grander fulfillments of prophecy in the 

eth good tidings, that publisheth peace, that bringeth good year to come. We are indeed grateful for the share which our 

tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto heavenly Father has given us in. the work of the year just 

Zion, Thy God reigneth!" — Isaiah 52:7, 8. finished; and we gladly hold ourselves ready to do whatever 

Poor/ tired feet! Long have they marched! Long have he will permit us to do in the year to come, 

they waited for this home-coming! Long have they watched Below we append a brief summary of the year's work. For 

for the evidences that the kingdom is at hand ! And now, as several reasons it is not possible to report accurately on some 

they near their journey's end, the Watchers are rewarded with things; as for instance, the number of letters sent out will 

a vision of the glory of the King and his kingdom. The pro- exceed the number reported, because the new executive did 

phet describes their joy in these words: "Thy watchmen shall no t realize the necessity of keeping a record of the corresponlift
 up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing; for dence. Again, the number of Studies ix the Scriptures sold 

they shall see eye to eye when the Lord returns to Zion." include only those sold by Colporteurs, and not those sent out 

The burden of the song is: "Thy God reigneth!" to classes and individuals by our Shipping Department. It 

But there is a still further reason for rejoicing; namely, j 8 also impossible even to approximate the amount of volunteer 

that we continue to love these truths and this work, and that work done. On the other hand, the friends seem to have apprethe
 Lord continues to count us worthy of his favor and to give ciated the convention privileges to a wonderful degree. Over 

us a part in the singing of this glad song. How grateful we forty conventions of a general character have been held during 

ought to be for these privileges! the year, besides probably as many more of a local character. 

The unparalleled conditions in the world during the past Glowing reports have been received from all these conventions, 

year have greatly curtailed our work, especially for the pub- Formerly all conventions were held during the late summer 

lie; and we suggest that possibly this may be the fulfillment or the early fall; but now every month in the year has its 

of our Lord's words in John 9:4: "The night cometh when conventions. Several large conventions are announced for the 

no man can work"; and that this text may have no reference near future. The annual report follows: 

to the work of comforting and encouraging one another, a CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT 

work which is still possible for all to do. Letters received 130,754 

VARIED EXPERIENCES A BUBSSlNa Letters sent out 100,000 

We should remember, however, that ours is not the only ^ GOIdPORTETTR DEPARTMENT 

work which has been curtailed; for many other business and Colporteurs in active service 225 

religious enterprises have been thus affected. We believe that Output of Scripture Studies 275,000 

this was all of divine arrangement, and therefore we have no , . PILGRIM DEPARTMENT 

complaint to make. We are glad to submit to what our heaven- Pilgrims in the service 101 

Jy Father permits; for, while our public activities have been Cltie ? &"<* towns visited 7,809 

much restricted, we believe that the Lord permitted this re- Public meetings held . * 2,131 

straint in order that we might have more time for study and Tota } attendance at puMjc meetings ,' ,X 

for learning lessons which we could not otherwise learn. The Semi-public meetings held 3,110 

Lord gives his people a variety of experiences so that they may Total attendance at semi-public meetings . . . 291,341 

learn to "stand" in them all. As the eagle stirs up the nest Parlor meetings held ^ ™>™ 

and pushes the young eaglets out so that they may learn to T <? tal attendance at parlor meetings 300,687 

fly, and then lends assistance by swooping beneath ' them and Miles traveled . .^ 784,295 

bearing them aloft again, so the Lord gives his children cer- Grand total meetings held 16,089 

tain experience until they become accustomed to these condi- Grand total attendance 949,444 

tions, measurably at ea.se, and then he forces them into other FINANCIAL REPORT 

and harder experiences, for their strengthening, for their good. Cash on hand, Nov. 1, 1917 $ 28,927.05 

And without these experiences we could never be properly fitted Donations to the Tract Fund 203,581.49 

for the kingdom work. — Deuteronomy 32 : 11-13. Pilgrim Service $43,586.90 

We are sure that the varied experiences of the past year Foreign Branches 36,470.19 

have been a blessing to those rightly exercised thereby. Num- Free Literature 49,782.19 

erous letters coming in to the correspondence department indi- Literature in storage 65,578.93 
