Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Witness Schoolchildren Commended
ARE you, as a student in school, timid about speaking out in behalf of your faith? The experiences below reveal that these young Witnesses were not afraid to uphold their Christian faith and were commended for doing so.
□ At a school in Australia, the students were assigned to write an essay on Christmas, but the teacher said to an 11-year-old Witness: “I know you are one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, so you cannot write about Christmas celebrations. You can write a different essay on the ‘History of Christmas.’” The young sister compiled the essay, using appropriate information from the Society’s publications and other reference books. To the astonishment of the class, the teacher commented that the information was excellent and historically accurate. “Out of all the essays I have received, yours is the best in the class,” stated the teacher. As a result, the young Witness placed one School brochure, 15 magazines, one Youth book, and two Live Forever books with her teacher and fellow students.
□ In another school in Australia, eight Witness children were supervised by a substitute teacher each afternoon for the final three weeks of school, since they did not participate in Christmas activities. She later commented to the mother of some of the children: “The part I played was only small. Quite a few of the teachers have come in and asked how things are going. I’ve said to them: ‘It doesn’t matter what you think of their religion and the way they withdraw from certain activities, this is the best bunch of children I’ve ever worked with.’” A few weeks later when contacted in the house-to-house ministry, she said: “By the way, did you pass on what I said about the children at school? I want everybody to know.”
□ From the United States comes this experience of one 17-year-old senior in high school whose law class was deeply involved in a discussion over the rights connected with freedom of religion and the separation of Church and State. Two of the cases involved Jehovah’s Witnesses and the blood issue. The young sister found the report under discussion one-sided and unfair as regards the Bible truths on blood and told her teacher that. He responded by giving her the opportunity to speak to the class. Before her talk, the students thought that the courts had made the right decision in forcing Witnesses to have blood transfusions against their wishes. But after hearing the Bible-based argument, the class voted unanimously against the court’s decisions. Our sister was pleased when many of the students approached her and asked for more information regarding the beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses. She now says she more fully appreciates that school is her special territory.
Yes, you schoolchildren have a unique territory. As you have opportunity, continue kindly to help your fellow students learn of the magnificent purpose of God, and you will get commendation not only from others but from Jehovah himself!​—Job 40:14.

