From Our Readers
Grandparents  I have just finished reading the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Get Closer to My Grandparents?” (May 22, 2001) My parents have long encouraged me to have a relationship with my grandparents, but because there has always been a feud between my parents and my grandparents on my mom’s side, I always felt that I really shouldn’t talk to them. This article helped me to realize that Jehovah wants me to have a relationship with them. Instead of choosing sides, I’ll choose only Jehovah’s side.
C.L.M., United States
What wonderful articles on grandparents! I am so glad you mentioned letter writing. Even some of us ‘younger ones’—I’m 36 years old—keep every letter or card sent to us. It’s so precious to get something besides bills and junk mail!
M. Q., United States
I want to thank you for the articles on grandparents in the April 22 and May 22, 2001, issues. Although my grandmother lives far away from me, I have a loving relationship with her. It is just like the ones described in your articles. She is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and she has given me great spiritual knowledge. Sometimes we prepare for Christian meetings together. My love for Jehovah gets greater every time I see her eagerly serving him. These articles are helping me to maintain this special relationship. Thank you very much!
G. M., Yugoslavia
I have a question. My grandfather is very sick, and my grandmother is low on money. How can I get close to them if I can’t go out with them?
T. O., United States
“Awake!” responds: If your grandparents live nearby, you may be able to visit them or talk with them on the phone from time to time. Considering their situation, you may even be able to take care of some errands for them. As the article brought out, writing letters can be another way of drawing close to your grandparents. In any event, your grandparents will undoubtedly appreciate whatever contact you are able to have with them.
Telephones  Working in the physics department of a large educational institution, I appreciated your article “You Are Connected—How?” (May 22, 2001) It was clearly written, and hopefully it will be stimulating for those who think that physics is too difficult to grasp.
S. T., Britain
Thank you for the article “You Are Connected—How?” This is a question I have often wondered about. I am a high school student, and I love to read Awake! This timely publication has been a great help with many school reports. Thanks for your hard work!
H. W., United States
The telegraph cable laid across the Atlantic in 1866 was not the first. The first was laid between Ireland and Newfoundland in 1858. It has been forgotten because it didn’t last very long.
L. D., Britain
“Awake!” responds: Our article simply stated that “a ‘telegraph’ cable was successfully laid across the Atlantic between Ireland and Newfoundland in 1866.” The first was, as you observed, completed in 1858. However, it became inoperable within a few weeks and was subsequently abandoned.

