Announcements
BEARING FRUIT MANIFOLD FROM THE RIGHT SOIL
Are you one of those Jesus mentioned in the illustration of the sower who produces fruit in abundance? If you are, it means life in the new world for you. The seed, God’s Word of truth, sown in a good heart is like a seed sown in good soil, as it is written, “As for the one sown upon the right kind of soil, this is the one hearing the word and getting the sense of it, who really does bear fruit and produces, this one a hundredfold, that one sixty, the other thirty.” (Matt. 13:23, NW) Those who receive this seed and use it in the proper way spread the life-giving Word. This work of planting seed and cultivating the soil is being engaged in by Jehovah’s witnesses, and during the month of November they will plant seed by offering to everyone three bound books on a contribution of $1. You may share in bearing fruit manifold by taking part in this activity. Why not write in to us, or attend the meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses in your vicinity, and learn how you may share in this fruitful work of preaching his Word and kingdom.
WASHINGTON, D. C., CONVENTION
If you are sincerely interested in learning what the Bible has to say on present world conditions and what the prospects for the near future are, you will want to attend the convention of Jehovah’s witnesses to be held in the Griffith Stadium of the city of Washington, D. C., on October 12, 13 and 14. Featured will be the public talk: “Will Religion Meet the World Crisis?” delivered by the president of the Watchtower Society, Mr. N. H. Knorr, at 3:00 p.m., Sunday, October 14, 1951. Noteworthy also will be other talks by the president and other Watchtower representatives recently returned from large assemblies held in various European cities where thousands attended and enjoyed them. Many of the talks delivered there will be given during the Washington Convention. Three full days of enjoyment await you at this Christian assembly. All sessions are open to the public, and no collections will be taken. Come and bring your family and friends. You are welcome.
LONDON CONVENTION RELEASE
The absorbing new book What Has Religion Done for Mankind? released at the London assembly is now available. Worsening world conditions show we hasten toward a climax that will fix the eternal destiny of mankind now living. What has religion done to prepare men for that showdown? This book answers by showing how the true religion in Eden turned false, branched out after the Noachian flood, and formed the great religious divisions of Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism and Mohammedanism. It traces prophecies concerning the true Seed, Christ Jesus, and shows which one of the many so-called “Christian” religions is the true one, then projects the reader’s mind into the future via Bible prophecy, to disclose what this true religion will do for mankind in a united new world. This revealing book is offered on a contribution of 50c for the publisher’s edition. It contains 352 pages, 27 chapters, subject and scripture indexes, two-color illustrations, and is in an attractive gold-color binding. Send for your copy.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 4: The Cornerstone of Zion.
Week of November 11: Laying the Stone in Completion.

