Way of Success
WHAT greater success could anyone attain than to gain endless life in peace and happiness? None, of course. And next to that, what sweeter privilege could anyone enjoy than to help other persons obtain the same success? The big question, therefore, is how we as individuals may obtain this good success.a
Jehovah God is conducting a school of success, and anyone that desires may enroll in it. What is required of all who do enter this course of training is willingness to apply themselves to the course of study as outlined by the Teachers. The pupils must choose to serve God, agree to do his will, and permit him to make out of them what he wishes. Enrollment will outlast this present world, for none will graduate from this school until they have proved worthy of the new world.
Persons obtaining what is called success according to old world standards pride themselves on having attended a certain school or having had a certain famed instructor as their teacher. But no one could attend a school of higher learning, nor have a Teacher more competent and wonderful than Jehovah God. Lovingly he cares for the particular needs of each student, giving both general and individual guidance, instruction, counsel, reproof and correction. “I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go,” he says, “I will counsel thee with mine eye upon thee.”—Ps. 32:8, AS.
The greatest man that ever walked this earth, Jesus of Nazareth, attended this same school, and had this same Instructor. As he says: “I do nothing of my own initiative, but just as the Father taught me I speak these things.” (John 8:28, NW) We do well, therefore, to follow Jesus’ example, for he finished his schooling and graduated with the highest degrees inscribed on a never-fading diploma.
This is a practical school, and not one where mere theory is taught. Jesus was taught by his Father, that he might teach others. So we, too, after learning ourselves, must teach others. When closing our divinely inspired textbook, the Bible, after a session of personal study, or upon leaving an assembly of fellow Christians, we must not forget what we have learned. We must meditate on the instruction given, apply the lessons to our daily lives, and tell others about what we have learned. We must “become doers of the word, and not hearers only”. A great part of our schooling comes through teaching others what we have learned.—Jas. 1:22, NW.
So what is the way of success? Faithful obedience to Jehovah, the Great Teacher, and his commandments set forth in his Lawbook the Bible. “This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.”—Josh. 1:8.
Never quit or play hooky from this divine school of success. Apply your mind to the instruction given. Be meek, be teachable. Draw good out of correction. As the scholar Paul told young Timothy: “Ponder over these things, be absorbed in them, that your advancement may be manifest to all persons. Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Stay by these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.”—1 Tim. 4:15, 16, NW.
[Footnotes]
For a complete answer, see The Watchtower, October 1, 1950.

