From Our Readers
Pit Bulls  I was the owner of a pit bull, and she was the sweetest and most timid dog I ever owned. I was therefore offended by the title of the article “‘Devil Dogs’?” (May 22, 1992) This title gives the idea that all pit bulls are related to Satan and things that are evil. Simply owning a pit bull could now result in offending others. I agree, though, that people should take precautions if they are thinking of owning one. I would recommend that they get to know the background of the dog and its parents. Find out, too, if the dog has been well cared for. If so, it’s more likely to have a gentle disposition.
L. H., United States
Our title merely quoted the British press, which has often used this term to describe the unpredictable pit bull. We were not implying that these dogs are satanic in nature; nor did we rule out owning them. But in view of the real potential for danger, we urged pit bull owners to take extra precautions to keep such animals under control.​—ED.
Fight to Live  After reading the article “My Fight to Live,” I would like to say thank you to Hans Augustin and his wife. (April 22, 1992) I want to thank them for their courage and their example of faithfulness to Jehovah in spite of suffering. I am well acquainted personally with the kind of experience they are going through, and I often think of them and pray for them.
A. Y., France
I have just finished reading the article, and tears are streaming down my face. Such articles show us that we have many wonderful Christian brothers and sisters throughout the world who endure so much and yet remain steadfast in their faith. We are also helped to remember that whether our problems are great or small, the main thing is to remain focused on the time when all these bad experiences will not even come to mind.
R. T., United States
Being Different  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Do I Have to Be Different?” (June 8, 1992) I am an 18-​year-​old Christian, and I must admit that it really is difficult to be different from other young people. When they ask, “Why don’t you dress like us?” or, “Why not go to this dance?” and so on, it takes courage to answer and give an explanation. But with the help of Jehovah and the Awake! magazine, I have been able to do so. Thank you for caring about us!
H. O. N., Brazil
Cockroaches  The article “The Enduring Cockroach” was very interesting. (January 22, 1992) My family has applied the information, and ever since, la cucaracha has not been seen in our home.
B. H., United States
I studied cockroaches in school about three years ago. But I never considered them useful. I was surprised to learn that roaches, which are usually viewed as enemies, could be useful in some way. Now I also understand why they are difficult to destroy, even with pesticides.
E. A., Nigeria
I’m surprised you didn’t mention boric acid as a “cure” for roach infestation. We have used this at home, and it works!
S. D., United States
Researchers warn that boric acid may pose serious health dangers for infants and children. See “From Our Readers” in the October 22, 1984, issue of “Awake!”​—ED.

