Announcements
FEAR OF THE SOVEREIGN JEHOVAH
“Let all the earth fear Jehovah.”—Ps. 38:8, AS.
Not a nation on earth today is free from fear. Jesus predicted men would be “faint out of fear and expectation of the things coming upon the inhabited earth”. (Luke 21:26, NW) But there is another fear which is healthful, conducive to long life. That is the fear of Jehovah, which is pure. Millions of people need to be taught that fear of Jehovah is the way of life, and that, in brief, is the purpose of the Watchtower magazine. During January, 1953, Watchtower readers may join in presenting this journal to the people on a year’s subscription for $1. Three booklets will be given free.
GOD’S WAY IS LOVE
A brand-new 32-page booklet by the above name has just come off the presses of the Watchtower Society. It contains a public address by the president of the Society, simultaneously broadcast over WBBR, New York. The booklet presents clear and easy-to-understand facts that demonstrate the great love of God toward humankind. All scriptures used in this booklet are from Catholic editions of the Holy Scriptures, and therefore it is of special interest to Catholics. God’s Way Is Love may be obtained on a contribution of 5 cents per copy. Companies of Jehovah’s witnesses may order supplies of God’s Way Is Love at the regular campaign literature rate for use with the three-booklet premium during the forthcoming Watchtower subscription campaign.
YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
During 1952 Jehovah’s witnesses preached the good news in 127 different lands. The 1953 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses sets forth a report from each country on the progress made. A 1953 calendar, interestingly depicting ways in which Jehovah’s witnesses perform their ministry, is also available. A Yearbook will be sent on a contribution of 50c, and calendars are 25c each, or 20c each if five or more calendars go to one address.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 25: The Voice of Jehovah.
Week of February 1: Hearkening to His Voice.

