From Our Readers
Century of Atrocities  Today I received the August 8, 1998, issue of Awake! in the mail. As soon as I saw the front cover, I just had to sit down and read “A Century of Atrocities—Is It Time to Forget?” It truly saddens me to see the kind of evils men can cause. How I long for the time when all mankind will live in true peace!
T. D., United States
This issue answered questions that I have had for some time now. I feel that God is working through your publications to help people like me.
T. C., United States
Latin Music  Thank you very much for the article “The Global Appeal of Latin Music.” (August 8, 1998) I love to dance and love music. Thank you for pointing out some of the possible dangers, such as the music called narco corrido. This is information I would not have found anywhere else. It was greatly appreciated.
J. B., United States
Shakespeare Mystery  “Marvelous” is the only word I can find to describe the article “The Enigma of William Shakespeare.” (August 8, 1998) I teach Portuguese language and literature to primary and secondary school students and often use your articles in class.
J. S. G., Brazil
I would like to congratulate you on your article regarding the authorship of the Shakespeare plays. It explains why so many people find the orthodox theory that Shakespeare authored these plays unconvincing.
F. C., England
Impressive Artwork  I studied design some years ago, and I think that the August 8, 1998, issue of Awake! was brilliant. Outstanding was the barbed-wire border that was transformed into a border of roses as well as the color pictures of “Jewels of the African Sky” and the amazing photographs on the inside of the back cover.
S. K. C., England
Advertising  My daughter is not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Since she works in the advertising field, I mailed her the August 22, 1998, issue with the series “Advertising—How Are You Affected?” She was full of praise for it and said that your writers had captured the essence of the art of persuasion.
R. S., United States
Taste  From infancy my 13-year-old daughter has refused to try new foods. I am thus very thankful for the article “Taste—Gift of a Loving Creator.” (August 22, 1998) I especially appreciated your suggestions for helping children to acquire a taste for new foods. I began asking my daughter to help me season some foods that she had disliked before. Your suggestion worked! Now she is eating nutritious foods she used to dislike.
B. M., Poland
Blaming Satan?  I am 17 years old and recently read Awake! for the first time. Now I am hooked on reading it! It had valuable information, such as “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Should We Blame Satan for Our Sins?” (September 8, 1998) Until I read this, I thought that I could blame him when I sinned. Anyway, your magazine is first-rate, and I recommend it to everyone. Please put me on your mailing list!
M. M., United States

