Who Would Be Interested in This?
 1. When we read our copy of The Watchtower or Awake! what should we consider, and why?
1 The Watchtower and Awake! are prepared with the worldwide field in mind. Therefore, the articles deal with a wide variety of topics. As we read each article in our personal copy, we should consider whom in particular it may interest, and then make it a point to offer it to that person.
 2. What topics covered in our magazines may be of particular interest to others?
2 Does the current Watchtower discuss a Bible topic that you and a workmate previously talked about? Is there an article on family life that would be of help to a relative? Do you have an acquaintance who is planning a trip to a land that has been featured in Awake!? Would one of the magazines appeal to certain businesses or local government agencies in your territory? For example, a magazine that highlights challenges facing the elderly may be of particular interest at nursing homes. Law enforcement agencies may be interested in a magazine on the subject of crime.
 3. Relate an experience that illustrates the value of offering specific issues of the magazines to those who we feel may be interested in their contents.
3 Results: After receiving the October 2011 Awake! on “How to Raise Responsible Children,” a couple in South Africa phoned 25 schools in their congregation’s territory. Twenty-two accepted copies and distributed them to their students. Another couple in that country had the same idea and placed copies at schools in their territory. Teachers at one of the schools decided to use the magazine in their weekly orientation and reading program. The couple shared their experience with a circuit overseer. He then encouraged congregations in his circuit to approach schools in their territories. The branch office received so many requests for additional magazines that this issue had to be reprinted!
 4. Why do we want to give the magazines wide distribution?
4 Our magazines discuss the real meaning behind current events and direct attention to the Bible and God’s Kingdom. They are the only magazines on earth that are “publishing salvation.” (Isa. 52:7) Therefore, we want to give them wide distribution. A good way to do that is by asking yourself, ‘Who would be interested in this?’

