





Promises That Will Come True




The good news of God’s Kingdom is being preached in all the earth, just as Jesus prophesied. (Matthew 24:14) The Bible book of Daniel tells us that this Kingdom is a government by God. Chapter 2 of that book contains a prophecy that traces the progression of certain dominant human governments, or kingdoms, from ancient Babylon down to our day. Foretelling what lies ahead, verse 44 says this:
“The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever.”
This and other Bible prophecies foretell that God’s Kingdom will replace all human rule and bring stability and order to people on earth. What will life be like under the Kingdom? Here are some marvelous promises that will soon come true.





NO MORE WAR
Psalm 46:9: “[God] is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth. He breaks the bow and shatters the spear; he burns the military wagons with fire.”
Imagine what the world would be like if all the money and expertise that is now being spent to create weapons were channeled into areas that would benefit people rather than kill them! That promise will become a reality under God’s Kingdom.






NO MORE SICKNESS
Isaiah 33:24: “No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”
Think about a world in which no one will suffer from heart disease, cancer, malaria, or any other ailment. Gone will be the need for hospitals and medications. Perfect health​—that is the future for earth’s inhabitants.






NO MORE FOOD SHORTAGE
Psalm 72:16: “There will be an abundance of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains it will overflow.”
The earth will produce enough food for everyone, and all will have access to it. Hunger and malnutrition will be no more.






NO MORE PAIN, SORROW, AND DEATH
Revelation 21:4: “[God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”
That will mean life without end in perfection on a paradise earth! That is what our loving Creator, Jehovah God, has promised.





“IT WILL HAVE SURE SUCCESS”

Does all of this sound too good to be true? Though most people would readily agree that life as promised and described in the Bible is truly desirable, for various reasons many find the idea of living forever difficult to comprehend. That is not surprising, for no fellow human has ever experienced life like that to tell us about it.
Humankind has been enslaved by sin and death and has labored under the burden of pain, suffering, and adversity for so long that many people have come to accept this way of life as normal or natural. But that is far from what our Creator, Jehovah God, purposed for mankind.
To help us appreciate the certainty of all that he has promised, God said emphatically regarding his word: “It will not return to me without results, but it will certainly accomplish whatever is my delight, and it will have sure success in what I send it to do.”​—Isaiah 55:11.
Jehovah is described in the Bible as the God “who cannot lie.” (Titus 1:2) Since he has promised all these wonderful things for the future, it would be prudent on our part to consider: Is it really possible for humans to live forever in the promised earthly Paradise? What must we do to benefit from God’s promise? In the following pages of this publication, you will find helpful information that answers those questions.



