
LESSON 18
Be God’s Friend Forever!




It takes effort to make a friend; it takes effort to keep a friend. Your efforts to become and remain a friend of God will be richly blessed. Jesus said to those who believed in him: “The truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) What does that mean?





You can enjoy freedom now. You can be free from the false teachings and lies that have been spread by Satan. You can be free from the hopelessness that fills the lives of millions of people who do not know Jehovah. (Romans 8:22) God’s friends are even free from the “fear of death.”​—Hebrews 2:14, 15.
You can enjoy freedom in God’s new world. What marvelous freedom you can enjoy in the future! In the Paradise earth, there will be freedom from war, sickness, and crime. Freedom from poverty and hunger. Freedom from old age and death. Freedom from fear, oppression, and injustice. The Bible says of God: “You are opening your hand and satisfying the desire of every living thing.”​—Psalm 145:16.
God’s friends will live forever. Everlasting life is a precious gift that God will give to all who seek his friendship. (Romans 6:23) Just think of what endless life would mean for you!





You will have time to do many things. Perhaps you would like to learn how to play a musical instrument. Or maybe you want to learn to paint pictures or to be a carpenter. You might like to learn about animals or plants. Or possibly you want to travel and see different lands and peoples. Having everlasting life will make all these things possible!
You will have time to make many friends. Living forever will make it possible to get to know many others who have become God’s friends. You will come to know their talents and fine qualities, and they will be your friends too. You will love them, and they will love you. (1 Corinthians 13:8) Having endless life will give you the time to befriend everyone on earth! Best of all, your friendship with Jehovah will grow ever stronger as the centuries pass. May you be God’s friend forever!



