
LESSON 4
How You Can Learn About God




You can learn about Jehovah by reading the Bible. Long ago God picked certain humans to write down his thoughts. Those writings are called the Bible. Today we learn about God by reading the Bible. Because the Bible contains Jehovah’s word, or message, it is also called God’s Word. We can believe what the Bible says because Jehovah never lies. “It is impossible for God to lie.” (Hebrews 6:18) God’s Word contains the truth.​—John 17:17.





The Bible is one of God’s most precious gifts to us. It is like a letter from a loving father to his children. It tells us about God’s promise to change the earth into a wonderful place to live​—a paradise. It tells us what he has done in the past, what he is doing now, and what he will do in the future for his faithful children. It also helps us to solve our problems and to find happiness.​—2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are friends of God; they will help you understand what the Bible teaches. Just tell them that you want to study the Bible. They do not charge money for this. (Matthew 10:8) In addition, you can attend Christian meetings. These are held in places of worship called Kingdom Halls. If you attend Christian meetings, you will rapidly grow in your knowledge of God.
You can learn about God from the things he has made. For example, the Bible says: “God created the heavens and the earth.” (Genesis 1:1) When Jehovah created “the heavens,” he made the sun. Now what does that tell us about God? It tells us that Jehovah has great power. Only he could make something as powerful as the sun. It also tells us that Jehovah is wise, since it required wisdom to make the sun, which gives out heat and light and never burns out.
Jehovah’s creation shows that he loves us. Think about all the different kinds of fruits that there are on earth. Jehovah could have provided just one kind of fruit for us​—or none at all. Instead, Jehovah gave us many types of fruit with a great variety of shapes, sizes, colors, and tastes. This shows that Jehovah is a God who is not only loving but also very generous and thoughtful and kind.​—Psalm 104:24.



