
LESSON 10
How to Find the True Religion




If you want to be a friend of God, you must practice the religion that God approves. Jesus said that “the true worshipers” would worship God in harmony with “truth.” (John 4:23, 24) There is only one correct way to worship God. (Ephesians 4:4-6) True religion leads to everlasting life, and false religion leads to destruction.​—Matthew 7:13, 14.





You can recognize true religion by watching the people who practice it. Since Jehovah is good, those who are his true worshipers must be good people. Just as a good orange tree produces fine oranges, the true religion produces fine people.​—Matthew 7:15-20.
Jehovah’s friends have deep respect for the Bible. They know that the Bible is from God. They allow what it says to guide their lives, to solve their problems, and to help them learn about God. (2 Timothy 3:16) They try to practice what they preach.
Jehovah’s friends show love for one another. Jesus showed love for people by teaching them about God, by curing those who were sick. Those who practice the true religion also show love to others. Like Jesus, they do not look down on those who are poor or are of a different ethnic group. Jesus said that people would know his disciples by the love they show for one another.​—John 13:35.
God’s friends honor God’s name, Jehovah. If someone refused to use your name, would that person be your close friend? No! When we have a friend, we use his name and we say good things about that friend to others. So those who wish to be God’s friends should use his name and talk about him to others. Jehovah wants us to do that.​—Matthew 6:9; Romans 10:13, 14.
Like Jesus, God’s friends teach people about God’s Kingdom. God’s Kingdom is the heavenly government that will make the earth a paradise. God’s friends share this good news about God’s Kingdom with others.​—Matthew 24:14.
Jehovah’s Witnesses try to be friends of God. They respect the Bible and have love among themselves. They also use and honor God’s name and teach others about God’s Kingdom. Jehovah’s Witnesses practice the true religion on earth today.



