
LESSON 6
Paradise Is Near!




The bad things that are now happening on earth show that Paradise is near. The Bible said that we would see terrible times just before the Paradise would come. We are living in such times now! Here are some of the things that the Bible said would happen:





Great wars. “Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom.” (Matthew 24:7) This prophecy has come true. Since the year 1914, there have been two world wars and many smaller wars. Millions of people have died in them.
Widespread disease. There would be “in one place after another pestilences.” (Luke 21:11) Has this come true? Yes. Cancer, heart disease, tuberculosis, malaria, AIDS, and other diseases have killed millions of people.





A lack of food. Throughout the earth there are people who do not have enough food to eat. Millions of people die of hunger every year. This is another sign that the Paradise will soon be here. The Bible says: “There will be food shortages.”​—Mark 13:8.
Earthquakes. “There will be . . . earthquakes in one place after another.” (Matthew 24:7) This also has come true in our time. Over a million people have died in earthquakes since 1914.





Wicked people. People would be “lovers of money” and “lovers of themselves.” They would be “lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God.” Children would be “disobedient to parents.” (2 Timothy 3:1-5) Do you not agree that there are many people like that today? They have no respect for God, and they make trouble for those who try to learn about God.
Crime. There would also be an “increasing of lawlessness.” (Matthew 24:12) Likely you will agree that crime is worse than it was years ago. People everywhere are at risk of being robbed, cheated, or harmed.
All these things show that God’s Kingdom is near. The Bible says: “When you see these things occurring, know that the kingdom of God is near.” (Luke 21:31) What is the Kingdom of God? It is God’s heavenly government that will bring Paradise to this earth. God’s Kingdom will replace human governments.​—Daniel 2:44.



