Announcements
IMITATING THE SHULAMMITE IN EXCLUSIVE DEVOTION—Cant. 8:6.
“Place me as a seal upon your heart, as a seal upon your arm; because love is as strong as death is, insistence on exclusive devotion is as unyielding as Sheol is.” (Cant. 8:6) These words of the Shulammite country girl show how fervently she desired the love of her shepherd lover. In this she pictures the faithful bride class of Christ and their undying love for him and his service. The “other sheep” likewise are desirous of proving their devotion to him, though not of the bride class pictured by the Shulammite. Throughout September all will prove their devotion by telling others of Jehovah God’s loving provisions through the Right Shepherd, Christ Jesus. Two Bible-study aid books and two booklets will be offered on a contribution of $1.
GOD’S KINGDOM RULES—IS THE WORLD’S END NEAR?
When Christ was on earth he taught men to pray, “Let your kingdom come. Let your will come to pass, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matt. 6:10) We are now living at the time when God’s kingdom has been born and we are rapidly approaching the time when it will cause his will to be done on earth as it is done in heaven. What will this mean for the world with its many nations that are not doing the divine will? Will it mean their end? What is the right course for us to take now to prepare for all the possibilities ahead? The answers to these questions can be found in the new booklet God’s Kingdom Rules—Is the World’s End Near? This thirty-two-page booklet can be had for five cents, or three copies for ten cents. Send right away and learn what God’s kingdom will do.
THE ANNUAL MEETING IN PITTSBURGH
At ten o’clock in the forenoon of Wednesday, October 1, 1958, the annual meeting of the members of Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will be held at the Society’s office located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. All members should be certain that the secretary’s office has their present addresses so that the letters of notice will reach them shortly after September 1.
Along with the notice of the annual meeting which will be mailed to all the members of the corporation, proxies will be sent. The proxies are to be returned so as to reach the office of the secretary of the Society not later than September 15. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 28: “You Ought to Be Teachers.” Page 529.
October 5: Teaching Men of Good Will. Page 535.

