Blind Man Helps Others to See
LACK of sight is no insurmountable barrier to Gene Cauthron, who, although blind, is an active minister of Jehovah’s witnesses. Working with the Hollenbeck unit of the Los Angeles (California) congregation, Cauthron has become efficient in the handling of Bible discussions as well as preaching from door to door.
This all became possible when another minister of Jehovah’s witnesses called on him back in 1953 and assisted him in gaining an accurate knowledge of the Bible. A short while later this minister supplied him with a Braille Bible and other literature in Braille. Thus Gene Cauthron started on the road of a vocation that has permitted him to become a help to those who, even though possessing normal vision, could not fully understand the Bible and its many truths.
With much effort and determination, Gene has also been able to deliver one-hour Bible lectures on special Bible topics. This is remarkable, considering the fact that all research must be done in Braille. Yet the audience never feels uneasy because of his visual blindness. They experience a feeling of assuredness in all that he says, because all statements are amply supported with Bible proof.
Gene also shares in instructing individuals who are interested in gaining accurate Bible knowledge in the privacy of their own homes. He is currently assisting a family of three in gaining comfort and knowledge from studying the Bible.
Gene experiences much joy in this very important profession of preaching. He now feels that he is contributing something to the everlasting welfare of his fellow man. He regularly engages in the house-to-house ministry and has devised ways of keeping a house-to-house record and delivering oral sermons right at the doors.
In addition to adequately caring for his ministerial duties he supports himself by working as an assembler for a plumbing firm. At the age of thirty-three, Gene finds himself happy in doing his utmost in praising the Almighty God Jehovah, and helping others to see with the eyes of understanding.

