Announcing the Rulership of God’s Kingdom
“GOD’S kingdom rules!” That stirring announcement is being made today by some 800,000 ministers in 175 lands and islands of the sea. Thereby the prophetic words of David are having fulfillment: “About the glory of your kingship they will talk, and about your mightiness they will speak.”—Ps. 145:11.a
Mankind is deserving of the best government. However, in spite of all the efforts and prayers of men and nations for the past nineteen centuries men have not succeeded in providing that government. Nor has the United Nations with its eighty-one members succeeded in uniting mankind in a loving peaceful brotherhood of all nations. These failures have proved the rightness of the counsel long ago given: “Do not put your trust in nobles, nor in the son of earthling man, to whom no salvation belongs. His spirit goes out, he goes back to his ground, in that day his thoughts do perish.”—Ps. 146:3, 4.
Although Jehovah God has ever been “the King of eternity,” he has not always projected his rule to the earth. Otherwise it would not have been necessary for Jesus to teach us to pray: “Let your kingdom come.” Also, there would not have been such misery and woe as this earth has seen for the greater part of the past six thousand years.—Matt. 6:10.
To look to God for the best government may seem impractical to some, but is it? Have not all human efforts failed, even those by the nation of Israel, which had kings sitting on the throne of Jehovah for some five hundred years? After more than fifteen centuries of professedly Christian rulers Christendom is proving itself helpless against both the inroads of immorality and ungodly communism.
Fulfillment of Bible prophecy shows that in 1914 God’s kingdom began to rule. (Rev. 11:15-18) Hundreds of thousands of persons earth-wide are already its obedient subjects. This is the best possible good news for all men of good will. For long such persons have yearned for a government of righteousness, life, peace and prosperity. All these blessings are certain to be realized as God’s kingdom projects its rule to the earth.
Think what this will mean for the earth! ‘God’s will done upon it even as it is in heaven!’ Jesus Christ will rule until he has put all his enemies under his feet, including even the enemy death. This means also that all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice and come forth to a resurrection. All earth will be made a delightful paradise and all those who meet the final test and thus prove themselves worthy will enjoy its blessings forever.—1 Cor. 15:25, 26.
Do we really appreciate the fact that God’s kingdom rules? Do we have faith that these conditions will soon prevail upon this earth? If so, then we will be zealous, yes, have the consuming zeal that Jesus had, to tell the good news to all we meet, from house to house, on the streets, and in the homes of the people. We will tell it to old and young, rich and poor, infirm and robust, and that regardless of race, nationality or social level.
Then too, we will buy out the opportune time, realizing that the days are wicked. We will avoid the snare of materialism, appreciating that we have brought nothing into the world and cannot take anything out of it. And we will bear in mind that “the world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever,” to enjoy the blessings of God’s new world to time indefinite!—1 John 2:17.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, October 15, 1958.

