Announcements
● Literature offer for October: Awake! subscription with either the Man’s Salvation, Know Jehovah, or Paradise—Theocracy book for $2.50. These books may be ordered from Brooklyn. November: Three pocket-size books: Holy Spirit, Great Teacher and This Life for $1.00. December: New World Translation and Choosing the Best Way of Life for $2.50. January: Watchtower subscription with a book given free to subscribers.
Congregations may request 45c credit for books given free to subscribers during October. These books will be replaced free of charge to the publishers when handing in subscriptions. On the Remittance and Credit Request form, a line under “Other Items” can show the total number of free books given to subscribers during October.
Books used in the November offer may be obtained by the publishers for 30c each and at the regular rate by pioneers. Congregations may request 15c credit for each of these books. The same procedure for requesting credit should be followed as was done in October.
● New Publications Available:
Is This Life All There Is?—Hindi, Kiluba
My Book of Bible Stories—Danish, Dutch, Hiri Motu, Italian, Norwegian
Our Incoming World Government—God’s Kingdom—French
Unseen Spirits—Do They Help Us? Or Do They Harm Us?—French
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century—Chinese, Dutch, German, Japanese, Portuguese
● When ordering the 1980 Yearbook, publishers and pioneers are requested to do so through the congregation. Orders for the Yearbook in the following languages may be placed after the dates here listed: November 15: English; December 15: French, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, Spanish; February 1, 1980: Dutch, German, Korean. PAYMENT SHOULD NOT ACCOMPANY ORDERS. Congregation literature accounts will be charged at the rate of 50 cents per copy. Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1979, may receive a free copy for which the congregation may request credit. Pioneers may obtain additional copies at 15 cents each.
● Correction: The offer for October is Awake! subscription for one year for $2.50 with Man’s Salvation, Know Jehovah, or Paradise—Theocracy as a free gift. (Not Paradise Lost as was mentioned in the September Our Kingdom Service.)

