Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
It was a busy summer for all of us, but a delightful one! The high point was the “Living Hope” conventions. There were 93 of them in the continental United States. Ten of these were in the Spanish language, two in French, one in Chinese, and at some assemblies, sessions were held in Korean, Japanese, Portuguese and Italian. The total peak attendance for all assemblies was 982,585 and there were 8,630 baptized.
The Friday morning field service activity resulted in a good witness to local residents, businessmen, and, in some cases, city and government officials. And how timely the reminders on the program that we conduct ourselves properly in all affairs of life, keep separate from the world, draw close to God, hold fast our hope without wavering, help one another, and keep busy in the witness work. Indeed, during the whole program we were repeatedly encouraged to keep busy in the field, using well all opportunities to spread our living hope.
Then there were those three outstanding releases, the Commentary on the Letter of James, Choosing the Best Way of Life, based on First and Second Peter, and the recording of the Bible book of Acts. Have you read the new publications yet? By all means do so before we begin our use of them in the congregation.
For the further training and strengthening of Jehovah’s people, arrangements have been made for all circuit and district overseers to meet together in two groups, each for a special two-week period of schooling provided by the Society from September 17 through October 13, 1979. These brothers will be going through the Pioneer Service School course, a Kingdom Ministry School course, and discussing other matters having to do with their regular activities. Representatives from Brooklyn Bethel will be present at each school. Arrangements are also being made for all the elders in the United States to attend a refresher class of the Kingdom Ministry School course later this fall.
Jehovah continues to provide for us all in marvelous ways. We appreciate what he is doing and we know that you do too. With you we are glad to show our appreciation for all of his goodness by occupying ourselves fully with works of faith to his praise.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

