Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 30
12 min: Song 103. Appropriate points from Announcements, including local announcements and high points from Branch Letter, as time permits.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Using Magazines Wisely.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Have one or two publishers who do well in approaching people on the streets and elsewhere demonstrate how they start conversations, what article they feature in the current magazine, and relate an encouraging experience. Inform congregation what the elders’ observations are on ordering and using magazines.
23 min: “Zealously Preaching and Making Disciples.” Question-and-answer consideration of article.
Demonstration: Have publisher make a presentation. He might say: “You no doubt have prayed for God’s kingdom to come and for his will to be done on earth. The Bible in Psalm 72 assures us that God’s kingdom will bring relief to the poor. [Read vss. 12 and 13.] There will be deliverance of those threatened with violence. [Read vs. 14.] And there will be no more hunger or sickness. [Read vs. 16.] That’s good news, isn’t it? [Allow householder to answer.] But many ask, How can we be sure that these things will really happen and that the Bible is right? I believe you will enjoy reading this article [open to specific article] in the current issue of Awake! The Awake! magazine regularly gives information concerning God’s kingdom and how we can be sure that it will bring the relief God has promised.” Offer subscription. If subscription is not taken, offer latest copies of Awake! and Watchtower for 20c.
Chairman explains that when a short presentation is appropriate, publishers may wish to discuss Psalm 72:16. Discuss with audience points that might be used in verse.
 7 min: This weekend show your zeal for fine works by adjusting your affairs to share with the congregation in special house-to-house activity arranged for Sunday. All are encouraged to share. Song 66 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 7
12 min: Song 37. Announcements and accounts report.
20 min: “Helping One Another (Part IV): To Start Bible Studies.” Service overseer and two study conductors discuss article. Give audience opportunity to ask them questions at end of their discussion. Make warm appeal to publishers to avail themselves of the provision to get help in disciple-making.
15 min: “Jehovah, a Dependable Refuge.” (w79 2/15 pp. 27, 28) Elder gives setting of Psalm 11. He then gives a verse-by-verse discussion of Psalm 11 with local application.
13 min: Experiences from witnessing on first Sunday of month. Discuss which articles appealed most to people in the territory. If it is known how many supported service that day, this could be a source of encouragement to congregation. Encourage all to follow up interest with goal of establishing studies. Song 44 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 14
 8 min: Song 41. Local announcements and Theocratic News.
17 min: Loving Help Available. Discussion by elder. Modern-day elders are much like Paul, who had many activities and matters occupying his time. (2 Cor. 11:28, 29) Yet, how did he feel about his weighty load in behalf of his brothers? (1 Tim. 1:12) Elders today feel the same and are grateful for the privilege of helping all spiritually. While accomplishments, at times, may not be as much as desired, there is the same determination that Paul expressed in spite of pressures.—2 Cor. 4:7, 8, 16.
What can we do mutually, elders and congregation, to increase benefits from shepherding? (Some may wish to share experiences on how they have been helped.)
Likewise, have some elders give suggestions on what they have found helpful to accomplish shepherding either in homes, at meetings or in field service. Conclude with encouragement that as elders continue shepherding work, we can all work together in the same spirit manifested by the Corinthian congregation during the relief effort for the needy in Judea.—2 Cor. 8:8-12.
30 min: When Jehovah Speaks, Listen! To be handled by an elder.
(5 min.) Talk by chairman. What does it mean to listen when Jehovah speaks? It means to obey the things that God has written in his Word.—Acts 20:31, 32.
(25 min.) Discussion based on Acts 20:17-28. Read verses and then ask the questions. (1) Read vss. 17-19. How did Paul show his concern for the brothers? (2) Read vs. 20. What did Paul mean when he said “from house to house”? (3) Is it applicable to us today? (Matt. 24:14; Mark 13:10; 1 Cor. 9:16; see w79 7/15 p. 18, pars. 16-18.) (4) Read vs. 24. How can we copy Paul’s example? (5) Read vss. 25-27. In what way can we be free from being bloodguilty? (6) Read vs. 28. What can elders do to help us to continue to listen to Jehovah?
 5 min: Song 10 and prayer. Bring April 1, 1979, Watchtower next week.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 21
THEME: “Showing We Care About Our Young People.”
 8 min: Song 73 and local announcements.
15 min: Question-and-answer discussion of article “Showing We Care About Our Young People.”
12 min: How to Do It! To be handled by an elder who has a good rapport with young people. Have a discussion showing an elder visiting with a young brother right after weekly Theocratic School and service meeting. Elder discusses with young brother his Bible reading for that week. He encourages him to continue to make fine progress. During the conversation he asks about his school studies and activities and if there are any particular problems in school. Elder takes the time to share practical suggestions and to encourage the brother. He leaves by making arrangements to work with him in field service that weekend.
18 min: “Youths—Are You on the Road to Real Success?” Enthusiastic talk based on April 1, 1979, Watchtower, pages 9-12. Have youths read paragraphs under subheading “Sowing with a View to the Spirit.”
 7 min: Song 39 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 28
 5 min: Song 31 and general announcements.
23 min: Hold Fast Your Hope Without Wavering. Talk to be handled by an elder. Please cover the following points: Hope is indispensable to Christians. (Rom. 15:13) Enables Christians to endure with rejoicing, no matter what conditions may be. (Rom. 12:12) Hope closely allied with love. (1 Cor. 3:10-15) We never want to lose tight grip on hope. Right foundation needed. Some, however, have become weak, lacking fire-resistant qualities. Some have allowed their worship, including field service, to become routine, not motivated by deep love of neighbor and Jehovah. (Matt. 22:39) Weakened ones have allowed ideas and qualities to be built into them that are like burnable materials. Some do not have a strong relationship with Jehovah. Endurance results in divine approval. (1 Cor. 15:58) There is a need for our faith to be tested. (Jas. 1:2-4) Urgent need for all of us to go on bearing fruit, increasing in accurate knowledge, being made powerful in order to endure.—Col. 1:10, 11.
12 min: Discuss and demonstrate offer for November. Offer Holy Spirit, Great Teacher, and This Life. Use Psalm 72:12-14, 16.
15 min: How Can We Use What We Have Learned? Review highlights in October Our Kingdom Service. The elder handling this part should have brothers and sisters prepared in advance to make meaningful comments. In addition, ask the following questions: How have you benefited from the suggestion to zealously preach and make disciples? How can we show that we care about our young people? If you need help in starting a Bible study, what is available?
 5 min: Encourage all to participate in the special Sunday activity this weekend. Song 107 and prayer.

