Showing We Care About Our Young People
1 A large percentage of the publishers in the Christian congregation are under 20 years of age. Public indifference, worldly pressures, materialism and sexual immorality are pressures being faced by these young people. What can we do to show that we care about them?
2 Many youths who are now in Jehovah’s organization have expressed great appreciation for the help that was given to them by different ones in the Christian congregation. An elder displayed interest in a young brother by picking him up to go with him to work on the Kingdom Hall. This young brother remarked years later that “it was the interest and concern of this brother that helped me to have a deep appreciation for Jehovah and his organization.”
3 The prime responsibility for training children, of course, rests with the parents. They are responsible for providing and arranging for recreation and other activities of their children. However, all of us can show that we, too, care about our young people. How can we demonstrate our concern?
WHAT CAN OTHERS DO?
4 At our “Living Hope” District Conventions this summer there was a drama: “The Need of the Fatherless Boy—Can You Help Him?” That drama gave us some good suggestions of what elders and others can do even in small ways to show their concern for young ones in the Christian congregation.
5 Since young people, too, are a part of the Christian congregation, how fine it would be for the elders to include one or two of them among those whom they converse with when at the meetings. Sometimes just saying “hello” or sharing a brief word of encouragement will suffice. But often there is a need for more extended comments, showing genuine interest and understanding. For example, elders might ask about activities at school, problems they may be facing, and then offer constructive suggestions to help them, if this is possible.
6 Concern for young people is shown by working with them in the field service on a regular basis. Their help can be enlisted in doing work necessary to maintain the Kingdom Hall. Yes, there are many things elders and ministerial servants can do that will show young people that they truly care about them. The same is true of all of us.
7 In most congregations there are young men and women who are doing quite well, progressing nicely, and are in a fine position to assist other young people in the congregation. Would you be willing to help others? Perhaps you could invite them to accompany you in field service or share with you in other activities.
WHAT CAN YOUNG PEOPLE DO?
8 Young people, we want to help you! To do this we need your help. There is a need for good communication. Be frank with those who are in a position to help you.
9 Parents, elders, all in the congregation, our young people need our help! Let us help them to become approved servants of Jehovah by showing we care about them.—Eccl. 12:1.

