From Our Readers
Suicide  I read the article “Young People Ask . . . Is Suicide the Answer?” (April 8, 1994) with my heart in my mouth. I am a 20-​year-​old and am now a full-​time minister. But not so long ago, I was suicidal. Jehovah has helped me and continues to hold me by the hand. When, just a few days ago, one of my closest friends told me that she had tried to kill herself, I looked for practical advice that would help her not to give up. This article answered my prayers.
A. C., Italy
Only last week thoughts of suicide were strong in my heart. A Christian elder and his wife became close confidants and helped me through. Your many articles on depression have been lifesaving to me.
D. J., United States
I just had to express my deepest thanks to you for the article. It stirred me like no previous article that I can ever remember. You see, some years ago I believed suicide was an option​—a way out of seemingly intolerable circumstances. Yet, with the help of parents and friends, I came to know that I had the best reason of all for living​—Jehovah wanted me to live.
M. V., United States
I found this article to be comprehensive and well written. I feel this is an extremely valuable tool to assist any who may entertain thoughts of suicide. I was touched by all the examples included.
L. S., United States
Hitchhiking Hippie  I want to thank you for the article about Richard Fleet, “From Hitchhiking Hippie to South American Missionary.” (March 22, 1994) Following our wedding my fiancé and I plan to move to Hungary to help with the preaching activity there. Until now I felt so apprehensive about the complete change in life-​style and learning a new language. The article clearly showed that what counts is not personal concerns but the people to whom we preach.
S. H., Germany
I believe all single people should read this article and should realize that you can be a servant of Jehovah and be happy without a mate. It’s wonderful to read how a single man fully used Matthew 6:33 in his life. Since I began serving as a full-​time evangelizer two and a half years ago, I have experienced joy similar to Richard Fleet’s.
D. M., United States
I was touched to the core to learn that there are men whose hearts go out to fatherless boys. I am a single mother with four boys. A Christian brother took an interest in one of them, and now that son is preparing to be baptized very soon. When someone reaches out to fatherless ones, it is much appreciated.
P. T., United States
Chile  I have just read the May 8, 1994, issue, and I particularly enjoyed the article “Chile​—Unique Country, Unique Convention.” I felt as if I had attended the convention myself. I even sensed the feeling of reluctantly pulling myself away when the program ended.
K. K., Japan
Compact Discs  Thank you for your article “The Compact Disc​—What Is It All About?” (April 22, 1994) It cleared up the mystery in my mind about these discs. After listening to a friend’s compact disc system, I marveled at its superiority over other music reproduction systems.
S. D., Nigeria

