Overseers Taking the Lead​—The Presiding Overseer
1 To serve as an overseer in the congregation is a serious responsibility. (Acts 20:28; 1 Tim. 3:1) This is the first of a series of articles that will outline the various duties of Christian elders so that all of us can appreciate the important work they do in our behalf.
2 The Society appoints the presiding overseer to serve for an indefinite period of time. As the presiding overseer coordinates matters, this helps elders to give proper attention to their assigned duties. (Our Ministry, p. 42) What does this entail?
3 The presiding overseer receives congregation mail and promptly passes it along to the secretary for handling. In preparing for elders’ meetings, the presiding overseer obtains suggestions from the elders on matters needing discussion and compiles the agenda. He also serves as chairman at elders’ meetings. When decisions are made, he sees to it that there is appropriate follow-through. He oversees the preparation of the Service Meeting and the scheduling of public talks. He approves all announcements that are made to the congregation, authorizes payment of all normal operating expenses, and ensures that the quarterly audit of the congregation accounts is performed.
4 As chairman, the presiding overseer coordinates the work of the Congregation Service Committee. When a Bible student asks to be recognized as an unbaptized publisher or when an unbaptized publisher wants to get baptized, the presiding overseer arranges for elders to meet with him. The presiding overseer also takes the lead in preparing for the circuit overseer’s visit so that the congregation can benefit to the full from the special week of activity.
5 The duties of the presiding overseer are many and varied. As he humbly cares for his responsibilities “in real earnest,” all of us can do our part by cooperating with the elders. (Rom. 12:8) If we are “obedient” and “submissive” to those taking the lead among us, they can perform their work with a greater degree of real joy.​—Heb. 13:17.

