Service Meetings for August
Week Starting August 3
Song 216
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Comment on May field service report for the country and the local congregation.
15 min: “Will August Be a Banner Month?” Questions and answers. Encourage everyone to share in the ministry during August and each month of the new service year.
20 min: “Use Brochures to Appeal to Both Mind and Heart.” Audience discussion. Briefly review brochures that have been published over the years to inform people about important Scriptural matters. (See Watch Tower Publications Index 1986-1995, pages 652-3.) Highlight current brochures, and discuss who might be interested in receiving each one. Demonstrate a presentation or two, making mention of the donation arrangement.
Song 191 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 10
Song 127
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Mention goal of all publishers sharing in the field ministry during August.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Youths​—Take Advantage of Your Schooling.” Questions and answers. Include appropriate comments from April 8, 1992, Awake!, pages 17-19, and July 15, 1991, Watchtower, pages 23-6.
Song 37 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 17
Song 163
10 min: Local announcements. Invite brief comments on how to get the name and address of a person who has been witnessed to on the street, in the park, or elsewhere so as to follow up his interest.
35 min: “A Progressive Look at the Urgent Work of Making Disciples.” Questions and answers. Read paragraphs 5, 10, and 11. Review how the Bible study work is progressing locally. Encourage all who are conducting studies to read the June 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry insert again so as to improve their teaching skills. Consider paragraphs 5 and 25 of that insert.
Song 108 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 24
Song 213
12 min: Local announcements. Consider the box entitled “One Million!” in the July 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry. With only one weekend left in August, encourage everyone to participate in the ministry before the month ends. Review “New Special Assembly Day Program.”
18 min: How to Persevere in the Pioneer Service. Talk based on September 15, 1993, Watchtower, pages 28-31. Interview a pioneer who has learned to cope with serious problems and continues to pioneer.
15 min: Make Good Use of Our Kingdom Ministry. Audience discussion. Using recent examples, illustrate timely information found in the pages of Our Kingdom Ministry and benefits we derive from it: (1) articles that motivate us to share regularly in the ministry; (2) experiences that encourage us in our sacred service; (3) suggestions that help us present the good news effectively; (4) announcements of new publications available that are beneficial in local territory; (5) service reports, which show the pace of Kingdom activity; (6) Theocratic News, which reports on the progress of the worldwide work; (7) announcements and schedules that keep us well-informed about upcoming events; (8) Question Boxes that answer matters of serious concern; and (9) inserts that tell us about conventions, special campaigns, and other matters keeping us attentive to our spiritual needs. Encourage all to read each issue, apply its suggestions, bring it to the Service Meetings and meetings for field service, and save it in a personal file for future reference.
Song 210 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 31
Song 65
12 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports for August. Congregation Book Study conductors should check with everyone in their group so that all reports can be tallied by September 6. Consider literature offer for September. Briefly demonstrate a presentation that raises the question, “Why should we use God’s name?” Answer it using the Knowledge book, chapter 3, paragraph 6. Announce service arrangements for September 7.
15 min: “Overseers Taking the Lead​—The Presiding Overseer.” A talk by the presiding overseer. After reviewing his duties, he expresses appreciation to the congregation for their cooperation with the elders as they shepherd the flock.
18 min: Help Your Child Cope With Problems at School. An elder has a discussion with two or three parents who have children in school. Briefly comment on some of the more common problems the children encounter, as outlined in the August 8, 1994, Awake!, pages 5-7. Then, referring to pages 8-10, discuss how parents can protect their children and maintain good parent-teacher relations.
Song 24 and concluding prayer.

