Use Brochures to Appeal to Both Mind and Heart
1 Bible truth should be presented so as to appeal to both mind and heart. When Jesus expounded the truth to his listeners, he chose topics that interested and motivated them. (Luke 24:17, 27, 32, 45) The success of our ministry depends greatly on the effort we put forth to identify the spiritual needs of our listeners.
2 Brochures can be effective tools for reaching the mind and heart of those we meet in the ministry. Give advance thought to who might respond to the message in each brochure being featured in August:
​—Does God Really Care About Us? People who are economically depressed or who have experienced tragedy will appreciate this comforting message about a future free from suffering.
​—What Is the Purpose of Life—​How Can You Find It? Youths who are thinking seriously about their future will benefit from the Bible-based answers found in this brochure.
​—Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! The many pictures and cited texts will help young children and those with limited reading ability to understand God’s purposes.
​—The Government That Will Bring Paradise. Anyone connected with government might respond to this message about how God’s Kingdom will solve mankind’s difficult problems.
​—When Someone You Love Dies. Many funeral directors appreciate having copies of this brochure on hand for bereaved families. Publishers who witness in cemeteries use this brochure to comfort mourners. Two sisters approached a family of seven who were praying at a grave. As a result of sharing the comforting message from the brochure, a Bible study was started with the mother the next day!
​—Should You Believe in the Trinity? A strongly religious person might respond to the truth found in this well-documented exposé of Christendom’s fundamental doctrine.
3 Familiarize yourself with each brochure, and determine how best to use it in your territory. For suggested presentations, see the back page of the July 1998 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. May Jehovah bless your efforts to reach both the minds and hearts of people.​—Mark 6:34.

