Will August Be a Banner Month?
1 The year 1963 was a banner year for Jehovah’s people. Do you know why? It was then that the number of publishers worldwide reached the one million mark. If you were in the truth at that time, you may remember how excited we were to have so many preaching the Kingdom message! Now, there are that many publishers in this country alone. However, each month, on the average, 90,000 of us do not report having some share in the ministry.
2 Accept the Challenge: During August we are endeavoring to reach an all-time peak of one million publishers in the United States. If our efforts are successful, August will be a banner month indeed! We can do this if all of us do our part.
3 Those planning vacations can spend some time in the ministry before going. Take tracts, brochures, or magazines with you so that you can give a witness to people you meet along the way. Also, at your destination you can enjoy sharing in the ministry with the local publishers.
4 If you are incapacitated, you can still have a share in the ministry. You may be able to witness to doctors, nurses, or visitors. Perhaps you can witness by letter or by telephone.
5 Some undoubtedly will appreciate assistance so as to share in the field service in August. Elders, ministerial servants, and study conductors should arrange for this help to be provided. By all means, do not forget to turn in your field service report promptly at the end of the month so that you will be counted as a publisher in August.
6 Cherish the Privilege: The ministry is a “fine trust.” (2 Tim. 1:14) We appreciate the privilege we have been given to preach the good news. (1 Thess. 2:4) When we consider everything that Jehovah has done for us, we should be moved to have a continuous share in this all-important work the whole year long. Nothing should be allowed to hinder us from preaching regularly. Let us make this August a banner month in Jehovah’s service and resolve to witness about him every month thereafter!​—Ps. 34:1.

