Youths​—Take Advantage of Your Schooling
1 How do you feel about returning to school after the summer break? Are you eager to benefit from another year of schooling? Will you take advantage of the opportunities that school affords you to share the truth with your classmates and teachers? We are confident that you want to do your best in school.
2 Be a Good Student: If you are well prepared when you attend your classes and pay close attention, you will derive lasting benefits. Be diligent about caring for your homework assignments, but do not allow your schoolwork to interfere with theocratic activities.​—Phil. 1:10.
3 Start out the new school year by reading the brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses and Education. Then, you or your parents should give a copy to each one of your teachers. Let them know that any questions they may have will be answered. This will help them understand your principles and beliefs better and work with you as you apply what you have been taught. It will also assure your teachers that you and your parents wish to cooperate with them as they help you acquire a valuable education.
4 Be a Good Witness: Why not view school as your personal territory for informal witnessing? During the coming school year, you will have unique opportunities to witness. You possess wonderful spiritual knowledge that when shared, can “save both yourself and those who listen to you.” (1 Tim. 4:16) By maintaining exemplary Christian conduct and by witnessing whenever it is appropriate to do so, you will benefit both yourself and others.
5 One young brother witnessed informally to fellow students in his school. Among those who responded favorably were a Catholic, an atheist who used to mock those who believe in God, and a youth who was a chain-smoker and a heavy drinker. In all, this young brother helped 15 of his peers to dedication and baptism!
6 So youths, apply yourselves to learning and to working your unique witnessing territory. Then you will enjoy the greatest benefit from going to school.

