
C4
Translations and Reference Works Supporting the Use of the Divine Name in the “New Testament”




Below is a partial listing of Bible translations and reference works that have used some form of the divine name (or some other way of indicating that the divine name is referred to) in what is commonly called the New Testament.a
KEY:
HEBREW translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures

ENGLISH translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures

OTHER LANGUAGE translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures

REFERENCE works


J1

בשורת מתי, Euangelium Hebraicum Matthæi (Gospel of Matthew, in Hebrew), edited by Jean du Tillet, with a Latin translation by Jean Mercier, Paris, 1555. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה or an abbreviated form of the Tetragrammaton in the main text of some verses.b


J2

Even Bohan (אבן בוחן, “Tested Stone; Touchstone”), by Shem-Tob ben Isaac Ibn Shaprut, Spain, c. 1385. This work includes a Hebrew text of the Gospel of Matthew. Edition: Hebrew Gospel of Matthew, by George Howard, Macon, GA, U.S.A., 1995. In his explanation under the heading “The Divine Name,” Howard states: “Shem-Tob’s Hebrew Matthew employs the Divine Name, symbolized by ה״ (apparently an abbreviation for השם, ‘the Name’).”c


J3

תורת המשיח, Euangelium secundum Matthæum in lingua hebraica, cum versione latina (Gospel of Matthew, in Hebrew and Latin), by Sebastian Münster, Basel, Switzerland, 1537. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.d
תורת המשיח, Euangelium secundum Matthæum in lingua hebraica . . . Vnà cum Epistola D. Pauli ad Hebræos, Hebraicè & Latinè (Gospel of Matthew and Paul’s letter to the Hebrews, in Hebrew and Latin), by Sebastian Münster, Basel, 1557. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה or an abbreviated form of the Tetragrammaton in the main text of some verses.e


J4

תורת המשיח . . . כפי מתי המבשר, Sanctum Domini nostri Iesu Christi Hebraicum Euangelium secundum Matthæum (Gospel of Matthew, in Hebrew), edited by Johannes Quinquarboreus, Paris, 1551. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.f


J5

בשורת הקרואות שנה בשנה בשבתות ובחגי, Euangelia anniuersaria, quae Dominicis diebus & in Sanctorum festis leguntur, Hebraicè conuersa (Liturgical Gospels, in Hebrew), by Fridericus Petri, Antwerp, 1581. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.g


J6

Euangelia anniuersaria Dominicorum et Festorum dierum, Germanicè, Latinè, Graecè, & Ebraicè (Liturgical Gospels, in German, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew), by Johannes Clajus, Leipzig, 1576. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.h


J7

Novum Testamentum Dn̄i: Nr̄i: Iesu Christi, Syriacè, Ebraicè, Græcè, Latinè, Germanicè, Bohemicè, Italicè, Hispanicè, Gallicè, Anglicè, Danicè, Polonicè (New Testament in 12 languages, including Hebrew), by Elias Hutter, Nuremberg, 1599-1600. This edition is often referred to as the Nuremberg Polyglot New Testament. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה in the main text of various verses.i


J8

תורת יהוה חדשה, Lex Dei summi nova; Atque hæc est, Novum Domini nostri Jesu Christi Testamentum Sacro-Sanctum (New Testament, in Hebrew), by William Robertson, London, 1661. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of various verses.j


J9

ארבעה אבני הגיליונים מהתורה החדשה, Quatuor Euangelia Noui Testamenti Ex Latino in Hebraicum (The Four Gospels, in Hebrew and Latin), by Giovanni Battista Jona, Rome, 1668. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה in the main text of various verses.k


J10

The New Testament . . . , in Hebrew and English, in Three Volumes, containing the Gospel of Matthew to First Corinthians, by Richard Caddick, London, 1798-1805. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה in the main text of various verses.l


J11

ברית חדשה על פי משיח (New Testament, in Hebrew), by Thomas Fry and others, London, 1817. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of various verses.a


J12

ספר הברית החדשה (New Testament, in Hebrew), by William Greenfield, London, 1831. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of various verses.b


J13

הברית החדשה (New Testament, The Gospels in Hebrew), by Thomas Yeates, London, 1805. As reproduced by Jean Carmignac in Traductions hebraïques des Evangiles, Vols. 2-3, Turnhout, Belgium, 1982; from the manuscript Add MS 11659 in the British Library, London. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of various verses.c


J14

ספר ברית חדשה על פי המשיח (New Testament, in Hebrew), by Alexander McCaul, Michael Solomon Alexander, Johann Christian Reichardt, and Stanislaus Hoga, London, 1838. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of various verses.d


J15

ספר בשורה טובה על פי המבשר לוקס (Gospel of Luke, in Hebrew), by Johann Heinrich Raphael Biesenthal, Berlin, 1851. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.e
ספר פעלי השליחים (Acts of Apostles, in Hebrew), by Johann Heinrich Raphael Biesenthal, Berlin, 1867. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.f
אגרת אל הרומים (Paul’s Letter to the Romans, in Hebrew), by Johann Heinrich Raphael Biesenthal, Berlin, 1855. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.g
אגרת אל העברים (Paul’s Letter to the Hebrews, in Hebrew), by Johann Heinrich Raphael Biesenthal, Berlin, 1857. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.h


J16

הברית החדשה על פי המשיח עם נקודות וטעמים (New Testament, in Hebrew), revised by Johann Christian Reichardt and Johann Heinrich Raphael Biesenthal, London, 1866. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of various verses.i


J17

ספרי הברית החדשה (New Testament, in Hebrew), by Franz Delitzsch, Leipzig, 1877. This translation uses יהוה or an abbreviation of the Tetragrammaton in the main text of various verses. In 1892, Delitzsch’s 11th edition replaced the abbreviated form with יהוה, which is also used in later editions.j


J18

הברית החדשה (New Testament, in Hebrew), by Isaac Salkinson and Christian D. Ginsburg, Vienna, Austria, 1886. This translation uses יהוה in the main text in various verses.k


J19

הבשורה הטובה על־פי יוחנ (Gospel of John, in Hebrew), by Moshe I. Ben Maeir, Denver, CO, U.S.A., 1957. This translation uses יהוה or an abbreviated form of the Tetragrammaton in the main text of some verses.l


J20

A Concordance to the Greek Testament, by William F. Moulton and Alfred S. Geden, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1897. In the scripture references under the entries ΘΕΟ΄Σ (The·osʹ) and ΚΥ΄ΡΙΟΣ (Kyʹri·os), this work shows parts of the Hebrew text containing the Tetragrammaton (יהוה) to which the Greek text refers or from which it makes a quotation.a


J21

The Emphatic Diaglott (Greek-English interlinear), by Benjamin Wilson, New York, 1864. The translation into English in the right-hand column uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.b


J22

ספרי הברית החדשה (New Testament, in Hebrew), by United Bible Societies, Jerusalem, 1976. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of various verses.c


J23

הברית החדשה (New Testament, in Hebrew), by Yohanan Bauchet and David Kinneret (Arteaga), Rome, 1975. This translation uses יהוה or an abbreviated form of the Tetragrammaton in the main text of various verses.d


J24

A Literal Translation of the New Testament . . . From the Text of the Vatican Manuscript, by Herman Heinfetter (pseudonym for Frederick Parker), Sixth Edition, London, 1863. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.e


J25

St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans, by William Gunion Rutherford, London, 1900. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.f


J26

Psalterium Hebraicum (Bible book of Psalms and Gospel of Matthew 1:1–3:6, in Hebrew), by Anton Margaritha, Leipzig, 1533. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of some verses in both Bible books.g


J27

Die heilige Schrift des neuen Testaments (New Testament, in German), by Dominik von Brentano, Kempten, Germany, 1790-1791. This translation uses “Jehova” or “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses or in explanatory commentaries and paraphrases.h


J28

ספרי הברית החדשה (New Testament, in Hebrew), as appearing in The New Covenant Commonly Called the New Testament​—Peshitta Aramaic Text With a Hebrew Translation, by The Bible Society, Jerusalem, 1986. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה in the main text of various verses.i


J29

The Original Aramaic New Testament in Plain English (An American Translation of the Aramaic New Testament), by Glenn David Bauscher, Seventh Edition, Australia, 2012. This translation uses “THE LORD JEHOVAH” in the main text of various verses.j


J30

Aramaic English New Testament, by Andrew Gabriel Roth, Third Edition, U.S.A., 2008. This translation uses “Master YHWH” or “YHWH” in the main text of various verses or in the footnotes.k


J31

Hebraic Roots Bible with Study notes, Word of Truth Publications, Carteret, NJ, U.S.A., 2012. This translation uses “YAHWEH” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.l


J32

The Holy Name Bible (formerly known as The Sacred Name New Testament), revised by Angelo Benedetto Traina and The Scripture Research Association, Inc., U.S.A., 2012 reprint. This translation uses “Yahweh” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.a


J33

The Christian’s Bible​—New Testament, by George Newton LeFevre, Strasburg, PA, U.S.A., 1928. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.b


J34

The Idiomatic Translation of the New Testament, by William Graham MacDonald, 2009 electronic version. This translation uses “Yahveh” in the main text of various verses.c


J35

Nkand’a Nzambi i sia vo Luwawanu Luankulu Y’olu Luampa (The Bible, in Kikongo), by George Ronald Robinson Cameron and others, 1926; reprinted by United Bible Societies, Nairobi, Kenya, 1987. This translation uses “Yave” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.d


J36

Bibel Barita Na Uli Hata Batak-Toba siganup ari (The Bible, in Batak-Toba), Lembaga Alkitab Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia, 1989. This translation uses “Jahowa” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.e


J37

Arorutiet ne Leel ne bo: Kiptaiyandennyo Jesu Kristo Yetindennyo (New Testament, in Kalenjin), by Frances J. Mumford and others, Nairobi, Kenya, 1968. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.f


J38

Ekonejeu Kabesi ni Dokuj Iesu Keriso (New Testament, in Nengone), by Stephen M. Creagh and John Jones, London, 1870. This translation uses “Iehova” in the main text of various verses.g


J39

Jesu Keriso ve Evanelia Toaripi uri (The Four Gospels, in Toaripi), by John Henry Holmes, London, 1902. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of various verses.h


J40

Edisana Ñwed Abasi Ibom (The Bible, in Efik), reprinted by the National Bible Society of Scotland, Edinburgh, 1949. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.i


J41

Testament Sefa an amam Samol o Rȧn Amanau Jisos Kraist: auili jonai kapas an re kris uili nanai kapas an mortlok (New Testament, in Mortlockese), by Robert W. Logan, New York, 1883. This translation uses “Jioua” in the main text of various verses.j


J42

Am-bóšra tráka Yī́sua Masī́a mo̱ ama-gbal ma Mátaī, o̱-sōm and Ama-Lémrane̱ ama-Fu ma o̱-Rábbu de̱ o̱-Fū́tia-ka-su Yī́sua Masī́a (New Testament, in Temne), by Christian Friedrich Schlenker, London, 1865-1868. This translation uses “Yehṓfa” in the main text of various verses.k


J43

Testament Vau ki nawota anigida go tea maumaupauri Yesu Kristo (New Testament, in Nguna-Tongoa), by Oscar Michelsen and Peter Milne, London, 1912. This translation uses “Yehovah” in the main text of various verses.l


J44

Wusku Wuttestamentum Nul-Lordumun Jesus Christ (New Testament, in the Algonquin language of Massachusetts), by John Eliot, Cambridge, MA, U.S.A., 1661. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.a


J45

Matīyū: Ku Nam Navosavos ugi (Gospel of Matthew, in Eromanga), by George Nicol Gordon and James Douglas Gordon, London, 1869. This translation uses “Iehōva” in the main text of various verses.b


J46

La Bible (The Bible, in French), by André Chouraqui, Tournai, Belgium, 1985. This translation uses a combination of “IHVH” and “adonai” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.c


J47

Biblia Peshitta en Español, Traducción de los Antiguos Manuscritos Arameos (The Peshitta Bible, in Spanish), Holman Bible Publishers, Nashville, TN, U.S.A., 2006. This translation uses “Yahweh” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.d


J48

Pin chitokaka pi okchalinchi Chisvs Klaist in testament himona, chahta anumpa atoshowa hoke (New Testament, in Choctaw), by Alfred Wright and Cyrus Byington, New York, 1848. This translation uses “Chihowa” in the main text of various verses.e


J49

Bosakú-w’ólótsi wa Yesu Masiya boki Matayo la Malako o kótaka and Bosakú-w’ólótsi wa Yesu Masiya boki Luka o kótaka (Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, in Lomóngo), by Edward Algernon Ruskin and Lily Ruskin, Congo Balolo Mission, Upper Congo, 1905. This translation uses “Yawe” in the main text of various verses.f


J50

Nalologena wo se Yesu Kristo Kome Mataio (Gospel of Matthew, in Tasiko, Epi), by Oscar Michelsen, London, 1892. This translation uses “Yehova” in the main text of various verses.g


J51

The Restored New Testament, by Willis Barnstone, New York, 2009. This translation uses “Yahweh” in some verses. A footnote at Matthew 1:20 comments on the expression “an angel of the Lord”: “From the Greek . . . (angelos kyriou), from the Hebrew . . . (malakh yahweh) . . . A literal rendering would be Yahweh’s malakh or ‘messenger.’” In the main text of Matthew 28:2, this translation reads: “An angel of Yahweh.”h


J52

Messianic Jewish Shared Heritage Bible, by The Messianic Jewish Family Bible Project, Shippensburg, PA, U.S.A., 2012. This Bible uses “ADONAI” in the main text of various verses in the Christian Greek Scriptures. The glossary on page 1530 explains: “ADONAI (יהוה)​—Hebrew for ‘LORD.’ When written in small capitals, it refers to God’s personal name YHWH as given in the Hebrew Bible. This personal name is God’s ‘covenant name,’ used when God is relating to the Jewish people in an intimate way.”i


J53

The Messages of Jesus According to the Synoptists (The Discourses of Jesus in the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke), by Thomas Cuming Hall, New York, 1901. This paraphrase uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.j


J54

Bibel Ñaran aen Gott, Ñarana Testament Õbwe me Testament Etsimeduw Õañan (The Bible, in Nauru), by Philip Adam Delaporte, New York, 1918; reprinted by The Bible Society in the South Pacific, Suva, Fiji, 2005. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.k


J55

Embimbiliya Li Kola (The Bible, in Umbundu), by Merlin W. Ennis and others, Luanda, Angola, 1963. This translation uses “Yehova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.l


J56

Ke Kauoha Hou a Ko Kakou Haku e Ola’i, a Iesu Kristo (New Testament, in Hawaiian), American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, Oahu, Hawaii, 1835. This translation uses “Iehova” in the main text of various verses.a


J57

Te Nu Tetemanti, ae ana Taeka Ara Uea ao ara Tia Kamaiu are Iesu Kristo, ae Kaetaki man Taetaen Erene (New Testament, in Kiribati [Gilbertese]), by Hiram Bingham II, New York, 1901. This translation uses “Iehova” in the main text of various verses.b


J58

Dal Co Mu Biale Saint Luke Terhu (Gospel of Luke, in Lonwolwol [Fanting]), by Robert Lamb, Dunedin, New Zealand, 1899. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.c


J59

Intas-Etipup Mat u Iesu Kristo, Natimarid Uja, im Natimi Imyiatamaig Caija (New Testament, in Aneityum), by John Geddie, John Inglis, and others, London, 1863. This translation uses “Ihova” in the main text of various verses.d


J60

New Testament (in Cherokee), revised by Charles Cutler Torrey, New York, 1860. This translation uses “Yihowa” in the main text of various verses.e


J61

Ntestamente Yipia ya Nkambo Wetu ni Mupurushi Yesu Kristu (New Testament, in Chiluva), by Daniel Crawford, Livingstonia, Malawi, 1904. This translation uses “Yehova” in the main text of various verses.f


J62

Injili Mar Mathayo (Gospel of Matthew, in Dholuo), by A. A. Carscallen, London, 1914. This translation uses “Yawe” in the main text of at least one verse.g


J63

The Gospels of Matthew, and of Mark, Newly Rendered Into English; With Notes on the Greek Text, by Lancelot Shadwell, London, 1861. This translation uses “JEHOVAH” in the main text of various verses.h


J64

A Liberal Translation of the New Testament, by Edward Harwood, London, 1768. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.i


J65

The Restoration of Original Sacred Name Bible, revised by Missionary Dispensary Bible Research, Buena Park, CA, U.S.A., 1970. This translation uses “YAHVAH” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.j


J66

The Scriptures, by the Institute for Scripture Research, Third Edition, South Africa, 2010. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.k


J67

The New Testament Letters​—Prefaced and Paraphrased, by John William Charles Wand, Melbourne, Australia, 1944. This paraphrase uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.l


J68

The Messages of Paul (Arranged in Historical Order, Analyzed, and Freely Rendered in Paraphrase, with Introductions), by George Barker Stevens, New York, 1900. This paraphrase uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.a


J69

The Epistle to the Hebrews with some interpretative suggestions, by Wilfrid Henry Isaacs, London, 1933. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.b


J70

The Apocalypse: A Revised Version in English, of the Revelation with Notes, Historical and Explanatory, by Edward Grimes, Newport-on-Usk, United Kingdom, 1891. This translation uses “Yahweh” in the main text of various verses.c


J71

The New Testament; Being the English Only of the Greek and English Testament, by Abner Kneeland, Philadelphia, PA, U.S.A., 1823. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.d


J72

The Gospel of the Hellenists, by Benjamin Wisner Bacon and edited by Carl H. Kraeling, New York, 1933. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.e


J73

The Family Expositor: or, A Paraphrase and Version of the New Testament; with Critical Notes, and a Practical Improvement of Each Section, by Philip Doddridge, London, 1739-1756. This paraphrase uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.f


J74

The Modern American Bible​—The Books of the Bible in Modern American Form and Phrase, With Notes and Introduction, by Frank Schell Ballentine, New York, 1899-1901. This translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.g


J75

The Guide to Immortality; or, Memoirs of the Life and Doctrine of Christ, by the Four Evangelists, by Robert Fellowes, London, 1804. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses or in the footnotes.h


J76

A New Version of the Four Gospels; with notes critical and explanatory, by a Catholic (John Lingard), London, 1836. This translation uses “The Lord (Jehova)” in the main text of Matthew 22:44.i


J77

The Documents of the New Testament, by George Woosung Wade, London, 1934. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.j


J78

Studies in Matthew, by Benjamin Wisner Bacon, New York, 1930. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.k


J79

The New Testament, in an Improved Version, Upon the Basis of Archbishop Newcome’s New Translation, edited by Thomas Belsham and others, London, 1808. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses or in the footnotes.l


J80

A New Family Bible, and Improved Version, From Corrected Texts of the Originals, by Benjamin Boothroyd, Huddersfield, England, 1824. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses or in the footnotes and explanatory commentaries, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.a


J81

The Holy Bible, Containing the Authorized Version of the Old and New Testaments, edited by John Tricker Conquest, London, 1841. This translation uses “JEHOVAH” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.b


J82

A Paraphrase and Annotations Upon All the Books of the New Testament, by Henry Hammond, London, 1653. This paraphrase uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.c


J83

The Epistle to the Hebrews, in a Paraphrastic Commentary, by Joseph B. M’Caul, London, 1871. This paraphrase uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.d


J84

A Revised Translation and Interpretation of the Sacred Scriptures of the New Covenant, by John Mead Ray, Glasgow, Scotland, 1815. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.e


J85

An Attempt Toward Revising Our English Translation of the Greek Scriptures, by William Newcome, Dublin, Ireland, 1796. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.f


J86

The Monotessaron; or, The Gospel History, According to the Four Evangelists, by John S. Thompson, Baltimore, MD, U.S.A., 1829. This translation uses “Jehovah” or “JEHOVAH” in the main text of some verses.g


J87

A Translation of the New Testament, by Gilbert Wakefield, London, 1791. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.h


J88

The Newberry Bible (commonly known as The Englishman’s Bible), by Thomas Newberry, London, 1890. In this translation, “LORD” appears in capital and small capitals in the main text of numerous verses, with marginal notes drawing attention to the divine name “Jehovah,” both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.i


J89

The Messages of the Apostles (The Apostolic Discourses in the Book of Acts and the General and Pastoral Epistles of the New Testament), by George Barker Stevens, New York, 1900. This paraphrase uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.j


J90

A Non-Ecclesiastical New Testament, by Frank Daniels, 2016. This translation uses “Yahweh” in the main text of various verses. In the opening comments by the translator, the following statement is made under the heading “The Divine Name”: “In every case where the Tetragrammaton appeared in a quotation from the Hebrew Bible (rendered Κυριος [Lord] in the LXX), this translation employs the proper name, Yahweh. There are also other places in the NT [New Testament] where Κυριος without an article indicates the divine name. In these cases, too, the form Yahweh is employed.”k


J91

Uebersetzung des Neuen Testaments mit erklärenden Anmerkungen (New Testament, in German), by Johann Babor, Vienna, Austria, 1805. This translation uses “Jhova” in the main text of some verses or in the footnotes.l


J92

Nsango ea Ndoci eki Malako o Kotaka (Gospel of Mark, in Mongo-Nkundu), by Ellsworth E. Harris and Royal J. Dye, Bolengi, Upper Congo, 1905. This translation uses “Yawe” in the main text of some verses.a


J93

Aramaic Peshitta New Testament Translation, by Janet M. Magiera, Truth or Consequences, NM, U.S.A., 2006. This translation uses “LORD” in the main text of various verses. The introduction states: “LORD is MARYA, meaning LORD of the Old Testament, YAHWEH.”b


J94

The Orthodox Jewish Bible, by Phillip E. Goble, Fourth Edition, New York, 2011. This Bible uses “Hashem” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. The term “Hashem” comes from the Hebrew expression hash·Shemʹ, meaning “the Name,” often used by Jews as a substitute for YHWH.c


J95

Pacto Mesiánico (New Testament, in Spanish), by Academia Bíblica BEREA, Argentina, 2010. This translation uses “YHWH” in the main text of numerous verses.d


J96

El Nuevo Testamento (New Testament, in Spanish), by Pablo Besson, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 1919. This translation uses “Jehová” at Luke 2:15 and Jude 14. When “Señor” is used in the main text, a footnote referring to “Jehová,” “Yahvé,” or “Jahvé” appears in various verses. In 1948, a second edition entitled El Nuevo Testamento de Nuestro Señor Jesucristo was published. This edition continued to use “Jehová” at Luke 2:15 and Jude 14 and provided an “Index of Citations,” where the use of “Señor” in the main text refers to “Jehová,” “Yahvé,” or “Jahvé.”e


J97

Livangeli tsa Yesu-Kereste Morena oa rona tse ’ngoliloeng ki Mareka le Yoanne (Luke 1:5–2:17, 40-52, Matthew 2:1-21, and Gospels of Mark and John, in Sesotho), by Eugène Casalis and Samuel Rolland, Cape Town, South Africa, 1839. This translation uses “Yehofa” in the main text of some verses.f


J98

The Four Gospels, Translated From the Greek, by George Campbell, London, 1789. This translation uses “Lord” in the main text with a footnote referring to “Jehovah” in various verses.g


J99

Nam Numpusok Itevau eni Iesu Kristo Novsuromon Enugkos (New Testament, in Eromanga), by H. A. Robertson, Sydney, Australia, 1909. This translation uses “Iēhōva” in the main text of various verses.h


J100

The Book of Yahweh​—The Holy Scriptures, by Yisrayl B. Hawkins, Ninth Edition, Abilene, TX, U.S.A., 1996. This translation uses “Yahweh” in the main text of numerous verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.i


J101

The Sacred Scriptures, by Assemblies of Yahweh, Bethel, PA, U.S.A., 1981. This translation uses “Yahweh” in the main text of numerous verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.j


J102

A Critical and Emphatic Paraphrase of the New Testament, by Vincent T. Roth, Pasadena, CA, U.S.A., 2000; reproduced from the revised edition originally published in 1963. This paraphrase uses “JEHOVAH” in the main text of various verses.k


J103

Neues Testament mit Anmerkungen (New Testament, in German), by Heinz Schumacher, Germany, 2002. This translation uses “JAHWE” in the main text or in the footnotes of various verses.l


J104

Das Neue Testament (New Testament, in German), by Adolf Pfleiderer, Langensteinbach, Germany, 2004; reproduced from a copy first printed in 1980. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of various verses.a


J105

Sämtliche Schriften des neuen Testaments (New Testament, in German), by Johann Jakob Stolz, Second Edition, Zürich, Switzerland, 1795. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.b


J106

Biblia, Das ist: Alle bücher der H. Schrift des alten und newen Testaments (The Bible, in German), edited by Johannes Piscator, Herborn, Germany, 1602-1604. This translation uses “HERR” in the main text with explanatory commentaries referring to “JEHOVAH,” “Jehováh,” or “Jehovah” in various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.c


J107

Neue Uebersetzung der Apostelgeschichte (Acts of Apostles, in German), Waisenhaus, Halle (Saale), Germany, 1779. This parallel comparison of the Luther translation with a new translation by an anonymous author uses “Jehovah” or “Jehoven” in the main text of some verses.d


J108

Die heiligen Schriften des neuen Testaments (New Testament, in German), by Sebastian Mutschelle, München, Germany, 1789-1790. This translation uses “Jehova” or “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.e


J109

A New Translation of the New Testament . . . Extracted From the Paraphrase of the Late Philip Doddridge . . . and Carefully Revised With an Introduction and Notes, London, 1765. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.f


J110

The Evangelical Expositor: or, A Commentary on the Holy Bible. Wherein the Sacred Text of the Old and New Testament Is Inserted at Large . . . With Practical Observations, by Thomas Haweis, London, 1765. This translation uses “JEHOVAH” in the main text of some verses in the Hebrew Scriptures. When “LORD” or “Lord” is used in the main text, an explanatory commentary referring to “Jehovah” appears in some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.g


J111

A New and Corrected Version of the New Testament . . . to Which Are Subjoined a Few, Generally Brief, Critical, Explanatory, and Practical Notes, by Rodolphus Dickinson, Boston, MA, U.S.A., 1833. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses or in explanatory notes.h


J112

Evangelical History: or a Narrative of the Life, Doctrines and Miracles of Jesus Christ . . . Containing the Four Gospels and the Acts, by Alden Bradford, Boston, MA, U.S.A., 1813. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses. In 1836, Bradford published a revision of the Gospels, which uses “JEHOVAH” or “Jehovah” in the main text of additional verses or in explanatory notes.i


J113

The New Testament of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ . . . by a Layman (Edgar Taylor), London, 1840. This translation uses “Jehovah” at Acts 7:49. When “LORD” or “Lord” is used in the main text, a footnote referring to “Jehovah” appears in various verses. Regarding the word Kyʹri·os, the preface states: “This word is well known to be used both in the Old and New Testaments as a term of distinction or courtesy in addressing a superior . . . It is also applied in a higher sense even to the Supreme Being, having been used in the LXX. [Septuagint] to represent the Hebrew ‘Jehovah.’”j


J114

The New Covenant, Reference Edition, edited by R. B. Banfield, 1995. This translation uses “LORD” in the main text of various verses. In the “Notes About This Translation,” the editor explains: “The word Lord is rendered LORD where applicable in Old Testament quotes. Where Lord is rendered as LORD elsewhere it is merely speculative and not intended as theological statement. In the Old Testament LORD is the Hebrew YHWH and Lord the Hebrew Adonai, both words are Kurios in the Greek, and agreement as to whether it should be capitalised here as the definitive divine name of God, or left as the common name for merely a master, can be left to the reader’s personal judgement.”k


J115

The Restored Name King James Version, edited by Richard Lattier, 2001. This translation uses “YHWH” in the main text of numerous verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. The “Introduction” states: “In the text of the Restored Name King James Version, the name of the Heavenly Father, יהוה, has been written “YHWH”, which is the transliteration of the Hebrew letters. . . . It is our hope that the restoration of the name of the Almighty Creator . . . will bless the reader to live a life in reverence to יהוה.”l


J116

One Unity Resource Bible . . . With Some Transliterated Hebrew Notations, by Thomas Robinson, 2016. This translation uses “ADONAI,” “Yahweh,” or “MarYah [Master Yahweh]” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. The appendix on page 705 explains that the Hebrew word “Yahweh” corresponds to the English translation “LORD, GOD, The LORD, ADONAI, Jehovah.”a


J117

Jewish New Testament, by David H. Stern, Clarksville, MD, U.S.A., 1989. This translation uses “ADONAI” in the main text with the corresponding definition “A·do·nai​—the LORD, Jehovah” appearing in the page-by-page glossary. The Complete Jewish Study Bible, Peabody, MA, U.S.A., 2016, continues to use “ADONAI” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. In the introduction to this Bible, Stern explains: “Most English translations represent the Name by ‘LORD,’ written as it is here, in large and small capital letters. More than six thousand times, the Complete Jewish Bible uses the Hebrew word ‘ADONAI’ also in large and small capital letters (and italicized, like other Hebrew words) to represent the tetragrammaton.” Under the heading “The Tetragrammaton in the New Testament,” he adds: “The word ‘ADONAI’ is used . . . wherever I, as the translator, believe kurios is the Greek representation of the tetragrammaton.”b


J118

Ai Vola ni Veiyalayalati Vou i Jisu Karisito (New Testament, in Fijian), revised and edited by James Calvert, London, 1858; published with Ai Vola Tabu, a ya e tu kina Na Veiyalayalati Makawa (Old Testament, in Fijian), revised and edited by James Calvert and Richard Burdsall Lyth, London, 1864. This translation uses “Jiova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.c


J119

Buk Baibel (The Bible, in Motu), by the Bible Society of Papua New Guinea, 1959-1973. This translation uses “Iehova” or “IEHOVA” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.d


J120

Ko e Tohi Tapu Kātoa (The Bible [Revised West Version], in Tongan), by James Baxley, 2018. This translation uses “Sihova” or “SIHOVA” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.e


J121

Testamente e Ncha ea Morena le Moluki oa Rona Yesu Kreste (New Testament, in Sesotho), by Eugène Casalis and Samuel Rolland, Beerseba, Lesotho, 1855. This translation uses “Yehofa” in the main text of some verses.f


J122

Vanuvei Eo e sepinien Vatlongos na mol-Vatimol xil niutestamen e rute te oltestamen (New Testament, Ruth, and Jonah, in Southeast Ambrym), by Wycliffe Bible Translators, Inc., 2015. This translation uses “Iahova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.g


J123

Yesu Keriso da Bino Dave (Mark, Luke, and Acts of Apostles, in Binandere), by Wycliffe Bible Translators, Inc., 2014. This translation uses “BADARI” in the main text with a footnote referring to “Jehovah” in some verses.h


J124

The New Testament in Braid Scots, by William Wye Smith, Paisley, Scotland, 1901. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.i


J125

Loina Hauhauna (New Testament, in Bunama), by Wycliffe Bible Translators, Inc., 2015; originally published by The Bible Society of Papua New Guinea, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 1991. This translation uses “Yehoba” in the main text of various verses.j


J126

Dakota wowapi wakan kin and Wicoicage wowapi, mowis owa: qa wicoie wakan kin, Salomon Kaga pejihuta wicaśta (New Testament, Genesis, and Proverbs, in Dakota), by Stephen Return Riggs and Thomas Smith Williamson, New York, 1865. This translation uses “Jehowa” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.k


J127

Nsango Yandoci yo kotamaki la Luka (Gospel of Luke, in [Lu]Nkundu), by John McKittrick and Mrs. F. T. McKittrick, Congo Balolo Mission, Bonginda, Congo, 1895. This translation uses “Yova” in the main text of some verses.l


J128

Kálaad Zɛmbî: Sɔ̧ á Gúgwáan (New Testament, in Makaa), by Wycliffe Bible Translators, Inc., 2014. This translation uses “Yawé” in the main text of various verses or in the footnotes.a


J129

Pulu Yili-nga Ung Konale (New Testament, in Bo-Ung [Mara-Gomu]), by Wycliffe Bible Translators, Inc., 2004. This translation uses “Yawe” in the main text of various verses.b


J130

Nzryrngrkxtr Kc Ate: Rut x Sam (New Testament, Ruth, and Psalms, in Natügu), by the Bible Society of the South Pacific, Solomon Islands Translation Advisory Group, and Wycliffe Bible Translators, Inc., 2008. This translation uses “Yawe” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. The appendix on page 530 indicates that “Yawe (Yahweh)” corresponds to “kurios” in Greek and “the LORD” in English.c


J131

Kaem Ko Den (New Testament and portions of the Old Testament, in Waskia), revised by The Bible Society of Papua New Guinea and Wycliffe Bible Translators, 2014. This translation uses “Yawe” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. The appendix on pages 726 and 727 indicates that “Jawe” (or, “Yawe”) corresponds to “JHWH” in Hebrew, “Kurios” in Greek, and “LORD, Jahweh, Jehovah” in English.d


J132

Buka Vivivireina Parivainuaḡana Wadubona Ḡuta Vinevine ma Mark ma Acts (portions of the Old Testament, Mark, and Acts of Apostles, in Wedau), by Wycliffe Bible Translators, Inc., 2010. This translation uses “BADA” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. In a footnote at Genesis 2:7, “BADA” is explained as referring to “Yahweh” or “Jehovah.”e


J133

Tus Votut en selusien ten out Voum niutestamen ka tei en oltestamen (portions of the Bible, in Paama), by Wycliffe Bible Translators, Inc., 2015. This translation uses “Iahova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.f


J134

Te akʼaʼj tuʼjal tuj tuʼjal qtata Dios (New Testament, in Tektiteko), by Wycliffe Bible Translators, Inc., 2003. This translation uses “Dios” in the main text with a footnote referring to “YHWH” or “Yawe” in some verses.g


J135

A Paraphrase and Notes on the Revelation of St. John, by Moses Lowman, London, 1737. This paraphrase uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.h


J136

The Documents of the New Treaty between YHWH and the Human Race​—A New Testament for Readers, by George A. Blair, U.S.A., 1996. This translation uses “YHWH” or “LORD” in the main text of various verses. In the introduction to this Bible, the translator explains that his purpose is to “present a translation whose words would convey to present-day readers something of what the original must have meant.” Regarding the use of the divine name, he states: “It was written, as all Hebrew was, with nothing but consonants, with the reader expected to put the right vowels in the right places. . . . I decided to leave it as it was, YHWH.”i


J137

The Translators New Testament, by Alvin Cordes, U.S.A., 2005. This translation uses “LORD (Jehovah)” or “LORD” in the main text of some verses.j


J138

2001 Translation: An American English Bible, edited by Jim Wheeler, U.S.A., 2001. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. The explanatory note “Jehovah (יהוה)” includes the following statement under the heading “Jehovah in the NT [New Testament]”: “We are Bible translators (not teachers); so, our conclusions on [the use of Jehovah’s name] are based strictly on our research, not on a desire to take a religious position. . . . This Bible is one that uses God’s Name in the Christian Era Scriptures.”k


J139

Epistolæ anniversariæ, quæ Dominicis diebus ac Sanctorum festis præcipuis in Ecclesia præleguntur Ebrææ iam recens ex Græco textu ac Syra Paraphrasi factæ . . . Et nunc demum Ebraice, Græce, Latine, ac Germanice. Editæ opera ac cum præfatione (“The Epistles of the Christian Year,” in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and German), by Conrad Neander, Leipzig, 1586. The translation into Hebrew of certain verses of the Christian Greek Scriptures uses יהוה in the main text.l


J140

Epistola ad Hebraeos (Paul’s Letter to the Hebrews, in Hebrew and Latin), by Johann Heinrich Callenberg and Friedrich Albrecht Christiani, Halle, Germany, 1734. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.a


J141

Evangelium Lucae (Gospel of Luke, in Hebrew and Latin), by Johann Heinrich Callenberg and Heinrich Christian Immanuel Frommann, Halle, Germany, 1735-1737. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.b


J142

בשורת המשיח ביד מרקוס המבשר, Euangelium divi Marci (Gospel of Mark, in Hebrew), by Walther Herbst, Wittenberg, Germany, 1575. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.c


J143

בשורת מתי, An Old Hebrew Text of St. Matthew’s Gospel, by Hugh J. Schonfield, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1927. This translation of Jean du Tillet’s בשורת מתי, Euangelium Hebraicum Matthæi, uses “Lord” or “God” in the main text with a footnote indicating that an abbreviated form of the Tetragrammaton appears in the original text of some verses. The footnote at Matthew 1:22 explains that “the representation of the tetragrammaton with three yods יּיּיּ found throughout the Hebrew text is similarly depicted in . . . other Hebrew documents.”d


J144

Traducción Kadosh Israelita Mesiánica (The Bible, in Spanish), by Diego Ascunce, Revised Study Edition, San José, Costa Rica, 2005. This translation uses “YAHWEH” in the main text of numerous verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. The title page includes the following statement: “This translation has rescued the Hebrew roots of the Kadoshim Scriptures and has also rescued the Divine Name of YAHWEH Elohim.”e


J145

Las Sagradas Escrituras (The Bible, in Spanish), revised by Yosef Aharoni, Camuy, Puerto Rico, 2007-2008. This translation uses “YHWH” in the main text of numerous verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.f


J146

Las Escrituras de Restauración Edición del Nombre Verdadero (The Bible, in Spanish), by Yosef Koniuchowsky, North Miami Beach, FL, U.S.A., 2010. This translation uses יהוה, “Yahweh,” “MarYah,” or a combination of יהוה and “Yahweh” or “MarYah” in the main text of numerous verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. The translator explains: “Our purpose in publishing [this edition] is to provide . . . a translation that first of all exalts and proclaims the True Names of YHWH and of Yahshua, as they originally appeared.”g


J147

Kitbé Haqódesh Las Sagradas Escrituras Versión Israelita Nazarena (The Bible, in Spanish), edited by José A. Álvarez, Isabela, Puerto Rico, 2012. This translation uses “Yahweh” in the main text of numerous verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. In the introduction, the following statement is made under the heading “The Sacred Name”: “In this special edition, . . . we use the Name with its vowels, Yahweh, the Sacred Name that the Creator himself chose in order to reveal who he is.”h


J148

Ai Vola ni Veiyalayalati vou ni noda Turaga kei na nodai Vakabula ko Jisu Kraisiti (New Testament, in the Mbau dialect of Fijian), revised and edited by John Watsford and others, Viwa, Fiji, 1853. This translation uses “Jiova” in the main text of some verses.i


J149

O le Feagaiga Fou a lo tatou Alii o Iesu Keriso (New Testament, in Samoan), British and Foreign Bible Society, London, 1849. This translation uses “Ieova” in the main text of various verses.j


J150

Koe Tohi oe Fuakava Foou a ho tau eiki moe fakamoui ko Jisu Kalaisi (New Testament, in Tongan), revised by Thomas Adams and others, London, 1852. This translation uses “Jihova” in the main text of various verses.k


J151

Koe tohi Tabu Katoa: aia oku i ai ae tohi Tabu Motua, bea moe tohi oe Fuakava Foou (The Bible, in Tongan), revised and edited by Thomas West and others, London, 1860-1862. This translation uses “Jihova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.l


J152

Act Apostelnu (Acts of Apostles, in Arawak), by Theophilus S. Schumann and edited by Theodore Shultz, New York, 1850. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.a


J153

Evangelion unni ta Jesu-ūm-ba Christ-ko-ba upatōara loūka-umba (Gospel of Luke, in Awabakal), by Lancelot Edward Threlkeld, Sydney, Australia, 1891, first printing from the manuscript translated and revised 1831-1857. This translation uses “Yehóa” in the main text of some verses.b


J154

Mbengu Etemu embe Yesu Masiya e nkolo mpe mokosoli o biso (New Testament, in Bangi), by A. E. Scrivener and others, Revised Edition, Bolobo Mission, Congo, 1922. This translation uses “Yawe” in the main text of various verses.c


J155

Sango Iam. Ya Matiu e Lĕndĕkidi (Gospel of Matthew, in Benga), by G. M’Queen, New York, 1858. This translation uses “Jĕhova” in the main text of various verses.d


J156

Nsango e ilo inki Yesu bobiki eketemeki la Luka (Gospel of Luke, in Bolia), by H. D. Brown, Ntondo, Congo, 1936. This translation uses “Yawe” in the main text of Luke 3:4.e


J157

Introduction to the Fernandian Tongue, by John Clarke, Second Edition, Berwick-on-Tweed, England, 1848. This work includes a translation of the Gospel of Matthew, chapters 3-5, in Bube. It uses “Yehovah” in the main text of some verses.f


J158

Book hoa Matthew (Gospel of Matthew, in Bullom So), by Gustavus Reinhold Nyländer, London, 1816. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.g


J159

Paraphraseische Erklärung des Briefes an die Hebräer (Paul’s letter to the Hebrews, in German), by Gotthilf Traugott Zachariae, Göttingen, Germany, 1771. This paraphrase uses “Jehova” in the main text or in the footnotes of some verses.h


J160

Das Neue Testament (New Testament, in German), by Carl Friedrich Bahrdt, Berlin, 1783. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses.i


J161

Das Neue Testament oder die heiligen Bücher der Christen (New Testament, containing the Gospel of Matthew to Acts of Apostles, in German), by Johann Otto Thiess, Leipzig, 1794-1800. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.j


J162

Bibel für Schwoba: Die schwäbische Bibelübersetzung (The Bible, in the Swabian dialect of German), by Rudolf Paul, Balingen, Germany, 2008. This translation uses “JAHWE” or “Jahwe” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. In the foreword to this Bible, the translator explains: “What I particularly noticed during the translation work was that the name of God JAHWE is mentioned almost six thousand six hundred times in the Old Testament . . . The fact that the name JAHWE appears so frequently in the Old Testament Scriptures has made me think a lot . . . May this work help many people to gain such inner closeness to the good news of the Holy Scriptures and to find peace in it, as has happened to me. Tribute, praise, and thanks be to JAHWE, who speaks to us in this book.”k


J163

Niu Testament ad ndorlaben adu Jesu Kristo i bolumiadu (New Testament, in Lele [Manus]), by R. Goebel and others, Sydney, Australia, 1956. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of various verses.l


J164

Ny Teny n’Andriamanitra, atao hoe, Tesitamenta ’ny Jesosy Kraisty (New Testament, in Malagasy), by David Jones, David Griffiths, and others, Antananarivo, Madagascar, 1830. This translation uses “Jehovah” or “JEHOVAH” in the main text of various verses.a


J165

Ny Baiboly, izany hoe, ny soratra masina rehetra amy ny Faneken-Taloha sy ny Fanekem-Baovao (The Bible, in Malagasy), revised by David Griffiths and others, London, 1855-1865. This translation uses “Iehôvah” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.b


J166

Ny Soratra Masina, dia ny Testamenta Taloha sy ny Testamenta Vaovao (The Bible, in Malagasy), by William Edward Cousins, Lars Nilsen Dahle, Josefa Andrianaivoravelona, and others, London, 1889; Revision Committee’s Version, 1887. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.c


J167

Bateli Vavaluna Sampela hap Buk Baibel long tokples Misima-Paneati long Niugini (New Testament and portions of the Old Testament, in Misima-Paneati), by Wycliffe Bible Translators and others, 1947-2018. When the New Testament was first published in Sydney, Australia, in 1947, this translation used “Iehova” in the main text. Later editions use the rendering “Yehoba” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.d


J168

Mozes bi naltso̱s aḷse̱dihigi Ġodesẓi̱ẓ holyẹhigi inda yistai̱ni̱ḷḷi ba Hani Mark naltso̱s ye̱ yiki-iscinigi (Genesis and Gospel of Mark, in Navajo), by Leonard P. Brink, Frederick G. Mitchell, and others, New York, 1910. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses in both Bible books. In 1917, Brink and Mitchell published God Bîzad, which included a revision of their work and additional portions of the Bible contributed by other translators. In this edition, the rendering “Jîho’vah” is used in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.e


J169

Nowy Testament (New Testament, in Polish), by Szymon Budny, Łęczyca, Poland, 1574. This translation uses “Jehowa” in the main text of some verses in the Gospel of Matthew.f


J170

Pulu Yemonga Ungu Kondemo (New Testament, in the Kala dialect of Umbu-Ungu), by Wycliffe Bible Translators, 1995. This translation uses “Yawe” or “Yawene” in the main text of some verses.g


J171

Pulu Yemonga Ungu Kondemo (New Testament, in the No Penge dialect of Umbu-Ungu), by Wycliffe Bible Translators, 1995. This translation uses “Yawe” or “Yawene” in the main text of some verses.h


J172

Erijen ga me res se Iesu Kristo rege Marik ko rege Luk ko nololien ne Apostol niri (Gospels of Mark and Luke, Acts of Apostles, in Uripiv), by John Gillan, Melbourne, Australia, 1893-1905; published by the Council of the British & Foreign Bible Society in Australia, 1957. This translation uses “Iova” in the main text of various verses.i


J173

Incuadi Yesibini Yabafundayo. Gokuzalua, Nokuenza, Nokufa, kuka Jesus Kelistus (Selections from the Gospels and the Old Testament, in Zulu), by Newton Adams, Port Natal, South Africa, 1841. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.j


J174

Incwadi ka Paule e balelwe Amaromani (Romans, in Zulu), by Jacob Ludwig Döhne, Port Natal, South Africa, 1854. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of some verses.k


J175

Ivangeli eli-yingcwele eli-baliweyo g’Umatu [Reprinted, with some alterations, from the Translation published by the American Missionaries] (Gospel of Matthew, in Zulu), by John William Colenso, London, 1855. This translation uses “YEHOVA” or “Yehova” in the main text of some verses.l


J176

Imisebenzi Yabatunywa: i kumšelwe ngabafundisi ba Semerika ngokwa ’maZulu (Acts of Apostles, in Zulu), by Lewis Grout, Msunduzi, South Africa, 1859. This translation uses “Yehova” in the main text of Acts 2:20.a


J177

Ivangeli Ngokuloba ku ka Johane (Gospel of John, in Zulu), by Seth Bradley Stone, Durban, South Africa, 1860. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of John 12:13.b


J178

Izindab’ezinhle ezashunyayelwa ku’bantu ng’uJesu-Kristo inkosi yetu (New Testament, in Zulu), by John William Colenso and edited by Harriette Emily Colenso, London, 1897. This translation uses “YAHWE” in the main text of various verses.c


J179

Sango Iam, ya Mark e lĕndĕkidi (Gospel of Mark, in Benga), by James Love Mackey and others, New York, 1861. This translation uses “Jĕhova” in the main text of some verses.d


J180

Sango Iam, ya Luk e lĕndĕkidi (Gospel of Luke, in Benga), by Thomas Spencer Ogden and revised by William Clemens, New York, 1863. This translation uses “Jĕhova” in the main text of various verses.e


J181

Sango eyamu ya Matyiu . . . Mark . . . ea Luk . . . Jân e lĕndĕkidi and Behadi Bea Metodu (The Four Gospels and Acts of Apostles, in Benga), revised by Robert Hamill Nassau, New York, 1881. This translation uses “Jĕhova” in the main text of various verses.f


J182

Panga ea Kya. Ekulu ya bebale (New Testament, containing Romans through Revelation, in Benga), revised by Reubina Hope De Heer and Hermann Jacot, New York, 1893. This translation uses “Jĕhova” in the main text of Revelation 1:8.g


J183

Minuajimouin gainajimot au St. Luke. Anishinabe enuet Giizhianikunotabiung (Gospel of Luke, in Chippewa), by Sherman Hall and George Copway, Boston, MA, U.S.A., 1837. This translation uses “Jihoua” or “Jehoua” in the main text of some verses.h


J184

Minuajimouin gaizhibiiget au St. John and Minuajimouin au St. Matthiu (Gospels of John and of Matthew, in Chippewa), by John Jones and Peter Jones, Boston, MA, U.S.A., 1838-1839. This translation uses “Jehoua,” “Jihoua,” or “Jehouah” in the main text of some verses.i


J185

Ewh oomenwahjemoowin owh tabanemenung Jesus Christ, kahenahjemoowaud egewh newin manwahjemoojig owh St. Matthew owh St. Mark owh St. Luke kuhya owh St. John (The Four Gospels, in Chippewa), by Frederick Augustus O’Meara, Toronto, Canada, 1850. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses. In 1854, O’Meara’s New Testament in Chippewa was published. This later edition uses “Jehovah” in the main text of additional verses.j


J186

Testament Mi Fö Poraus me kapas en ach samol Jesus Kristus me an chon kaiö kana lon kapas en Chuk me Fanäpi (New Testament, in Chuukese), by Richard Neumaier, Bad Liebenzell, Germany. This translation uses “Jiowa” in the main text of various verses.k


J187

Iyala ya bwam. e tatilabe na Mattiyu and Kalati ya Loba, bwambu bo Dualla (The Four Gospels, Acts of Apostles, and Romans 1:1-16, in Douala), by Alfred Saker, Cameroons, Western Africa, 1848-1855. This translation uses “Yehova” in the main text of various verses. By 1861, Saker’s New Testament in Douala was completed. This later edition uses “Yehova” in the main text of additional verses.l


J188

Miaṅgo ma bwam ka ponda Mateo na Yohane (Gospels of Matthew and John, in Douala), by Theodor H. Christaller and revised by Eugen Schuler, Stuttgart, Germany, 1896. This translation uses “Yehowa” in the main text of Matthew 3:3.a


J189

Tus narogorogoanauia ki Iesu Kristo, Nawota nagmolien anigita. Luka eka mitiria (Gospel of Luke, in the Havannah Harbour dialect of Efate), by Daniel Macdonald, Sydney, Australia, 1877. This translation uses “Iofa” in the main text of some verses.b


J190

The Gospels According to Matthew and John Translated Out of the Greek Into the Language of Nguna, New Hebrides (Efate [North]), by Peter Milne, London, 1882. This translation uses “Yehova” in the main text of some verses.c


J191

Tus Nanrognrogona Uia ni Iesu Kristo nag Ioane i mitiria (Gospel of John, in the Nguna dialect of Efate [North]), by John Whitefoord Mackenzie and Daniel Macdonald, Sydney, Australia, 1885. This translation uses “Iofa” in the main text of some verses.d


J192

Nubabla yeye la we agbalẽ le Ewegbe me (New Testament, in Éwé), revised by Jakob Andreas Spieth and Gottlob Däuble, Stuttgart, Germany, 1898. This translation uses “Yehowa” in the main text of some verses.e


J193

Biblia alo ŋɔŋlɔ kɔkɔe la le evegbe me (The Bible, in Éwé), by Gottlob Däuble and revised by Diedrich Westermann, London, 1960. This translation uses “Yehowa” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.f


J194

Évangile selon Matthieu (Gospel of Matthew, in Fang), by Arthur W. Marling, London, 1894. This translation uses “Jehôva” in the main text of some verses.g


J195

Wo̱ Nyonts̆o̱ ke̱ Yiwalaherelo̱ Jesu Kristo Kpãṅmo̱ Hē Le̱ Ye̱ Gã Wiemo̱ Le̱ Mli (New Testament, in Ga), by Johannes Zimmermann, Basel, Switzerland, 1859-1861. This translation uses “Jehowa” in the main text of some verses.h


J196

Biblia alo Ṅmãle̱ Kroṅkroṅ le̱ Kpãṅmo̱ Momo ke̱ Kpãṅmo̱ Hē le̱ ye̱ Gã wiemo̱ mli (The Bible, in Ga), by Johannes Zimmermann and revised by C. Koelle, M. Suger, and others, Basel, Switzerland, 1907-1909. This translation uses “Iehowa” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.i


J197

Saelenapa Gilala Aenaepi Matthewtae, Luketae Alilijana Acts Gigiwina dalate gi aenaedaeminijana gilala (Gospels of Matthew and Luke and Acts of Apostles, in Gogodala), by F. Charles Horne, Sydney, Australia, 1958. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.j


J198

Ăpŏslebo ăh nunude (Acts of Apostles, in Grebo), by John Payne, New York, 1851. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of Acts 2:34.k


J199

Four Gospels, Acts, Genesis, and Exodus (Chapters 19 and 20), Translated Into the Winnebago Indian Language (Ho-Chunk [Winnebago]), by John Stacy and Jacob Stucki, New York, 1907. This translation uses “Jehowa” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.l


J200

Mwo Sasu lun Jisus Kraist leum las, ma Mattu el sim (Gospel of Matthew, in Kosraean), by Benjamin Galen Snow, Honolulu, Hawaii, 1865. This translation uses “Jeova” or “Jeofa” in the main text of some verses. In 1895, Snow’s translation of Ruth, Psalm 23, Gospel of Matthew to Acts of Apostles, 1 Corinthians 11:23-29, Philippians to 2 Thessalonians, 1 Timothy 3:8-13, and 1-3 John was published as the Kusaien Scriptures by the American Bible Society. This edition uses “Jeova” or “Jeofa” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.a


J201

Ko te tahi wahi o te Kawenata Hou o Ihu Karaiti te Ariki, to tatou kai wakaora. Me nga upoko e waru o te Pukapuka o Kenehi (Genesis 1-8, Gospels of Matthew and John, and Acts of Apostles to 1 Corinthians, in Maori), by James Shepherd, William Yate, William Williams, and others, Sydney, Australia, 1833. This translation uses “Ihowa” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.b


J202

Ko te Rongo Pai i tuhituhia e nga Kai Wakaako o Ihu Karaiti. Me te Mahi o nga Apotoro. Me nga inoinga, me nga himene hoki (containing “Harmony of the Gospels” and extracts from Acts of Apostles, in Maori), by William Woon, Mangungu, New Zealand, 1837. This translation uses “Ihowa” in the main text of some verses.c


J203

Gospel Matu, Gospel Mak, Gospel Luk, and Gospel Jon (The Four Gospels, in Marshallese), by Edward Topping Doane, Benjamin Galen Snow, and others, Honolulu, Hawaii, 1873. This translation uses “Jeova” in the main text of various verses. By 1882, these translators had produced Genesis, Psalms 1-14, Paul’s letters to the Romans through Philippians, and 1-3 John in Marshallese. This edition uses “Jeova” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.d


J204

ωpωnvkv hera Chanichωyvten, oksumkvlki irkinvkv (Gospel of John, in Muskogee [Creek]), by Henry Frieland Buckner and Goliah Herrod, Marion, Alabama, U.S.A., 1860. This translation uses “Chehωfv” in the main text of some verses. In the closing comments by the translator, the following statement is made under the heading “Chehωfv​—God”: “In my translation of John I have transferred the Hebraic name Jehōvah for the name of the Supreme Being, instead of adopting the Creek word Hesakitvmise. I did this (1.) Because wherever the Gospel is preached among the Indians, they know that the God whom Christians worship is called Jehovah. (2.) The Creek name Hesakitvmise is rather objectionable to me from the fact that it expresses no more than the idea of Life-Giver. . . . (3.) The name Chehωfv is not likely to be profaned; but will be spoken with reverence; and only on such occasions as may be necessary in worshipping or praising the Great I AM. (4.) The adopted, or transferred name is euphonious, and suits the Indian tongue.”e


J205

Cesvs Klist em opunvkv-herv Maro Coyvte (Gospel of Matthew, in Muskogee), by Robert McGill Loughridge and others, New York, 1867. This translation uses “Cehofv” in the main text of some verses.f


J206

Muskokee Gospels, Acts and Epistles (in Muskogee), by Robert McGill Loughridge and David Winslett, revised by William Schenck Robertson and Ann Eliza Worcester Robertson, New York, 1875-1883. This translation uses “Cehofv” in the main text of some verses.g


J207

Pu pucase momet pu hesayecv Cesvs Klist en Testement Mucvsat (New Testament, in Muskogee), by William Schenck Robertson, Ann Eliza Worcester Robertson, and others, New York, 1906. This translation uses “Cehofv” in the main text of some verses.h


J208

Te Evanelia a to tatou atu a Iesu Mesia, tataia e Ioane (Gospel of John, in Rarotongan), by John Williams, Huahine, Society Islands, 1829. This translation uses “Iahova” at John 1:23 and “Iehova” at John 12:13.i


J209

Te Korero-motu ou a to tatou atu e te ora a Jesu Mesia (New Testament, in Rarotongan), by Aaron Buzacott, Charles Pitman, and John Williams, London, 1836. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of some verses. In 1851, Buzacott and others produced the first complete Bible in Rarotongan. This edition uses the rendering “Iehova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.j


J210

Te Bibilia Tapu ra, koia te Koreromotu taito e te Koreromotu ou (The Bible, in Rarotongan), revised by George Gill and Ernest Rudolf William Krause, London, 1872. This translation uses “Iehova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.k


J211

Barita na uli na sinuratkon ni Lucas (Gospel of Luke, in Batak Toba), by Ingwer Ludwig Nommensen, Jakarta, Indonesia, 1874. This translation uses “Djahowa” in the main text of Luke 1:28.l


J212

Ai Vola Tabu, sa volai kina na Veiyalayalati Makawa, kei na Veiyalayalati Vou (The Bible, in Fijian), revised by Frederick Langham, London, 1902. This translation uses “Jiova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.a


J213

Nai Vola Tabu Me Nomu Na Kalouvinaka Kei Na Sautu Vakavakadewa Vou (The Bible, in the Bauan dialect of Fijian), by Samisoni Seru and Peni Seru, Second Edition, Suva, Fiji, 2011. This translation uses “Jiova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.b


J214

Na Veiyalayalati Vou ka Vakadewataka o Joni Oniti, 1847 (New Testament, in Fijian), a reprint of John Hunt’s 1847 edition, by Andrew Thornley, Suva, Fiji, 2012. Although Hunt’s translation makes only one reference to the divine name, “Jiova,” at Acts 2:5, Tauga Vulaono, who was on the editorial staff for the reprint, indicates an alternate rendering for “Lord” (“Turaga,” in Fijian) as “Jiova” in the marginal note of additional verses. For example, where Hunt used “Turaga” in the main text of Mark 12:30, the reprint provides a marginal note that reads “na Turaga = Jiova.”c


J215

The Gospels and Acts, in English and Hindustha’ni’ (Hindustani), by Henry Martyn, William Bowley, and the Benares Translation Committee, Calcutta, India, 1837. This translation uses “LORD” and “Yihováh” in the main text of some verses. For example, where “LORD” is used at Mark 12:36, the parallel Hindustani translation reads “Yihováh.”d


J216

Evangelia Iesu Keriso Mataion minarpalaizinga: tusi ina Iesu Kerison mina Iadai (The Four Gospels, in Kala Lagaw Ya), by Isaia and others, corrected by Sidney Herbert Ray, London, 1900. This translation uses “Ieova” in the main text of John 12:38b.e


J217

Isisinyikeu ka Nyipixe i Johu Iesu Keriso . . . Tusi Salamo (New Testament and Psalms, in Drehu), by James Douglas Sleigh and Stephen Mark Creagh, London, 1873. This translation uses “Iehova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Psalms and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.f


J218

Amashiwi Aba Lesa (The Bible, in Lamba), by the Bible Society of Zambia; reproduced from the edition originally translated by Clement Martyn Doke and others, London, 1959. This translation uses “ŵaYawe” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.g


J219

Tã-drị̃ Lẽlẽ Óꞌdí Óvârí Kâ (New Testament, in Avokaya), by the Avokaya Bible Translation Committee and Wycliffe Bible Translators, Inc., 2002. This translation uses “Yãkóvã” in the main text of some verses.h


J220

E’yo Siza AlatararU Munguniri Biblia E’yo Okuri pi E’yo O’dirUri be (The Bible, in Lugbara), revised by the Lugbara Translation Committee, Nairobi, Kenya, 1966; reprinted by the Bible Society of Uganda, Kampala, Uganda. This translation uses “Yehova” in the main text of some verses in the Hebrew Scriptures and at Acts 4:26.i


J221

Losangu lunengela lwakafundibwa kudi Mateyo (Gospel of Matthew, in Luna), by William Henry Westcott and others, Leeds, United Kingdom, 1905. This translation uses “Yeoba” in the main text of some verses. By 1911, these translators had produced the complete New Testament in Luna. This edition continued to use “Yeoba” in the main text of Matthew 4:7, 10.j


J222

Bebe sorai ducuducu non Iesu Kristo noda moli socen Marik mei Luk na cacari a, mana Sakasakai non Apostelo (Gospels of Mark and Luke, Acts of Apostles, in Malo), by John D. Landels, London, 1897. This translation uses “Iova” in the main text of various verses.k


J223

Njia Yekpei kina Mati iye Nyegini (Gospel of Matthew, in Mende), by James Frederick Schön and others, London, 1871. This translation uses “Yẹ̄wo̱i” in the main text of some verses. By 1872, these translators had produced all four Gospels, Acts of Apostles, and Romans in Mende. These later editions use “Yẹ̄wo̱i” or “Yẹ̄woi” in the main text of additional verses.l


J224

Nene Karighwiyoston tsinihorighhoten ne Saint John (Gospel of John, in English and Mohawk), by John Norton, London, c. 1804. The translation into Mohawk uses “Yehovah” in the main text of John 6:45. “Yehovah” is also included in a list of special words with explanations at the end of the Bible book.a


J225

Ebi egberi ne̱ St. John ge̱ yemi (Gospel of John, in the Nembe [Brass] dialect of Ijo, Southeast), by Daniel Ogiriki Ockiya and others, London, 1903. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.b


J226

La Evangelia hna cinihane hnei Mataio (Gospel of Matthew, in Drehu), by Samuel McFarlane, Nengone, Loyalty Islands, New Caledonia, 1863. This translation uses “Iehova” in the main text of some verses.c


J227

Feag-Hoiporakkiug Foou ne os Gagaja ma Aamauriga, Iesu Karisito (New Testament, in Rotuman), by William Fletcher, London, 1884; reprinted from the first edition printed in Sydney, Australia, 1870. This translation uses “Ieova” in the main text of various verses.d


J228

Puk Haʻa ne fåʻ ‘atakoa sin Puk Haʻ Mafua ma Puk Haʻ Foʻou (The Bible, in Rotuman), by Aiveni Fatiaki and others, Suva, Fiji, 1999. This translation uses “Jihova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.e


J229

Nivarp obokobok ve Iesu Kristu. Mark migle (Gospel of Mark, in the Hog Harbour, East Santo, dialect of Sakao), by Ewen Mackenzie, Melbourne, Australia, 1905. This translation uses “Ihova” in the main text of some verses.f


J230

N’ere-pep nan Salamo erep David co oppel tha cam klep (Psalms, Galatians, Ephesians, Colossians, 1 and 2 Thessalonians, James, 1 and 2 Peter, and Revelation, in Santo: Eastern [or, Hog Harbour]), by William Anderson and Katherine L. Anderson, London, 1949. This translation uses “Iehova” in the main text of some verses, both in the Psalms and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.g


J231

Ho i’wi y os’do̱s hăħ neh Cha ga̱’o̱ hee dưs gee ih’ ni ga’ya do̱s’hă gee; kuh he ni o di yă̱ na̱ wă̱ħ’syo̱ħ na go̱’i o̱ duk (The Four Gospels and Acts of Apostles, in Seneca), by Asher Wright, New York, 1872. This translation uses “Ya’wĕn” in the main text of some verses.h


J232

Da Njoe Testament vo wi Masra en Helpiman Jesus Kristus (New Testament and Psalms, in Sranantongo), revised by Wilhelm Treu, Bautzen, Germany, 1846. This translation uses “Jehova” or “Masra (Jehova)” in the main text of some verses, both in the Psalms and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.i


J233

Da Njoe Testament vo wi Masra en Helpiman Jezus Kristus (New Testament and Psalms, in Sranantongo), edited by Friedrich Stähelin, Fifth Edition, London, 1901. This translation uses “Jehova” or “Masra (Jehova)” in the main text of some verses, both in the Psalms and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.j


J234

Anjili kina yaliyotonwa na Luka (Gospel of Luke, in Sukuma), by Edward Henry Hubbard, London, 1897. This translation uses “Yahuwa” in the main text of some verses.k


J235

Masomo ya Agano Jipya (Selections from the New Testament, in Swahili), Zanzibar, 1881. This translation uses “Yahuwa” in the main text of some verses.l


J236

Biblia Kitabu cha Mungu kwa Swahili ya Congo (The Bible, in Swahili), revised by G. I. Harlow, Port Colborne, Ontario, Canada, 2009; Third Edition, U.S.A., 2018. This translation uses “YEHOVA” or “Yehova” in the main text of some verses in the Hebrew Scriptures. A marginal note referring to “Yehova,” “Yehovah,” “Yehova,” or “Yehovah” appears in various verses in the Christian Greek Scriptures.a


J237

Parau no Iesu Christ te Temaidi no te Atua; e no te mou pipi nona (Selections from the Gospels and Acts of Apostles, in Tahitian), by John Davies, Henry Nott, and others, Sydney, Australia, 1814. This translation uses “Iehova” in the main text of some verses. By 1838 these translators, with the assistance of a native Tahitian named Tuahine, had produced the first complete Bible in Tahitian. This edition uses “Iehova” or “IEHOVA” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.b


J238

Te Bibilia moa ra, oia te Faufaa Tahito e te Faufaa Api ra (The Bible, in Tahitian), revised by William Howe, Thomas Joseph, and others, London, 1847. This translation uses “Iehova” or “IEHOVA” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.c


J239

Te Bibilia mo’a ra, oia te Faufaa Tahito e te Faufaa apî ra (The Bible, in Tahitian), edited by James L. Green and others, London, 1884. This translation uses “Iehova” or “IEHOVA” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.d


J240

Ncia e mbwe e Yesu Masiya e shoni Malako (Gospel of Mark, in Teke-Eboo), by Arthur Billington and Edith Brown Billington, Bwemba, Tchumbiri, Upper Congo, 1905. This translation uses “Yawe” in the main text of some verses.e


J241

Na taveti tahonae hi Iesu Kristo, Matíu moulia. Na leo hi Iehova, mono, ra provet Jona, Hakaí, Malakaí, teulia (Gospel of Matthew and the Bible books of Jonah, Haggai, and Malachi, in Tolomako), by James Sandilands and others, London, 1904. This translation uses “Iehova” in the main text of Matthew 22:37, 44.f


J242

I-Gospel, ezindaba ezilungileyo; ebalwe gu-Luke (Gospel of Luke, in Xhosa), by William Binnington Boyce and others, Grahamstown, South Africa, 1833. This translation uses “YEHOVAH” or “YEHOVA” in the main text of various verses.g


J243

Itestamente Entsha Yenkosi yetu Kayesu Kristu (New Testament, in Xhosa), by Henry Hare Dugmore, William J. Davis, Karl Wilhelm Posselt, Jacob Ludwig Döhne, and Joseph Cox Warner, Newtondale, South Africa, 1846. This translation uses “Yehova” or “YEHOVA” in the main text of various verses.h


J244

Itesamente Entsha: okukuti, inncwadi zonke zocebano olutsha Lwenkosi yetu Uyesu Kristu (New Testament, in Xhosa), revised by John Whittle Appleyard, King William’s Town, South Africa, 1853. This translation uses “YEHOVA” or “YEHOVA” in the main text of various verses. In 1864, Appleyard, assisted by other translators, produced the first complete Xhosa Bible published in one volume. This edition uses “YEHOVA” or “YEHOVA” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.i


J245

Ensurua embu ta Iesu Kristo. Matiu i ulia (Gospel of Matthew, in the Aulua dialect of Malekula, New Hebrides), by T. Watt Leggatt and others, Melbourne, Australia, 1894. This translation uses “Iova” in the main text of some verses.j


J246

Sveto Pismo Staroga i Novoga Uvita (The Bible, in Croatian), by Ivan Matija Škarić, Vienna, Austria, 1858-1861. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text throughout the Hebrew Scriptures and in the main text of some verses in the Christian Greek Scriptures. In addition, it uses “Jehova” in explanatory commentaries, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.k


J247

Biblia, Dat is: De gantfche H. Schrifture, vervattende alle de Canonijcke Boecken des Ouden en des Nieuwen Testaments (The Bible, in Dutch). This translation, commonly known as the Statenvertaling, was commissioned by the Synod of Dort, Leiden, Netherlands, 1636 (1637). It uses “HEERE” (LORD) throughout the Hebrew Scriptures. The marginal note at Genesis 2:4 explains: “Where you find the word HEERE written with large letters, the Hebrew uses the word IEHOVAH.” And “Heere” (Lord) is used at Mark 12:29, where the marginal note states: “The word Lord translates the Hebrew word Iehova, which signifies the Divine being who exists eternally in and from himself and who gives all things their existence.”l


J248

Biblia, of De gantsche H. Schrift des Ouden en Nieuwen Testaments (The Bible, in Dutch), Gorinchem, Netherlands, 1755-1762. This special edition of the Statenvertaling (see J247) is commonly known as the Jehovahbijbel, that is, the Jehovah Bible. The reason for the title is that this version uses “JEHOVAH” instead of “HEERE” (LORD) in the main text throughout the Hebrew Scriptures. Regarding the use of “Heere” (Lord) at Mark 12:29, the footnote explains: “The word Lord translates the Hebrew word Jehovah.” Several editions of the Jehovahbijbel were published. The title pages of the 1762 editions state: “For weighty and well-known reasons, we have also left God’s Memorial Name JEHOVAH untranslated.”a


J249

Verklaring van de geheele Heilige Schrift (The Bible, with an explanation of the entire Holy Scripture, in Dutch), Amsterdam, Netherlands, 1740-1757. This multivolume edition includes extracts from works by Simon Patrick, Matthew Poole, Edward Wells, Philip Doddridge, and others. It uses “HEERE” (LORD) in the main text of various verses in the Hebrew Scriptures, with explanatory commentaries referring to “JEHOVAH.” Some verses in the Christian Greek Scriptures also include explanations drawing attention to the divine name. For example, the comment on Matthew 22:44 explains that the first occurrence of “Heere” (Lord) in the main text of this verse refers to “Jehovah the Father.”b


J250

De Bijbel, vertaald, omschreven en door aanmerkingen opgehelderd (The Bible, in Dutch), by Wilhelmus Antonius van Vloten, Utrecht and Amsterdam, Netherlands, 1789-1796. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses and in paraphrases of verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.c


J251

Het Nieuwe Testament onzes Heeren Jesus Christus (New Testament, in Dutch), by Joannes Theodorus Beelen, Amsterdam and ‘s Hertogenbosch, Netherlands, 1860-1866. This translation uses “Heeren” or “Heer” (Lord) in the main text with some footnotes drawing attention to the divine name. For example, the footnote for Matthew 21:9 states: “Blessed is he . . . that cometh in the name of the Lord (by order of and as a messenger of Jehovah, the God of Israel)!”d


J252

Het Nieuwe Testament, van wege de Algemeene Synode der Nederlandsche Hervormde Kerk op nieuw uit den grondtekst overgezet (New Testament, in Dutch), Amsterdam and Haarlem, Netherlands, 1868. This translation, commonly known as the Synodale vertaling, uses “Heeren” (Lord) in the main text of Matthew 3:3 with a footnote referring to “Jehova.”e


J253

De Boeken, genaamd Het Nieuwe Testament (New Testament, in Dutch), The Hague, Netherlands, 1877. This translation, commonly known as the Voorhoevevertaling, uses “Jehovah” in the footnotes of some verses. In 1931 a third revised edition was published, which includes two additional footnotes drawing attention to the divine name in the book of Revelation.f


J254

Het Nieuwe Testament (New Testament, containing The Four Gospels and Acts of Apostles, in Dutch), by Gerrit Jan Vos, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1893. This translation uses “Jehova” or “Jehova” in the marginal notes of some verses.g


J255

Het Nieuwe Testament voor leeken leesbaar gemaakt (New Testament, in Dutch), edited by Herman Bakels, Second Revised Edition, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 1914. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.h


J256

Het Nieuwe Testament (New Testament, in Dutch), by Joannes Theodorus Beelen and others, included in the Bible commonly known as the Vlaamse Professorenbijbel, newly published by Achille Vander Heeren, Brugge, Belgium, 1925-1933. This edition uses “Jehovah” in the footnotes of some verses.i


J257

De Heilige Schrift (The Bible, in Dutch), Utrecht, Netherlands, 1948. This translation, commonly known as the Petrus Canisiusvertaling, uses “Jahweh” in the footnote of Acts 13:47.j


J258

De Bijbel (The Bible, in Dutch), published by the Catholic Bible Foundation, Boxtel, Netherlands, 1975. This translation, commonly known as the Willibrordvertaling, uses “Jahwe” in the main text of some verses in the Hebrew Scriptures. “Heer” (Lord) is used in the main text of 2 Corinthians 3:17, where the footnote states: “According to others, the Lord in [verse] 17a (and also in [verse] 16) is not Christ, but Jahwe.”k


J259

Het evangelie van Lukas (Gospel of Luke, in Dutch), by Huub Oosterhuis and Alex van Heusden, Vught, Netherlands, 2007. This translation uses “JHWH” in the main text of various verses. The following explanation is provided on page 8: “As is the case with every Bible translation, the question arises: How should the Hebrew name of God, JHWH (the Tetragrammaton), be rendered? The Jews do not pronounce this name. They read JHWH (the four consonants without vowels) with their eyes, but they pronounce it adonai, meaning ‘lord,’ or ha’sheem, meaning ‘the name.’ With this ancient tradition, they differentiate what they read from what they pronounce. Adonai in Greek is kurios, ‘lord.’ When quoting from the Jewish Scriptures, the Greek text of the book of Luke contains the word kurios every time the Tetragrammaton was used in the Hebrew text. For this translation, it has been decided to transcribe the Hebrew four-letter name JHWH in small capitals not only when Luke quotes from the Jewish Scriptures but also when kurios is used in the main text to refer to the God of Israel, the God of Moses and the Prophets. The first example of this can be found at Luke 1:6: ‘They walked completely in all the commandments and regulations of JHWH.’ Some early manuscripts of the Septuagint, the translation of the Jewish Scriptures into Greek, remain in which the name JHWH is written in Hebrew in the midst of the Greek. Jerome, a Bible translator who lived at the end of the fourth century, wrote in his Prologus Galeatus: ‘We find the four-lettered name of the Lord in certain Greek books written to this day in the ancient characters.’ It is likely that Jerome was referring to the scrolls of the Septuagint. In some cases, Greek letters were also used to write the four-letter name. Therefore, it is quite possible that Luke​—as well as other writers of the Scriptures in the New Testament​—followed suit.”l


J260

HSV-Studiebijbel (Study Bible, in Dutch), edited by Maarten Jan Paul and Teunis Martinus Hofman, Heerenveen, Netherlands, 2014. This edition of the Herziene Statenvertaling uses “Jahweh,” “JHWH,” or “HEERE” in the study notes of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. The chart on page 2274 indicates that “HEERE” in small capitals corresponds to “JHWH, or Jahweh,” in Hebrew. The study note explains that when “HEERE God” is used in the main text of Genesis 2:4, “the reader is introduced to the personal name of God, namely, ‘Jahweh.’”a


J261

Les Saints Évangiles Traduction Nouvelle (The Four Gospels, in French), by Henri Lasserre, Eighth Edition, Paris, 1887. This translation uses “Jéhovah” in the main text of some verses.b


J262

Les Évangiles Jean, Matthieu, Marc, Luc (The Four Gospels, in French), by Claude Tresmontant, Paris, 1991. This translation uses “yhwh” in the main text of various verses.c


J263

Omahungi oa Embo ra Jehova na omaimpuriro mo Otjiherero (containing extracts from the Old Testament, the Four Gospels, and Acts of Apostles, in Herero), by Carl Hugo Linsingen Hahn and others, Cape Town, South Africa, 1849. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of some verses. In 1859 these translators produced a revision of their work. This later edition uses the rendering “Yehova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.d


J264

Ncango Ndau i komaka Yoane. I bongoana o mosimo moa Eleku (Gospel of John, in the Iliku dialect of Lusengo), by Charles E. Bond, Congo Balolo Mission, Lolanga, Upper Congo, 1906. This translation uses “Yawe” in the main text of some verses.e


J265

Kilombeno Kihya kia nfumwetu Yesu Kidisitu (New Testament, in Kisonge [Luba-Kalebwe]), Bible Society of the Democratic Republic of Congo, 1952, electronic version. This translation uses “Yehowa” or “Yeowa” in the main text of various verses.f


J266

Nouveau Testament en Kisongye (New Testament, in Kisongye), 1925, electronic version. This translation uses “Yeoba” in the main text of some verses in the Gospel of Matthew.g


J267

Mwuleun Sasu Lun Jisus Kraist Leum Las a Met Lano Las (New Testament, in Kosraean [Kusaie] and English), American Bible Society, New York, 1953. The translation into Kosraean uses “Jeova” in the main text of some verses.h


J268

A Buk Tabu Kalamana ure to Iesu Karisito (containing the Four Gospels and Acts of Apostles, in Kuanua), by Richard Heath Rickard and others of the Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society, Parramatta, New South Wales, Australia, 1892. This translation uses “Ieova” in the main text of some verses. By 1901 these translators had produced the complete New Testament in Kuanua. This later edition uses “Ieova” in the main text of additional verses.i


J269

Ukulayana Kwa Wukumo (New Testament, in Lamba), by William Andrew Phillips and others, First Edition, London, 1921. This translation uses “Yawe” in the main text of some verses.j


J270

Mukanda wa Nzambi Dihungila Dikulukulu ne Dihungila Dihia-dihia (The Bible, in Luba-Kasai [Tshiluba]), Zaire Bible Society, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1964. This translation uses “Yehowa” or “Yehowa” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.k


J271

Kipwanino Kipya kya mfumuetu umpandijyi Yesu Kidishitu ne Nyimboyamitōto (New Testament and Psalms, in Luba-Katanga [Kiluba]), by John Alexander Clarke and others, London, 1923. This translation uses “Yehova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Psalms and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.l


J272

Mukanda wa Nzambi Dihungila Dikulukulu ne Dihungila Dihiadihia (The Bible, in Luba-Lulua), by Thomas Chalmers Vinson and others, New York, c. 1927. This translation uses “Yehowa” or “YEHOWA” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.a


J273

Mukanda Wakalunga (The Bible, in Luvale), United Bible Societies, Plymouth, Great Britain, 1976 reprint; translated and revised by Albert E. Horton and originally published separately as Tesetamende Yamwaka in 1955 and Tesetamende Yayihya in 1961. This translation uses “Yehova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.b


J274

Abele Iauali Kerkar gelar meriba Opole Iesu Keriso depegeli Miriam Mer (The Four Gospels, in Meriam), by Samuel McFarlane and island teachers Finau and Iotama, revised by Harry Scott and Mary Scott, London, 1902. This translation uses “Iehoua” in the main text of some verses.c


J275

Bonkanda wa Nzakomba w’aeyoko (New Testament, in Mongo-Nkundu), by Edward Algernon Ruskin, Lily Ruskin, and others, London, 1921. This translation uses “Yawe” in the main text of various verses.d


J276

Testamènti Nyoṉa kaluṉô pa gô nkambiṉi yi Galwa (New Testament, in the Galwa dialect of Myene [Ômyènè]), by Urbain Teisserès, Paris, 1907. This translation uses “Yeôva” in the main text of some verses.e


J277

The Books of Genesis, Part of Exodus, Proverbs, and Acts (in the Mpongwe dialect of Myene), by William Walker and others, New York, 1859. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Acts of Apostles.f


J278

The Gospel of Luke (in the Mpongwe dialect of Myene), by Ira Mills Preston, Gabon, c. 1864. This translation uses “Jihova” in the main text of some verses.g


J279

The Epistles of St. Paul (in the Mpongwe dialect of Myene), by Albert Bushnell and others, New York, 1867. This translation uses “Jehovah,” “Jehova,” or “Jihovah” in the main text of some verses. By 1879, these translators had produced a revision of the Mpongwe Gospels and other Bible books. Some of these later editions use “Jehova” or “Jihova” in the main text of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.h


J280

Testamènt Nyonla nli Mpôngwè (New Testament, in the Mpongwe dialect of Myene), revised by Adolphus Clemens Good, New York, 1893. This translation uses “Jihôva” in the main text of some verses.i


J281

Keneme Tateube (Acts of Apostles, in Naga, Zeme), The Bible Society of India, Pakistan and Ceylon, First Edition, Calcutta, India, 1953. This translation uses “Jehoba” in the main text of Acts 2:34.j


J282

Tungarar Jehovald. Yarildewallin. Extracts From the Holy Scriptures (containing portions of Genesis, Exodus, and the Gospels of Matthew and John, in Narrinyeri), by George Taplin, Adelaide, South Australia, 1864. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. Taplin’s rendering of the Sermon on the Mount from Matthew chapters 5 to 7 alone uses the divine name over a dozen times.k


J283

Baiberi Mazwi Akacena aMŋari Testamente Yekare neTestamente Itsa (The Bible, in Ndau), by Clyde J. Dotson, M. E. Doner, and M. Bwerudza, Salisbury, Rhodesia, 1975 reprint; originally published by the British and Foreign Bible Society, London, 1957. This translation uses “Jehova” or “JEHOVA” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.l


J284

Loñodanwa o Jehova Hagamouli Go Jesus Klist. Ne sisi i de lima o Malkus (Gospel of Mark, in Nukuoro), by Leka Loveland and others, Stuttgart, Germany, 1921. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of some verses.a


J285

O Evangelho Segundo S. Mattheus (Gospel of Matthew, in Portuguese), by Manuel Fernandes de Santanna, Lisbon, Portugal, 1909. This translation uses “Iáhve” in the main text of some verses or in explanatory commentaries.b


J286

Mataio nu Evanelia (Gospel of Matthew, in the Iai [Namau] dialect of Purari), by John Henry Holmes, London, 1910. This translation uses “Iehova” in the main text of some verses.c


J287

Te Bibilia Tapu ra (The Bible, in Rarotongan [Cook Islands Maori]), revised by William Wyatt Gill and Taunga, London, 1888. This translation uses “Iehova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.d


J288

Narijan mi bu sa Iesu Kristo. Marik mi ri (Gospel of Mark, in Rerep [Pangkumu]), by Alexander Morton, Melbourne, Australia, 1892. This translation uses “Iova” in the main text of some verses.e


J289

Narijan mi bu sa Iesu Kristo. Jon mi ri (Gospel of John, in Rerep [Pangkumu]), by Alexander Morton and revised by Frederick James Paton, London, 1897. This translation uses “Iova” in the main text of some verses.f


J290

Biblia sau Sfînta Scriptură Vechiul şi Noul Testament (The Bible, in Romanian), Gute Botschaft Verlag, Third Edition, Dillenburg, West Germany, 1991. In this translation, “DOMNUL” appears in capital and small capitals in the main text of various verses, with some footnotes drawing attention to the divine name “Iehova,” both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. The introductory note states: “The aim of this revision was to bring the existing translation as close as possible to the ‘original manuscripts.’” Regarding the use of “LORD” (“DOMNUL” in Romanian), the note explains: “The word LORD indicates cases where this name corresponds in the original to YHWH (Iehova), which has the meaning of ‘the Eternal One,’ ‘the One who exists for (through) Himself.’”g


J291

Sveto pismo Stare in Nove Zaveze z razlaganjem poleg nemškiga, od apostoljskiga Sedeža poterjeniga sv. pisma, ki ga je iz Vulgate ponemčil in razložil Dr. Jožef Franc Allioli (The Bible, in Slovenian), Ljubljana, Slovenia, 1856-1859. This translation uses “Jehova” or “Jehova” in the footnotes of some verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.h


J292

Matthew (in Suki), by Midim Bidri, Ivy Lindsay, and Grahame Martin, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 1966. This translation uses “Jehovah” in the main text of some verses.i


J293

Amayo̱s Ma Aṅsom (Acts of Apostles, in Temne), revised by John Alfred Alley, London, 1904. This translation uses “Yehofa” in the main text of some verses.j


J294

Itestamente Lipya nya Pfumu yatu Jesu Kristu. Kanga ku lobidwego ki Gitonga (New Testament, in Tonga [Mozambique]), by Erwin Hart Richards, Third Edition, New York, 1905. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of 1 Corinthians 10:26.k


J295

Ibbaibele ibbuku lyamajwi aa-Leza Cizuminano Cakale Acizuminano Cipya (The Bible, in Tonga [Zambia]), The Bible Society of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia, 1977 reprint; translated by a committee including Cecil Robert Hopgood, and originally published in 1963. This translation uses “Jehova” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.l


J296

Evangelia kotsa mahuku a molemo a kuariloeng ki Luka (Gospel of Luke, in Tswana [Tlahaping (Tlapi) dialect of Setswana]), by Robert Moffat, Cape Town, South Africa, 1830. This translation uses “Yehova” in the main text of some verses. By 1840, Moffat, assisted by other translators, produced the first New Testament in Tswana. The entire Bible was completed by 1857 and published in one volume in 1872. The later editions use “Yehova” or “YEHOVA” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.a


J297

Bibela e e boitshèpō e e chotseñ Kgōlaganō e Kgologolo le e ncha e hetolecwe mo puoñ ea Secwana phetolō e ncha (The Bible, in Tswana), revised by Alfred John Wookey and others, London, 1908. This translation uses “Yehofa” or “YEHOFA” in the main text in various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.b


J298

Jakobo nè Juda (Bible books of James and Jude, in the Akuapem dialect of Twi), by Johann Adam Mader, Stuttgart, Germany, 1863. This translation uses “Jehowa” in the main text of James 5:4.c


J299

Testament yr Ysgol Sabbathol (New Testament, in Welsh), by Thomas Roberts, John Ogwen Jones, and others, Denbigh, United Kingdom, 1866-1871. This translation uses “Iehofah” in the explanatory commentaries of some verses.d


J300

Cyfieithiad Briscoe 1894 (New Testament and portions of the Old Testament, in Welsh), British and Foreign Bible Society, Digital Edition, 2020-2021; reproduced from the Bible books originally translated by Thomas Briscoe, 1853-1894. This translation uses “IEHOFAH,” “Iehofah,” or “Iehofa” in the main text of various verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures.e


J301

The Revelation of St. John (containing chapters 1-2:12, in Hebrew), possibly 17th century; manuscript Sloane MS 237 in the British Library, London. This translation uses יהוה at Revelation 1:8.f


J302

Epistola ad Hebraeos (Paul’s letter to the Hebrews, in Hebrew), by Richard Bruarne, Oxford, England, c. 1530; manuscript Ms. 24.1 in the Hebrew Union College Library, Cincinnati, OH, U.S.A. This manuscript was evidently presented as a gift to King Henry VIII. It uses יהוה in the main text of at least ten verses, including Hebrews 13:6.g


J303

מכתב יעקב השליח and מכתב יהודה השליח (letters of James and Jude, in Hebrew), by John Shepreve, England, completed between 1530 and 1540; manuscript Royal MS 16 A II in the British Library, London. This manuscript was evidently presented as a gift to King Henry VIII. It uses יהוה in the main text of various verses in both Bible books. Shepreve’s rendering of James chapter 5 alone uses the Tetragrammaton at least seven times. Jude 5, 9, and 14 also use the divine name.h


J304

Postilla Euangeliorum, & Epistolarum Dominicarum, & praecipuorum Festorum totius Anni (Liturgical Gospels, in Greek, Hebrew, and Latin), by Peter Artopoeus, Basel, Switzerland, 1550. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה in the main text of some verses in the Gospel of Matthew. For example, the Tetragrammaton is used at Matthew 4:4, 7, 10. At least one explanatory commentary and some marginal notes, including the one for Luke 1:76, also draw attention to the divine name.i


J305

Η ΚΑΙΝΗ ΔΙΑΘΗΚΗ. Testamentum Novum. דיתיקא חדתא Est autem interpretatio Syriaca Noui Testamenti, Hebraeis typis descripta, plerisque etiam locis emendata (New Testament, in Greek, Latin, and Syriac), edited by Immanuel Tremellius, Geneva, Switzerland, 1569. The translation into Syriac, printed with Hebrew characters, uses מריא (transliterated Mar·yaʼ) at Matthew 22:44, Mark 12:36, Luke 20:42, and Acts 2:34. Marginal notes indicate that these four verses quote Psalm 110:1, which begins with the words: “Jehovah [יהוה in Hebrew] declared to my Lord.” In each occurrence of this quote in Tremellius’ Syriac New Testament, Mar·yaʼ is used when the Tetragrammaton appears in the original Hebrew text. A Compendious Syriac Dictionary (1903 edition, p. 298, col. 1) explains that Mar·yaʼ in “the latter form is used only of THE LORD God” and “represents the Tetragrammaton” in the Hebrew Scripture portion of the Syriac Peshitta. It is thus reasonable to conclude that Tremellius’ use of Mar·yaʼ in at least these four verses of the Christian Greek Scriptures represents the divine name.​—See also J93.j


J306

הברית החדשה (New Testament, in Hebrew), 1563; manuscript Hs. 314 in the University Library, Freiburg, Germany. This translation is attributed to Erasmus Oswald Schreckenfuchs. It uses יהוה in the main text of various verses. Some marginal notes and alternate renderings provided above the main text also use the Tetragrammaton.k


J307

בשורה כפי מרכוס (Gospel of Mark, in Greek and Hebrew), by Richard Clarke, c. 1583-1589; manuscript Emmanuel College MS 90 in the Emmanuel College Library, Cambridge, United Kingdom. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה or an abbreviated form of the Tetragrammaton in the main text of some verses.l


J308

Harmonia Historiae Passionis et Resurrectionis Domini & redemptoris nostri Jesu Christi ex quatuor Evangelistis concinnata & edita Germanice, Latine, Graece & Hebraice (“Harmony of the Four Evangelists,” in German, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew), by Theodosius Fabricius, Wittenberg, Germany, 1595. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה in the main text of some verses, including Matthew 27:10 and 28:2.a


J309

Epistolae Pavli Apostoli Ad Galatas Et Ephesios (Paul’s letters to the Galatians and the Ephesians, in Hebrew), by Georg Thurius, Wittenberg, Germany, 1598. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of more than 20 verses, including Galatians 3:6 and Ephesians 5:17.b


J310

Novum Testamentum (New Testament, in Hebrew), by Georg Mayr, c. 1622; manuscript Hebrew 131 in the National Library of France, Paris. This translation uses יהוה or an abbreviated form of the Tetragrammaton in the main text of numerous verses, including 1 Corinthians 7:17. Some marginal notes and alternate renderings provided above the main text also draw attention to the divine name.c


J311

הברית החדשה (New Testament, containing the Gospel of John, in Hebrew), possibly 17th century; manuscript Add.170 in the Cambridge University Library, Cambridge, United Kingdom. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of John 12:38.d


J312

הברית החדשה (New Testament, containing extracts from the Gospels of Luke and John, in Hebrew), c. 18th century; from the manuscript MS Vat. ebr. 530 Fragment 11 in the Vatican Library in Rome, Italy. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of at least 14 verses of Luke 1:1-35.e


J313

Epistola divi Pauli ad Hebraeos Hebraice cum annotationibus criticis (Paul’s letter to the Hebrews, in Hebrew), with editing attributed to György Kalmár, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 1766; originally translated by Friedrich Albert Christian (see J140). This translation uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.f


J314

Die katholischen Briefe (containing 1 and 2 Peter and 1, 2, and 3 John, in Hebrew), by Johann Christian Wilhelm Augusti, Lemgo, Germany, 1801-1808. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of some verses in 1 and 2 Peter.g


J315

המשיח ותורתו או ספר תולדות ישוע הנצרי מן הבשורה לפי מתיה (Gospel of Matthew, containing chapters 1-7, in Hebrew), by Robert Young, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1854. This translation uses יהוה in the main text of at least 11 verses. Young’s well-known Analytical Concordance to the Bible, originally published in 1879, includes the following entry for the divine name: “JE-HO’-VAH, יהוה the existing one.”h


J316

קול קורא או התלמוד והברית החדשה ספר מתיא (containing the Gospel of Matthew, in Hebrew), published by Charles Blot, Paris, c. 1879; reissued by the Jerusalem Center for Biblical Studies & Research, Jerusalem, 1985. This work by Elie Soloweyczyk is commonly known as Kol Kore or Qol Qore. (Compare J317.) The translation of Matthew that it contains uses יהוה at Matthew 4:7 and an abbreviated form of the Tetragrammaton in the main text of other verses or in explanatory commentaries.i


J317

The Bible, the Talmud, and the New Testament​—Elijah Zvi Soloveitchik’s Commentary to the Gospels, edited by Shaul Magid and translated by Jordan Gayle Levy, Philadelphia, PA, U.S.A., 2019. This work includes an English translation of commentaries (originally in Hebrew) on the Gospels of Matthew and Mark that were made by Elijah Zvi Soloveitchik (also known as Elie Soloweyczyk; see J316). It also includes translations into English of the Bible text that is included in these commentaries. In the English translations of these Bible passages, the translator chose to use “YHWH” multiple times to represent the divine name in various verses in these two Gospels.j


J318

Das Trostschreiben des Apostels Paulus an die Hebräer (containing Paul’s Letter to the Hebrews, in German and Hebrew), by Johann Heinrich Raphael Biesenthal, Leipzig, Germany, 1878. The translation into Hebrew uses an abbreviated form of the Tetragrammaton in the main text of various verses.​—See also J15.k


J319

Die Logia Jesu nach dem griechischen und hebräischen Text wiederhergestellt (containing extracts from the Four Gospels, in Greek and Hebrew), by Alfred Resch, Leipzig, Germany, 1898. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה in the main text of some verses.l


J320

ביאור לספרי הברית החדשה Commentar zum Matthäus-Evangelium (commentary on the Gospel of Matthew, in Hebrew), by Jechiel Zevi Lichtenstein and published by H. Laible and Paul Levertoff after the author’s revision, Leipzig, Germany, 1913. This work includes a Hebrew translation of the Gospel of Matthew. It uses יהוה in the main text of various verses.a


J321

ספר הבשורה על־פי מרקוס A Hebrew Translation of the Gospel of Mark​—Greek-Hebrew Diglot With English Introduction, by Robert Lisle Lindsey, First Edition, Jerusalem, Israel, 1969. The translation into Hebrew uses יהוה in the main text of some verses. The Hebrew text of Lindsey’s second edition of the Gospel of Mark, published in 1973, continued to use the Tetragrammaton.b


J322

ספר הבריתות תורה נביאים כתובים והברית החדשה (The Bible, in Hebrew), The Bible Society in Israel, Jerusalem, Israel, 1991. This Bible includes a revision of the 1976 United Bible Societies’ translation (see J22), commonly known as the Modern Hebrew New Testament. It uses יהוה in the main text of numerous verses, both in the Hebrew Scriptures and in the Christian Greek Scriptures. A further revision of the Modern Hebrew New Testament, produced in 1995, continued to use the Tetragrammaton.c


J323

הברית החדשה (New Testament, in Hebrew), edited by Eric S. Gabe, Third Edition, Hertfordshire, England, 2000. The publisher’s page states: “This version of the Salkinson-Ginsburg Hebrew New Testament [see J18] has been completed and edited to correspond to the Greek Textus Receptus.” It uses יהוה in the main text of various verses or in the footnotes.d


J324

ספרי הברית החדשה (New Testament, in Hebrew), The Society for Distributing Hebrew Scriptures, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom, 2012. The work for this edited version of the Salkinson-Ginsburg Hebrew New Testament (see J18 and J323) was completed by Pieter A. Siebesma. It uses יהוה in the main text of various verses or in the footnotes.e


J325

The Delitzsch Hebrew Gospels ספרי הבשורה הקדושה​—A Hebrew/English Translation, by Vine of David, First Edition, Marshfield, MO, U.S.A., 2011. This parallel work includes the Hebrew translation of the Four Gospels from Delitzsch’s 11th edition of the New Testament (see J17). It uses יהוה in the main text of various verses and “HASHEM” (meaning “the Name”) in the corresponding English translation. Under the heading “The Name of God,” on page 9, the following explanation is provided: “Although God is called by many names and titles in Scripture, one name in particular holds an especially sacred status. This sacred name, spelled with the Hebrew letters yod, he, vav, and he, is often called the ‘ineffable name.’ It is also called the Tetragrammaton, which comes from the Greek words for ‘four letters.’ In Hebrew people often refer to it as ha-shem ha-meforash (השם המפוש), which means ‘the explicit name.’ Most translations render this name as ‘the LORD.’” The explanation goes on to state: “In this book, we have used the term HaShem to represent the sacred name.”f






a Also called the Christian Greek Scriptures.
b c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k l c d g i l a b c d f g h i k l a b c d e f g h i k l a b c d e HEBREW translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures
b e f j k l a b c h i j h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k b c g i j k f g h i j k l a b h i j k j f ENGLISH translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures
h d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g k l a b c d e f g l a d e f h l a b c d e c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k l a c d e f g h i j k l b c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e f g h i j k l a b c d e j OTHER LANGUAGE translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures
a b a REFERENCE works


