
FOREWORD




The Holy Bible is God’s written communication to all of us. We must study it to get to know its Author. (John 17:3; 2 Timothy 3:16) Within its pages, Jehovah God reveals his purpose for humans and for their earthly home.—Genesis 3:15; Revelation 21:3, 4.
No other book has such an impact on people’s lives. The Bible inspires us to reflect Jehovah’s qualities of love, mercy, and compassion. It gives hope, helping people to endure even the worst suffering. And it continues to expose the elements of this world that are out of harmony with the perfect will of God.—Psalm 119:105; Hebrews 4:12; 1 John 2:15-17.
Originally composed in Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek, the Bible has been translated, in whole or in part, into over 3,000 languages. It is by far the most widely translated and distributed book in history. We should expect nothing less. Bible prophecy states: “This good news of the Kingdom [the key message contained in the Bible] will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.”—Matthew 24:14.
Recognizing the importance of the Bible’s message, we have undertaken the revision of this text with a profound respect for the content of the Bible. We feel the full weight of our responsibility to convey its message accurately. This revised edition has built on the fine foundation laid in previous editions of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, a Bible that was first released more than 60 years ago. However, the English language has changed during the past half century. Such change prompted current members of the New World Bible Translation Committee to initiate this comprehensive revision. Our goal has been to produce a translation that is not only faithful to the original texts but also clear and easy to read. The Appendix articles “Principles of Bible Translation,” “Features of This Revision,” and “How the Bible Came to Us” discuss some of the linguistic refinements that were made in this edition.
Those who love Jehovah God and worship him desire an accurate, understandable translation of God’s Word. (1 Timothy 2:4) To that end, we have made this revision available in English, with the intention of translating it into as many languages as possible. It is our hope and prayer that you, dear reader, will find this edition of the Holy Scriptures beneficial as you endeavor to “seek God . . . and really find him.”—Acts 17:27.



New World Bible Translation Committee
August 2013


