
Introduction to Philemon


Writer: Paul

Place Written: Rome

Writing Completed: c. 60-61 C.E.





Noteworthy Facts:

  The letter to Philemon is the shortest of Paul’s inspired letters. It is also among the most personal. He addresses it primarily to his friend Philemon, who lived in Colossae, Asia Minor. (Phm 1, 2; compare Col 4:9 with Phm 10-12.) Apparently, Philemon had become a Christian through Paul’s efforts. (Phm 19) Philemon seems to have been well-off; he was a slave owner and had a house that could accommodate the local congregation. Philemon was known for his hospitality and love.​—Phm 1, 2, 7.

  This letter deals with a delicate matter that was of personal concern to Paul. Onesimus, a slave in Philemon’s household, had run away to Rome. Paul apparently preached to Onesimus, and he became a Christian. (Phm 10, 12, 16) Even though Philemon had the legal right under Roman law to punish Onesimus severely because he ran away, Paul encourages Philemon to accept Onesimus back kindly. The apostle does not want to command Philemon to do so. Instead, he tactfully appeals to him on the basis of brotherly love, their personal friendship, and Philemon’s relationship with God. (Phm 8, 9, 14-17) It seems that Paul wrote the letter with his own hand, which added weight to his plea.​—Phm 19.

  It is likely that Paul wrote this letter about 60-​61 C.E., toward the end of the two-year period when he was under house arrest in Rome. (Ac 28:16, 30; Phm 1, 9, 13) Paul had preached in Rome long enough to make converts; he also expressed hope that he would be set free soon. (Phm 10, 22 and study note) About the same time, Paul wrote to the congregations in Ephesus, Philippi, and Colossae. It is possible that the letter to Philemon, as well as the letters to the Ephesians and to the Colossians, were delivered by Tychicus and Onesimus.​—Eph 6:21, 22; Col 4:7-9.

  The letter to Philemon reveals interesting details about the first-century Christians. For example, they assembled in private homes and referred to one another as “brother” and “sister.” (Phm 1, 2, 7, 20) They prayed for one another. (Phm 4, 22) They drew encouragement from the faith and love of fellow believers.​—Phm 5-7.

  Early writers Tertullian (second to third centuries C.E.) and Origen (third century C.E.) acknowledge that Paul was the writer of this letter. It is also listed, along with other letters by Paul, in the Muratorian Fragment (late second century C.E.).





