Celebrating 40 Years of Missionary Training
HAD you been anywhere near the Queens, New York, Assembly Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses on March 6, 1983, you might have wondered what the excitement was all about. A noticeably exuberant crowd of 2,000 persons poured in to see the graduation of 38 students comprising the 74th class of Gilead!
Secular graduation ceremonies are often little more than dry, cliché-ridden speeches. Gilead graduations, however, are unique. The graduates from this class, for example, are being sent to 16 countries as missionaries. Those interested in the preaching of the good news of the Kingdom cannot help but be thrilled by this! And the graduation chairman, A. D. Schroeder of the Governing Body, explained that this graduation marked 40 years of such missionary training. Since February 1, 1943, when the school was inaugurated, over 6,000 students from more than 50 countries have passed through this school. Nevertheless, preaching in a foreign country presents a number of challenges. So various speakers on the program gave pointed counsel for these prospective missionaries.
“Humility can safeguard you,” said Martin Poetzinger. When they arrive in their assignments, the missionaries will be confronted with new people to work with. “We cannot change people,” said Martin Poetzinger, but through humility we can “make the adjustments in ourselves” so as to deal with them. Max Larson of the Factory Committee advised the students to “Think Missionary.” They should never even entertain thoughts of leaving their assignments, he counseled, but, rather, meet each problem with the determination to stay there.
Instructors U. V. Glass and J. Redford had worked with the students on a daily basis for five months. U. V. Glass therefore encouraged the missionaries to be like the apostle Paul, who was willing to ‘pour himself out’ on behalf of others. He told of one young missionary who went with her husband into the circuit work in the South Pacific. It was not easy for this rather refined woman to travel in the bush, hiking up hills until she was utterly exhausted. Yet she stuck with her work and found satisfaction in helping her brothers and sisters. Jack Redford similarly encouraged the missionaries to “take the bitter with the sweet”​—which might mean some pain, discomfort, inconvenience and even disease. At times they might miss little things​—like their favorite soft drink. But if they keep their eyes “on the things unseen,” they could nevertheless find sweet joy in their assignments.​—2 Corinthians 4:16-18.
Theodore Jaracz and Milton Henschel of the Governing Body also had some warm admonition. Jaracz reminded the students of the Israelites who, though having seen miraculous plagues and the splitting of the Red Sea, forgot Jehovah. (Deuteronomy 6:10-12) Milton Henschel developed his remarks around Ecclesiastes 7:12, which contrasts money and godly wisdom. In some countries inflation has made money all but worthless. However, the knowledge the students had acquired could be ‘scattered’ to benefit many.​—Proverbs 15:7.
Finally, the president of Gilead School, F. W. Franz, spoke at length on the subject of “Jehovah’s Organization.” He recalled the time when the need for organization was not clearly understood by Jehovah’s people. Nevertheless, as our understanding of the Bible increased, we came to see that there were really only two organizations​—Jehovah’s and Satan’s. He therefore exhorted the missionaries to stick to the organization Jehovah is using.
In the afternoon the students presented a thrilling slide program showing the history of Gilead School. They also put on a moving modern-day drama, realistically portraying some of the problems many parents are having in communicating with their children.
We are confident that these graduated missionaries will adjust to their new homes and make a fine contribution to the progress of the worldwide preaching work. Those who have gone before them certainly have done so.
[Picture on page 30]
Brooklyn Bethel family attends graduation services at the 40th anniversary of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead

