Were You There?
NOT far from the site of the notorious Jonestown mass suicide in Guyana is a place called Matthew’s Ridge. Last year a group of seven Christians there planned to attend the “Kingdom Truth” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the nation’s capital, Georgetown. Matthew’s Ridge is a mere 45 minutes by air from Georgetown, but the group could not afford the air fare. So they traveled by boat. The trip took them seven days.
Were you at one of the hundreds of “Kingdom Truth” District Conventions held around the world last year? If so, you were one of more than 4 million, many of whom went to a lot of trouble to be there.
It Took Determination
For some it took determination to be there. That is what Al, from Maceió in Brazil, has. Al is a paralytic, and he was unable to take his wheelchair with him on the bus to the convention. So he had to drag himself around on the ground, and at the convention he had to pull himself up the bleachers to his seat. But he was determined not to miss it.
For some it took teamwork. A Japanese Witness was planning to attend the convention when a typhoon blew all the pears off the trees in a family orchard. Witnesses from the local congregation with their children helped to gather the pears and then sell them. All was finished in time, so that her unbelieving husband was happy to allow her to attend.
And for some it took sheer appreciation. A Christian man in Brazil lost his wife just five days before the convention. In spite of the terrible loss, he attended with his three young children. The association and counsel enjoyed there helped him and his family survive the severe emotional shock.
Why were these, and millions of others, determined to let nothing stand in the way of their attending the “Kingdom Truth” District Convention last year? If you have ever attended one of Jehovah’s Witnesses’ conventions, you already know. For one thing, they provide a unique opportunity for large-scale Christian association. (Psalm 133:1) A delegate at a convention in New Caledonia, in the South Seas, remarked, “The unity of God’s people was foretold in the Bible, and you can appreciate it especially during conventions.” Additionally, the program is always packed with things really worth hearing.
‘They Reached the Heart’
From the first day’s welcome by the chairman to the concluding talk on Sunday, the program was full of heartwarming experiences, faith-strengthening discussions and practical counsel.
On Friday morning delegates enjoyed being introduced to some old-timers. Conventioners in Sydney, Australia, heard from 85-year-old Geordie Gibb, who was baptized in 1927 and has served with the Australian headquarters staff since 1929. There are people like Geordie all around the world, with a whole lifetime of faithful service behind them. The 1982 district conventions provided a good opportunity to meet some of them.
The talks were greatly appreciated, especially those that exposed some hidden snares. After listening to the discussion “Beware of Music That Debases,” Ana, from Brazil, said: “I had several records with lyrics anything but upbuilding. But we kept them because we liked the music. After listening to that talk we decided to get rid of them all.”
Barbara, a conventioner in Hawaii, thoroughly agreed with the warnings she heard in the talk “Exposing the Devil’s Subtle Designs.” Among other things, the talk warned against certain kinds of television programs. Barbara used to be a soap-opera addict and found that these programs were dulling her sense of right and wrong. “Even the ‘good guys’ lied and committed immorality,” she said, “and I started to adopt their way of looking at life.” (1 Corinthians 15:33) A family in Korea had been saving money to buy a color-television set. After hearing these and other talks at the convention, they changed their mind. They did not want to spend their money on something that could allow satanic influences into their home.
Highlighting all conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses are the moving dramatic presentations, where ancient or modern situations are depicted that have real meaning for Christians today. Conventioners empathized with Jeremiah, in the drama “Fearless Proclaimer of an Unpopular Message.” And many hearts were touched by the presentation “How Will They Hear Without Someone to Preach?” This was the story, based on several true-life experiences, of Nottingham Goodenough. In the drama, Nottingham opposed his son’s preaching of the good news and expelled him from his home. Then, years later, he was helped to have a change of heart when his young grandchildren called his attention to God’s name, Jehovah, at Psalm 83:18 in his King James Bible.
“There is a Nottingham Goodenough in our family,” said Lois from the Bahamas, as she happily described the changes in her husband’s attitude. The drama was especially encouraging in Korea, where several Christian wives have husbands who oppose them.
Another highlight of all conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses is the baptism. At the “Kingdom Truth” conventions, tens of thousands of persons symbolized their dedication to Jehovah God by public water immersion. For many, the step necessitated hard work. A 23-year-old woman who was baptized in Japan, for example, was at one time unmarried and pregnant, and smoking 40 to 50 cigarettes a day. She had a lot of adjustments to make before she was baptized, but with Jehovah’s help she made them and now lives a clean, wholesome life married to the father of her child.
There were other highlights too. Do you remember the exciting release of the beautiful new book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever or the eye-catching tract Are We Nearing Armageddon?
Perhaps you were one of the host of conventioners who went out on Friday evening and shared copies of the tract with householders in the convention city. Many householders responded like the young man in Kalgoorlie, Western Australia, who was so taken with the conversation he had with two convention delegates that he resolved to attend the convention himself.
In some lands delegates had extra blessings when publications were released to serve their special needs. Japanese conventioners were overjoyed to receive the complete New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures in their own language. “I couldn’t sleep the whole night,” said one delighted conventioner who received a copy.
“The talks at this convention truly reached the heart,” said a Hawaiian delegate. Even non-Witnesses agreed. “This was the first time in my life that I heard talks that really said something,” commented a member of a political group that attended a Brazilian convention.
And Now . . . “Kingdom Unity”!
Yes, the “Kingdom Truth” conventions were an unqualified success. Millions of lives were aided by them. If you were there, you undoubtedly benefited greatly. But what if you did not attend? Well, all is not lost. This year Jehovah’s Witnesses will have another worldwide series of conventions, with the theme “Kingdom Unity.”
This year, too, there will be dramatic presentations, faith-building talks and demonstrations, timely counsel and, doubtless, a few surprises as well! These will include a unique feature that will make this year’s district conventions outstanding. If you attended the 1982 convention, we feel sure that you will want to attend again for all four days. If you were not there, be determined to attend this year. It may prove to be the highlight of your year.
[Picture on page 28]
At the São Paulo, Brazil, convention 626 new Witnesses were baptized
[Picture on page 29]
Young conventioner at Kalgoorlie, Western Australia, “Kingdom Truth” District Convention, September 23-26, 1982

