God’s Word Is Alive
What Will God’s Kingdom Do?
IN HIS famous Sermon on the Mount, Jesus Christ taught his followers the prayer commonly called the Our Father or the Lord’s Prayer. Perhaps you have repeated it many times. Millions of people have. They have prayed to God: “Thy kingdom come.” (Matthew 6:10, Authorized Version; Douay Version) When making that request, do you know what you are asking for?
Perhaps like most people you have said these words without giving much thought to their meaning. But since God’s Kingdom is a real government, what will happen to the present governments of the world when God’s Kingdom comes? Have you thought about that?
The Bible leaves us in no doubt as to the answer. In a prophecy that points forward to our day, the Bible says: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom [this is God’s Kingdom, for which Christians pray] that will never be brought to ruin. . . . It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms [present governments of the world], and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”​—Daniel 2:44.
Think about that! God’s Kingdom is going to destroy all present governments of the world. And when you pray, “Thy kingdom come,” you are praying for this to happen. Yet surely such a change is needed. Never in history has a human government been completely satisfactory. So what could be better than to have a perfect government by God replace all human governments!
Because Jehovah God is almighty, his Kingdom will satisfy the desires of all righteously inclined persons. “Your kingship is a kingship for all times,” the Bible explains. “You are opening your hand and satisfying the desire of every living thing.” (Psalm 145:13, 16) What desires do you wish to see fulfilled? The end of war, hunger, injustice, poor housing, crime, sickness and even death? All these problems and others will be eliminated by God’s Kingdom.
The Bible promises “the abundance of peace until the moon is no more.” “As regards the wicked,” it says, “they will be cut off from the very earth.” Yes, people then “will certainly build houses and have occupancy.” “God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more.”​—Psalm 72:7, 8; Proverbs 2:22; Isaiah 65:21-23; Revelation 21:3, 4.
What blessings for the human family! Would you like to be a subject of God’s Kingdom? Then learn how to be one. Study God’s Word and apply what you learn.​—John 17:3.
[Pictures on page 8, 9]
clear away this system . . .
. . . usher in a new one

