Questions From Readers
▪ Moses told the Israelites that “the things revealed belong to us and to our sons to time indefinite.” (Deuteronomy 29:29) Have these “things revealed” come to include the light that has been shed on God’s Word during these last days?
No, it would not be correct to put the understanding of prophecies that we have been granted during these last days on the same level as “the things revealed” that Moses was discussing.
According to the context of Moses’ words, “the things revealed” that he was talking about had to do with the Law covenant. (Deuteronomy 29:25) Moses showed that these “things revealed” carried responsibilities. Failure to live up to these responsibilities would cause Jehovah to discipline his people.
The Law covenant, of course, was a revelation from Jehovah God. It was preceded by other revelations to the patriarchs, to Noah, and going all the way back to Adam. Moses was used to put into writing the things revealed up to his time, and they have been preserved for us in the first five books of the Bible. Later, as the article “The Things Revealed Belong to Us” (The Watchtower, May 15, 1986) explained, these “things revealed” came to include all the information recorded in the Bible.​—2 Timothy 3:16.
Thus, the Bible contains “the sacred pronouncements of God,” the things revealed by him. (Romans 3:2) When the natural Jews proved unfaithful, anointed Christians became the stewards of these “things revealed,” and the Christian congregation became “a pillar and support” for them. (1 Timothy 3:15; 1 Corinthians 4:1) Hence, members of that congregation today can properly echo Moses’ words, that “the things revealed belong to us.”
Today, Jehovah has shed much light on these “things revealed.” As prophesied by Daniel, Jehovah’s people have ‘roved about’ in the inspired Word, and ‘true knowledge has become abundant.’ (Daniel 12:4) Thus, we now know the identity of the “other sheep.” (John 10:16) We recognize the “great crowd.” (Revelation 7:9-17) We see the fulfillment of the parable of the sheep and the goats. (Matthew 25:31-46) Such things have been disclosed, or made known, to us but not in the sense of “the things revealed” as recorded in Jehovah’s inspired Word.
Therefore, it would not be correct to put such advances in understanding on the same level as the inspired revelations that make up “the things revealed” recorded in the Bible. Rather, through an intensive study of the Bible, Jehovah’s people have prayerfully sought a correct understanding of those “things revealed.” Jehovah, by means of holy spirit, has given that understanding in his own due time.
The Bible tells us that “the path of the righteous ones is like the bright light that is getting lighter and lighter until the day is firmly established.” (Proverbs 4:18) The increasing light that Jehovah has shed on “the things revealed” shows that that “day” is getting closer and proves that his blessing is on the Christian congregation today.

