Acts of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Modern Times
Jehovah’s Witnesses are a people with a purpose. They know why some 40,000 Christian congregations exist world wide. Theirs is a work of witnessing, of ‘declaring abroad the excellencies’ of Jehovah God. (1 Pet. 2:9) And this they do with joy, enthusiasm and dependence upon the God whose purpose they serve.
This activity is carried on despite hardship and persecution. Certainly, the slanderer Satan does not want the excellencies of Jehovah declared abroad. But the Devil has been foiled in all his efforts to silence proclaimers of the good news.
Why, persecution of Jesus Christ’s first-century followers actually served to spread the good news! Yes, for after the stoning of faithful Stephen, “those who had been scattered went through the land declaring the good news of the word.”​—Acts 8:4.
Those early believers were well aware of their chief purpose in life​—to serve to God’s praise. Moreover, they were not afraid to face hardship and persecution. They knew that their foes ‘would not prevail against them, for Jehovah would deliver them.’ (Jer. 1:19) In fulfilling their commission to declare the good news today, Jehovah’s Witnesses have the same conviction.
But could you maintain integrity to God and continue witnessing amid primitive conditions in the face of religious opposition? Well, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Papua New Guinea have done just that, as succeeding pages reveal.
With firm determination and dependence upon God, Christians in the Philippines have survived the hardships of World War II. They have persevered as witnesses of Jehovah, and he has granted them spiritual prosperity. You will thrill to their account of faithful deeds in declaring the good news.
Jehovah’s Witnesses in Spain have endured years of religious opposition and persecution. But they have been delivered by God and have been used mightily in ‘declaring his excellencies’ throughout that Catholic land. Now, through these pages, you can accompany them in their joyful and enthusiastic work of witnessing.
These faithful acts of modern-day Christians prove that foes of God’s people cannot prevail against them. Witnesses of Jehovah have a real purpose in life and can be confident that he will be with them as they carry it out. Indeed, Jehovah never abandons those relying on him, for he is “a God of saving acts.”​—Ps. 68:20.

