I Never Forgot the Truth of God!
I WILL always remember that day when one of Jehovah’s witnesses called at our home. I was just eight years old. When she offered my parents literature explaining the Bible they refused it, but I was interested. I wanted so much to learn about the Bible. So I asked my parents if I could have this literature. They said that I had my own money and that if I wanted it I could pay for it myself.
Right at this first call the Witness lovingly began helping me to understand God’s Word. I learned from my own Bible that God’s name is Jehovah.​—Ps. 83:18.
For several weeks thereafter the Witness came with her husband to help me. Then other Witnesses were sent. All during this time my parents never took an interest in studying the Bible with us, although it was mentioned to them. After each study session I would make it a point to tell them what I was learning.
Later on I began attending a few meetings of the Witnesses. What love the Witnesses showed me! They drove all the way out to our home, ten miles from town, just to pick me up and take me to their meetings. A few times I was allowed to stay overnight with them in order to see how they did their preaching work.
During one of these visits while I was playing with the daughter of one of the Witnesses, I learned about the need to refrain from nationalistic acts that are idolatrous and that violate Christian neutrality. The fuller explanation I received from the older Witnesses made me so glad that I wanted to share this information with the ones I loved the most, my parents.
I was eleven years old and I will never forget the shock I received when I told them about these Christian requirements and my decision to obey God by living up to them. My parents became enraged. I was ordered to tell the Witnesses, the next time they called, that they were never to return or else they would be met with a shotgun. I pleaded with my parents to let me show them from the Bible that these were God’s requirements. But it was to no avail.
My parents thought that this would end the matter. But I had Bible-study books and my Bibles. Most important of all, there was communication with Jehovah God by means of prayer.
Several times during the next five years I firmly resolved to forget everything I learned and I would try to put it out of my mind. But I realized that I could not forget it because it was a part of me, and it was the truth. Throughout this time Jehovah always lovingly provided me with encouragement to carry on my limited worship of him. Just when I would get to the point where I would think that I was all alone in trying to worship him, I would be visited by a Witness who would leave literature with me. I would hide and read every word just like a thirsty man getting a drink of cool water.
Once, I remember, when I was in town I saw a Witness in the next block offering magazines to passersby. How delighted I was to see someone serving Jehovah! I ran all the way down the street to catch up with her just to say hello. But, ah! She was gone before I reached her! Yet I was so thrilled just to see a worshiper of Jehovah God!
During this time I did much personal study to keep my faith strong. One of my favorite scriptures was 1 Corinthians 10:13, which assures us that God will not let us be tested beyond our endurance, but will always make the way out so we can remain faithful. Other scriptures, such as Galatians 6:9, assured me that God would see that I had blessings and opportunities to serve him more fully. Also, I was able to talk about his promises to others on occasion.
When I entered high school I was able at last to have again some association with Jehovah’s servants. I attended some meetings, and even conventions. Upon reaching sixteen I told my father that I wanted to be baptized at an approaching assembly. I explained that I would understand his not allowing it as long as I was living in his house and that I would respect his wishes but that when I came of age I would be baptized. He and my mother decided that I was old enough to know what I wanted and so gave their consent. I was baptized on March 20, 1965.
Things went fairly smoothly until graduation day. When I refused employment that violated my Christian neutrality, then the wrath and fury of my father broke loose again. He told me that I was no longer his daughter. I was completely disowned. He swore at me until he was breathless and told me not to come home anymore.
Through this painful period, the Witnesses came to my aid and always, yes, always there was Jehovah God strengthening me. Ever faithful, ever kind, he never abandoned me. Eventually my prayers to him for the honor of serving him more fully were answered. I was able to spend a vacation preaching full time about his kingdom. It was too marvelous for words! Soon after this I became a regular full-time preacher of God’s Word, and this has been my gladsome activity since.
When I look back over the years I see that Jehovah has indeed been my shepherd and I have lacked nothing. Though I may undergo further persecution, I know that as long as I maintain my integrity Jehovah will always be with me to comfort and bless me. I have seen that Jehovah God’s goodness is beyond compare.​—Contributed.

