From Our Readers
Travel Sickness  I am ten years old and want to thank you for the item “Travel Sickness” in “Watching the World.” (January 22, 1996) I tried the suggestions in the article, and they worked! Please keep publishing such articles.
J. C. S., Brazil
Near Death  I am writing regarding the article “Doctors Learned From My Near Death.” (December 22, 1995) Is not erythropoietin buffered with a small percentage of albumin, a blood protein?
R. P., United States
In some cases, yes, and each Christian must personally decide whether or not to accept medications that contain small amounts of albumin. For a detailed discussion, please see “Questions From Readers” in the October 1, 1994, and June 1, 1990, issues of “The Watchtower.”—ED.
Earthquake  I read the article “Japan’s Sudden Disaster—How People Coped.” (August 22, 1995) I am wondering why you confined your relief efforts to Witnesses only? One would have thought that the Witnesses would have extended love to Witnesses and non-Witnesses alike.
V. C. E., Nigeria
Actually, many non-Witnesses were helped. Oftentimes, channeling the relief supplies through congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses proved to be the fastest way to get the supplies to those in need. In one case two vans full of food supplies were sent to a local refugee center. Many similar examples could be cited. Naturally, Witnesses gave priority to congregation members, since in the Bible we are exhorted: “Work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.” (Galatians 6:10)—ED.
Sports Competition  Your article “Is Competition in Sports Wrong?” (December 8, 1995) was very confusing to me, in that it used Galatians 5:26. What does the book of Galatians have to do with sports and games? Paul is speaking about spirit versus flesh and freedom versus slavery. The King James Version renders that verse: “Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another.”
P. O., United States
It is true that the apostle did not specifically have in mind athletic competition when he penned those words. However, some Christians were evidently making unfair comparisons with one another. This gave rise to ‘fleshly’ attitudes such as ‘enmities, strife, jealousy, contentions, and divisions.’ (Galatians 5:20, 21; 6:3, 4) Paul thus cautioned Christians not to be “stirring up competition with one another.” According to “The New Thayer’s Greek-English Lexicon,” the Greek word rendered “competition” means “to challenge to a combat or contest with one.” This principle would certainly apply to sports activities or to any activity that could cause Christians to compete with one another in an unwholesome way.—ED.
Aliteracy  I read the article “Guard Against Aliteracy” (January 22, 1996) and enjoyed it so much that I was moved to write and thank you for the informative reading material you provide. Reading gives us the opportunity to know the Creator of the universe through his precious Word, the Bible. There is thus a connection between spiritual weakness and aliteracy.
R. R., United States
Although I have been a baptized Christian for 28 years and a regular reader of the Society’s publications, I would procrastinate and I felt I was losing the desire to read. Your article identified my problem! Your reasoning on this subject gave me the incentive to read so as to benefit myself.
A. O., Canada

