The Bible’s Viewpoint
Whose Guidance Can You Trust?
“IT’S time to go!” announces the father to his five-year-old son. The father extends a hand, and without hesitation the son reaches out and wraps his small hand around his father’s fingers. Wherever the journey may lead, the child trusts in the guidance of his parent and follows with confidence. Come what may, the child’s firm grip remains unbroken.
Living in these days of economic, political, and personal uncertainty, would you not welcome a guiding hand from a source you could trust implicitly? Yet, we live in a time when unscrupulous people take advantage of inexperienced ones. Thus, there is good reason to be cautious as to whom we trust. Perhaps you have been sorely disappointed in the past when someone you relied on for guidance let you down.
Nonetheless, the Bible encourages us to put our trust in God. “For I, Jehovah your God, am grasping your right hand, the One saying to you, ‘Do not be afraid. I myself will help you,’” recorded the prophet Isaiah. (Isaiah 41:13) And the apostle Peter advised: “Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time; while you throw all your anxiety upon him, because he cares for you.”—1 Peter 5:6, 7.
Still, you may well ask, ‘What reason do I have to place my trust in God for guidance?’ The following sound reasons are found in the record of the ancient Israelites.
The Hand of God Directs His People
The series of events that culminated the night of Nisan 14, 1513 B.C.E., broke the will of the despotic taskmaster Pharaoh and of the Egyptians, so that they released God’s people, the Israelites, from slavery. (Exodus 1:11-13; 12:29-32) On Nisan 15, the jubilant nation of Israel headed toward the wilderness on their way to the Promised Land. The most direct route was to the north of Memphis, along the seacoast of the Mediterranean, close by the land occupied by the feared Philistines, and on into the Promised Land. However, God had in mind another route.—Exodus 13:17, 18; Numbers 33:1-6.
God provided a visible guide to the ancient nation of Israel, which appeared as a pillar of cloud during the day and a pillar of fire during the night. (Exodus 13:21, 22) Along with this supernatural phenomenon, Jehovah used as his earthly representative the faithful man Moses. (Exodus 4:28-31) There was, therefore, indisputable proof that God’s hand was guiding the Israelites.
At their second campsite, Etham, “at the edge of the wilderness,” Jehovah directed Moses to turn back and camp on the shores of the Red Sea, at Pihahiroth. (Exodus 13:20) This seemingly inexplicable move prompted Pharaoh to conclude that the Israelites were “wandering in confusion in the land.” Emboldened, Pharaoh had a change of heart. Now determined to reenslave the Israelites, he gathered his army and set out in pursuit.—Exodus 14:1-9.
By taking the nation in a different direction, into what was evidently a low plain leading down to the Red Sea, Moses, it seemed, was positioning the Israelites to be trapped by the mountains on either side of the camp at Pihahiroth, the Red Sea, and the advancing army of Pharaoh. It appeared that the Israelites had become an easy target for quick subjugation or annihilation.
What effect did this have on them? Would they demonstrate trust in the guidance of Jehovah? To all outward appearances, the situation was hopeless. Therefore, some became panicky. Still others began to murmur against Moses. Some were even ready to give up and return to Egyptian slavery!—Exodus 14:10-12.
Hold Fast to the Hand of God!
In this situation the Israelites needed to display a childlike trust in the Almighty. Unknown to the nation as a whole, Jehovah had good reason for instructing Moses to cross the Red Sea at Pihahiroth. By initiating the Israelites’ passage into the Promised Land south of the land of the Philistines, Jehovah showed loving insight. After 215 years in Egypt, there was little doubt that the Israelites were unprepared for warfare with a nation of fierce warriors. Therefore, Jehovah selected a route that would avoid such a conflict.a—Exodus 13:17, 18.
The deliverance of the nation and the defeat of Pharaoh and his army at the Red Sea bear marvelous testimony to the saving power of God. Furthermore, how thankful were the Israelites who, although not comprehending the reason for God’s guiding them in a particular way, did not forsake the hand of God! They held fast and saw the miraculous parting of the Red Sea as well as the annihilation of their enemies. Their trust in the guidance of Jehovah was rewarded.—Exodus 14:19-31.
Again, let us consider the example of a child holding the hand of a parent. When a child becomes anxious, how does he respond? Rather than letting go or relaxing his grip, the child will tighten his little hand around his parent’s fingers. In doing so, he demonstrates unwavering trust that the parent will provide unfailing guidance and strength during difficulties.
Similarly, when we experience distress in our life, we need to tighten our grip, trusting even more in God’s guidance! His Word, the Bible, can become our guiding light. (Psalm 119:105) Also, remember that along with trust comes patience. Therefore, we must give Jehovah time to work things out, even if for some period of time we may not fully understand why he is guiding us in a certain course. Yes, we can trust in God’s guidance.—Exodus 15:2, 6; Deuteronomy 13:4; Isaiah 41:13.
[Footnote]
For further information on Pihahiroth, see Insight on the Scriptures, Volume 2, pages 638-9, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.

