Build Godly Personalities on the Right Foundation
AMONG the various kinds of activity to which the Scriptures liken the work of Christian ministers is that of building. “If anyone builds on the foundation gold, silver, precious stones, . . . each one’s work will become manifest, . . . because it will be revealed by means of fire.”​—1 Cor. 3:12, 13.a
The right foundation upon which the Christian witnesses of Jehovah are to build is Jesus Christ, who is not only man’s Ransomer but also earth’s rightful King, now reigning. And what are they to build on this foundation? Christian personalities, even as the context shows. With what are these Christian personalities to be built? With that which is pictured by the noninflammable materials of gold, silver and precious stones, namely, godly qualities.​—1 Cor. 3:9-11.
Yes, we are living in very critical times, and if one who is a servant of God does not want his building work to be destroyed by the fiery tests and opposition all about us, he must build with the right materials. He must build these materials, or Christian qualities, into those whom he is teaching. These qualities are heavenly wisdom and spiritual discernment, appreciation of integrity and devotion to Bible principles, respect for all God’s laws and commandments, faith in his written Word, loyalty to God’s visible organization and an unbreakable attachment to His kingdom. Building such godly qualities into persons makes them strong, able to resist the fiery trials that Satan and his agents bring against all those who would serve Jehovah God.​—2 Tim. 3:1-5.
For Jehovah’s witnesses to build these godly qualities into persons with whom they are studying the Bible, what must they do? First of all, they must set a good example. They must have and display these godly qualities themselves, at no time stumbling those with whom they are studying by careless, indiscreet or selfish conduct. (Phil. 1:9-11) Further, they must stress the importance of these qualities and show how these can be applied to one’s own life. Thus if they are studying with a person who is proud, or one who uses profane language, or one whose conduct tends toward uncleanness, they must tactfully, as opportunity affords, point out to that person the need for humility, for clean speech and purity of conduct. More than that, they must impress upon the minds of these persons how they can cultivate godly personalities, by regular study of God’s Word, by meditating on it, by prayer and by association with God’s people.
In all such ways Jehovah’s witnesses build Christian personalities on the foundation of Jesus Christ. They help sincere persons to acquire godly qualities that will enable them to withstand all the fiery tests that may come upon them, all to Jehovah’s glory, to their eternal salvation and to the lasting joy of those who have helped them.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, November 1, 1966.

