From Our Readers
“Leap Second”
While reading the article “Leap Second” in “Watching the World” (May 22, 1988), I noticed that the affirmation of Dr. Dennis McCarthy that an airplane would miss the runway by 300 meters (330 yards) [“one-fifth of a mile”] in one second is not correct. For example, a fully laden Jumbo coming in to land is flying at about 150 knots, so the actual speed would be 78 meters (85 yards) per second.
Since I am an airline pilot and fly Boeing 747’s, I thought it my duty to point out this error.
B. G., Italy
If Dr. McCarthy had landing speed in mind, then B. G. is correct. The aircraft would miss by about 1/20 mile [80 m] rather than 1/5.[300 m]​—ED.
Bodybuilding
I had started to do muscle exercises so as to have a good physical appearance. I began to take hormones to develop faster (a common thing among weight lifters). I trained four hours a day. But as I developed physically, I became stationary mentally. Then I read that article (“Young People Ask . . . Should I Go In For Bodybuilding?” December 22, 1986). I never thought I would give up that sport, but now I realize the need to build my mind and not just my body. So I have given it up. Thank you very much.
G. P., Brazil
Safe Driving
My wife and I would like to express our deep appreciation to you for the article “Safe Driving​—The Urgent Need.” (January 8, 1988) We own a driving school here in Ireland, and we, as driving instructors, are very interested in instilling in all our students the need to be not only a good driver but also a safe driver. This article helped us both greatly, and we are able to impart this valuable information to our students.
P. and A. B., Ireland
Glaucoma
I enjoyed reading your article on glaucoma in the May 8 Awake! But I did find one part to be inaccurate. The body does not replace vitreous humor solution. Oftentimes when people injure their eyes and this fluid escapes, eyesight is lost forever or is permanently impaired.
G. R., EMT Paramedic, United States
The article’s reference was not to vitreous humor, about which G. R. is correct, but instead to aqueous humor, a watery fluid located in the front part of the eye around the iris.​—ED.
I had occasion today to read the article on glaucoma, appearing in your May 8, 1988, issue of Awake! I wish to commend you on publishing such informative and very accurate information.
R. J. G., M.D., The Eye Institute of California, United States
I found the article on glaucoma to be accurate and most interestingly written. Easy to understand articles like this are a big help to patients, and I am glad to see this sort of article in magazines.
R. S. L., M.D., United States

