Teach Others to Benefit Themselves
1 Jehovah wants all people to benefit themselves. (Isa. 48:17) He knows what brings us genuine happiness. His earnest desire is for humans to avoid calamity and to enjoy life by paying attention to his commandments. We are benefiting ourselves greatly by living our lives God’s way. (Ps. 34:8) How can we teach others to do the same?
2 What Do People Want? What concerns householders where you live? Is it not the security of their home, the strength of their marriage, the future of their children, and similar matters? When they have problems, where do they turn for help? They may rely on themselves, on self-help programs, or on the guidance of others. In the process, many are left bewildered by inconsistent and impractical ideas as to how to benefit themselves. We must convince them that what God’s Word offers in the way of guidance is far better. (Ps. 119:98) We can do this by showing them how they can improve the quality of their lives even now if they make the effort to study the Bible and apply what it says.​—2 Tim. 3:16, 17.
3 Improved Family Life: Few people realize how well the inspired counsel at Ephesians 5:22–6:4 works in resolving family problems. This was the case with a couple who, after ten years of marriage, decided that they would separate. However, a Bible study was started with the wife, who was taught Scriptural principles regarding married life. The husband soon noticed the changes she was making as she applied Bible principles, and he joined in the study. He later said: “Now we have found the basis for a really happy family life.”
4 Real Purpose in Life: When a young drug addict sought help from the Witnesses, he was taught that Jehovah cares about him personally. He said: ‘I learned that the Creator has a purpose for man and holds out everlasting life to those in his favor. You can’t imagine how happy I felt about this. Today I enjoy good health, peace of mind, and a close relationship with God.’
5 No one is beyond benefiting from the practical help found in God’s Word. By using it as our guide, we confirm that Jehovah’s way is far superior to the ways of the world. (Ps. 116:12) It is our privilege to convey this message to others, teaching them to benefit themselves. As we do so, we will see many fine results.

