From Our Readers
Young People Ask . . .
Your articles on “Young People Ask . . ” are fantastic. Not only do they help young people face up to life in the best way possible but they help many parents, including my sister who has a daughter, to find the right words when talking to children about the problems they have to face, such as drugs, sex, religion, finding a job, violence, school, communication with parents, teenage parents. Unfortunately there are many young people who have difficulty in communicating with their parents on these subjects, and others lack the courage to do so. But I believe that with the help of these articles many are doing so now.
S. F., Italy
Getting Along With Teachers
A week ago our Afrikaans teacher told the class to write an essay on the subject of our choice. I immediately knew what I wanted to write about. An article that had struck me was “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Get Along With My Teacher?” (October 22, 1985) There are 31 pupils in my class, and many, especially the boys, are rebellious and don’t get along with some of the teachers. When we got our essays back, the teacher said to the class, “I want to read a good essay to you.” Then she read my essay to the class, all listening attentively. Some shook their heads, some looked guilty, and others even turned pale. To me Awake! is of great value. I use it constantly at school to help me with my essays, oral parts, and projects.
I. B., South Africa
Recovering From Drug Abuse
Thank you for your article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Recover From Drug Abuse?” (July 8, 1986) My husband is a recovering drug abuser, and the article helped tremendously in my understanding of what he is going through. We soon realized how true it is that negative attitudes are easily formed if he becomes too hungry, angry, tired, or lonely. I am better equipped to care for him now because I understand more than I thought possible.
A. S., United States
Bodybuilding?
Thank you for the fine material on bodybuilding. (December 22, 1986) You see, I had been thinking about spending an hour a day on muscle development, but the material you published was a great help to me. I now appreciate that body image is not the all-important thing; rather, people should like me for what I am. Also, God doesn’t look at the body but searches the heart. So I have decided to give attention to developing my mind.
D. M., Brazil
Getting a reasonable amount of exercise that contributes to a healthier body is likely a good thing, as the article showed, but striving for improving the mind and cultivating godly devotion should be our first goal. See the article “Good Health Is Good for Business.” (February 22, 1987)​—ED.
The Stutterer’s Challenge
I read with interest your article “Understanding the Stutterer’s Challenge.” (November 8, 1986) Being a stutterer myself, I found it interesting to read what other sufferers of this disposition experienced in their daily lives. I thank you for bringing this somewhat neglected subject into the open.
G. E., Wales

