





FIND RELIEF FROM STRESS
What Is Stress?




Stress is your body’s response to a demanding situation. Your brain causes hormones to flood your system. These increase your heart rate, regulate your blood pressure, expand or constrict the capacity of your lungs, and tense your muscles. Before you are fully aware of what is happening, your body is primed for action. When a stressful episode is over, your body comes off “high alert” and returns to normal.



GOOD AND BAD STRESS

Stress is a natural response that enables you to deal with challenging or dangerous situations. The stress response begins in your brain. Beneficial stress enables you to act or react quickly. A certain amount of stress can also help you to reach your goals or to perform better, perhaps during an exam, a job interview, or a sporting event.
However, prolonged, extreme, or chronic stress can harm you. When your body is repeatedly or constantly on “high alert,” you may begin to suffer physically, emotionally, and mentally. Your behavior, including the way you treat others, may change. Chronic stress can also lead to substance abuse and other unhealthy means of coping. It may even spiral into depression, burnout, or thoughts of suicide.
While stress may not affect everyone in the same way, it can contribute to a wide range of diseases. And it can affect nearly every part of the body.



HOW STRESS CAN AFFECT YOUR BODY
Nervous system.





Your nervous system causes hormones such as adrenaline and cortisol to be released. These increase your heart rate, your blood pressure, and the glucose levels in your blood​—all of which enable you to respond quickly to danger. Too much stress can lead to
  irritability, anxiety, depression, headaches, insomnia


Musculoskeletal system.
Your muscles tense up to protect you from injury. Too much stress can lead to
  body aches and pains, tension headaches, muscle spasms


Respiratory system.
You breathe faster to take in more oxygen. Too much stress can lead to
  hyperventilation and shortness of breath, as well as panic attacks in those who are prone to them


Cardiovascular system.
Your heart beats faster and harder to distribute blood throughout your body. Blood vessels dilate or constrict to direct blood where your body needs it the most, such as in your muscles. Too much stress can lead to
  high blood pressure, heart attack, stroke


Endocrine system.
Your glands produce the hormones adrenaline and cortisol, which help the body react to stress. Your liver increases your blood-sugar level to give you more energy. Too much stress can lead to
  diabetes, lower immunity and increased illness, mood swings, weight gain


Gastrointestinal system.
The way your body processes food is disrupted. Too much stress can lead to
  nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation


Reproductive system.
Stress can affect sexual desire and function. Too much stress can lead to
  impotence, disrupted menstrual cycle




