Practical Christianity Featured at “Sacred Service” Assemblies
WITH the theme “Sacred Service,” this year’s district assemblies of Jehovah’s Witnesses certainly made headline stories in newspapers around the world. The Oklahoma City Times reported concerning the one held there: “Thousands of Bible-carrying Jehovah’s Witnesses swarmed to Oklahoma City today to attend one of the largest conventions of any kind ever held in the Myriad convention center.”
Regarding the assembly in Billings, Montana, a city of about 60,000, the local Gazette said: “They may not have intended to rule the city, but a conclave of Jehovah’s Witnesses who came to town for a Watchtower Convention at the Metra is having that effect on Billings by virtue of numbers alone. . . . 8,500 people were attending their gathering.”
In city after city there were suchlike reports about the “Sacred Service” District Assemblies of Jehovah’s Witnesses. One hundred and two of them were held in the United States in recent months, with a combined peak attendance of 982,283! For each assembly that is an average crowd of about 9,600 persons.
However, at the same time, this four-day assembly program was presented in many other countries. An Athens, Greece, newspaper reported regarding just one of the assemblies in that country: “Some 20,000 persons of all ages​—whole families with their children in perambulators—​attended the ‘District Assembly’ of Jehovah’s Witnesses.”​—Ta Nea, June 25, 1976.
In Canada eighteen assemblies were held this summer, and 105,270 persons attended. There were six assemblies in the British Isles, with an attendance of 110,298. At Germany’s eighteen gatherings 133,863 were present; 84,740 came to the twenty-one assemblies in France; 66,005 to six assemblies in Japan, and so on.
Thus far, reports from just 34 of these countries outside the United States show that 971,928 persons have attended. And hundreds of thousands more persons will yet gather at many additional “Sacred Service” assemblies that either are now in progress or are yet to be held in other lands throughout the earth.
Why do so many thousands of people come to these Christian assemblies of Jehovah’s Witnesses? What is the attraction?
A Message to Meet Problems of Life
There were those who came to find out. Tony Lioce, staff writer for the Providence, Rhode Island, Journal-Bulletin, asked: “Who are all these people, these 8,000 New Englanders who call themselves Jehovah’s Witnesses . . . What are they doing in there?”
Lioce went on to observe:
“The convention, in its second day today, is anything but a tent show for screamers. . . . the group was listening to speeches that were rooted much deeper in logic than in religious hocus-pocus.
“The ritualistic, ‘Magical Mystery Tour’ atmosphere that pervades even some ‘accepted’ religions was conspicuously absent. On the stage, men in suits and ties delivered reasoned speeches, and in the audience, people sat quietly listening, taking notes.
“It all had very little to do with Lord-praising for the sake of Lord-praising. Instead, it focused on the problems of life in the 20th century.”​—The Evening Bulletin, July 23, 1976.
You will no doubt agree that lack of considerateness and good manners is one of the problems today, especially when large numbers of people get together. In recognition of the problem, the first speaker of the assembly pointed out that assembly delegates were, in effect, guests at a spiritual feast at God’s table. So all were urged to display good table manners. Children should be seated with their parents and attention should be given to the speakers.
Paula Biggerstaff, staff writer for the Lexington, Kentucky, Herald-Leader, asked: “Were the Witnesses obedient to the counsel?” She answered, drawing upon the remarks of one of the workers at the Kentucky Fair and Exposition Center:
“Judy Keys, a Service Desk Clerk at the Center, spoke of Jehovah’s Witnesses as being the ‘most organized group we have here all year. . . . Usually with a crowd this size, the children are running wild. But your children are well-behaved.’”​—August 1, 1976.
Such comments were the rule. Although exceptions were at times noted, again and again it was observed that the Witnesses as a whole do practice what they preach. The Athens, Greece, News reported: “The competent police authorities of Athens were also this year impressed by the exemplary order in which nearly 20,000 people, mostly from Athens district, were assembled . . . for four days in a decent, thoughtful and happy disposition.”​—June 29, 1976.
The Green Bay, Wisconsin, Press-Gazette said:
“Motel operators . . . are delighted to have the Witnesses back again. Commented one manager: ‘These are marvelous and warm people. We don’t have to worry about any trouble, breakage or theft. They conduct themselves very well, are understanding when service bogs down temporarily and everything is in perfect order when they leave. The Witnesses are welcome at anytime.’”​—July 10, 1976.
Meeting the Problems of Youth
What about the problems of youth? Would you agree with the U.S. presidential candidate who pointed to what he called “the erosion and weakening in the family structure,” and said, “We need to do something about teen-age pregnancies”? But what can be done?
Visitors could see that the assembly program addressed itself to the problem the very first day. One of the speakers quoted this recent UPI dispatch: “A wave of teenage pregnancies is sweeping the nation and girls as young as 9 are asking for birth-control devices.” What is the solution?
Assembly speakers explained that the answer lies in looking to our Creator, Jehovah God, for guidance. In fact, James Adams of Canada’s Edmonton Journal entitled his article that reported on the first day’s program: “WITNESSES TOLD TO FOLLOW BIBLE IN LIFE PATTERN.” For the afternoon’s sessions all teen-agers were asked to sit in a special section up front to hear the talk directed specifically to them, “What Does Youth Want out of Life?”
During the talk the speaker released the new 192-page book Your Youth​—Getting the Best out of It, which is designed to help young people to cope with present-day problems and to make a success of their lives. The speaker explained how the book’s Bible-based guidance on such subjects as “Masturbation and Homosexuality,” “Does Sexual Morality Make Sense?” and “Dating and Courtship” will help them to avoid the tragedies that have brought heartbreak to so many families. Each teen-ager present was provided with a free copy.
Did young people feel that the message was practical, meeting their problems? Well, many started reading the book right away, even finishing it before the assembly was over. An Indianapolis, Indiana, youth noted: “The book deals with the problems we really face.” A teen-ager from the southwestern United States said: “It’s as if they took all the things in my head and gave me the answers in the book. Sometimes it’s scary because it’s as if someone knows everything you’re thinking.” A Cleveland, Ohio, seventeen-year-old observed: “The chapter on drugs is especially good because it has solid points that will help me and other teen-agers refute the ideas of students.”
In England, a Witness, a woman with children, had returned from the Sheffield assembly. She was taking a bath when her mother, a Catholic religious instructor, came to see her. While waiting, the mother noticed the new Youth book on the table and started reading it, although previously she had been opposed to the Witnesses’ literature. When her daughter finished her bath, the mother told her what a wonderful book it was, asking: “Can I buy one from you? It’s just the thing to help the young people in my class at school.”
Meeting Other Family Problems
Another evidence of today’s eroding family structure is the skyrocketing divorce rate​—there were over a million divorces in the U.S. last year​—as well as a marked increase in the number of wives abandoning their families. In 1960 the number of American men running away from their families was about 300 times the number of women who left. But in 1974 nearly as many women left as did men. Then last year almost twice as many women were said to be fleeing their homes as were men!
The first day’s program dealt with this problem. The Vancouver Sun, in commenting on the program, noted: “The family and its well-being are a prime concern of the sect, as is the Bible, which contains the principles by which family life​—and life in general—​should be ordered.” The practical Scriptural guidance given in the talks, which described the proper roles of men and women in the family, was greatly appreciated.
“This was a tremendous lesson for the family unit,” one Christian elder said. A bright twelve-year-old observed: “I liked the part about the woman’s role in the family. The Bible doesn’t downgrade her. She has a lot to do with the family and the home, though she still has to be submissive to her husband.” A Christian wife explained: “I liked the point that Jehovah is not partial. He chose both men and women to be part of the 144,000 who go to heaven. (Rev. 14:1, 3) That gives sisters reassurance that they aren’t second-class citizens.”
The assembly’s principal talk, “Will Serving God Solve Your Problems?” also dealt at considerable length with marital problems. Ephesians 5:28 and 1 Peter 3:7 were discussed, where husbands are told to be “loving” their wives and showing them “honor.” The speaker noted: “When one woman was asked what quality she appreciated most in her husband, she replied: ‘His tenderness toward me.’ Contrary to what many men of this world may think, decent women do not appreciate men who boss them around, who dominate them, or treat them roughly or unkindly.”
After pointing out also the Bible counsel to wives at 1 Peter 3: 1, 2, the speaker made this interesting observation: “Now, are we saying that applying God’s ways will produce perfect marriages at this time? No, not now, since we are still imperfect. But it will produce much, much better marriages. So if you were to take 100 marriages and apply God’s ways to them, far more of them would be successful than 100 marriages where neither partner respected Bible principles.”
The effects of practicing what God’s Word teaches were evident to assembly visitors. And on occasion they commented on how well everyone got along together. A former Catholic explained that he had read the Watch Tower publications and was elated with the things he was learning, but felt that it seemed too good to be true. He said:
“Then I recalled what Jesus had said in John 13:35 about love being the trademark of his followers. I determined to let Jehovah’s Witnesses prove to me that they were indeed God’s people.” So he attended a Witness assembly, as he explained, “with the express purpose of viewing the people. In retrospect the feeling I came away with after that short association still amazes me. It was like a short refreshing interlude at an oasis after a long trip through a hot and hostile desert.”
This man was one of the 1,076 persons who symbolized their dedication to serve Jehovah God by being baptized at the Canadian “Sacred Service” assemblies this summer.
Baptism​—An Assembly Highlight
In the U.S. 10,253 were immersed at the assemblies. But, all together, 27,717 have been baptized at the “Sacred Service” assemblies from which reports have thus far been received. It is young people especially who are accepting Bible truths, as evidenced by a survey at one assembly which revealed that 70 percent of those baptized were between eleven and thirty years of age.
It was a grand thing to hear the marvelous effect that learning and applying God’s Word has had upon many of these persons. One woman baptized at London, England, explained:
“I had been under treatment by a psychiatrist for four years, and had taken a lot of drugs for a nervous complaint. The drugs hadn’t helped though. But Bible truth did! I don’t take drugs anymore. My whole life has been changed, so much so that my husband decided that he would look into the Bible also, and he’s having a study now.”
A person baptized at Inglewood, California, told her experience: “I was working as a therapist in a mental hospital and became well acquainted with one of the patients. The psychiatrist admitted they could not help, and released her. In the hospital she hadn’t eaten well and would not talk; she had once even swallowed a bottle of Chlorox in an attempt to commit suicide.
“Two months later, however, she came back to visit me, tremendously improved. She explained that she had become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The change in her was so evident that I was convinced there is something greater than science, and I was moved to study the Bible and dedicate my life to serve Jehovah God.”
Some of those who were baptized had previously suffered severe marital problems or had been drug addicts, alcoholics, criminals or sexual deviates. But as a result of practicing what they studied in the Bible their lives had been completely changed. The Kennebec Journal told of a man in prison for murder who was given a one-day release to be baptized at the Augusta, Maine, assembly. Another person, baptized in Buffalo, New York, explained:
“I had been in the entertainment business for the past 15 years, without any great success. Since I was 13 I was homosexual. I really didn’t enjoy living; I was very unhappy and did not want people to know about my life.
“I wanted to change and knew that some of my family were Jehovah’s Witnesses. I knew there was a better life somewhere. Last year I heard on television that there was going to be an assembly in Buffalo and I decided right then I wanted to come.
“My mother had a friend of hers call on me. I obtained a Bible from her and she answered many questions for me. I began to study and to change from an immoral way of life to a clean one. This led me to dedicate my life to serve Jehovah.”
Other Assembly Features
Each assembly day had a theme. After the first day’s theme “Sacred Service as a Family,” there was “Your Sacred Service in the Congregation,” then, on the third day, “Sacred Service in the Field,” and the last day’s theme, “Enduring in Sacred Service.” Many delegates expressed appreciation that each day’s program was organized around a theme, as it served as an aid for them to remember the information.
A feature of each assembly day was a Bible drama that nicely impressed a point of instruction. The first one, entitled “Have You Fixed Your Heart on Jehovah’s Worship?” centered around the efforts of young King Josiah of ancient Judah to serve Jehovah God and the vacillating attitude of the people around him. (2 Ki. chap. 22 and 23) It caused many of those watching to examine whether it is truly their own heart’s desire to serve Jehovah.
The two dramas “In Showing Honor . . . Take the Lead” and “Are You an Example to the Flock?” contained fine instruction for Christian overseers. And the final day’s drama, “Maintaining integrity Down to the End,” portrayed the faithfulness of the three young Hebrews who refused to bow to King Nebuchadnezzar’s golden image. The presentation was especially encouraging for young Christians who often face the issue of nationalism in school.​—Dan. chap. 3.
What force is it that backs up Jehovah’s servants and helps them to serve him? The feature discourse of the second day, “Holy Spirit in Action,” showed that it is God’s invisible active force​—his holy spirit. At the conclusion of the talk the new 192-page book Holy Spirit​—The Force Behind the Coming New Order! was released.
The third day of the assembly program laid great stress on a Christian’s responsibility to share in witnessing to others about God’s kingdom, even as Jesus Christ did. (Luke 4:43; 8:1) There were such talks as “Are You Prepared to Talk on the Bible?”, “Enlarging Your Sacred Service” and “Never Forget You Are a Witness.” And insofar as practicing what they hear preached is concerned, the Edmonton Journal observed: “One sure thing about the Witnesses: they can never be accused of being ‘Sunday Christians.’” Yes, Jehovah’s Witnesses have the well-earned reputation of actively witnessing to others regarding their Bible-based beliefs.
During the course of the third day’s principal talk, “Sounding Forth Good News in All the Earth,” the new 192-page book Good News​—to Make You Happy was released. It is designed particularly to be used in bringing the Bible’s message to Orientals and others who may have had little or no previous acquaintance with the Bible’s teachings.
The final day’s program, besides a Bible drama and the public talk, “Will Serving God Solve Your Problems?”, featured a series of discourses that encouraged endurance in God’s service.
Practicing What Is Preached
Delegates to an assembly at Belmont racetrack in Elmont, New York, needed endurance. That was when Hurricane Belle swept over the assembly grounds during the early morning darkness of the assembly’s third day. Some Witnesses were forced to spend the night in local Kingdom Halls. But the program began the next morning as scheduled with nearly 16,000 in attendance. None of the Witnesses were hurt, but the homes of some were damaged.
Service to God in behalf of others is fundamental to Christianity, making so appropriate the theme of this year’s assemblies, “Sacred Service.” (Matt. 4:10; 20:28) Well, did the Witnesses really practice serving others? The Philadelphia Evening Bulletin commented:
“A few hours after the [Major League All-Star] game the Stadium was as spic-and-span as the day it was opened. . . . Over night, about 2,000 members of Jehovah’s Witnesses descended on the ball park and swept it clean to the last nook and cranny.”​—July 14, 1976.
The Kemper Arena, the site of the Republican National Convention in August, was used for the Witnesses’ assembly in Kansas City. The Kansas City Times explained:
“Before the opening of the assembly Thursday morning the Witnesses​—mothers, fathers and children—​washed the arena seats and scrubbed down the floor. Then after the convention closed yesterday part of the 12,509 Witnesses on hand returned to the cleaning. . . .
“And that is an attitude city officials appreciate . . . In their appreciation they have encouraged the Witnesses to continue holding assemblies here. Forever more.”​—June 14, 1976.
In city after city newspapers carried similar reports. Yet Jehovah’s Witnesses freely volunteered their services not only to clean assembly facilities. They performed many other necessary services, including securing rooming accommodations for out-of-town guests, preparing food and serving it to delegates. The Providence Sunday Journal reported:
“It’s a problem a field commander would stumble over, a logistic puzzle to worry the best of planners.
“How do you feed 10,000 people at a time, providing a variety of food, all for a dollar a meal?
“Using time-tested methods and a self-reliance seldom found elsewhere, the Jehovah’s Witnesses have come up with an answer. . . .
“Before the convention even began, hundreds of volunteers came in, building serving and eating tables, and vegetable and fruit washing vats. Then, at the beginning of the first of two four-day assemblies​—each to be attended by about 9,500 persons—​hundreds more came in to do the cooking.”​—July 25, 1976.
This loving concern for the interests of others was manifest in many, many different ways at the assemblies. Time and again, for instance, when items of value were lost, Witnesses who found them took them to the Lost and Found Department, where they could be recovered. How happy a young man attending the Tiger Stadium assembly in Detroit, Michigan, was to recover an engagement ring! He had dropped it from the third deck down to the lower level when showing it to his cousin. The next day, however, it was turned in by a young Witness who had found it.
Quite a different kind of service in behalf of others is the appeals made by Jehovah’s Witnesses to the Malawi government to stop persecuting their fellow Christians in that country. At some assemblies aerograms were made available​—29,000 of them being purchased by the Reno assembly delegates alone! An area was set up for letter writing, and even some sample letters were provided.
If it appeals to you to associate with people who practice the love and service urged in God’s Word, we invite you to prove whether Jehovah’s Witnesses are this sort of people or not. In the months ahead they will be having smaller assemblies, perhaps in your own vicinity, as well as weekly meetings at their local Kingdom Hall. Why not plan to visit and examine for yourself?
[Picture on page 17]
Delegates to the “Sacred Service” Assembly in Athens, Greece. For the assemblies from which reports have thus far been received, the combined attendance is 1,954,211
[Picture on page 18]
Young people listening to the talk “What Does Youth Want out of Life?”
[Picture on page 19]
All together, 27,717 persons were baptized at the assemblies from which reports have thus far been received
[Picture on page 20]
Four Bible dramas were a feature of the assemblies. Here is a scene from one of them
[Picture on page 21]
The new book “Good News to Make You Happy” should be of particular help to Orientals
[Picture on page 22]
Thousands of persons, including the three above, volunteered their services to make the assemblies a success
[Picture on page 23]
Among the services for assembly delegates was the providing of rooming accommodations

