VOL. XXXIV NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Because We Love the Brethren 339 

Principles of Church Government 340 

The Ecclesia Superior to its Servants 340 

What Course Should We Take? 341 

A Clearer View of Prophecy 342 

The Image of the Beast 342 

Important Step Toward Federation 343 

Electing Elders and Deacons 344 

The Sin of Covetousness 345 

Covetousness in the Consecrated 345 

The Logos Made Flesh 346 

"The Light of the World" 347 

Christ in the Heart (Poem) 347 

"Choose Ye This Day" 348 

"Testified in Due Time 348 

Marriage is Honorable 349 

Some Interesting Letters 349 

Evil Spirits and the Editor's Comment 349 

"The Tower" Grows Deeper and Sweeter 350 



Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 351 

page 338 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



"HANDWRITING ON THE WALL" 



We have on hand a large quantity of the BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY, the foremost article of which is entitled, "The 
Handwriting on the Wall." It is very opportune literature, 
we believe. We printed more than we needed apparently 
and have more than a million on hand. Undoubtedly there 
are many places where they have not been distributed. Here 
is an opportunity for some to preach the Gospel. The papers 
will be sent free, charges prepaid, in whatever quantities you 
can use. In estimating quantities, remember that census reports 
include children; hence the census figures should be 
divided by six to allow one paper for each family. Order 
accordingly. 

We also have a considerable quantity of the "Creed Smashing" 
and "Fire and Brimstone" issues. These we also offer 
free, prepaid. 



R5353 : page 338 



FREE LITERATURE IN THIRTY LANGUAGES 



We can supply literature on Present Truth in any of the 
following languages: English, German, French, Swedish, 
Danish, Norwegian, Finnish, Welsh, Polish, Hungarian, Hollandish, 
Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Greek, Russian, Armenian, 
Arabic, Tamil, Malayalam, Zulu, Esperanto, Maori, 
Gujarati, Marathi, Telugu, Urdu, Chinese (Wenli and Mandarin), 
Korean and Japanese. 

Also literature for the English-reading blind in American 
Braille, English Braille and New York Point; likewise literature 
for German, French, Swedish and Danish-reading blind 
people. 

We do not always have all of these in stock at Brooklyn, 
but usually have the main supply nearest the point of demand. 
However, communicate with us if you are in the vicinity of 
any of the above mentioned peoples and we shall be pleased 
to co-operate with you by supplying the desired literature as 
quickly as possible. 

page 338 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR DECEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for December 
follow: (1) 165; (2) 18; (3) 160; (4) 145; (5) 303; (6) 
44; (7) 14; (8) 229; (9) 186; (10) 315; (11) 168; (12) 235; 
(13) 230; (14) 327; (15) 119; (16) 233; (17) 60; (18) 12; (19) 
53; (20) 7; (21) 166; (22) 197; (23) 54; (24) 163; (25) 180; 
(26) 221; (27) 103; (28) 273; (29) 26; (30) 38; (31) 307. 



R5346 : page 339 

"BECAUSE WE LOVE THE BRETHREN" 

"We know that we have passed from death unto 
life, because we love the brethren."— 1 John 3:14. 

WE are glad to testify that both from personal 
contact and through correspondence we 
have every reason to believe that the Bible 
Students, who constitute the large majority 
of our readers, have been growing in grace 
lately— during the past few years. Contrasting 
the present with three, six or ten 
years ago, we notice a great increase in 
spirituality— the Spirit of the Lord— the 



Holy Spirit of Love. 

Not only is this manifested in activities in the service 
of the Truth, but also in broader sympathies one for 
another and for all Christians— and, indeed, for the entire 
groaning creation. This is just what it should be 
every year; every week, indeed, should mark progress in 
Christ-likeness, as we remember that, "If any man have 
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His," and therefore 
will have no part in the Kingdom— whatever inferior 
blessing he may obtain under stripes and disciplines 
necessary to the development of the proper character. 

We remember further the Apostle's statement that the 
Divine predestination respecting the Church is that we 
must each individually in character become copies of our 
Lord. (Romans 8:29.) Surely such clear statements of 
the Divine will and of the terms upon which we may 
make our calling and election sure should be stimulating. 

Nevertheless, notwithstanding all the progress noted, 
many of the little classes are experiencing friction, which 
causes more or less concern and unhappiness. As the 
Truth makes us free and opens the eyes of our understanding, 
it enables us to see our own imperfections and 
the imperfections of the brethren and of the world more 
clearly than ever. Unless there be a large amount of 
love, this will mean a disposition to find fault, to criticize. 

We may safely give ourselves considerable liberty 
along these lines in dealing with our own character. We 
may find fault with ourselves and criticize ourselves often 
to advantage. Yet even this should not be carried so far 
that we forget the Lord's gracious promise that He will 
judge us according to our heart intentions and not according 
to our imperfect attainments. We are, perhaps, 
better able to appreciate our own shortcomings, and how 
they were unintentional; but when the shortcomings are 
those of others, it tests our love, patience, brotherly-kindness, 
meekness, gentleness, etc. Yet such testings are 
very profitable. We pray that the Lord will assist us in 
growing in the graces of the Holy Spirit. Let us 
remember that the only way to assist us would be by 
giving us testings along these very lines. Our strength 
of character, our development in these graces, will be in 
proportion as we receive these testings in the proper spirit. 

PROOF OF RELATIONSHIP AS NEW CREATURES 

Our text seems to imply that the love of the brethren 
is one of the most beautiful experiences of the Christian. 
Whoever finds that he has full love for all the brethren, 
full sympathy for them, therein has a specially strong 
Scriptural proof that he himself is a New Creature— 
that he has passed from death unto life. And whoever 
has any other sentiment than love to any of the brethren 
surely lacks proof, or demonstration, along this line of 
his relationship to God as a New Creature. 

If we keep this always in mind, how valuable an 
assistance it will be to us! Do we not frequently desire 



to reassure ourselves of the Lord's favor and of our 
continued relationship to Him as New Creatures, passed 
from death unto life? If we do, here is the text, the 
application of which, if we are in the right condition, 
should bring peace and joy. And if we are in the wrong 
condition, it should bring alarm for our personal safety 
as New Creatures. 

One of the points of friction in many of the classes 
is the relationship between the class and its servants. 
So far as we can judge, the fault is sometimes with the 
one and sometimes with the other. We are frequently 
asked in respect to the duties of the Elders, the responsibility 
of the classes, etc. In general, we prefer to 
refer all such inquiries to our very full discussion of 
the subject in the sixth volume of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 
We know not how to improve on the suggestions 
there made. We believe that if what we have written 
were thoroughly studied, the recommendations there 
given would be found ample for every case. 

On doctrinal matters we prefer not to write personal 
letters; for in a few cases we have found that the persons 
receiving the letters have either misunderstood 
them, or only partially communicated their contents to 
others when discussing the matter. Again, some have 
said, "Brother Russell wrote thus and so in STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES, but we have a later letter which intimates 

R5347 : page 340 

that he has changed his mind." We wish the 
dear friends to feel assured that if our judgment changes 
respecting any important truths we will put the change 
before all THE WATCH TOWER readers as speedily as 
possible. Until you see such changes mentioned in THE 
WATCH TOWER give no credit to them; esteem the statements 
of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES just as though 
they were written yesterday and direct to yourself. 

PRINCIPLES OF CHURCH GOVERNMENT 

Briefly summarizing the principles governing the 
Church of Christ, let us say: There are two views 
prevalent amongst Christians respecting Church 
government: 

(1) The Episcopal view, which holds that the Church 
is to be ruled and governed by bishops, because of the 
claim that these are Apostolic bishops; that is, that they 
are successors to the Apostles, and invested with Apostolic 
wisdom and inspiration and authority for the regulation 

of the Church and its affairs. This view is held 

by Roman Catholics, Greek Catholics and Episcopalians. 

(2) The other view is the Congregationalist, and 
holds that each congregation of the Lord's people is a 
unit, and has the right to govern itself and to make its 
own regulations for its own welfare, subject to Divine 
guidance. Congregationalists, Baptists and some others 



claim to be governed by this view. Other denominations, 
with more or less confusion and indecision, divide 
authority between the ministers and the laity. 

We hold that the Bible arrangement combines the 
Episcopal and the Congregational views. Thus the 
Scriptures teach that the twelve Apostles were and still 
are the Episcopate— the only inspired and authoritative 
Apostolic Bishops. Whatsoever these declared to be 
binding on earth is binding amongst the Lord's people. 
Whatsoever they declared loosed, or not binding, would 
not be obligatory upon the Church in the sight of 
Heaven. From this viewpoint, the words of Jesus respecting 
all other so-called apostolic bishops are quite 
pointed. He declares that they are "false apostles and 
do lie"— they are not apostles in any sense of the word. 
(Revelation 2:2; 2 Corinthians 11:13.) Hence we are 
not to give heed nor to in any manner recognize the 
claims of these bishops, whom Satan has deluded into 
thinking that they have Apostolic power— Apostolic 
succession. 

As the people of God have the original Episcopacy, 
the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, for authority and direction, 
they are thus organized under an Episcopal government, 
or government of the Apostolic Bishops— nevertheless 
their organization is properly congregational. 
Each company of the Lord's consecrated people is entirely 
free, and should have its own faith in the Bible 
and all the precious truths of the Bible. No congregation 
and no individual can properly be bound by the 
vows of other congregations or other individuals. 

The Congregation, Ecclesia, Church, coming together 
to act as one, to worship together, to serve God's Cause 
together, should do so because of their mutual appreciation 
of the Divine character and Plan. They are not 
under anybody's government, or rule, except that of the 
Bible Episcopate— the Apostolic teachings. As for the 
Elders and Deacons of each Congregation, they are to 
be chosen by the Congregation from their own number, 
in accordance with the instructions of the Bible. No 
earthly power has a right to intervene between the instructions 
of the Divinely-appointed twelve Apostles and 
the companies of the Lord's people who choose to assemble 
themselves in harmony with the Apostolic instructions. 
This at one stroke wipes out all papal 
authority and the authority of all apostolic bishops 
falsely so-called. 

Since the Deacons and Elders, Pastors and Teachers, 
are lifted to their places of service and honor by the 
votes of the brethren, it places the Congregation in 
greater authority than its servants. But the Congregation, 
in turn, is bound not to force its preferences, but 
merely to act loyally in harmony with the Divine direction 
given by the Apostles in the Bible. Thus we see 
that the truth on the subject from the Divine standpoint 
has been measurably lost sight of for centuries, to the 
disadvantage of the Church— some taking one part of 



the Truth and some another— few, if any, recognizing 
the whole. Indeed, this is what we find to have been 
the case in respect to nearly every doctrine. 

While particulars have been set forth in STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Volume VI, yet in what we have above stated 
lie the principles involved. Whoever thoroughly grasps 
the principles should be able to appreciate the details. 
And it would be only a question of thought and patient 
deliberation to settle all the details of the affairs of any 
little Class, in accordance with the Scriptures. Thus 
while the Class gives certain authority and service into 
the hands of those chosen to be its Elders, and appoints 
others to assist them in the work as Deacons, or servants, 
nevertheless, both Elders and Deacons are answerable 
to the Congregation, to the ecclesia. 

THE ECCLESIA SUPERIOR TO ITS SERVANTS 

In case of any dispute, the judgment, or decision, 
of the Congregation should stand as the right thing for 
the time being. If it prove later to have been unwise, 
the Lord is able to overrule the error of judgment for 
good— for instruction. To illustrate: Should the judgment 
of the Class at any time differ from the judgment 
of the Elder or Elders, the proper course would be for 
the Elders to submit to the higher authority, which is 
the Class, the Church, the Ecclesia; for he who appoints 
is superior to him who is appointed. Our Lord's arrangement 
for the Classes, or Ecclesias, is, "Wherever 
two or three of you are met in My name, there am I." 
The Lord has promised to be with the Class. He has 
not said, Wherever there is an Elder, there am I, and 
to him shall the Class gather; but, Wherever there is a 
Class there am I; and it may appoint an Elder, whom I 
will recognize and bless as its representative and for its 
good, in proportion as he shall strive to be a suitable 
vessel to be My servant in blessing that Class. 

This appreciation of the true relationship between the 
Elder and the Class should help the Elders to cultivate 
those fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit described by 
St. Paul as meekness, gentleness, patience, brotherly 
kindness, long-suffering, love. But, on the other hand, 
the Congregation, Ecclesia, having chosen one of its 
number to serve it as an Elder Brother and to look out 
for its interests, should hope that they had wisely chosen 
in harmony with the Lord's Word and providences. So 
hoping, they should be prepared to give support and encouragement 
to the Elder, in proportion as they see him 
striving to know and to do the Lord's will and faithfully 
to lay down his time and talents in the service of the 
Class. Should they subsequently find that apparently 
they had not fully discerned and followed the Apostolic 
instructions respecting the selection of the Elder, they 
should still be kind and gentle toward him, remembering 
that the fault was theirs in electing him— a fault to be 
rectified at the next election— and trusting and praying 



R5347 : page 341 

that they may know the will of the Lord more perfectly 
and be wiser in their selection. 

DUTIES OF THE ECCLESIA 

From this viewpoint the Congregation has everything 
to say in respect to the number of meetings to be held, 
where they are to be held, by whom they are to be conducted, 
the character of the lessons or studies, etc. 
Nothing of this kind is for the Elder to decide, though 
as a member of the Congregation he has the same right 
to be heard that the others have. In proportion as he 
is esteemed highly, his opinion will have weight with the 
Ecclesia, Class, or Congregation. Nevertheless, the 
Class should never forget the thought that however 
highly the Elder may be esteemed, he is not their guide. 
The Elders and all others are to be heeded in proportion 
as they are seen to wisely interpret the teachings of the 
Holy Scriptures. 

We believe that with these principles seen, approved 
and looked up to, there will be less and less friction in 
the Classes. The Elders, in just their proper sphere 
and conscientiously seeking to serve in harmony therewith, 
will be restrained from doing and saying many 
things out of their province and likely to stir up difficulties 
among the members of the Classes. 

A POTENT FACTOR IN ALL DISPUTES 

It will generally be found, we believe, that pride is a 
potent factor in all Church disputes. Sometimes the 
Elder undertakes to do for the Class more than it wishes 
him to do and more than it has authorized him to do. 
Or, misguided by the sentiments prevalent among all 
denominations of Christendom, he thinks of his Eldership 
as an office of authority over the Church, and not 
as an honorable service, the authority being vested in the 
Class. Sometimes the difficulty is with some member 
of the Class, who, seeking to preserve the rights and 
authority of the Class, goes to an extreme, and unnecessarily 
harries the Elder, criticizing him for doing 
the right thing, but not doing it exactly the way this 
well-intentioned brother thinks he should do. 

Love should apply the Golden Rule. We should be 
willing to give the Elder as much reasonable liberty of 
action as we would like to enjoy if we were in his place 
—provided, of course, that this liberty should be in full 
harmony with the Word of God. Furthermore, we 
should remember that the Elder is the servant of the 
whole Class, and not the servant specially of any one 
member of it. Any criticism, therefore, of his conduct 
should come from the Class and not merely from an 



R5348 : page 341 

individual member of it. If an individual member has 
an important thought which the Elder ignores he should 
be at liberty to ask the judgment of the Class on the 
subject for his own instruction and for the instruction 
of the Elder; but no individual member should undertake 
to criticize the Elder or to find fault with his procedure. 

If the Class approves of the Elder, the individuals 
thinking differently are at liberty still to think as they 
please, but should yield to the majority. In other words, 
peace and order in a class are items of great value in 
respect to all progress in Bible study. Nothing should 
be done to disturb the peace and order unless there be 
something positively wrong, unscriptural, connected with 
the matter. Then the brother or the sister calling attention 
to the matters which he considers unscriptural, 
should say little about his own opinion and deal chiefly 
with the Scriptural injunctions which he believes are 
being violated. 

"LET BROTHERLY LOVE CONTINUE" 

These suggestions are intended to increase and promote 
peace and unity amongst the Lord's brethren 
wherever this journal goes. We have confidence that all 
who are begotten of the one Spirit, the Holy Spirit, are 
desirous of knowing and doing that which is right- 
that which is pleasing and acceptable to God and for the 
best interests of His Cause. "By one Spirit we were 
all baptized into one Body." "If any man have not the 
Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." Our thought is that 
all being one with the Lord— of one heart, of one will— 
our difficulties lie almost entirely in our heads, in our 
misapprehension of some of the principles governing the 
Divine arrangement. And these principles, we may be 
sure, are perfect, right. In proportion as we can come 
into harmony with these principles, we shall be at peace 
one with another, joyfully assisting each other toward 
the Kingdom, in which we shall have a share with our Lord. 

Let us continually remember that love for all the 
brethren is a sure indication that we love as New 
Creatures. And love for the brethren means that we 
will do them no injury, that we will speak no evil respecting 
them unless of absolute necessity; and, finally, 
that we will not even surmise evil in respect to their 
words and deeds. "Love is the fulfilling of the Law." 
"He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God (by 
His Spirit dwelleth) in him." For though we should 
give all our goods to feed the poor, and though we should 
even sacrifice our bodies to be burned in the interests 
of righteousness, yet if we have not love— the Spirit of 
love— we are nothing in God's sight.— Romans 13:10; 
I John 4:16; I Cor. 13:3. 



R5348 : page 341 

WHAT COURSE SHOULD WE TAKE? 

WE HAVE received two letters inquiring about 
the practical bearing of our October, 1914, 
hopes on the affairs of this life. It occurs 
to us that others who have not written may 
have the same thought; so we give to you 
all a digest of our answers. 

The Brother who wrote us suggested 
that he is a farmer, and that if sure that the 
Church would be gathered before October, 
1914, or that the great Time of Trouble 
would there begin, he would in either case 
be inclined to quit farming and to spend the year in the 
Colporteur work, as he would have sufficient money to do 
this if he were to mortgage his farm or sell it. 

In our reply we advised the Brother that if he had a 
wife or family dependent upon him for support, we 
thought that this suggestion would not be a wise one at 
all, but that if he were unincumbered, we would consider 
the thought a very good one. He would be merely giving 
a year to the Lord's work, and at the close of the year 
might hope in any event to be in reasonable health and as 
capable as ever of earning a living. 

We believe that a year spent in the Colporteur work 
would prove an excellent schooling in perseverance and 
self-denial, in service of others, and in thinking upon and 
handling holy things. Yet even in this case we believe 
that some allowance should be made for temperament and 
capability for Colporteur service. While few, if any, have 
no talent whatever for such work, there are some who 
have so little talent that they might merely discourage 
themselves without accomplishing much in the interest of 
others. We must use all wisdom in respect to what we 

R5348 : page 342 

attempt to do, that our time and strength— mental and 
physical— shall render us as good results as possible to the 
Lord's praise. Each should seek wisdom from on High 
to guide him in such matters. 

Another letter received inquired respecting the proper 
treatment to be given to a member of the Class who insisted 
on opposing the chronology and denouncing all faith in October, 
1914, either as respects the gathering of the Church 
or the inauguration of the world's great Time of Trouble. 
Our reply may be applicable in other cases. It is to the effect 
that nobody should be specially encouraged in such an 
opposition; for a bad spirit is always objectionable, injurious. 
However, we should not denounce those who in 
a proper spirit express their dissent in respect to the date 
mentioned and what may be there expected; nor should 
we feel aggrieved toward them. We should recognize the 



individual rights of all, and treat everybody according to 
the Golden Rule. Nor should we feel at liberty to express 
our views more dogmatically than we would think right 
for others to do in expressing their views. 

THE SIGNS OF THE TIMES 

The fact is that, notwithstanding the strength of our 
position and our hope that it may be true, it is nevertheless 
of faith and not of knowledge. To some, faith in the matter 
may become almost as strong and convincing as knowledge. 
Nevertheless, it is not knowledge, it is faith. We 
must admit that there are possibilities of our having made 
a mistake in respect to the chronology, even though we do 
not see where any mistake has been made in calculating 
the Seven Times of the Gentiles as expiring about 
October 1, 1914. 

If others feel equally convinced respecting some other 
date which does not appeal to us, we should not on that 
account reject them as members of the Body of Christ. 
Rather, we should say, Whether you or we have the date 
correct, we must all agree that the signs of the times as 
we read them indicate clearly that the Master is nigh, 
even at the door; and that His Kingdom is soon due to 
begin to take control. This means that, whether within 
one year or within ten or twenty years, the things which 
we are expecting will surely be accomplished. The Church 
will be gathered, the Messianic Reign of Righteousness 
will begin, preceded, as foretold, by the great Time of 
Trouble. 

The general facts are much more valuable and important 
than merely the day or the year respecting these facts. 
"Let brotherly love continue!" Suffer not any dispute 
over a day or a year to break the most precious bond of 
love which binds us to the Lord and to all who are truly 
His. Be specially careful on this point when the subject 
of discussion is one respecting which we have no positive 
knowledge. The rupture of fellowship may sometimes be 
necessary, when we "contend earnestly for the faith once 
delivered unto the saints"— faith in the Divine Plan, in the 
Redeemer, in the efficacy of His death, etc. These matters 
are positively stated in the Bible— not left to deduction, as 
in the case of chronology and all matters based upon 
chronology. 

A CLEARER VIEW OF PROPHECY 

From time to time the Editor has assured the friends 
that as features of the Truth become more and more distinct 
to him he would surely give THE WATCH TOWER 
readers the benefit of this clearer view; in other words, he 
would keep nothing back. 

We have presented in THE WATCH TOWER, for thirty-three 
years past, the fact that great Babylon will receive 
her judgment before the nations receive theirs. The statement, 
"Judgment must begin at the House of God," while 



applying especially to the real, or consecrated Church, we 
believe has also a bearing upon the nominal systems. It 
will be after the fall of Babylon, her casting as a great 
millstone into the sea, that the great distress of nations 
will come, apparently. 

Nevertheless, we have all probably been inclined to 
think more particularly of the world's Time of Trouble- 
to look for it, to expect it daily, or by October, 1914, as 
one result of the closing of the Gentile Times, or years. 
Perhaps we have neglected to some extent the fact that 
great Babylon apparently is dealt with before that world-trouble 
comes. The thought has been borne in upon the 
Editor very forcefully during the past two weeks that to 
expect the world's great trouble to begin on or before 
October 1, 1914, would be to expect astounding things during 
the intervening months. 

St. Peter describes the great Day of Wrath, intimating 
that it will begin with the nominal church class— the 
heavens. "The Day of the Lord will come as a thief in the 
night, in which the heavens shall pass away with a 
great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; 
the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be 
burned up." (2 Peter 3:10.) Understanding the earth 
here to represent the present social order, and the 
heavens to represent the ecclesiastical order of affairs, we 
find that the ecclesiastical heavens are to pass away with 

R5349 : page 342 

a great noise, a great commotion, a great confusion, and 
their elements or component parts will be melted in the 
fervency of the heat and strife of that time; and that then 
the earth, or social order, will follow it in the combustion 
or consumption of the trouble of that Day— destroying 
the present social fabric— overthrowing all law and order 
in anarchy. If, then, we should expect that the trouble 
would reach society in general within a year, this would 
seem to mean that before that time the present religious 
institutions would collapse. Will they? 

THE IMAGE OF THE BEAST 

Revelation, 13th Chapter, we interpreted in THE 
WATCH TOWER as far back as 1880. We there suggested 
that in symbolic language a beast represents a government 
—that the ten-horned beast represented the Papal government, 
which for a time ruled over all Europe, then the 
Roman Empire. Although Papacy has no such political 
influence now, it still claims that it has the right, or authority, 
to rule all nations, as the representative or vicegerent 
of Messiah. 

We pointed out the two-horned beast as represented 
in the Church-nation of Great Britain and Ireland; for it 
also is a government which combines Christianity and 
civil power. The Bishops sit in Parliament and the King 
is officially the head of the Church of England. The symbol 



tells us that as an ecclesiastical power this is a harmless 
one, "its two horns being like those of a lamb"— not 
intended to do injury. "But it spake as a dragon." The 
dragon represents purely civil power and the Government 
of Great Britain, though nominally religious, speaks, or 
governs as a dragon, or purely civil power. 

We also called attention to the fact that "the Image of 
the (Papal) Beast" was formed in 1846 A.D. In that 
year the Protestant denominations, especially in the United 
States, allied themselves as the "Evangelical Alliance." 
Their alliance ostensibly was for peace and harmony and 
noble objects of co-operation; but really the organization 
would appear to have been intended as an attempt to give 
dignity and authority to all of the various Protestant sects, 
and as far as possible to hinder the formation of any new 
sects by excluding them as unorthodox. 

The Alliance endeavored to establish a standard of 
orthodoxy and to give a mutual support and backing to all 
the different creeds identified with it— Baptists, Methodists, 

R5349 : page 343 

Lutherans, Presbyterians, etc. This attempted authority, 

or power, constituted it an Image of the Papal Beast, or 

Government. They saw the power of the Papal argument, 

that it is the Church, and that all others are heretical. 

So the Evangelical Alliance undertakes to say for its constituent 

members of all denominations: "All these are 

orthodox; all others are heretical." In this sense it was a 

copy, or image, of the Papal institution. It has been 

merely an Image without life or power for now more than 

sixty years. 

However, the Lord's symbolic prophecy, which we are 
now considering (Revelation 13), tells us that in the close 
of this Age the Image will receive life, vitality, energy, 
power. No longer will it stand as a mere Image. It will 
become as active as the Beast. Moreover, it will not be 
antagonistic to the Beast, but sympathetic, and cause that 
all shall either worship the Beast or the Image— all must 
be in harmony either with Catholicism, or with the Protestant 
system, of which the Evangelical Alliance was the 
primary organization or Image. The Protestant Church 
Federation will be the outcome as soon as it receives the 
vitalizing breath. 

AN IMPORTANT STEP TOWARD FEDERATION 

The vitality of the Image is to come from the two-horned 
Beast; that is, the Church of England. We have 
been waiting for this consummation more than thirty 
years, and have seen it draw nearer and nearer. A few 
years ago the Episcopal Church took an important step 
toward vitalizing the Church Federation movement, which 
it is favoring and backing. That important step was the 
recognition of the ministers of the denominations represented 
in the Evangelical Alliance. Previously no minister 



not ordained by the laying on of hands of a Catholic 

or an Episcopalian bishop was allowed to preach from an 

Episcopalian pulpit. 

Perhaps this recognition of the Image is all the vitalization 
the Image needs, but we are inclined to expect 
more. For years the Episcopalians have proffered reordination 
to the ministers of the different denominations 
represented in the Evangelical Alliance. And they still 
proffer it. We have been inclined to expect that the ministers 
would finally concede the point and accept a reordination 
at the hands of an Episcopal bishop. But we 
are not sure of this. It is possible that, to meet the requirements 
of the case, some other way will be found by 
which the Episcopal Church will recognize the Church 
Federation without obligating the ministers to be reordained. 
We are waiting for this. 

As, we understand this Chapter of Revelation, the 
Image, as soon as vitalized, will very promptly use its influence, 
prestige, power, in every way to "make fire come 
down from heaven" (Rev. 13:13); that is, to punish in 
the name of the Lord those who in any sense of the word 
it shall consider to be its opponents. Speedily none will 
be allowed to buy or sell, in the spiritual marts, except 
those who have either the mark or the number of the 
Beast, or of the Image, either in the right hand of co-operation 
or in the forehead of public confession. 

This will mean that the INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
ASSOCIATION and all others not in affiliation with 
the Alliance will be subjected to radically coercive measures. 
Truth shall fall in the streets. Righteousness will 
be unable to enter under the stress of the new order of 
things. For a time it will appear as though a great Christian 
victory had been won, shared equally by Papacy and 
federated— Protestantism— no longer protesting. Already 
we see these two divisions of the heavens rolling together, 
approaching one another, sympathizing with each other- 
rolling together for mutual protection. 

But the triumph of that new order of things will be 
short. The masses of the people, no longer ignorantly 
stupid as during the Dark Ages, will awaken to the true 
situation, and will execute upon Babylon the Great— 
already repudiated by the Lord— the judgment foretold. 
She shall be cast like a great millstone into the sea, never 
to rise again. The sea represents the masses of the people, 
especially a restless opposition class. The two-horned 
Beast apparently loses its personality when it gives 
life to the Image by becoming a member of the Federation. 

THE PRESENT OUTLOOK 

Now the question arises: Can all these things take 
place within a year? We answer, Yes; it would be possible. 
A second question is, Is it likely? Is it probable? 
And the answer is, No; it seems scarcely probable that so 
much would be accomplished in one year. Now, there 
we have the question— each must exercise his own judgment 



in respect to the matter. We certainly see a very 

rank spirit of anger, malice, hatred and strife developing 

in many quarters, amongst the very ones who constitute 

the members of the federation. And these slanderous oppositions 

come usually from the ministers of these 

denominations. 

If they do these things in a green tree, what shall be 
done in the dry? (Luke 23:31.) If such bigotry and 
bitter falsification are practised and such hatred is manifested 
before the Evangelical Alliance has any life, how 
arrogant might we suppose the same persons to become 
after the Image would receive life? And how quickly 
might the spirit of rancorous persecution be developed? 

Let us make the matter clear. According to the old, 
but erroneous, thought handed down for centuries, the 
bishops of the Church of England and of the Church of 
Rome are "apostolic bishops," or successors to the Apostles, 
according to the old theory of apostolic succession. 
According to that same theory, no one on earth has one 
particle of right to teach and to preach, except as those 
"apostolic bishops" shall grant their permission by laying 
on their hands. 

According to this rule, then, Methodists, Baptists, 
Lutherans, Presbyterians and all such are preaching without 
authority. When they talk about ordination, they 
merely mean that each sect ordains its own ministers. 
The Alliance is attempting to get around this difficulty 
and to have the sects recognize each other's ordination. 
The Federation is building upon this general recognition 
of orthodoxy, and is about, in some manner, to be given 
life, virility, power, dignity, by something which the 
Church of England will do for them which will recognize 
their ordination as ministers. 

We may be sure that they will make the road to the 
preaching and teaching of the Gospel a very narrow one 
to all attempting to preach without their recognition and 
ordination. These will be trying times upon us and upon 
all who will refuse to worship the Beast and his Image, 
or to receive the mark of the Beast upon the forehead or 
upon the hand.— Revelation 13:15-17. 

OUR ATTITUDE TOWARD ONE ANOTHER 

The special point we are now emphasizing is that if 
we find it difficult, though not impossible, to see that these 
things could be accomplished within a year, we should feel 
and act most kindly and tolerantly toward others of the 
brethren who feel positive that these things will not take 
place within a year, or who think that they see flaws in 
our chronological views. "Let brotherly love continue." 
"Abhor that which is evil. Cleave to that which is good." 
Thus will the grace of God be with us, to guide us, to bless 

R5350 : page 344 

us, to cause all of our experiences to work for good, even 



though some of those experiences should be disappointments 
in respect to fulfilments of prophecy within the 
next few months. 

The Episcopal Church Conference has just passed an 
amendment to the Church constitution, providing for the 
choice of one of their number to be Presiding Bishop- 
much the same as the Archbishop's office in the Church of 
England. After some sharp discussion they also authorized 
their Mission Board to co-operate with mission 
boards of other Christian bodies. Some bishops objected 
that this would violate their "priestly vows," but they 
were outvoted. This co-operation with other Protestants, 
in conjunction with the action previously taken, permitting 
other Protestant ministers to participate on invitation 
in Episcopal Church services, is practically a recognition 
of the Evangelical Alliance or Church Federation. How 
much more may be necessary to give LIFE and POWER to 
the Image we must wait and see. 

Our statement in October 15th issue that we have 
never mentioned October, 1914, as an infallibly sure date, 
either for the ending of the "Times of the Gentiles" or 
for any particular occurrence, has been called in question 
by one of our readers. We are cited to the following 
words of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II.: 
"Now bear in mind the date already found for the beginning 
of these Gentile Times, viz., 606 B.C., while we proceed 
to examine the evidence proving their length to be 
2520 years— ending A.D. 1914. ...In view of this 
strong Bible evidence concerning the Times of the Gentiles, 
we consider it an established truth that the final end 
of the kingdoms of this world and the full establishment 
of the Kingdom of God will be accomplished at the end 
of 1914." 

We hold that nothing in these quotations declares the 
infallibility of the theories we suggested respecting 1914. 
In these statements, and in all of our statements, we have 
merely informed our readers respecting our views and the 
processes of our reasoning on the Scriptures which we 
have brought to their attention. Thus we have asked 
each reader to think and judge for himself, and to agree 
or disagree with us according to his own judgment of 
the facts. 

Notice that in the above quotations no dogmatic statement 
is made, but that the reader is requested to use his 
own intellect. For instance, note the words, "bear in 
mind"; again, "while we proceed to examine the evidence"; 
again the reference to "Bible evidence." In the 
last sentence the author sums up his own views, declaring 
what he considers to be the truth established by the evidences 
which he sets before his readers. 

In this respect we believe that THE WATCH TOWER 
presentations differ considerably from others. We state 
with positiveness the opinions of the writer and the reasons 
therefor, but leave the final decision with each head 
and heart in all matters, without attempting more. 



R5350 : page 344 

ELECTING ELDERS AND DEACONS 

IT WAS a slip of the pen on the part of the 

Editor when he recently intimated that the 

only ones who would properly be entitled 

to a vote at Church meetings would be those 

believers in the Atonement who had made 

full consecration and who had symbolized 

that consecration. The error was in including 

the symbolization. Many of us were 

truly Christians, truly accepted of the Lord, 

truly members of "the Church of the Firstborns 

whose names are written in Heaven" (Hebrews 12:23), 

before we saw the real force and significance 

of water immersion. We have always held (See 

Vol. 6, STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES) that all such are entitled 

to vote at Church elections— yea, that it is their duty 

to vote— to express the Lord's will in respect to the 

servants of the Church, according to their judgment. 

But what we meant to emphasize is that any brother 
who had not as yet accepted the Bible teachings respecting 
the proper symbolization of his consecration would 
not be far enough advanced to be properly appointed to 
be either a Deacon or an Elder in the Church. It was altogether 
by an inadvertence that we included with this the 
thought that such should not vote. 

Difficulty has been experienced by some classes in respect 
to nominations. When a call for nomination is 
made, a brother is nominated as an Elder or as a Deacon, 
without proper consideration of his qualifications. His 
nomination is seconded; and the whole class, loving the 
brother, feels disinclined to vote against him lest they 
should be misunderstood. 

There should always be a reason for the choice of anybody 
to any service in the Church. An elder should be 
an able teacher, of a broad mind, able to give assistful advice 
to those who need it, of deep insight into the Word 
of God, of good influence in the Church, and a wise counselor. 
No one, probably, could have all of these good 
qualifications in equal measure. Some might possess more 
of one, and some more of another qualification; but all 
should possess some of them or there would be no excuse 
for his election. Likewise a Deacon should have time at 
his disposal and some aptitude as a prospective Elder, and 
also an inclination to serve the Church. 

What seems to us a very good plan of nominating 
Elders, Deacons, etc., is by ballot, particularly if there 
has been any difficulty or if to a majority such a nomination 
might seem desirable. To put this plan into operation 
pieces of paper and pencils would be required. Each 
one entitled to a vote should write, "I nominate the following 
to be Elders of the Class for the ensuing 



months." Then should follow as many names as 

there are Elders at the time the election was taken. If 
the Class desire to either increase or decrease the number 
it can be done after the nomination at election time. 

After the ballots have been collected the results should 
be tabulated and announced publicly to the Ecclesia. The 
Class should then decide how many Elders it would properly 
need. If it decided that the number should be three, 
then the six brethren receiving the largest number of 
nominating ballots should be voted for. The three receiving 
the largest number of votes with outstretched 
hands should be considered the choice of the Class. Or 
another way would be to accept all the nominated ones 
who received ballots equal to one-third of the entire number 
of voters and to elect all such by, as nearly as possible, 
a unanimous vote, this arrangement being intended to 
give minorities a representation amongst the Elders. 

The thought always to be borne in mind is that, so far 
as possible, the judgment of all the Class should have 
recognition. While a majority might rule, it is always 
preferable that they yield something to the minority, so 
that the eldership of a Class might reflect the sentiment 
of the entire membership. No matter how this result be 
reached, we are doing wisely; and no matter how any 
other result be reached it would be unwise, as endangering 
the peace and harmony of the Class. Brotherly love 
always represents sympathy, kindness, love and a desire to 
yield something wherever no vital principle is involved. 



R5350 : page 345 

THE SIN OF COVETOUSNESS 

-DECEMBER 14.-JOSHUA 1 .- 

"Be sure your sin will find you out."— Numbers 32:23. 

THE Israelites, full of faith and flushed with 

the victory over Jericho, proceeded with the 

conquest of Canaan. Spies were sent to Ai. 

These, returning, advised that the place was 

small, and that a force of two or three thousand 

men would be quite sufficient for its 

capture. Indeed, from the experiences of 

Jericho they anticipated that none of the 

Israelites would be killed— that their enemies 

would be so terror-stricken as to render 

little or no defense. But the experiences at Ai were the 

reverse. Thirty-six Israelites were slain; and Israel's 

army, perceiving that they had not the Lord's favor, fled 

before their enemies. 

Joshua and his associates, the Elders of Israel, were 
bewildered at this. They prostrated themselves before 
the Ark of the Covenant, bewailing the trouble and especially 



fearful of the influence which the defeat would 

have upon their enemies— encouraging them and discouraging 

Israel, who were God's typical people. 

THE ACCURSED OR DEVOTED THING 

In our Common Version, accursed has been used where 
devoted would have been preferable. The Lord informed 
Joshua that Divine favor was not with Israel because of 
their unfaithfulness. When Jericho was captured, a portion 
of the spoils had been appropriated by one of the 
soldiers. But according to the Lord's arrangement all 
the spoils were devoted in advance; hence this was a 
breach of their agreement, and Israel's armies could have 
no blessing until the matter was rectified. 

In order that the lesson might be learned by the entire 
people, the Lord directed that the representatives of all 
the tribes should appear before Him and lots be cast, and 
that thus would be indicated the tribe to which the guilty 
one belonged. In like manner the different families of 
that tribe were tested, and the family found. Thus step 
by step the matter came down to Achan, who was the 

R5351 : page 345 

one indicated as guilty— the cause of the trouble. 

"And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give, I pray 
thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession 
unto Him; and tell me now what thou hast done; 
hide it not from me. And Achan answered Joshua and 
said, Indeed I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel, 
and thus and thus have I done: When I saw among the 
spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred 
shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels 
weight, then I coveted them, and took them; and behold, 
they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent." 

THE PENALTY UPON ACHAN 

The penalty upon Achan was death by stoning, and 
after the stoning the corpse was burned— the burning indicating 
symbolically that there was no hope of a future 
life for him. It is our thought, however, that this was 
a part of the general allegory, and that really Achan, as 
a member of Adam's family, must ultimately have a share 
with all the remainder of the race in the redemption provided 
through Jesus' death. Thus also the Sodomites 
were destroyed by fire from heaven— in a figure representing 
the class which will die the Second Death. But none 
can die the Second Death without being first released in 
some manner from the condemnation of the first death— 
Adamic death. These were merely types, or foreshadows, 
of the wilfully wicked class and of the everlasting destruction, 
as brute beasts, which will come upon them. 

As the Sodomites experienced no knowledge nor blessing 
through Jesus, so Achan had none. As the Sodomites, 



redeemed by the merit of Jesus' sacrifice, will be awakened 

from the sleep of death during the Messianic Age, and 

their experiences will be more tolerable than those of the 

people of Chorazin and Bethsaida, so it will surely be 

with Achan. As the Apostles declare, these typical experiences 

of the past were set forth as an ensample of 

the destruction which will be the ultimate punishment of 

all who wilfully, knowingly and intelligently reject the 

Lord's ways.— I Corinthians 10:11; Jude 7. 

COVETOUSNESS IN OUR DAY 

Perhaps at no time in the world's history was there 
ever so much covetousness as in our day. How few 
comparatively in any city, in any nation, would do very 
differently from what Achan did! If all such were to 
be stoned to death and to be burned, the world would be 
one vast funeral pyre. True, they are not deterred by 
fear of any such punishment. Nevertheless, a large proportion 
of them profess to believe that for all such sins 
the penalty is eternal torture. Yea, many who are ready 
to condemn the curse of Joshua and the Israelites in the 
stoning of Achan, are ready to believe that the God of 
Love, the God of all Grace, the Father of all Mercies, 
would do ten times worse by Achan and by practically 
the entire human family— all except saintly ones who have 
come into vital relationship with the Redeemer. 

Alas, how twisted our minds have become! How 
glad we are that the true light is now shining, and chasing 
away to some extent our hobgoblins of error and false 
doctrine handed down to us from the Dark Ages, and 
wrongly supposed to be teachings of the Bible! 

COVETOUSNESS IN THE CONSECRATED 

When we remember that Jordan represents consecration, 
and that those who crossed Jordan typically represented 
those Christians who have entered into a Covenant 
with God and who have been begotten of the Spirit; and 
when we remember that the conquests of Canaan represented 
the spiritual battles of the consecrated and the 
subjugation and possession of the citadel of the heart, the 
sin of Achan has a new force and meaning. It corresponded 
closely to the sin of Ananias and Sapphira. They 
had devoted, or consecrated, their property to the Lord's 
service, and then attempted to take back a portion of the 
devoted wealth. They would rob God. They would steal 
back that which they had given to Him. This class seems 
to be especially represented in Achan. He stole, not from 
his brethren, but from the Lord, things which had been 
devoted to the Lord. 

The name Christian today has a very wide application, 
and in general signifies a civilized person. But the term 
Christian really belongs only to a comparatively small 
class of humanity— to those who, believing the Message 
of Jesus, have made consecration of their lives to be His 



disciples, His footstep followers. These have accepted 
His terms— "If any man will be My disciple, let him 
deny himself and take up his cross and follow Me." 
This is the class, typified by Israel, who have entered 
the antitypical Canaan, who are fighting the good fight 
and who would recognize all the spoils of their warfare 
as consecrated to the Lord. 

It is for these to inquire respecting their own faithfulness, 
loyalty. Each of them should inquire, Am I 
keeping and holding as my own any portion of what was 
consecrated to God? If they are keeping back as their 
own any portion of that which was devoted to the Lord, 
they are in danger of being part of the antitypical Achan. 
They are in danger of exercising an injurious influence 
on others of the Church; and not only so, but they are 
in danger of that fate which was typically illustrated in 
Achan's case— in danger of the utter destruction of the 
Second Death— everlasting destruction. 

R5351 : page 346 

"COVETOUSNESS, WHICH IS IDOLATRY" 

The Apostle declares that "Covetousness is idolatry." 
It puts first and most prominently the thing which is 
coveted; and when this coveted thing is contrary to the 
Divine will, it signifies that the coveted thing is esteemed 
more than God— is desired more than the Divine favor. 
From this viewpoint the whole world is full of idolatry 
today. The idols most worshiped are wealth and pleasure. 
These occupy the time and the attention of nearly everybody. 
Time and strength, honor and manhood and 
womanhood, are poured out lavishly for these "idols." 
On the contrary, the true God, from whom comes every 
perfect gift, receives but slight attention from the masses 
of His creatures. His laws and His will, His pleasure and 
His favor are scarcely thought of. 

What is the result? Has the worship of mammon 
been real joy or peace and satisfaction to the hearts of 
humanity? Has the pursuit of pleasure and the devoting 
to it of time, talents and money brought real pleasure of 
soul to the masses? This question must be answered in 
the negative. Wealth is being pursued and bowed down 
to on every hand, yet grants its favor to only a comparatively 
small number, and even the favored ones find 
bitterness mingled with their sweets. The possession of 
wealth brings not the joy and peace which they had hoped 
and believed. It has brought care, perplexity and still 
greater hunger, which they know not how to satisfy. 

So it is with the worship and pursuit of pleasure. It is 
an ever-continuing chase and seeking for pleasure. The 
grasping of it seems to bring, not joy, but discontent and 
heart-hunger. As a result the worshipers of mammon 
and pleasure are unhappy. The world is discontented, and 
apparently growing more so as the days pass by. 

Man is so constituted by nature that his finest and 



noblest sentiments, which bring him the most satisfaction, 
joy and peace, rest and happiness, are the exercise 
of his mind and talents God-ward. According to St. Paul, 
all men by nature should be feeling after God, desiring to 
find Him. But, alas, many of the noblest of God's people, 
who have found rest and peace through a knowledge of 
the length and breadth and height and depth of 

"Love Divine, all love excelling," 
are not only not helping the world to find the true God, 
but, on the contrary, actually misdirecting them! 

The monstrous misrepresentations received by us from 
the Dark Ages we have heartily repudiated. And yet 
we are holding up these misrepresentations of the Divine 
Character and Plan before the world, and in so doing 
are turning them away from God and from the Bible— 
to seek rest of soul and peace and joy in the worship of 
mammon and the pursuit of pleasure, which can bring 
only disappointments. Alas, how long will it be before 
we openly acknowledge to the world that we have repudiated 
the monstrous teachings of our creeds and have 
accepted the teachings of the Bible that God is Love, 
and that He has a gracious Plan whereby through Jesus 
all who will may be recovered and enter into rest! 



R5351 : page 346 

THE LOGOS MADE FLESH 

-DECEMBER 21. -JOHN 1:1-18.- 

"And the Logos became flesh, 
and dwelt among us."— V.14. 

OUR Christmas Study is one of the most beautiful 
in the whole Bible. Genesis goes back 
to the beginning of things earthly; but this 
lesson goes back to the beginning of all 
beginnings, when God was alone. The very 
beginning of Divine operation was the 
Logos— "the Beginning of the creation of 
God"— "the First-born of every creature."— 
Revelation 3:14; Colossians 1:15. 

Logos signifies mouthpiece, or special 
messenger. Not only so— not only was the Logos the 
beginning, or Alpha— but He was also the last, the Omega, 
of Divine creation, as He Himself informs us. (Revelation 1:11; 
21:6.) The first and only begotten Son of 
Jehovah was given an exclusive place, so that "all things 
were made by Him, and without Him was not anything 
made that was made." (V.3.) Thus highly did the 
Father honor Him as His Agent in all the creative work, 
both as respects angels, cherubim and men. 

The Greek text is not fully represented in our Common 



R5352 : page 346 

Version. Accurately translated it reads, "The Logos was 
with the God and the Logos was a god; the same was 
in the beginning with the God." Here the majesty of 
our Redeemer in His prehuman condition is fully set 
forth, and yet He is distinctly shown to be the Son and 
not the Father— to be a god and not the God. 

The word god signifies mighty one; but there is only 
one God whose name is the Almighty. St. Paul affirms 
this great truth, saying, "To us there is one God, the 
Father, of whom are all things; and one Lord Jesus 
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by Him." (I Corinthians 8:6.) 
Again, the Apostle writes, "The head of 
every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the 
man; and the Head of Christ is God." (1 Corinthians 11:3.) 
This is the claim that Jesus made for Himself— 
not that He was the Father, or Jehovah, but that He was 
the Son of God, who came to do the will of His Father 
in Heaven. 

The so-called doctrine of the Trinity, put into the 
Nicene Creed by Emperor Constantine, A.D. 325, has 
been the cause of much of our confusion when studying 
the Bible, which contains neither the word trinity nor any 
suggestion of it, except in the one passage acknowledged 
by all scholars to be spurious, namely, I John 5:7. This 
passage is not found in any of the old Greek manuscripts. 

The Redeemer was not deceitful when He prayed to 
the Father with strong cryings and tears, "My God! My 
God!" Neither was He deceitful when He declared to 
Mary after His resurrection, "I have not yet ascended to 
My Father and to your Father, to My God and to your 
God." He declared His oneness with the Father, and 
desired that a similar oneness should prevail amongst 
His followers— oneness of spirit, of purpose. Therefore 
He prayed for His Church, "That they all may be one, 
even as I, Father, and Thou, are one."— John 17:21-23. 

"THE LOGOS BECAME FLESH" 

St. Paul tells us of how He who was rich on the spirit 
plane for our sakes became poor, leaving the Heavenly 
comforts for the scenes of this world, darkened by sin 
and death. (2 Corinthians 8:9.) And so our lesson tells 
us also. (V.14.) "The Logos became flesh and dwelt 
among us, and we beheld His glory, the glory as of the 
Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." 
St. Paul also corroborates this, declaring that our Lord 
stooped from His high position, took the bondman's form 
and was found in fashion as a man, of the seed of 
Abraham. (Philippians 2:7,8; Hebrews 2:16.) But lest 
we should get the wrong thought, that He had become 
a sinful man, we are guarded by the assurance that He 
was "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 
(Hebrews 7:26.) We are also assured that His body 
was especially prepared, separate and different from 



R5352 : page 347 

others of our race, all of whom were of Adamic stock 
and all tainted with sin and the seeds of death.— 
Hebrews 10:5-9. 

But, on the other hand, we are to guard ourselves 
against the thought that the Logos remained a spirit being 
and merely materialized, or appeared in human form. 
This unscriptural thought is the one held by many, and 
styled incarnation. The angels incarnated, or got into 
flesh, when they materialized from time to time, as described 
in the Old Testament Scriptures. Our Lord Himself 
incarnated, or appeared in the flesh, to Abraham in 
company with others; and He talked with Abraham, who 
knew not that he was entertaining Heavenly beings, mistaking 
them for human travelers. 

Similarly Jesus after His resurrection appeared in 
various forms of flesh. That is to say, He materialized, 
or incarnated, for the purpose of teaching certain lessons 
to His disciples, because after His resurrection He was 
a spirit being, as He was before He was made flesh. 
As a spirit being, He appeared and disappeared, the 
doors being shut. Thus He taught His disciples a 
double lesson: 

(1) That He was no longer dead, but risen; 

(2) That He was no longer a human, but a spirit 
being— "put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the 
spirit."— I Peter 3:18— Emphatic Diaglott. 

A RANSOM, OR CORRESPONDING-PRICE 

As Bible students we are learning that we must strive 
more earnestly than we have done to keep close to the 
Word of God. It was the perfect man Adam who sinned 
and was sentenced to death, and under the Divine Law 
he could be redeemed only by the sacrifice of a perfect 
man. The Law declares, "An eye for an eye, a tooth 
for a tooth, and a man's life for a man's life." Hence 
the blood of bulls and goats could never make atonement 
for Adam's sin; for they did not correspond. It was 
not a bullock nor a goat that had sinned and was to 
be redeemed, but a perfect man. 

Because all of the human family were children of 
Adam and sharers in his death sentence, therefore, "no 
man could give to God a ransom for his brother." (Psalm 49:7.) 
God so shut up the matter that Adam and his 
race could not have been redeemed except by the finding 
of a perfect man who would be willing voluntarily to 
die on their behalf. It was because there was no such 
man that God arranged with the Logos, His only begotten, 
that he should become a man and be the Redeemer 
of the race— Adam and all his children. 

But even this might not be demanded of the Logos. 
The Heavenly Father, therefore, as St. Paul points out, 
set before His Son, the Logos, a great proposition; 



namely, that if He would demonstrate His faith and 

loyalty to the extent of becoming man's Redeemer, the 

Father would still more highly exalt Him and make Him 

partaker of the Divine nature, far above angels and 

every name that is named. (Hebrews 12:2; Philippians 2:5-11.) 

The Logos, full of faith and obedience, heartily 

entered into the proposition, was made flesh, consecrated 

His life, kept nothing back, finished the work at Calvary, 

and was raised from the dead by the Father to the 

Heavenly nature and glory and honor. 

"THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD" 

The Logos was made Jesus. The work of Jesus in 
the flesh, however, is not the completion of the Divine 
Plan, but merely the beginning of it. His death constitutes 
the basis of all future blessings to the Church and 
to the world. According to the Father's Plan, an elect 
class was to be gathered out of Israel and out of every 
nation to be the Church of Christ, His Bride, associates 
with Him in His Throne, glory and work. 

With the completion of the Elect, the Kingdom for 
which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come," is to be established. 
Satan is to be bound; all evil is to be brought to 
an end; every good influence and enlightenment is to be 
shed; and He who died for the world is thus to become 
the Light of the world. He has not yet been the Light 
of the world, but merely a light to His people. As St. 
John declared, His light shined in darkness, and was 
not appreciated. Similarly the light of Truth upheld by 
His consecrated Church will not be appreciated, so strong 
are the powers of the Prince of Darkness influencing 
the minds of the world, which, as yet, lies in the Wicked 
One. -I John 5: 19.-Diaglott. 

But the Prince of Life and His Kingdom will cause 
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God to fill 
the whole earth, as the waters cover the great deep 
(Habakkuk 2:14), so that none shall need to say to his 
brother, Know thou the Lord, for all shall know Him, 
from the least to the greatest. (Jeremiah 31:34.) Thus 
according to His promise Jesus eventually will be "the 
true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into 
the world." (V.9.) The great mass of humanity have 
never seen nor even heard of this true Light— not merely 
the heathen millions, but the masses in civilized lands. 

The resurrection of the just will be necessary to bring 
the Church to glory and joint-heirship with her Lord. 
But the resurrection of the unjustified, which includes 
practically all humanity, will be for the very purpose of 
permitting them to see the true Light, which God has 
provided in His Son and which will be shed abroad during 
His Millennial Kingdom. Only those who refuse the light, 
preferring the darkness, will die the Second Death. 

"POWER TO BECOME SONS" 



John the Baptist was a messenger sent to call attention 
to the Light, but he was not the Light. He was not 
even one of the Church class, of whom Jesus said, "Ye 
are the light of the world"; for John the Baptist did not 
continue to live to the time of the begetting of the 
Spirit, after our Lord's sacrifice. 

The world recognized not the great One who was in 
it, the Logos, by whom it was made. His own nation 
recognized Him not, but crucified Him. Yet some then 
and some since have received Him, and to such He has 
given the power, the right, the liberty, the privilege, to 
become children of God. No such privilege was given 
to the Jews, nor to any of the fallen race, until Pentecost 
—after Jesus had appeared in the presence of God 
to make atonement for our sins. 

These sons are all begotten of the Holy Spirit. Theirs 
is not a fleshly sonship. Their birth of the Spirit will 
be the resurrection change, when they shall be made like 
their Master, see Him as He is and share His glory. 



CHRIST IN THE HEART 

As some rare perfume in a vase of clay 
Pervades it with a fragrance not its own, 

So when Thou dwellest in a mortal soul, 

All Heaven's own sweetness seems around it thrown. 

The heart alone, like a neglected harp, 

Grows out of tune, and needs Thy hand Divine; 

Dwell Thou within it, tune and touch its chords, 
Till every note and string shall answer Thine. 
MRS. H. B. STOWE. 



R5353 : page 348 

"CHOOSE YE THIS DAY" 

-DECEMBER 28. -JOHN 3:16.- 

"For God so loved the world that He gave His only-begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, 
but have everlasting life." 

THE closing of the year and the opening of a 
new one is properly considered an opportune 
time for an inventory or balancing of the 
books and the carrying forward of profit 
and loss, and the determination of advantageous 
policies for the future. It would be 
a pity and a shame for all of us if we should 
be thus prudent in respect to earthly matters, 
and careless as respects higher interests. 



We may safely say that no human 

soul can strike a thoroughly satisfactory balance of accounts 

at the close of this year unless Jesus has been a 

partner and counselor and guide. And every one dissatisfied 

with his status of affairs at the close of the 

year— every one who finds himself weary and heavy-laden, 

perplexed and discouraged— we would like to have 

know how to begin the new year aright by entering into 

covenant relationship with the Redeemer, who declares, 

"Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy-laden, 

and I will give you rest." 

Today's Study is full of helpful instructions. The 
very first lesson that all need to learn is that "God so 
loved the world." No other message than that has any 
attraction for thinking people. The difficulty with the 
world and with the Church in the past has been that we 
have not emphasized the Love of God. How could we 
do so when our eyes of understanding were misdirected 
by our creeds away from the God of the Bible to a creedal 
image which pictured the Heavenly Father in most 
Satanic colors— more loveless, more unjust, more diabolical 
than any human being we have ever known and than 
any demon we can possibly imagine! It is well for us 
as Christians that we have tried to forget those horrible 
pictures and instead to fill our minds with precious 
Scripture texts such as the one of today's lesson. 

But while we have thus gotten away from the "doctrines 
of devils," as St. Paul calls them (I Timothy 4:1), 
we forget that Christendom is still holding up those terribly 
slanderous creeds before the world, hindering them 
from getting even a glimpse of the length, breadth, height 
and depth of the "Love of God which passeth all understanding 
and giving them, instead, awful misrepresentations 
—of the height and depth and length and breadth 
of Divine injustice. We have thus been unintentionally 
driving the world away from God, instead of helping them 
in their endeavor to feel after a Friend, the true God. 

But the people of God are awakening to the Truth, 
and gradually gaining courage to assert it and to "show 
forth the praises of Him who called us out of darkness 
into His marvelous light." We are now met with the difficulty 
that the world has so thoroughly believed our 
blasphemy of the Divine character that they can scarcely 
believe the gracious Message of the Bible when we 
bring it to them— the message of great joy. 

"MIGHT NOT PERISH" 

The very text we are considering illustrates our 
bondage, our blindness of the past, and tells us of God's 
righteousness. It does not say, as we once supposed, 
that God gave His only begotten Son to save us from 
eternal torture. Quite to the contrary, it declares that 
His mission was and is to save from perishing. We know 
what perishing signifies. The brute beasts, when they 
die, perish, because God has made no provision for their 



resurrection. And mankind under the death sentence, 
"Dying, thou shalt die," would have perished like the 
brute beast, without hope, had it not been for God's 
mercy and provision in Christ. "Christ died for our 
sins"— "tasted death for every man"— to the intent that, 
the sentence of death having been thus satisfied, all men 
might have a resurrection. 

Without the death of Jesus our race would perish like 
the brute beast. Because of His death there is to be a 
resurrection, not only of the just who now come into 
harmony with God through faith, but also of the unjust— 
the unjustified, who have not yet come to a knowledge of 
God, whose eyes of understanding have not yet been 
opened to see the grace of God and its length and breadth 
and height and depth. Thus we read that "as all in Adam 

R5354 : page 348 

die, so all in Christ shall be made alive." Even "as by a 
man came death, by a man also [Christ Jesus] comes the 
resurrection of the dead"— "every man in his own order." 

It is St. Paul himself who particularly points out to 
us that, unless there be a resurrection of the dead, there 
is no hope of a future life, but all who have fallen asleep 
are perished. It is he who points out that, because Jesus 
died for our sins and has been raised from the dead by 
the Father, we have an assurance that all who sleep in 
Jesus— all who were purchased by the redeeming blood— 
the whole world of mankind— will God bring from the 
dead with Him. Therefore we need not sorrow as those 
who have no hope— even in respect to our friends and 
relatives who are not in Christ and have not the hope of 
the Church.— See I Corinthians 15. 

THE "BETTER RESURRECTION" 

The chief resurrection to glory, honor and immortality 
is only for those who are called during this Gospel Age, 
who receive the call into honest hearts, and who lay aside 
every weight and run the race for the prize with patience. 
These saintly ones Jesus declares will constitute the Royal 
Priesthood, who, in association with Himself as the Royal 
Chief Priest, will be engaged in blessing the world, restoring 
the world, resurrecting the world from sin and death, 
during the thousand years of his Messianic Reign. 

The resurrection of the Church begins in the present 
life with believers, who in their minds rise in newness of 
life into Christ. (Colossians 3:1.) These will be perfected 
by the instantaneous change mentioned by the 
Apostle, "When this mortal shall put on immortality," 
they "shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye"; for "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God."— I Corinthians 15:50. 

"WHOSOEVER BELIEVETH IN HIM" 



The Divine Plan is purposely arranged so that none 
can obtain everlasting life except through a personal 
relationship to Christ, the Redeemer, and the exercise of 
faith in His redeeming blood and obedience to His counsels. 
This being true, none of the heathen are saved yet. 
None of those who lived before Jesus came into the 
world are saved. And the great mass of our friends and 
neighbors, yea, of our own families, are still unsaved, 
because they have not come into vital relationship with 
the Savior. "He that hath the Son hath life"; "he that 
hath not the Son shall not see life."— I John 5:12; 
John 3:36. 

"TESTIFIED IN DUE TIME" 

St. Paul, commenting upon the fact that Jesus died 
for all— a Ransom-price for all— declares that this is to 
be testified in due time. (I Timothy 2:5,6.) God's due 
time for the testimony to reach the world evidently has 
not yet come. The testimony began when Jesus "brought 
life and immortality to light through His Gospel." As 
we read, "So great salvation began to be spoken by our 
Lord."— Hebrews 2:3. 

Since then, a few here and there have had the hearing 

R5354 : page 349 

ear, have heard of the grace of God and have seen something 
of His Divine providences. Jesus congratulated 
this class, saying, "Blessed are your eyes, for they see, 
and your ears, for they hear." The great mass of mankind 
see not and hear not, because, as St. Paul explained, 
the God of this world hath blinded the minds of those 
that believe not, that thus he might hinder them from 
seeing the true light of the grace of God, as it shines 
in the face of our Lord Jesus.— 2 Corinthians 4:4-6. 

God has permitted this blindness, but declares that it 
will soon end; that under the blessed influences of 
Messiah's Kingdom the true light shall shine everywhere; 
and not only so, but He also assures us that "all the blind 
eyes shall be opened, and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped. 
What a blessed vista this opens before us on 
behalf of the poor world! We see that God has special 
grace and blessing for His faithful Church, the Little 
Flock, the saints; but now we perceive that He has a 
blessing also for the world, although a different blessing 
from that which He has provided for the Church. 

Our text tells us of this, assuring us that God not 
only loved the Church, but also loved the world— not only 
redeemed the Church, but also redeemed the world. All 
will have an opportunity that, by believing, they may 
attain everlasting life. The life provided for the world, 
however, according to the Bible, will be very different 
from that provided for the Church. The latter are to 
have life on the Divine plane, being made partakers of 
the Divine nature; and they are to be sharers of the 



glory, honor and immortality of the Master. The world, 
by faith and obedience during the Messianic Kingdom, 
will be privileged to re-attain the earthly life and perfection 
which Adam lost, and which Jesus redeemed for the 
world at Calvary. 

All the willing and obedient may thus come into relationship 
with the Life-giver and obtain the everlasting 
life, the eternal life, which was given to Father Adam 
conditionally and lost by disobedience. Nevertheless, all 
who will refuse this grace of God in Christ and fail to 
come into vital union with Him will perish. But they 
will not perish in the first, or Adamic death, from which 
all were redeemed and will be rescued by the Master. 
Their perishing will be in the Second Death, for their 
own wilful sins, and there will be no hope of recovery; 
"for Christ dieth no more." None will be redeemed from 
the Second Death. 



R5353 : page 349 

"MARRIAGE IS HONORABLE" 



NO MATTER what others may say or do, each 

one of the Lord's people is to be guided in 

his judgment by the letter and spirit of 

God's Word, the Bible. It declares, "Marriage 

is honorable in all, and the marriage-bed 

not impure." (Hebrews 13:4.) St. 

Paul recommended that such of the Lord's 

people as desired to give themselves, completely, 

to the Divine service would doubtless 

be able to accomplish their sacrifice 

joyfully by remaining unmarried. He tells his reason 

for this argument; but he does not say that the 

marriage state is unholy or impure or in any way contrary 

to God's law. He merely declared that the married 

man, properly enough, would seek to please his wife, 

and that the married woman would, naturally and properly, 

seek to please her husband. 

Thus, to be in the married condition would more or 
less take away from the singleness of purpose with 
which the individual would be able to serve God in body 
and in spirit. (1 Cor. 7:32-35.) St. Paul reminds the 
Church that he had found the single, or celibate, condition 
advantageous— that he was able to accomplish 
greater service than if he had been more or less mortgaged 
by the care of a companion and the necessary duties 
toward that one. 

But St. Paul points out distinctly that there is no law 
of God to prohibit brothers and sisters in the Lord from 
marrying if they find, in their judgment, that this is 
the necessary or preferable thing in their cases— if they 
believe that thereby they can carry out their consecration 
vows the more acceptably. 



We mention this because in some instances brethren 
and sisters, in counseling the unmarried, have been going 
beyond what is written— laying upon them burdens 
which the Lord has never declared— telling them that 
to marry means to lose the prize of our High Calling. 
Good intentions cannot justify one in such a course. 

Additionally, we heard recently of a dear couple who 
have an infant child, which properly they very dearly 
love. The mother was shocked by some sisters intimating 
to her that it should be considered a disgrace to 
be a mother, in view of our expectation of great changes 
shortly. 

We believe that those dear sisters made a mistake. 
They, of course, have a right to think for themselves and 
to shape their own courses in life according to their best 
judgment of the Lord's will. But they have no right to 
censure others for having a different opinion on the subject. 
To his own Master each servant stands or falls. 
Nothing in the Bible speaks disrespectfully of either 
fatherhood or motherhood— quite to the contrary. 

If, as the Apostle suggests, some of the Lord's people 
mutually agree to live celibate lives, it is a matter of 
their own concern. If they thus make themselves 
eunuchs in the interests of the Lord's cause, that they 
may have the more opportunity, energy and means to 
invest in the service of God, it is their sacrifice at their 
own option, and they are to look to the Lord for such reward 
as He sees best. But if it is their option and 
they are to be rewarded, we should remember that others 
have an equal option and may, if they think proper, take 
an opposite course without condemnation from us, and, 
indeed, without our feeling that we have even the least 
right to interfere with their social rights and privileges. 

The Golden Rule is very helpful to us in our dealing 
with the brethren as well as in our dealings with the 
world. We should do toward others as we would that 
they should do toward us. We should grant them the 
same liberties that we think proper for ourselves. 

We fear that some of our readers have not given 
sufficient attention to Chapter xii. of Vol. VI. of 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, which examines this subject 
in detail. 



R5354 : page 349 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
EVIL SPIRITS AND THE EDITOR'S COMMENT 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Greetings in the name of our dear Redeemer and King. I 
take this opportunity of reporting to you what, to my mind, is 
a most remarkable manifestation of the fallen angels. 

Some six weeks ago I started to do some Extension work in 



a private way, there being no class here. 

Much interest was aroused, and four symbolized their consecration. 
Among these was a young man, Brother J. He 
grew rapidly, and gave all the evidences of begetting of the 
Holy Spirit. 

One day he asked Brother B. if he had ever been bothered 
by the fallen angels. Brother B. said no; he never gave them 
an occasion, and asked Brother J. if he had ever been troubled. 

R5354 : page 350 

He said no; but thought he had seen something at his window, 
remarking that he had not been to the Lord with the matter. 

That evening the friends were to have a testimony meeting 
at Brother B.'s house. Brother B. invited Brother J. to have 
supper with him. He did so. In the meantime they went out 
to do some chores, and while they were out Brother J.'s father 
came in and told those in the house that his son was going 
crazy. Brother J. went in and soon after was told what his 
father had said. He went back to Brother B. and told him 
about it. Then he stepped away out of sight to pray. When 
he came back he said it was all right. 

The two then returned to the house, and Brother J. asked 
them if they thought they had ever had a trial. They said, 
Yes. He told them they had had no trial. He stepped away 
and lifted his hand as if to pray and said, "Listen!" 
Then he came back to them and said that they should not 
worry, everything was all right. 

They then went to supper and Brother J. was asked to invoke 
the blessing. He had no more than finished when he 
jumped from the table and began to bounce over the room and 
scatter the furniture and to talk in an unknown tongue. This 
lasted about two minutes and then it left him. He said, "Isn't 
this awful? they are trying to break down the Truth." All 
suggested that they pray, and did so, Brother J. joining in. 
But he broke right out again. 

When he is rational he says that it is the fallen angels; but 
his people think him crazy. He warned his wife against the 
evil spirits and said that they were very cunning, and he could 
not resist doing the things they told him to do. He remembers 
all he has done, but is in a stupor much of the time. 

The whole country is worked up, and people have suddenly 
become very bitter against the Truth. Do you think this 
might be permitted more extensively, thus bringing reproach 
upon the Truth and the Lord's people? 

Should you have any suggestions to make, we would be 
very pleased to hear from you. 

Your brother by His grace, BEN H. BOYD. 

THE EDITOR'S REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Your letter is before me. The case you relate is a sad one. 
I fully agree with you that Satan and all the fallen angels 
would be specially desirous of gaining an influence over those 
who espouse the cause of Present Truth. In proportion as 



we have the Truth and present it, we are their enemies, even 
as they are the enemies of the Lord and of the Truth. The 
only safe course for anybody, and especially anybody accepting 
Present Truth, is to follow the suggestions of the Vow. Whoever 
recognizes that there are only two masters— Christ and 
Satan— should resolve to have nothing whatever to do with 
anything that is of Satan. 

Such should be as speedily as possible informed respecting 
the fallen angels and their constant endeavor to misrepresent 
the Truth and to injure humanity— especially the "children of 

R5355 : page 350 

the light." They should be shown that all occult, spiritual 

influences are evil; that the holy angels indeed have a charge 

concerning the saints, but not to give them instruction of any 

kind. The Bible most explicitly declares that the Word of 

God is sufficient that the man of God may be thoroughly furnished. 

(2 Tim. 3:16,17.) We are not therefore to expect 

visions or revelations or any kind of communications from the 

Lord or the holy angels. We are to conclude that all such 

attempts to communicate with us are of the Adversary and to 

shun them accordingly. 

In the instance you mention, Brother J. evidently yielded his 
will to some extent; else he would not have been entrapped. 
While obedient to the Lord, we are entirely safe— then the 
evil spirits cannot do us injury. "The wicked one toucheth 
him not." But the slightest yielding of the will, as through 
curiosity, is dangerous, as those in insane asylums demonstrate. 
It is estimated that fully one-half of all those in 
insane asylums have no functional brain disorder, but are 
merely possessed of evil spirits. 

In a case like that of Brother J. no time should be lost in 
doing everything possible for him. A brother who is in 
close fellowship with the Lord should be for a time his constant 
companion, continually stimulating him to courage in 
the exercise of his will in resisting the evil angels and in 
joining with him in prayer. If in spite of all these assistances 
the evil spirits still get him under their control, we 
advise that said companion exorcise the evil spirit in the 
name of the Lord— saying, "In the name of the Lord Jesus 
Christ I command the evil spirit to depart from him and to 
enter him no more." 

Please read this letter to the brother and assure him of 
my sympathy. 

"THE TOWER" GROWS DEEPER AND SWEETER 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The July 15th issue of THE WATCH TOWER has come to 
hand, and as usual it is full of helpfulness. I am unceasingly 
and increasingly thankful to the dear Father in heaven for 
the wonderful manner in which He has put His blessing upon 
you as you have sought to serve His flock through the pages 
of that precious journal. I count it a privilege to confess both 
privately and publicly that if I am one of those so favored 



as to be a sharer in the glory of the Kingdom, as I hope to be, 
the grace of God will have brought me there in large measure 
through the edifying influence of the articles in THE TOWER. 

THE TOWER grows grander and its messages deeper and 
sweeter. As the Lord makes me to grow in grace in spite of 
all those infirmities in my flesh which would hold me back, 
the uplift each succeeding number of THE TOWER gives me 
becomes more and more apparent, and my prayers are multiplied 
for you in your labor of love. We appreciate it, dear 
Brother, and better still the Lord appreciates it, too. 

In the current number of THE WATCH TOWER you quote 
some views which Prof. Flinders Petrie has given expression 
to, and I feared that some might infer that you wished to give 
emphatic endorsement to the Professor's ideas. My first impression 
was that this was a wonderful truth, but when I went 
to compare it with the Bible the erroneousness of it was 
readily apparent. However, I know that you are too busily 
engaged to find time to look thoroughly into the many matters 
of secondary importance brought to your attention, and in 
addition it would be natural that in a thing of this kind we 
would suppose that Prof. Petrie would have gone carefully 
over it before putting forth such a theory. But I fear that he 
gave his views without sufficient study. 

The extract from the July TOWER, page 216, is as follows: 

"Prof. Flinders Petrie calls attention to the fact that the 
Hebrew word alaf is used in the Scriptures sometimes to 
mean a thousand, and at other times to signify a group, families, 
or tents, very much in the same way that we use the 
word regiment, as signifying a group of a thousand men, yet 
often far less in number, especially after a battle. Thus understood, 
the record, 'Judah 74,600,' would read, 'Judah, 
seventy-four families, or tents, with six hundred men in all'; 
'so they set forward, every one after their families, according 
to the house of their fathers.'— Num. 2:34." 

Now it is true that the Hebrew word for a thousand is also 
sometimes used to signify a family or tribe, but it would be 
impossible to give it that application in the Pentateuch for the 
following reasons: 

In the second chapter of Numbers we have the number of 
each of the twelve tribes given, but there is also given the 
sum of the numbers of the three tribes on each side of the 
tabernacle. If you figure up these statements it will be found 
that they are figured on the basis of thousands. The following 
table will illustrate it: 

Tribe. Thousands. Hundreds. 

Numbers 2:18,19. Ephraim 40 500 

Numbers 2:20,21. Manasseh 32 200 

Numbers 2:22,23. Benjamin 35 400 

Numbers 2:24. Total 108,100 

But according to Professor Petrie the total ought to be 
107 families of 1,100 persons. 

Another passage will serve to further illustrate it, viz., 
Num. 3:42-5 1 . Here we are told that the number of the first-born 



are twenty-two thousand two hundred and seventy-three. 
Now it seems incredible that all the first-born were gathered 
together into twenty-two families; they must have been scattered 
all through the host of Israel. Then verses 46-50 indicate 
that there were 273 more first-born than Levites, but 
according to the interpretation of Prof. Flinders Petrie, 273 
would be the whole number of the Israelites. 

Other examples of this inconsistency are plentiful in the 
book of Numbers, but I believe these will suffice. 

Please consider this not in the nature of an attempt at criticism, 
but merely as an humble effort to present facts which 
your busy life may have prevented you from following up. 

The Lord continues very good to me in assisting me each 
day to glorify Him in the Pilgrim service. I realize that my 
efforts are very imperfect, but they are nothing like what they 
would be if I attempted this work in my own strength. Every 
day He is proving to me the faithfulness with which He 
keeps the promise that all things will be supervised by Him 
to our good, and that His grace will be sufficient. 

With much Christian love, and wishing you many spiritual 
joys even in the midst of your earthly trials, I remain, 
Yours by His favor, BENJ. H. BARTON. 

page 351 

TIME SHORT FOR CULTIVATION OF FRUITS 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

On my arrival here last evening, THE WATCH TOWER for 
October 15, was received. A little later I read, with much 
interest, the leading article: "Resume of the Ending of the 
Times of the Gentiles." 

The writer is very much interested in this matter: (1) 
Because we are sure that we are right at the end of that 
period; and (2) because so many of the friends are now, 
more than ever, discussing that wonderful event— the termination 
of the "Times of the Gentiles." 

It is only natural and reasonable that the brethren should 
now be particularly interested in this question; for we are 
very close to the fulfilment of the prophecies which relate 
to the ending of that period and to the winding up of the 
present order of things. 

Dear Brother, I wish to state here that your advice to 
WATCH TOWER readers in WATCH TOWER articles during 
the past two or three years, not to lay too much stress on 
any particular date, but to give special attention to character 
building, has had an excellent effect. Evidently the friends 
are coming to realize more and more that to cultivate the 
fruits of the Spirit is the principal thing; and that we need all 
the time remaining for that purpose— whether it shall prove 
to be one year, or two years, or less, or more. 

And in the event of the Lord's having permitted a slight 
mistake to be made, relative to the ending of the Gentile 
Times, or even the time when the last member of the Church 
shall be glorified, I do not think it would prove a stumbling-block 
to very many, if any, of the dear friends who are in 



Present Truth; for like you and myself, they are laying 
stress on their consecration to God for all Eternity— not to 
1914 or to 1915. 

Yours in His love, FRANK DRAPER. 



RESTITUTION SOLDIER BUGS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We have some of the beginnings of Restitution on our 
farm; and I thought that you might like to know about 
them. 

We have a bug which destroys the potato bug, which 
has been such a pest of late years. This bug is called the 
soldier bug, and is really a kind of beetle. I am sending you 
in this same mail a specimen in a small box. 

This "soldier bug" has red markings about the head, and 
a red shield-shaped mark on its back. It has a sword-like 
proboscis which it runs out, spears the potato bugs with, 
and sucks the juice out of them. It comes to the house to 
winter. There were several of these bugs on our potatoes 
this year. We had only a small patch, and we did not have 
to put a bit of Paris-green on them. 

We overheard, when traveling one day, a conversation 
between two commercial travelers concerning this bug. The 
one said that the other day he was in a store and a farmer 
came in. The store-keeper asked him how many pounds 
of Paris-green he should need this year. "Oh, not a pound," 
replied the farmer, "I have the soldier bugs at my place." 
This same farmer, so the store-keeper said, had other years 
taken several pounds of Paris-green. Surely, this is Restitution! 

This soldier bug is found here and there all through the 
country. It attacks the potato bug in both the larvae and the 
full-grown state. 

Your sister in Christ, BESSIE TATE. 



GARDEN PEA-BEANS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Last spring a brother in the West sent me a supply of pea-beans, 
assuring me "they are very good." I planted them in 
rows similar to pea-planting and find they bloom and bear 
continuously from early summer until cut by frost in the 
fall. We are still picking them for table use at this date, 
October 14. 

We have more seed than we need. Am sending you a supply 
for such of THE TOWER readers as have garden space and may 
desire some to plant next spring. Should they wish to pay 
the postage on as many as you could apportion, that would, 
of course, be their privilege; I donate them. 

I might state, the stalk resembles a bean stalk, but within 
the long pods are peas, and suitable for cooking in the pods 
green, or, after ripening, shelled. They are tender and taste 



unlike beans or peas. We all like them. Until nearly ripe 
the pods are stringless or nearly so. 
In Christian love, your brother and servant in the Lord, 
J. A. BOHNET. 



page 351 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

THE RESURRECTION INHERITANCE OF THE NEW 
CREATION 

JANUARY 4 

Read p. 699, par. 3, to p. 703, par. 1. 

(12) After the resurrection of the Ancient Worthies, how 
may we expect the gradual resurrection of the world to proceed? 
P. 699, par. 3; P. 700, par. 1. 

(13) Will it not be necessary for every member of the 
human race to go down into actual death before experiencing 
the resurrection? P. 700, par. 2; P. 701, par. 1. 

(14) What reasonable suggestion has been made respecting 
the manner in which those of the world who have gone 
down into the tomb will be brought forth? P. 701, par. 2. 

(15) Explain why the real meaning of the word resurrection 
has been lost sight of. P. 702, par. 1. 

(16) From what Greek word is our English word resurrection 
derived, and what is its significance in the original? 

P. 703, par. 1. 

JANUARY 1 1 



Read p. 703, par. 2, to p. 706, par. 2. 



(17) Who were the only two human beings that ever possessed 
life? And how are all the rest of mankind regarded 

from the Divine standpoint? P. 703, par. 2. 

(18) What two conditions must be clearly kept in mind in 
order to fully appreciate the significance of the word 
anastasis? P. 704, par. 1. 

(19) Is this word anastasis ever used in connection with 
the mere awakening of the dead? P. 704, par. 2, first seven 
lines. 

(20) What is the popular but erroneous explanation of 
Hebrews 1 1:35, and what is the proper interpretation? P. 
704, par. 2, 3; P. 705, par. 1. 

(21) Does the word anastasis limit the resurrection process, 
to make it either instantaneous or gradual? Or does 
anastasis change the nature of the being resurrected? P. 
706, par. 1. 

(22) What was the experience of our Lord Jesus previous 
and subsequent to His anastasis, and what is the hope of the 
Church in this respect? P. 706, par. 2. 



JANUARY 18 
Read p. 707 to p. 710 par. 3. 

(23) What will anastasis signify in the case of the natural 
man? and how will the resurrection of the Ancient Worthies 
differ from that of the rest of mankind? P. 707. 

(24) What will be the process of anastasis as respects the 
Great Company? P. 707, foot note. 

(25) Upon what will the anastasis or re-standing of the 
world as individuals depend? P. 708, par. 1. 

(26) What Scripture clearly indicates how this passing 
from death to life will be accomplished? P. 708, par. 2; P. 
709, par. 1. 

(27) To whom does the expression, "They that have done 
good," apply? And what will be the nature of their resurrection? 
P. 709, par. 2. 

(28) Who are "They that have done evil"? And what 
kind of resurrection will they experience? P. 710, par. 1 to 3. 

JANUARY 25 



Read p. 711, par. 1, to p. 714, par. 2. 



(29) Will the world's trial correspond with the present 
methods of trying criminals in court? If not, how will it be 
conducted? P. 711, par. 1, 2. 

(30) At what time during the world's trial will obedience 
be required, and what will be the experience of those who 
positively refuse to make progress toward righteousness? 
P. 712, par. 1. 

(31) What is the significance of the Scripture, "They that 

shall be counted worthy to attain that world and the resurrection"? 
(Luke 20:35.) P. 712, par. 2. 

(32) What would be the disadvantages of an instantaneous 
resurrection to perfection for the world of mankind? P. 
713, par. 1,2. 

(33) Explain the reasonableness, beauty and harmony of 
the Divine Plan for the world's resurrection. P. 714, par. 1. 

(34) Would it be reasonable to expect the awakened ones 
to come forth in exactly the same physical condition as 
when they went into death? P. 714, par. 2. 



page 353 
