
Learning From More Experienced Publishers




We truly treasure the experienced publishers in the congregation. Some have been faithfully serving Jehovah for many years. Others may have acquired good skills in the ministry more recently. These publishers have seen how Jesus has directed the Christian congregation in these last days by expanding the preaching and disciple-making work. (Matt. 28:19, 20) By sharing in this ministry, they have received “the power beyond what is normal” when facing personal challenges and trials. (2 Cor. 4:7) There is a lot to learn from these seasoned publishers. When given the opportunity, they find delight in teaching others what they have learned. (Ps. 71:18) Thus, we should make opportunities to learn from them. How can this be done?
In the Ministry. To be effective in the ministry, new or less experienced publishers need training. A great deal can be learned by observing how mature publishers carry out their ministry. (See the article in the February 15, 2015, Watchtower, “Maintain Your Zeal for the Ministry,” the third paragraph under the subheading “Help Less Experienced Ones.”) How have you benefited by working with such ones in the ministry?
Could you invite a well-qualified publisher to work with you in the ministry? If the publisher is infirm, perhaps you could periodically conduct one of your Bible studies at his home. After the study, ask the publisher for his observations and advice.
Spend Personal Time With Them: Get to know experienced publishers by spending time with them. Invite one of them to your family worship and interview him. If the publisher is infirm, could arrangements be made to enjoy family worship at his home? Find out how he came into the truth. What blessings has he enjoyed? What growth has he seen locally? What joy has he found in serving Jehovah?
Be understanding and balanced in your expectations. Like all of us, long-standing publishers have differing gifts in the ministry. (Rom. 12:6-8) Some are advanced in age, and this may limit the amount of time that they can spend with us. Nevertheless, we can learn much from them because of their experience in serving Jehovah faithfully.




