An Electrician Lets His Light Shine
AIDING men to appreciate the light of truth that shines forth from the pages of God’s Word can take many interesting forms. Here is how a zealous witness of Jehovah in Nigeria, Africa, does it:
“Some years ago I started a business as an electrical contractor. My purpose in life is to advance the Kingdom interests, but with a family to support I had to engage in secular work to provide for their needs. Right from the start I was resolved that this would only be a means to an end, the end being to do everything possible to advance the preaching of the Kingdom good news. So I thought, ‘What better place could there be than my own workshop?’
“Accordingly I arranged that every morning my wife, children and my employees, including several apprentices, should gather at my workshop to consider the daily Bible text as found in the Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Although not Jehovah’s witnesses, my employees and apprentices attended. Every morning before business for at least an hour we study the text and consider some of the experiences printed in the Yearbook. We often consider Bible questions too. This has been my regular practice for the past fourteen years.
“As time went on my business grew so that in addition to my employees I have had as many as thirty or more apprentices. Now the attendance at our morning meeting sometimes runs as high as sixty. What has resulted from all this?
“From those who have been in my employ, thirteen are now baptized Witnesses and others are having Bible studies in their own homes. One is a traveling representative of the Watch Tower Society. Imagine how I feel when I see him addressing the meeting and I think back to the time when he came to me as an apprentice knowing nothing of God’s Word of truth.
“In addition to those whom I have employed I have never failed to witness to my customers, and two whose homes I have wired for electric light are now dedicated witnesses of Jehovah walking in the light of God’s Word. At the beginning of each year, I present a copy of the Watch Tower Society’s calendar with two magazines to each of my customers and this year [1968] I distributed no fewer than seventy-two sets.
“While working to provide electric light for my customers I have never failed to allow the spiritual light to shine forth and, as you can see, Jehovah has blessed my efforts.”

