From Our Readers
SMOKING
Your polemics on smoking about turned me off. You sound like those who were going to cure the evils of the world when they got prohibition. Most thinking people realize how that worked out.
D. Y., Illinois
Our appeal was not for a legislative ban but was directed to individual readers for them to consider the evidence and personally decide in their own interests.​—ED.
Please send me 10 copies of your “Awake!” on smoking. The article was very good and it has helped me to quit smoking. I’d like to share it with some smoking friends. I am not interested in being visited or becoming a member, as I‘m affiliated with another religious body; but I do appreciate what you’re doing. Keep up the good work.
M. W., North Carolina
I have just read your article on “Is Smoking Here to Stay?” As a Christian trying to ‘break free’ of this, I ask you to send me the information mentioned in this article please.
M. A., England
FAMILY PROBLEMS
I am a single parent (divorced not by my own choice). I’d like to say this: Divorce is not the recommended way. However, the innocent victims need not feel that the world ends there. It doesn’t. Oftentimes a new and better life begins. It did with me. To be honest, I am much happier now and my children seem happier. My daughter’s grades have improved. I’m sure we all know of single-parent homes that are far happier and more successful than many two-parent homes. It really depends. Life is what you make it.
Anonymous, Ohio
As a father of four children I just had to drop you this line of thanks. I have just read “Awake!” of April 8 on children and parents. As a court reporter employed by a family court, I have heard and written millions of words dealing with the full gamut of family problems, and particularly with children. I have never read anything so touching to the heart. Also I can see the need for an immediate adjustment in my own household.
Anonymous, New York
HELP FOR STUDENTS
As a high school student I appreciated very much “Awake!”, which helped me to prepare various essay topics for school. These interested many a teacher and student. Now as I am a university student the magazines are a priceless source of information for all my studies.
E. P., Australia
I am writing to thank you for the articles you publish. They have proved useful to me for research and developing of my school assignments. I have found them effective in all fields, in geography, history, science, etc. I am 12 years old.
L. L., Italy
CROSSWORD PUZZLES
We have found the crossword puzzles especially helpful in teaching the children. They have their own Bibles and, with questions phrased to their understanding, thoroughly enjoy finding the books required to give the answers. This is teaching them to find their way around in God’s Word.
B. P., England
I love the crossword puzzles. I have never seen Bible study so interesting.
P. W., Illinois
Thank you for the crossword puzzles. They are interesting and relaxing, and you learn a lot about details in the Bible.
L. K., Australia

