Prepare for the Millennium That Matters!
THE Thousand Year Reign of Christ will bring untold blessings to the human family. Under Jesus’ loving direction, mankind will be lifted from its present sorry state to glorious perfection. Think of what that can mean for you. Radiant health! Imagine waking up each morning feeling better than the day before. Millions of men, women, and children look forward to living during that happy time. They count on it, pray for it. Their study of the Bible has convinced them that these blessings can be theirs to enjoy.
Before he begins his Thousand Year Reign, however, Jesus Christ must rid the earth of all who oppose his rulership. He will do this at the battle called Armageddon in the Bible. (Revelation 16:16) Genuine Christians on earth will not fight in that war. It is God’s war. And it will not be confined to a single geographic location. The Bible says that it will reach to the farthest corners of the earth. Enemies of Christ’s rulership will be slain. None of them will escape!​—Jeremiah 25:33.
Then Jesus will turn his attention to Satan the Devil and his demons. Picture the scene, as the writer of the book of Revelation saw it: “I saw an angel [Jesus Christ] coming down out of heaven with the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand. And he seized the dragon, the original serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years.” (Revelation 20:1, 2) Later, Satan and his demons will be destroyed forever.​—Matthew 25:41.
“A great crowd, which no man [is] able to number,” will survive Armageddon. (Revelation 7:9) Christ will guide these to benefit fully from “fountains of waters of life,” just as a shepherd guides his sheep to lifesaving waters. (Revelation 7:17) Unhindered in their spiritual progress by Satan and his demons, these Armageddon survivors will gradually be helped to overcome their sinful tendencies until finally they reach perfection!
Under Christ’s loving rulership, living conditions will steadily improve. Jehovah God, through Jesus Christ, will eliminate all causes of pain and sorrow. He “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.” (Revelation 21:4) The prophet Isaiah rounds out the picture, saying: “At that time the eyes of the blind ones will be opened, and the very ears of the deaf ones will be unstopped. At that time the lame one will climb up just as a stag does, and the tongue of the speechless one will cry out in gladness.” (Isaiah 35:5, 6) And the dead, “the great and the small,” will come back to life with the prospect of never having to die again!​—Revelation 20:12.
Even now, the “great crowd” that will survive Armageddon are being gathered. They are getting ready for Christ’s Millennial Reign. Although they do not know when that reign will begin, they are confident that in God’s due time, it will be ushered in. You can be among them, but you too must get ready​—not by selling your belongings and traveling to some geographic location, but by taking in accurate knowledge of Jehovah God and his purposes through a study of the Bible. At no cost or obligation, Jehovah’s Witnesses will gladly show you how a study of the Bible can benefit you and your family. The publishers of this magazine will be happy to provide further information.
[Box on page 7]
The Thousand Years​—Literal or Symbolic?
  Since most of the Bible book of Revelation was written in symbolic language, a question arises. What about the Thousand Year Reign of Christ mentioned in Revelation? Is it a literal or a symbolic period?
  There is every indication that a literal thousand-year period is meant. Consider: The apostle Paul refers to the Thousand Year Reign of Christ, during which mankind is judged, as a day. (Acts 17:31; Revelation 20:4) The apostle Peter wrote that one day (24 hours) with Jehovah is as a thousand years. (2 Peter 3:8) That would argue that this judgment “day” is literally one thousand years long. In addition, at Revelation 20:3, 5-7, we read four different times, not of “a thousand years,” but of “the thousand years.” This would seem to indicate a period of definite length.

