





COVER SUBJECT | WHAT DOES THE BIBLE SAY ABOUT LIFE AND DEATH?
What the Bible Says About Life and Death




Reading the creation account in the Bible book of Genesis, we learn that the first man, Adam, was told by God: “From every tree of the garden you may eat to satisfaction. But as for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad, you must not eat from it, for in the day you eat from it you will certainly die.” (Genesis 2:16, 17) That statement clearly and simply shows that if Adam had obeyed God’s command, he would not have died but would have continued living in the garden of Eden.





Sadly, rather than choosing to obey and live forever, Adam chose to ignore God’s command, and he ate the forbidden fruit when his wife, Eve, gave it to him. (Genesis 3:1-6) The consequences of that act of disobedience are still with us today. The apostle Paul explained it this way: “Through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned.” (Romans 5:12) That “one man” was, of course, Adam. But what was the sin, and why did it lead to death?
What Adam did​—willfully disobeying or breaking God’s law—​is sin. (1 John 3:4) And the penalty for sin is death, as God told Adam. As long as Adam​—and his future offspring—​remained obedient to God’s command, they would have no sin and would never have to taste death. God did not create humans to die but to live​—even forever.
There is no disputing that death has “spread to all men,” as the Bible stated. But does some part of us live on after we die? Many would say yes, that a part of us​—something called the soul—​is immortal. This, however, would amount to saying that God lied to Adam. How so? Because if a part of us moves on to live in some other realm after we die, then death would not be the penalty for sin, as God stated. The Bible says: “It is impossible for God to lie.” (Hebrews 6:18) In reality, it was Satan who lied when he told Eve: “You certainly will not die.”​—Genesis 3:4.
That raises the question, If the teaching of the immortality of the soul is based on a lie, then what really happens at death?



THE BIBLE SETS THINGS STRAIGHT

The Genesis account of creation says: “Jehovah God went on to form the man out of dust from the ground and to blow into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living person.” The expression “a living person” is translated from the Hebrew word ne’phesh,a which literally means “a breathing creature.”​—Genesis 2:7, footnote.
The Bible thus makes clear that humans are not created as individuals with a soul that is immortal. Rather, each individual is “a living person.” That is why, search as you may, you will not find any Bible text that uses the expression “immortal soul.”
Since the Bible does not say that humans possess what some call an immortal soul, why do so many religions teach the contrary? The answer takes us all the way back to ancient Egypt.



A PAGAN TEACHING FLOURISHES

Herodotus, a Greek historian of the fifth century B.C.E., said that the Egyptians were “the first of mankind who have defended the immortality of the soul.” Another ancient culture, the Babylonians, also toyed with the idea of the immortal soul. By the time Alexander the Great conquered the Middle East in 332 B.C.E., Greek philosophers had popularized the teaching, and it soon spread throughout the Greek Empire.
You will not find any Bible text that uses the expression “immortal soul”

In the first century C.E., two prominent Jewish sects, the Essenes and the Pharisees, taught that the soul survives the body at death. The Jewish Encyclopedia says: “The belief in the immortality of the soul came to the Jews from contact with Greek thought and chiefly through the philosophy of Plato.” Likewise, first-century Jewish historian Josephus attributed the teaching, not to the Holy Scriptures, but to “the belief of the sons of Greece,” which he viewed as a collection of tales by their mythologists.
As the influence of Greek culture continued to expand, professed Christians adopted this pagan teaching as well. According to historian Jona Lendering, “Plato’s hypothesis that our soul was once in a better place and now lives in a fallen world made it easy to combine platonic philosophy and Christianity.” Thus, the pagan doctrine of the immortal soul was absorbed into the “Christian” church and became a fundamental part of its beliefs.



“THE TRUTH WILL SET YOU FREE”

In the first century, the apostle Paul sounded this warning: “The inspired word clearly says that in later times some will fall away from the faith, paying attention to misleading inspired statements and teachings of demons.” (1 Timothy 4:1) How true those words proved to be! The doctrine of the immortal soul is but one example of “teachings of demons.” It is not supported by the Bible, and it has its roots in ancient pagan religions and philosophies.
Happily for us, Jesus said: “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) By gaining an accurate knowledge of Bible truth, we are set free from the God-dishonoring teachings and practices promoted by so many of the world’s religions. Moreover, the truth in God’s Word sets us free from the shackles of the traditions and superstitions associated with death.​—See the box “Where Are the Dead?”
Our Creator did not intend for humans to live just 70 or 80 years on earth and then move on to spend an eternity in another realm. His original purpose was for his human creation to live forever right here on earth as his obedient children. This grand purpose is an expression of God’s love for humankind, and it will not be thwarted. (Malachi 3:6) Reassuringly, the inspired psalmist declared: “The righteous will possess the earth, and they will live forever on it.”​—Psalm 37:29.



For more information on what the Bible says about life and death, see chapter 6 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses. This is also available at www.jw.org.

Some Bible translations, such as the King James Version and the Catholic Douay Version, render ne’phesh by the words “living soul,” whereas many modern translations render it “living creature,” The New English Bible; “living being,” New International Version and The Jerusalem Bible; or simply “began to live,” Today’s English Version.

Can Humans Live Forever?
A few years ago, researchers reported the discovery of some underwater plants that they believe have been alive for thousands of years​—perhaps the longest of any living thing on earth. The plants are of the species Posidonia oceanica, a type of seagrass that covers huge swaths of the Mediterranean seabed between Spain and Cyprus.
If plants can live to that amazing age, what about humans? Some scientists who study aging are optimistic about the prospect of an extended life span. For example, a book on the subject is said to delve into “the multitude of cutting-edge scientific developments” in that field. Whether scientific developments will have any real impact on the human life span remains to be seen.
True prospects for living forever, though, do not hinge on modern science. The Bible points to our Creator, Jehovah God, and says: “With you is the source of life.” (Psalm 36:9) To him, Jesus Christ said in prayer: “This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) Indeed, our efforts to know and please Jehovah God and his Son, Jesus Christ, will be rewarded with everlasting blessings.





Researchers believe that some plants of this species of seagrass have lived for thousands of years






WHERE ARE THE DEAD?





Simply put, the Bible says that the dead are in the grave, awaiting the resurrection. (John 5:28, 29) They are not suffering or in any kind of pain, for “the dead know nothing at all.” (Ecclesiastes 9:5) In his teachings, Jesus likened death to a deep sleep. (John 11:11-14) Thus, we have no need to fear those who have fallen asleep in death or to appease them by making offerings to them. They can neither help nor harm us, because “there is no work nor planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave.” (Ecclesiastes 9:10) By means of the resurrection, however, God will do away with death forever.​—1 Corinthians 15:26, 55; Revelation 21:4.


Why You Can Trust What the Bible Says
We can have full confidence that what the Bible says is worthy of our trust. Why? Consider the following:





Unique Authorship: The Bible is composed of 66 books written by some 40 writers over a period of 16 centuries, from 1513 B.C.E. to about 98 C.E. Still, its content is harmonious and coherent throughout. This proves that its real Author is the almighty God. He revealed the information to the men who penned it.






Historical Accuracy: Events recorded in the Bible are in full harmony with proven historical facts. The book A Lawyer Examines the Bible remarks: “While romances, legends and false testimony are careful to place the events related in some distant place and some indefinite time, . . . the Bible narratives give us the date and place of the things related with the utmost precision.”






Scientific Accuracy: The Bible is not a science textbook, but when it touches on scientific matters, it reflects an accuracy far ahead of its time. For example, in chapters 13 and 14 of the book of Leviticus, detailed laws on hygiene and quarantine were given to the Israelites, long before people knew anything about germs and contagion. The Bible also speaks of the earth as being round and suspended in space, facts that were not fully understood by science until centuries later.​—Job 26:7; Isaiah 40:22.


These are just a few examples to substantiate the Bible’s claim of authenticity when it says: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight.”​—2 Timothy 3:16.


