The Challenge of Sowing Kingdom Seed in Southern Chile
HOW delightful it is to walk along a quiet country road in southern Chile! Cattle peacefully graze in tree-lined fields against a backdrop of majestic snowcapped volcanoes. You can hear birds chirping and leaves rustling in the breeze. As idyllic as such surroundings seem to be, there are challenges here for those sowing seeds of Kingdom truth.
Would you like to meet some of our pioneers, or full-time Kingdom proclaimers? How about spending a day or two with them as they preach the good news? First, let’s listen as Jaime and Oscar describe the delights and challenges of such a day in southern Chile.
A Day in the Preaching Work
“We start to stir and become aware of the cold that has penetrated our small dwelling. Wearing woolen socks and with a cap still on his head, Oscar climbs out of bed. He kindles the wood stove, lights the small gas heater to take the chill out of the room, and then heads back to the warmth of his bed. It is still dark outside, and we can hear the rain that has been falling all night long. We look out the window and then at each other. Oh, how easy it would be to take this day off! Then we recall our plans for the day and the need to work an isolated territory that was not reached at all last year. We are motivated to get started.
“On our way before eight o’clock, we walk at a brisk pace and hope that someone will offer us a ride or that a bus will come along, so that we can hasten our trip to the back roads leading to the isolated homes and hamlets of our territory. Here comes a tractor pulling a flatbed trailer with some workers on it. The driver stops and allows us to climb aboard. We are happy that, thanks to last night’s rain, today we are spared the usual experience of traveling in a cloud of dust. As we bounce along, we share the good news with the agricultural workers. When it is time to get off, we give them a few magazines. How grateful we are for the ride that has saved us a seven-mile [12 km] walk!
“It will be a long day as we crisscross the countryside in search of deserving ones. When we first started in our assignment, we could not understand why people would agree with what we were saying but seemed reluctant to accept Bible literature. We learned that often this was because they could not read. So we find it beneficial to point out that our literature is a wonderful gift for their children and relatives, who in turn can share the contents with them. Most of those to whom we talk do not have much in the way of this world’s goods. But since they are happy to share what they have, when they have received Bible literature, they have often given us eggs, potatoes, beets, onions, beans, lentils, and garbanzos.”
Jaime has learned to make suggestions when a householder wants to donate items for Bible literature he is given. Why? On one occasion, the pioneers returned with 30 pounds [15 kg] of vegetables, and his partner had to carry a live chicken in his book bag a good part of the day! Jaime often suggests merquén, a delicious seasoning prepared with chili peppers and spices. The account continues:
“Crossing the fields, we come upon some rucas [homes] of the native Mapuche [meaning, “People of this land”]. It is difficult to talk with the older Mapuche, for many speak only their native language. When younger ones are nearby, they often serve as translators. As we move deeper into the countryside, we meet people who have never seen a Bible or visited a large city like Temuco, capital of the region. This presents the challenge of helping them to discern how world conditions are deteriorating. We must do this step-by-step, showing them how local problems reflect what is happening elsewhere.
“As the day advances, our tired legs demand a rest. The weather has alternated between brilliant sunshine and a driving rain that makes an umbrella useless. Recently plowed fields have left our boots caked with mud. When we hear the words Pase no más (Come on in), we gratefully step into the kitchen and enjoy the warmth of a wood stove, a cup of ‘coffee’ brewed from cereals, some cottage cheese, and fresh homemade bread. Ah, that luscious smell of fresh bread!
“With renewed energy, we continue into early evening, crossing fields rarely separated by fences, though you will find some wheat fields bordered by a shrub called pica-pica, an evergreen broom with yellow flowers. Since the sun will soon disappear and we must reach another main road to catch the last bus back to town, our walk of 12 miles [20 km] will shortly come to a close.
“We return safe and sound, tired but happy, for we have had many delightful conversations with sheeplike ones. After a bite to eat, we review the day and then drag our tired bodies into bed.”
A Visit to Chiloé
The archipelago of Chiloé is composed of a number of small islands. Its main island is 110 miles [180 km] long and has verdant hills separated by small lakes. And what fetching seaside scenes and quaint fishing villages can be seen wherever you go!
In the town of Achao, just off the main island, we find Rubén and Cecilia. When they arrived in March 1988, the local priest warned the people ‘not to listen to the couple walking all over the island talking about the Bible.’ His negative comments closed the minds of some but aroused the curiosity of others. In time Rubén and Cecilia were conducting 28 Bible studies. Several of the studies are with teachers, four of whom use the Watch Tower publications “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial” and My Book of Bible Stories to teach religion classes in their schools.
Jehovah cares for these hardworking pioneers, who walk up to 20 miles [34 km] a day in the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work. (Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20) One day, Rubén and Cecilia were walking along a path that bordered a beach when they noticed that at low tide an abundance of choritos (a kind of mussel) were within easy reach. Rubén began his harvest, but how would they get them home? Cecilia solved that problem. Her stockings became bags. The pioneers now had the makings of a delicious seafood meal!
Just north of Achao, two full-time Kingdom preachers known as special pioneers are associated with a small congregation in Linao. The preaching work got its start there in 1968, and the first Witness of Jehovah in Linao was baptized in 1970. For four years this brother was alone in the preaching work and had to endure ridicule from family members and acquaintances. Finally, in 1974, his wife responded favorably to Bible truth and was baptized. This was followed by the baptisms of four fleshly brothers, four sisters, four uncles, six nephews, and a brother-in-law and his wife. The congregation formed there was one big family. In time, three of the five brothers began serving as elders and one as a ministerial servant.
Luis and Juan are full-time preachers who concentrate on sowing Kingdom seed in Quemchi, a small town 20 miles [30 km] from Linao. Daily, they climb fences, cross fields thick with vegetation, and walk up and down hills, with wind and rain as constant companions. To reach nearby islands, they use small boats that travel to the island of Chiloé two or three times a week. They remain on an island for a couple of days. A trip between islands can make a landlubber feel a bit queasy, but the islanders’ hospitality and kindness more than make up for this. Luis and Juan were joined by another Kingdom publisher, and together they try to reach the 11,500 inhabitants in their territory. Though the increase was slow, Luis and Juan were overjoyed to have 36 present at the 1989 Memorial celebration.
Back to the Mainland
Continuing north, we cross the Chacao channel and reach the mainland. In this area, pioneers Ramón and Irene work a vast territory that includes isolated groups in Maullín, Carelmapu, and Pargua. Witnesses on the island of Chiloé walk for an hour and then take a transbordador (ferry boat) to cross the strait and attend Christian meetings in Pargua. Ramón travels an hour and 20 minutes by bus from Maullín to conduct meetings that are generally attended by twice as many people as there are publishers. Why does it take so long to go a distance of only 24 miles [38 km]? Because the bus stops all along the road to pick up passengers burdened with bags of fruits and vegetables, sacks of potatoes and onions, and sometimes even with live pigs and chickens. Anything that cannot be placed on top of the bus goes inside. The net result is a long trip with many smells, sights, and sounds.
Since very few of these pioneers have cars, missing a bus running between towns results in a long walk, unless someone offers a ride. As Ramón and a Bible student rode with one driver, he asked: “How are the people responding to your work?” Noting their inquisitive glances, he said: “I’m the priest in this pueblo, and you are Jehovah’s Witnesses. I know your work well and like your magazines.” There was quite a question-and-answer session before he dropped them off in Pargua in time for a meeting. The priest surely had other questions answered as he continued to read our journals.
It is not always easy for Ramón and Irene to reach the 20 homes where they conduct Bible studies. Some are located across the Maullín River or in isolated fishing villages and have to be reached by small boat. Though the heavy rains can be discouraging, it was clear that the endurance displayed by them and the 18 other Kingdom publishers scattered throughout this rural territory was producing fruitage when 77 gathered together for the Memorial.
In Los Muermos, full-time Kingdom proclaimers Juan and Gladys have conducted 23 Bible studies. Long walks over muddy roads are rewarded when Kingdom seed takes root in the hearts of teachable individuals. In one isolated region in the coastal mountain range near Estaquilla, Juan and Gladys worked an area that had not previously been visited. They asked a Bible student if he would lend them his horse for the day. “Of course,” he replied. “May I go with you?” Juan soon realized that this must have been by Jehovah’s direction. It would have been easy to get lost in the dense forest, but the interested person knew the area well and led them to homes not visible from the mountain paths. Quite sore after nine hours of walking and horseback riding, one of the special pioneers asked the Bible student how he felt. The man responded: “The only thing I ask is that you take me along the next time.” This appreciative person continued to make spiritual progress and was baptized in January 1988. His wife was soon baptized at a circuit assembly.
During a visit by the circuit overseer, the 11 publishers in Estaquilla were delighted to have 110 attend the public talk. In a small town of 1,000 closer to Los Muermos, 66 met for the Memorial. So there is much to do in this large field.​—Matthew 9:37, 38.
Farther north, we find pioneers Alan and Fernando. As they walked along a dusty road one day, a driver offered them a ride on the back of his truck. After getting off, they had to laugh because a thick layer of dust covered them from head to toe. A sense of humor and the joy of conducting 20 home Bible studies helps to overcome such inconveniences. And imagine their joy when 65 attended the Memorial and the first two local people joined them in the preaching work the next month!
Crossing the Bío-Bío
To reach sheeplike ones closer to the Andes Mountains, it is necessary to cross a gorge with the roaring waters of the Bío-Bío River 150 feet [50 m] below. This is done on a fragile wood structure suspended from a cable that stretches across the gorge. With some misgivings, you climb on and move a lever that frees the platform to roll down the cable. You hang on to the railing of the platform as you move swiftly out over the middle of the gorge, where you swing to a stop. After catching your breath, you move another lever back and forth, slowly inching your way across the other half. Definitely not for the fainthearted! Yet, one sister does this every week to reach a sheeplike person in a distant mountain village!
The fine example set by pioneers and other Kingdom publishers encourages interested ones who have appreciative hearts to make a corresponding effort to attend Christian meetings. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) One family travels 25 miles [40 km] on horseback to the Bío-Bío River and then walks another 7 miles [12 km] to the Kingdom Hall.
What do the pioneers recall when they look back over the years? Snowcapped volcanoes, graceful fields, and rushing rivers? The dust, rain, mud, and long walks? Yes, but they especially remember the friendly people who responded favorably to the good news. These sheeplike ones surely make all the effort worth while. What a joy it is to sow Kingdom seed in southern Chile!

