
LESSON 3
Is the Good News Really From God?



1. Who is the Author of the Bible?






The good news that people will live forever on earth is written in the Bible. (Psalm 37:29) The Bible is made up of 66 smaller books. God used about 40 faithful men to write them. The first five books were written by Moses about 3,500 years ago. The last book was written by the apostle John over 1,900 years ago. Whose ideas did Bible writers present? God communicated with the Bible writers by means of his holy spirit. (2 Samuel 23:2) They wrote down the thoughts of God, not their own thoughts. So Jehovah is the Author of the Bible.​—Read 2 Timothy 3:16; 2 Peter 1:20, 21.
Watch the video Who Is the Author of the Bible?




2. How can we be sure the Bible is true?

We know that the Bible is from God because it accurately foretells the future in detail. No man can do that. (Joshua 23:14) Only Almighty God can accurately foresee mankind’s future.​—Read Isaiah 42:9; 46:10.
We would expect a book from God to be unique, and it is. Billions of copies of the Bible have been distributed in hundreds of languages. Though ancient, the Bible is in harmony with proved science. Also, its 40 writers did not contradict one another.a Furthermore, the Bible bears the unmistakable stamp of God’s love, and it still has the power to change people’s lives for the better. These facts convince millions that the Bible is God’s Word.​—Read 1 Thessalonians 2:13.
Watch the video How Can We Be Sure the Bible Is True?




3. What is the Bible about?






The Bible centers on the good news that God has a loving purpose for mankind. The Scriptures explain how man’s privilege of living on a paradise earth was lost early in human history and how a paradise will finally be restored.​—Read Revelation 21:4, 5.
God’s Word also contains laws, principles, and advice. In addition, the Bible records the history of God’s dealings with mankind​—a history that reveals God’s personality. Thus, the Bible can help you to know God. It explains how you can become his friend.​—Read Psalm 19:7, 11; James 2:23; 4:8.



4. How can you understand the Bible?

This brochure will help you to understand the Bible by using the same method that Jesus used. He referred to one Bible text after another and explained “the meaning of the Scriptures.”​—Read Luke 24:27, 45.
Few things are as fascinating as the good news from God. Yet, some people are indifferent to it, and others are even annoyed by it. Do not be discouraged. Your hope of enjoying everlasting life depends on your getting to know God.​—Read John 17:3.



For more information, see chapter 2 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?

See the brochure A Book for All People.

