
LESSON 5
What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?



1. Why did God create the earth?






Jehovah gave the earth to men and women. It is our home. Therefore, the first human couple, Adam and Eve, were not created to populate the heavens​—God had already created angels to live in heaven. (Job 38:4, 7) Rather, God took the first man and settled him in a delightful paradise called the garden of Eden. (Genesis 2:15-17) Jehovah gave him and his future offspring the prospect of enjoying life without end on earth.​—Read Psalm 37:29; 115:16.
Originally, only the garden of Eden was a paradise. The first human couple were to fill the earth with their offspring. In time, they were to subdue the entire globe and make it a paradise. (Genesis 1:28) The earth will never be destroyed. It will always be mankind’s home.​—Read Psalm 104:5.
Watch the video Why Did God Create the Earth?




2. Why is the earth not a paradise now?

Adam and Eve disobeyed God, so Jehovah put them out of the garden. Paradise was lost, and no man has succeeded in restoring it. The Bible says: “The earth has been handed over to the wicked.”​—Job 9:24.​—Read Genesis 3:23, 24.





Has Jehovah abandoned his original purpose for mankind? No! He is almighty. He cannot fail. (Isaiah 45:18) He will restore the human race to the way he meant it to be.​—Read Psalm 37:11, 34.



3. How will Paradise be restored?

Paradise will be restored on earth during Jesus’ rule as God’s King. In a battle called Armageddon, Jesus will lead God’s angels and destroy all who oppose God. Then Jesus will imprison Satan for 1,000 years. God’s people will survive the destruction because Jesus will guide and protect them. They will enjoy everlasting life in Paradise on earth.​—Read Revelation 20:1-3; 21:3, 4.



4. When will suffering end?

When will God bring an end to evil on earth? Jesus gave a “sign” to indicate when the end would be near. Present world conditions threaten man’s survival and show that we now live in “the conclusion of the system of things.”​—Read Matthew 24:3, 7-14, 21, 22.
During Jesus’ 1,000-year rule from heaven over the earth, he will bring all suffering to an end. (Isaiah 9:6, 7; 11:9) Besides serving as King, Jesus will act as High Priest and will cancel the sins of those who love God. Thus, by means of Jesus, God will eliminate sickness, aging, and death.​—Read Isaiah 25:8; 33:24.



5. Who will live in the future Paradise?






At the Kingdom Hall, you will meet people who love God and want to learn how to please him




People who obey God will live in Paradise. (1 John 2:17) Jesus sent his followers to search for meek people and to teach them how to become acceptable to God. Today, Jehovah is preparing millions of people for life in the future Paradise on earth. (Zephaniah 2:3) At Kingdom Halls of Jehovah’s Witnesses, people learn to be better husbands and fathers and to be better wives and mothers. Children and parents worship together and learn how to benefit from the good news.​—Read Micah 4:1-4.



For more information, see chapter 3 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?

