
LESSON 15
Why Should You Continue?



1. How will continuing your Bible study benefit you?






No doubt, this overview of basic Bible teachings has strengthened your love for Jehovah. This love needs constant cultivation. (1 Peter 2:2) Your hope of everlasting life depends on whether you continue to draw close to God by studying his Word.​—Read John 17:3; Jude 21.
As you grow in knowledge of God, your faith will become stronger. Faith will help you to please God. (Hebrews 11:1, 6) It will move you to repent and to make beneficial changes in your way of life.​—Read Acts 3:19.



2. How could your knowledge of God benefit others?






You can enter into a special relationship with Jehovah




Naturally, you will want to share with others what you have learned​—we all enjoy telling good news. As you continue studying the Bible, you will learn how to use the Bible to explain your faith in Jehovah and the good news.​—Read Romans 10:13-15.
Most people start by sharing the good news with friends or relatives. Be tactful. Rather than saying that their religion is mistaken, tell them about God’s promises. Also, remember that people are often more impressed by your kind behavior than by what you say.​—Read 2 Timothy 2:24, 25.



3. What relationship with God can you enjoy?

Studying God’s Word will help you to grow spiritually. Eventually, you may enter into a very special relationship with Jehovah. You can actually belong to him as a member of his family.​—Read 2 Corinthians 6:18.



4. How can you continue to progress?

You can advance spiritually by continuing to study God’s Word. (Hebrews 5:13, 14) Ask one of Jehovah’s Witnesses to study the Bible with you using the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? The more you learn from God’s Word, the more successful your life will be.​—Read Psalm 1:1-3; 73:27, 28.





The good news comes from Jehovah, the happy God. You can draw closer to him by drawing closer to his people. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) By continuing your efforts to please Jehovah, you are reaching out for the real life​—everlasting life. Drawing close to God is truly the best thing that you can do.​—Read 1 Timothy 1:11; 6:19.



For more information, see chapter 18 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?

