Power and Presence of Our Lord Jesus Christ
 1. What great truths would these three witnesses recall later as they pondered the transfiguration?
THESE three disciples, Peter, James and John, were well informed regarding the Scriptures, not only in knowledge of the prophecies but their hearts were in tune with the great God of heaven and they had learned much from Jesus. So when they saw his transfiguration it was not like a passing picture. They had climbed a lofty mountain and were tired and sleepy. However, they got fully awake and they gazed at that wonderful scene and also heard some of the conversation. How very often these three men would recapture that blaze of glory, that effulgence which could never be forgotten, and contemplate its meaning, linking prophecy with prophecy, promise with promise, and, to crown it all, the voice of God! In Moses they saw represented the law, the covenant, the theocratic organization, the Kingdom, the deliverance of the nation and being safely transferred to the Promised Land. To them, Moses meant this and much more. In Elijah they would see the faithful advocate of pure and true worship, a real hater of false worship, a champion for Jehovah’s service, a rebuker of kings, destroyer of false priests, restorer of the dead and one taken from earthly service without the determination of men. Then they saw the Son of God in glory, and such glory they knew belonged to the Christ of God. Surely the vision, for such it was, portrayed for them in miniature form, almost in tableau form, though not without life, the Son of man in glory, with his Kingdom power. In what better way or form could they have seen it, for everything was embodied in that vision!
 2. Is the conversation of the trio in the vision enlightening? Why?
2 Then there was the conversation among Moses, Elijah and Jesus. And what were they talking about? Probably many things not recorded, but we do know they were discussing the departure of Jesus at Jerusalem. (Luke 9:31, NW) Therefore we are interested to learn what was involved. It is necessary for us to remember that only a week before Jesus had openly said to his disciples: “The Son of man must undergo many sufferings and be rejected by the older men of influence and chief priests and scribes and be killed and on the third day be raised up.” (Luke 9:22, NW) The use of the word “departure” is most enlightening, and very important. In the King James Version the word “decease” is used, which does not carry the complete thought. When the word “decease” is used we think only of death, whereas departure carries the thought of leaving, of going somewhere. The Greek word from which the English words “departure” and “decease” are translated is éxodos. When we entertain the thought of exodus it implies more than “decease”.
 3. How did Moses have a departure? and were others included?
3 Moses and the typical theocratic nation experienced an exodus and it was obtained on the basis of Jehovah’s promise, the death of the firstborn of Egypt, the slain lamb and sprinkled blood. Death was involved in the firstborn of Egypt and in the slain lamb which stood for Moses. It was their decease, but also the departure of Moses, who foreshadowed Christ. Deliverance came not only to Moses but to at least two million others. It was their exit, their going out, an exodus, a departure. The Hebrew book Exodus gives an account of the first stages in the fulfillment of the promise made by Jehovah to the faithful ones before Moses’ day with reference to the growth of Israel, actually from a family to a nation. Their exodus was the accomplishment of deliverance, during which time they had no permanent city but were on the move from Satan’s world to their inheritance. Jehovah called his people out of Egypt and made them finally a kingdom.
 4. In what way did Elijah have a departure, and is he alive in heaven?
4 Elijah had an exodus, though his departure was vastly different. The record states: “And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, which parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof!” (2 Ki. 2:11, 12, AS) This departure should not be taken to mean that Elijah is in heaven still active in bodily form, because Paul says in Hebrews 11:13 (NW): “In faith all these died, although they did not get the fulfillment of the promises, but they saw them afar off.” The Lord Jesus said: “Moreover, no man has ascended into heaven but he that descended from heaven, the Son of man.” (John 3:13, NW) Jehovah arranged Elijah’s departure in this way so as to portray and foreshadow something greater concerning the Elijah who was yet future.
 5, 6. Did Jesus expect only a decease at Jerusalem? How do we know?
5 The Moses and Elijah of the vision were discussing Jesus’ departure, not merely his death, leaving the earthly work by dying and there having it end, but a moving out to something else, a future, yes, eternity before him. He had said he would be raised the third day, and on one occasion declared: “What, therefore, if you behold the Son of man ascending to where he was before?” (John 6:62, NW) His death was a victorious one and it meant salvation to those in the world hearing his voice. The departure of Christ Jesus means setting free multitudes of prisoners. Hence Paul quotes: “When he ascended on high he led captive a multitude; he gave gifts in men.” (Eph. 4:8, NW) King David had prophetically written: “The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands upon thousands: the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the sanctuary. Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led away captives; thou hast received gifts among men, yea, among the rebellious also, that Jehovah God might dwell with them.” (Ps. 68:17, 18, AS) Here note also the apostle’s words: “It is according to the operation of the mightiness of [God’s] strength, with which he has operated in the case of the Christ when he raised him up from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly places, far above every government and authority and power and lordship and every name named.”—Eph. 1:19-21, NW.
6 The departure of Jesus Christ meant leaving this earth by death and then being raised from the dead by his Father and exalted to the glorious position in heavenly majesty. The promise had been made, “Thou wilt not leave my soul to Sheol; neither wilt thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Thou wilt show me the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of joy; in thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.” (Ps. 16:10, 11, AS) The departure in the case of Jesus Christ thus meant much more than just his decease.
 7. What further feature of the transfiguration served to confirm prophecy?
7 There is more yet to the transfiguration scene, for to crown this all-glorious spectacle further confirmation is given. As the cloud formed and began to cover them protectively “they became fearful. And a voice came out of the cloud, saying: ‘This is my Son, the one that has been chosen. Listen to him.’” (Luke 9:34, 35, NW) No wonder Peter in later years writes: “He received from God the Father honor and glory when words such as these were borne to him.” (2 Pet. 1:17, NW) It is when we combine all these separate features into one grand whole that we really begin to appreciate how it was that these three apostles saw the Son of man in his glory, in the Kingdom with its power and majesty. Jehovah was confirming the word he had spoken through Moses and the prophets. “Listen to him” the voice of Jehovah said. “Unto him ye shall hearken” had been stated through Moses. Then shortly after Jesus’ departure Peter exclaims: “You must listen to him according to all the things he speaks to you. Indeed, any soul that does not listen to that Prophet will be completely destroyed from among the people.” (Acts 3:22, 23, NW) Instead of Moses now speaking to God’s people the authority was transferred to Christ Jesus. The law covenant was ending and a new covenant beginning.
 8, 9. (a) How does Paul show his knowledge of and understanding of this vision? (b) How important is the voice of Jesus Christ in this regard?
8 It would appear that the apostle John’s words in his first Joh chapter 1 had been influenced by the transfiguration scene. “So the Word became flesh and resided among us, and we had a view of his glory, a glory such as belongs to an only-begotten son from a father.” (John 1:14, NW) Perhaps many of these things John speaks of were written with the glorious vision in mind. Then there is other confirmation showing the importance of the transfiguration and its portrayal of the Kingdom and the majesty of the King. Listen to Paul’s words: “God, who long ago spoke on many occasions and in many ways to our forefathers by means of the prophets [Moses, Elijah and others], has at the end of these days spoken to us by means of a Son [‘Listen to him!’], whom he appointed heir of all things [‘This is my Son!’], . . . He is the reflection of his glory and the exact representation of his very being, and he sustains all things by the word of his power, and after he had made a purification for our sins [passed into death] he sat down on the right hand of the majesty in lofty places [completed his exodus or “departure”].”—Heb. 1:1-3, NW.
9 Paul continues explaining that, not to anyone has he said ‘You are my Son’, but when he brings his firstborn forth he acknowledges him and calls upon all the angels to worship him; and Paul follows these words with a quotation from Psalm 45 to prove he is the anointed and that he will continue forever. Then he uses words similar to Peter’s: “That is why it is necessary for us to pay more than the usual attention to the things heard by us, that we may never drift away. How shall we escape if we have neglected a salvation of such greatness in that it began to be spoken through our Lord?” (Heb. 2:1, 3, NW) So much of Paul’s writing to the Hebrews reflects the transfiguration scene. Even the tone of thought rises to great height for it, sets forth the glories of the new covenant in true expression, and shows the eveningtime of the old covenant. But how grand is the sunrise of the new, and the heavenly prospects thus illuminated! The transfiguration shows the glory of Moses and Elijah and then its fading away in honor, but the voice of authority comes from heaven recognizing the Son and commanding that he is the one to whom they must listen. Yes, though Jehovah did in the times past speak through the prophets he will now speak through his Son. The voice of Jesus Christ is as the voice of Jehovah God to his people. Blessed are your eyes if they see and your ears if they hear, for these truths will bring much joy and comfort.
PROPHETIC SIGNIFICANCE
10. Does the transfiguration foreshadow something grander, and what does it confirm?
10 Though that magnificent appearance was so impressive and significant to the three apostles and to the early church, also to the faithful since, yet that is not the end, because it means much more to us today. Why? The simple answer is that we have now come to the actual presence of our Lord Jesus Christ and his kingdom is here in its power. The King, Christ Jesus, was not ruling at his first advent, and let us remember that the transfiguration was but a vision, though assuredly portraying grander things to come. The Scriptures and the facts point to the second appearing of our Lord, at which time he will come in the glory of the Father to rule the world. There is one thing sure, and it is that the transfiguration vision confirms the prophetic word of Jehovah, giving life to it, and so speaks eloquently to us. Peter says: “Consequently, we have the prophetic word made more firm, and you are doing well in paying attention to it as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until day dawns and a daystar rises, in your hearts.”—2 Pet. 1:19, NW.
11. When will be the glorious appearing, of Christ? Quote scriptures to show it and who will see it.
11 Here also is something future, a looking forward to a great event. Paul says: “For what is our hope or joy or crown of exultation—why, is it not in fact you?—before our Lord Jesus at his presence?” (1 Thess. 2:19, NW) Jesus said, “For the Son of man is destined to come in the glory of his Father with his angels.” (Matt. 16:27, NW) “And they will see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.” (Matt. 24:30, NW) “When the Son of man arrives in his glory and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne.” (Matt. 25:31, NW) This time of glory was future and Paul showed that, though the promise of the prophetic word was to have all the angels subject unto the Son, yet for specific reason that time was yet to come. (For explanation see Hebrews 2:8-15, NW.) The glory of the King Christ Jesus would be in completeness at the second appearing, which time is now. Jehovah God will again declare him, this time to all people as his Son, the King of the new world.
12. In what manner has the power of Christ been demonstrated in these last days? and what message is going to the world, and why?
12 The King reigns in and from heaven, for the second presence is an accomplished fact. His authority and strength have already been demonstrated by hurling Satan and his demons out of heaven and breaking his power; also by freeing his people from Babylon’s imprisonment so that hundreds of thousands are now rejoicing in their liberty. By his direction and power these delivered ones have been preserved, regardless of all the concentrated hatred brought against them. The proclamation of the Kingdom’s establishment is growing louder and being heard farther afield each year, and before the work is done it will be known to be the most important and foremost proclamation in the world. This preaching of the good news must be performed before the end comes. Yes, the telʹic end, for when the witness to the nations has been accomplished then the greatest time of trouble this world has ever known will come, for God will smite the earth with a curse. “Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of Jehovah come upon you, . . . Seek ye Jehovah, all ye meek of the earth, . . . seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye will be hid in the day of Jehovah’s anger.”—Zeph. 2:2, 3, AS.
13, 14. (a) How is the Elijah work performed? (b) Explain Acts 3:19-22 in this connection.
13 The message to earth’s population involves calling upon the people to see clearly the perilous days, to know the nearness of the complete end of the old system. Before Jehovah’s anger comes those wanting salvation should produce works which will bring mercy and forgiveness. Repentance is necessary. Remember the promise of Jehovah: “I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and terrible day of Jehovah come.” (Mal. 4:5, AS) The work by Elijah was one of turning the inhabitants to repentance of their evil deeds. Jehovah has displayed his consideration and mercy toward this world’s entire population by sending forth his servants under his guidance to give warning of the impending destruction. To be saved for life those hearing the message must give heed to the commands of God as expressed through the King, Christ Jesus.
14 Now let us examine briefly Peter’s word expressed after Pentecost. “Repent, therefore, and turn around so as to get your sins blotted out, that seasons of refreshing may come from the person of Jehovah and that he may send forth the Christ appointed for you, Jesus, whom heaven, indeed, must contain within itself until the times of restoration of all things of which God spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets of old time. In fact, Moses said: ‘Jehovah God will produce for you from among your brothers a prophet like me. You must listen to him according to all the things he speaks to you.’” (Acts 3:19-22, NW) This word must apply in the fulfillment of the great day of restoration, the time of the Kingdom rule; and so Peter joins Moses, Elijah and Christ as he teaches the kingdom of God.
15. For what purpose does Christ come in the glory of Jehovah, and how do we know he is present?
15 In the glory of Jehovah, Christ Jesus appears for the second time to judge and rule. It is written: “Who is the King of glory? Jehovah strong and mighty, Jehovah mighty in battle. . . . Jehovah of hosts, he is the King of glory.” (Ps. 24:8, 10, AS) The glory of Jehovah is upon Christ. “He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.” (Col. 1:15, NW) The following prophetic word is now receiving fulfillment: “Mine eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of hosts. . . . Holy, holy, holy, is Jehovah of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.” (Isa. 6:5, 3, AS) The day has at last come for all that has been written in the prophecies to come to pass. The days are at hand for the fulfillment of every vision. (Ezek. 12:23) Many signs and wonders have already come to pass and there are yet more to follow, for the Son of God and the King of the world is here, and everything foreshadowed and promised through Moses, Elijah and for the Messiah will now come to pass.
16. Resulting from his power and presence what are some of the signs and wonders now evident?
16 The remnant of the anointed have been brought together; hundreds of thousands of the “other sheep” have already been gathered; the old world has been warned; new systems of things are commencing; God’s beloved Son has been enthroned in heaven; the old-world ruler and his demons have been removed and debased; false religion has been exposed; the “rich man” class is in torments. True worship has been restored. The Kingdom message is being published everywhere. Unity has come to Jehovah’s people. The theocratic organization is now restored, and many more wonders have happened too numerous to mention here. And think of some of the marvelous things yet to take place: Babylon the great will be utterly destroyed; wars will be stopped; all iniquity and every form of wickedness will be ended, with a full restoration of all the things man lost through disobedience, and restored mankind will enjoy endless peace, joy, happiness and life. The Prince of Peace will be in control. What a happy and glorious day! Who can withhold its good news!
17. Should we continue to sound out the warning to the world before destruction comes? Why?
17 In these last days Jehovah’s people have been engaging in the Elijah work, particularly from 1878 to 1918, when the work was interfered with and that part of the Kingdom service ended then. Shortly afterward God’s people came out of the silenced condition and did mightier works, just as Elisha continued on after Elijah finished; in fact, Elisha carried on Elijah’s work by anointing Hazael to be king over Syria and Jehu as king over Israel, in harmony with Elijah’s commands. (1 Ki. 19:15; 2 Ki. 8:8-15; 9:1-10) Though Elijah ended the work as far as he was concerned, yet it was Elisha who completed it. So it is in these last days: though the Elijah service as such was interfered with in 1918, yet Jehovah through his people still completes the warning work to be done before destruction comes.
18. Will the remnant of the anointed in these last days experience a departure or only a decease?
18 Furthermore, we believe that in 1918 the saints who had been sleeping were awakened and raised to heavenly glory to be with their Lord forever. Those saints now alive on earth will at death be changed in a moment’s time to join the returned Lord. Their decease will be an exodus, a departure. Yes, they also will suffer many things, be rejected, but will, without sleeping in death, be changed and raised to heavenly glory, forevermore to be at the Father’s right hand. Today in the flesh the remnant of anointed ones are not on a literal mountain, but are with those who are on Mount Zion singing the Song of Moses and the Lamb, surely a song of praise and thanksgiving for deliverance.—Rev. 14:1-3.
19. In glorious fulfillment of the transfiguration do we see the Greater-than-Moses setting multitudes free? Explain.
19 What a marvelous and stupendous departure today! On the basis of the shed blood of the Lamb of God, multitudes, in obedience to Jehovah’s commandments under the direction of the Greater-than-Moses, are moving out of the old world of satanic domination and forsaking it entirely. The illumination of the wonderful fulfillment of the transfiguration is penetrating the uttermost parts of the earth. “I saw another angel descending from heaven, with great authority, and the earth was lighted up from his glory.” (Rev. 18:1, NW) This angel announces the doom of Babylon the great, which proclamation is being made today. At the same time a voice out of heaven rings out in no uncertain manner saying: “Get out of her, my people, if you do not want to share with her in her sins, and if you do not want to receive part of her plagues.” (Rev. 18:4, NW) This command of earth’s new King is similar to the command expressed at Isaiah 49:9: “Say to the prisoners, Go forth.” Do not forget the word of Jehovah concerning his Son: “Listen to him.” Those who do not will be cut off from among the people.
20. The King in glory issues what command in connection with the fall of Babylon the great? If it is not heeded, what happens?
20 Keep in mind Jehovah does not threaten, for there is no need for him to do so. With him is complete knowledge, “declaring the end from the beginning.” (Isa. 46:10) However, he does warn persons of coming disasters, for he knows what the inevitable end is bound to be from the course of action being taken. In these last days he has clearly shown that “Babylon the great has fallen”. The great satanic organization is to be utterly destroyed. This determination of Jehovah God is irrevocable. Therefore what will the supporters of this wicked organization now do? There is only one thing to do: “Repent, therefore, and turn around so as to get your sins blotted out.” (Acts 3:19, NW) “Listen” to the voice of the Messiah of Jehovah, earth’s new King. “Get out of her, my people.” (Rev. 18:4, NW) It is determined that plague upon plague will come upon the great mystical city of Babylon. Do not overlook what happened to Egypt in the days of Moses, and now a Greater-than-Moses is here. “Get out of her” is the command. Those of Jehovah’s witnesses who have escaped now look upon her and see in that great city what Jehovah God knows is there. What is it they see? Why, a dwelling place of demons, a lurking place of every unclean and hateful bird, passion-arousing wine to offer to rulers so that spiritual fornication may be committed, merchants of the earth using her for commercial gain and this by the power of her shameless luxury. For further disclosure see Revelation 18.
21. Can any of Jehovah’s children be partly in and partly out of his organization? What should indecisive ones do now?
21 To those who are mixing in with filthy Babylon and living on the plains of Babylon the word of Jehovah is to you to forsake her before you receive of her plagues and go down with her. Neither can you have one foot in God’s organization and the other in mystic Babylon. “What harmony is there between Christ and Belial? Or what portion does a faithful person have with an unbeliever?” “‘Therefore get out from among them, and separate yourselves,’ says Jehovah, ‘and quit touching the unclean thing.’” (2 Cor. 6:15-17, NW) Leave entirely the sordid things of this evil world and come into God’s organization and take in the pure, clear, unpolluted spiritual air there. Open your eyes of understanding wide and see the glorious King of Jehovah in his majesty and splendor and power and honor. Gaze intently with wholesome faith to the Greater-than-Moses, leading out the multitudes into the new world. May the consciousness of the second presence of the Lord Jesus cleanse your heart and mind from all defilement of flesh and spirit and cause you to perfect holiness in God’s fear. Then realize that we are in the service of the beloved of God, his own Son, the ‘chosen one’.
22. Must we go into the world, and for what purpose? and how can we remain clean and have pure minds?
22 Impetuously we would all exclaim, ‘Let us remain here! Let us not go into the world at all!’ But this cannot be, for we must deliver the good news of the Kingdom to those of the world and help them escape. But we certainly can retain this vision in our minds, day and night, never to forget it. Then even though the ministry of Jehovah causes us to go into all kinds of places and conditions, our minds will be pure and bright. Yes, how true it is that beautiful flowers keep on blooming and dispensing their sweet fragrance in the slums of the cities. So Jehovah’s witnesses can minister where the homes and districts are dirty and perhaps squalor is all around, maybe even amidst unsavory odors. But these things and many other conditions disagreeable to the flesh do not deter or contaminate the faithful, for their minds are on the Kingdom and its beauties. Actually it is the Kingdom they are living for, and its purity, holiness and blessing. Therefore, Jehovah’s witnesses, continue to look up, for from heaven comes your joy, salvation and life.
CONFIRMATION OF THE WORD
23. How do we understand the transfiguration in fulfillment ‘makes more firm’ the prophetic word?
23 As we thus obtain some understanding of the transfiguration scene in its miniature and its major fulfillment, then how easily we can accept and appreciate Peter’s further words after telling us about the vision! He says, “Consequently, we have the prophetic word made more firm, and you are doing well in paying attention to it as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until day dawns and a daystar rises, in your hearts.” (2 Pet. 1:19, NW) When we witness the Almighty Jehovah directing events and actually causing the vision to first appear to the sight of the disciples, for no one else did it, then at the second presence causing the chain of marvelous events to come to pass, this time through the direct agency of his beloved Son, then the prophetic word is “made more firm”. It is as though God had put his signature to it. Yes, what he has promised to do is now coming to pass. His word is our only light. “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and light unto my path.” (Ps. 119:105, AS) “For the commandment is a lamp; and the law is light; and reproofs of instruction are the way of life.” (Prov. 6:23, AS) “Great peace have they that love thy law; and they have no occasion of stumbling.” (Ps. 119:165, AS) “The path of the righteous is as the dawning light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.” (Prov. 4:18, AS) It is not merely the possession of a Bible that counts. Indeed it is not only the very valuable reading of it that shows the way to go, but rather studying it regularly with purpose in mind. It is a “prophetic word” and therefore it is reasonable that we should see how it is being fulfilled.
24. In addition to God’s Word as being a lamp explain what other brilliant light we have on God’s purposes.
24 Without the prophetic word we certainly would be in a sorrowful condition, living as we do in a dark, squalid, dirty—yes, filthy world, not knowing why conditions continue to get worse, and we would not know what to do or where to go. How merciful and kind our heavenly Father has been and is by providing for his children an understanding of his prophetic Word! As a lamp it is always before us; we can take hold and so see the road to take. It burns brighter as the evil conditions grow darker. But thanks be to Jehovah that not only do we have a light to our path, but today something so much greater and grander. For, look, far ahead on the horizon, can you not see the morning dawning, golden, brilliant and shining? Oh, what a marvelous and beautiful sight, for very shortly the sun will rise in its strength and brightness, and we shall walk on in the daytime! The new day is just starting to beam through this evil world’s gloom and some of the obscurities are clearing away. Even now much of our Kingdom service is performed in the light of the new day. The ruler of darkness nears his end; for just as the morning sunshine dispels the darkness of the night, so the glorious Son of God as the new world’s King will cause to disappear all systems of iniquity. Knowing these things we rejoice and sing the Song of Moses and the Lamb.
25, 26. (a) What is the daystar, and how do we know it has now risen? (b) Why is it that prophecy does not spring from private release?
25 Because the prophetic word is so confirmed to us that Satan’s world is certain to end, we take up the “taunt song”. Also we say with confidence to the prisoners, “Go forth!” Only Jehovah’s undeserved kindness makes this possible. This information is not merely an intellectual appreciation but it must really sink into our hearts. “And a daystar rises, in your hearts.” The Lord Jesus Christ is “the bright and morning star” and he it is who heralds the new day. ‘The sun of righteousness arises with healing in its wings.’ (Mal. 4:2, AS) Away back in 1918 some of the Lord’s anointed realized the King was present and a few years later knew in their hearts he had come to his temple for judgment, and so published this information to all of Jehovah’s people, and thousands more saw the Lord at the temple. And in 1925 the fact and truth came home that the Kingdom, ‘the man child,’ had been born. (Rev. 12:5) How the hearts of the people of God rejoiced! They sang for sheer joy. They knew the King and the Kingdom were here, and they have not ceased to sing and shout aloud the good news of the Kingdom. They saw these things clearly thirty years ago and believed them. The morning star had risen in their hearts, and it can rise in the hearts of others of Jehovah’s witnesses if they will wholly concentrate their minds upon the things of the Kingdom.
26 Those who will desire first the Kingdom will be honored by Jehovah and Christ Jesus, and their privileges and responsibilities will be enlarged. The ones whose hearts are wholly set for the kingdom of God will listen to the new world’s King and obey his commandments. Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are the Directors, Guides and Teachers. They are the ones who form the prophecies. No man or company of men do it. Peter says “no prophecy of Scripture springs from any private release”. The reason is obvious. “For prophecy was at no time brought by man’s will, but men spoke from God as they were borne along by holy spirit.”—2 Pet. 1:20, 21, NW.
27. Show briefly how the transfiguration is seen in fulfillment.
27 So in grand fulfillment we look up to heaven from where God’s anointed King rules, not now from a lofty earthly mountain, but we “have approached a Mount Zion and a city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem, and myriads of angels, in general assembly, and the congregation of the firstborn who have been enrolled in the heavens, and God the Judge of all, and the spiritual lives of righteous ones who have been made perfect, and Jesus the mediator of a new covenant, . . . See that you do not implore him not to speak”. (Heb. 12:22-25, NW) Now by faith we see the all-glorious King in his beauty and glory shining to the utmost parts of the earth, and people of all nations being enlightened by his glory. As the one responsible for causing the warning to be delivered to all nations of the coming battle and day of vengeance, he reveals the fulfillment of all the prophecies written down and causes the transformation of multitudes of minds and hearts. And, too, he is the one who is the upholder and exponent of Jehovah’s righteous principles, foreshadowed by the law. All this and a great deal more are combined in the identity of Jehovah’s beloved Son and chosen King of the new world.
28. How should the sight and knowledge of it affect us?
28 Jehovah God and Christ Jesus confirm their word by causing it to begin to come to pass. Blessed are your eyes if they see these marvelous happenings. If you do, then in humility thank the great Magnificent One for his undeserved kindness. Be happy that you are at Mount Zion and witnessing a fulfillment of this glistening, all-glorious transfiguration scene, and let the joy and privilege of seeing it help toward cleansing ourselves in the fear of God, to be more sure of our hope in the new world. Then unselfishly look toward the many thousands in the world and say to the meek ones who are yet prisoners “Go forth!” for the exodus has already started.

