Witnesses to Assemble in New York in International Gathering in 1953
When the congregations of Jehovah’s witnesses in Greater New York heard this good news of an 8-day assembly, they certainly expressed their joy by prolonged applause. There are thirty-seven units of Jehovah’s witnesses in New York city now and they remember with pleasure their fellow workers who came many miles to be in New York in 1950, and they also recall the wonderful time they had with representatives from all the different countries of the world. Many of the publishers here were able to house these delegates, and delightful friendships sprung up.
Jehovah’s witnesses in New York are pleased to once again be the host for this coming assembly in midsummer of 1953. (Exact dates will be announced later.) They have arranged to place special convention contribution boxes in each of the Kingdom Halls. In this way those persons who wish to make contributions toward convention expenses may thus do so. These contributions will be turned over to the Society monthly and the Society will use these funds to help bring representatives from all parts of the world to New York. The Society is very desirous of having brothers come from as many countries as possible. Some may be able to finance their own way; others may need a little assistance. We hope to aid many through these contributions from the New York units. If any other companies of Jehovah’s witnesses wish to make like contributions to the Society, we will help as many full-time representatives as we can to get to this international assembly.
Please keep this assembly before the Lord in your prayers. Talk it to your friends. Make up your mind now to attend the convention and then work to that end, by the Lord’s undeserved kindness. The New York company of Jehovah’s witnesses is happy with the prospect of again taking care of the rooming arrangements and other work necessary in connection with this great assembly and welcomes all of you, as does the Society too. All of us will work together to make your visit comfortable at Yankee Stadium in New York city, and we feel sure all attending will receive a great blessing from Jehovah through his theocratic organization.

