Announcements
LIVING TRUE TO OUR DEDICATION—Eccl. 5:4.
Dedication means a decision to do Jehovah God’s will, to serve him in spirit and truth with all the heart, mind, soul and strength forever. Having made this vow of dedication one must “defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed.” Sharing in Jehovah’s service is a prime essential in fulfilling dedication vows. Such service includes making known the truth about Jehovah and his kingdom by Christ Jesus. As Jehovah’s witnesses participate in this blessed work, each in an assigned territory, news of the Kingdom is spread far and wide. During September Jehovah’s witnesses will call on people at their homes and offer a Bible-study aid in book form on a contribution of 50c.
SUBSCRIBE FOR “THE WATCHTOWER”
For more than seventy-eight years The Watchtower has been used by Jehovah God to provide up-to-date spiritual food for sincere Christians, in keeping with Proverbs 4:18, which promises that the path of the righteous would be like the light of the sun that shines ever brighter until the day is fully established.
In keeping therewith The Watchtower will publish the principal talks given at the “Lifegiving Wisdom” district assemblies held by Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the United States and Canada during the past summer. The first of these will appear in the September 15 issue and is the public lecture “Healing of the Nations Has Drawn Near.” Be sure to receive all these talks by subscribing now. A year’s subscription is only one dollar.
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA ANNUAL MEETING OF MEMBERS
It will be at ten o’clock in the forenoon of October 1, 1957, that the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will hold its annual meeting of members. This will be at the registered office of the Society, which is located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, corner of Parkman Avenue, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Notice of the meeting will be sent by letter to the members of the corporation, and in order for this to be done it is necessary that the secretary’s office have the proper addresses to which to mail such notices. All who are members should be certain that their membership records do show their addresses properly. With the notice of meeting the proxy forms will be sent. All the proxies should be returned promptly to the office of the secretary of the Society not later than the 15th of September.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 29: Never Compromising on Christian Principles. Page 524.
October 6: Happy Those Who Refuse to Compromise. Page 530.

