Questions From Readers
● Page 68 of “Let God Be True” says that at Genesis 1:20, 30 the marginal readings show “soul” for “creature” and “life” in these verses. However, in the King James Version that I have the margin shows “soul” for “life” in these verses but not for “creature.” Is “Let God Be True” in error?—M. C., United States.
The book is not in error, but it depends on which King James Version you check. The marginal references vary with different Bibles. The Oxford edition of the King James Version was used as the basis for the statement on page 68 of “Let God Be True”, and at Genesis 1:20 “creature” has the marginal reference “soul.” At Genesis 1:30 the word “life” appears, and the margin gives “soul.”
● At our Kingdom Hall, and at other halls in our vicinity, we have been told that nothing should be discussed in the hall before or after meetings that does not pertain to Kingdom truths or service. For example, if we want to invite some of the brothers to our home after the meeting the invitation must be extended outside the hall, not inside. I have accordingly asked others to step outside with me for a moment to voice such an invitation, and then we go back into the hall. Is this the proper procedure?—E. C., United States.
It is possible that the instruction was misunderstood or was not clearly stated. However that may be, the Society thinks it inadvisable for the Kingdom Halls to be used as centers for the recruiting of large parties, such as some have done in the past, even using the information board in halls for announcement of such events, or going so far as to announce such arrangements from the platform. Also, the halls should not be used as a place to solicit business or conduct commercial affairs. Such matters can be taken care of at other times and in other places. It is to avoid such abuses of the Kingdom Hall, dedicated to Jehovah God and his service, that proper instruction should be given.
However, this should not become so strict that it becomes unreasonable. It is good for publishers to discuss Bible truths and service problems and experiences in the hall before and after meetings. It can be upbuilding and it should be an enjoyable part of coming to the hall. But it is not improper to talk some about daily activities or events, to invite someone to your home, to ask someone to join you in some recreation, to discuss the weather, to engage in some small talk as you visit, to discuss other persons so long as it is not malicious gossip or slander, or even to mention briefly some business matter and perhaps arrange a time to discuss it more fully elsewhere.
We should be able to feel relaxed and at ease in our halls with our brothers and visit freely, not always having to weigh cautiously every word and keep our mouths with a bridle, as though we were in the midst of wicked enemies. Be very careful to use the hall dedicated to Jehovah properly, but while avoiding the abuses do not become petty and unreasonable.

