VOL. XXII. FEBRUARY 1, 1901. No. 3. 
CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 51 

The Christian Advocate's View of 

the New Century 51 

How the Century Looks to a 

Millionaire 52 

God's Blessing Brings Riches 52 

Heavenly vs. Earthly Riches 55 

Laodicea's Counterfeit Riches 56 

Parable of the Ten Virgins 57 

"To Every Man According to His 

Several Ability" 58 

Interesting Questions Answered 62 

Sin and Sickness 63 

Interesting Letters 63 

page 50 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These patent binders permit the insertion of each copy of 



the WATCH TOWER as received. Each binder holds two years' 
issues. Very durable and cheap— 40 cents including postage: 
British money Is. 8d. Binders, etc., for Great Britain, can be 
had through our London branch. 

NEW FOREIGN TRANSLATIONS. 



We now have the "Parousia" booklet in French and in 
Swedish, and "What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism?" 
in German. 

R2750 : page 50 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 



Preaching and divine worship every Sunday afternoon in 
Bible House chapel, No. 610 Arch street, at 3 P.M. 

Cottage meetings for prayer and testimony on Wednesday 
evenings; and Dawn Circles for Bible Study on Monday, Friday 
and Saturday evenings— various localities, Pittsburg and 
vicinity-inquire at WATCH TOWER office. 

page 50 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 

This volume contains a very choice selection of 150 Poems and 333 
Hymns, purged, we trust, from much of the too common, erroneous, 
hymn-book theology: 494 pages, good print, cloth binding only. It is 
the Gospel of the Kingdom in verse, by the pens of many of God's dear 
saints of all centuries. It is a companion to MILLENNIAL DAWN, and 
sells at the same price as the cloth-bound volumes. It is designed to 
lead the mind aright in meditation and worship. 



R2760 : page 51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE DAWN of the twentieth century has naturally 
led to the launching of new programs along 
ethical and religious lines. The United Free Churches 
of Great Britain, it is announced, "have been quietly 
working to bring about one of the greatest and most 
striking revivals on record." Their primary effort, 
for which they have prepared for more than a year, is 
the conversion of London, tho it expected to extend 
more or less to the whole world. In the same metropolis 
Rev. Dr. Joseph Parker has for a week tried to 



demonstrate the advantages of a religious daily newspaper. 
In our own land various Union-movements 
have been started which welcome Jews, Romanists, 
and Unitarians who deny the ransom, to unite with the 
so-called "Orthodox" who ignore the ransom. The 
general plaint of all is that an effort to uplift mankind 
must be made, and yet they ignorantly oppose or ignore 
the divinely appointed uplift so near at hand— 
the Millennial Kingdom of God's dear Son, the result 
of the great sin-offering finished at Calvary over 
eighteen centuries ago, but delayed until now for the 
calling and perfecting of the elect Church to be joint-heirs 
with her Savior and Bridegroom in that heavenly 
Kingdom. 

What these various "movements" and "crusades" 
will accomplish is hard to guess: our surmise is that 
they will amount to little socially so long as times are 
prosperous; and that they will amount to nothing spiritually 
—along the lines of true spirituality— "sanctification 
through the truth;" because they are not 
built upon the truth of God's Word, but upon various 
human philosophies and theories. 

Some, however, seem impressed with the fact 
that the new century opens under conditions very unfavorable 
to peace on earth and good will amongst 
men. For instance,— 

CARDINAL VAUGHN DECLARES THE WORLD 
OUT-OF-JOINT. 

In a recent address in London he is reported to 
have said: "The twentieth century will dawn on a 
world badly out-of-joint and sick unto death. The 
sense of uncertainty and unrest is universal. Races 
are exasperated against races. Rival nations have 
provoked each other to strife by gibes and insults, 
and men are asking whose influence is to dominate 
mankind when Asia is armed like ourselves? Will the 
heathen races prevail against Christian? 

"Envy, jealousy, hatred, desires for revenge, 
avarice, greed of power and influence, have broken out 
among the nations like a plague of vices that threaten 
to destroy them. Remedies have been applied, but 
remedies are worthless. 

"The nations called a conference for peace, but 
excluded the pope. They have forged weapons of destruction; 
harbored compulsory education without religion; 
preached the gospel of commerce; of the 'open 
door' and 'spheres of influence,' and then dispatched 
armies to fight the people. 

"They have dug passionately into the bowels of 
the earth for more and more of the precious metals; 
yet taxation is increased and wants multiplied, and 
there is a chaos of conflicting cries, but no common 
agreement." 



THE CHRISTIAN ADVOCATE'S VIEW OF THE NEW 
CENTURY. 

"The nineteenth century goes out in war all 
around the world. The Hague Conference led some 
to sing 'Hosanna!' and to cry, The age of peace 
dawns!' We sat among the doubters; for human nature 
unregenerated is the same all over the world. 

"The Christians are still cutting one another's 
throats in South Africa. The Christians are not done 
cutting one another's throats in the Phillipine Islands. 
The Christians and the pagans are but pausing for 
breath in China. 

"Clouds are rising over various parts of Northern 
Africa, and the shadow of revolution is upon a score 

R2760 : page 52 

of nations in South and Central America and on the 
continent of Europe. 

"An epidemic of lynching pervades this country. 
Prize-fighting is a great popular amusement. New 
York loves it, and also can breed a race riot... 

"Those premillennarians who think that the world 
must get worse before Christ can come are solemnly 
pointing to these things as portents." 

HOW THE NEW CENTURY LOOKS TO A MILLIONAIRE. 



At the annual meeting of the Educational Alliance 
recently held, former Mayor of New York City, Abram 
S. Hewitt made caustic criticism of the rich men of 
New York City and of the country, and prophesied 
that unless they changed their attitude toward the 
masses of society the twentieth century would bring 
forth a social cataclysm such as the world has never 
seen. Mr. Hewitt said in the course of his remarks: 

"The rich are blind. There is not one among 
them who is giving what he would give if his conscience 
were properly aroused. They do not seem to 
realize that this is a government by the majority. 
Ours is the only country in which there is universal 
suffrage. To be exercised rightfully and righteously, 
that suffrage must needs be educated. The rich in 
contributing to its education are but building for their 
own protection. If they neglect so to build, barbarism, 
anarchy and plunder will be the inevitable result. 

"I believe that in the twentieth century the spirit 
of commercialism will steadily grow less strong and 
the spirit of altruism stronger. I believe that the rule, 
'Do unto others as you would have others do unto you,' 
will more generally prevail than in all the centuries 
which have gone before. 

"If I am mistaken in this— if the spirit of commercialism 



and greed continues to grow stronger- 
then the twentieth century will witness a social cataclysm 
unparalleled in history. It is only by the discountenancing 
of commercialism and the spreading of 
altruism that we can safeguard justice, property and 
liberty." 

How much the above words resemble the Scriptural 
declarations respecting our day, and their assurances 
that the growing selfish rapacity will eventuate 
in that great time of trouble "such as was not since 
there was a nation," in which "every man's hand 
shall be against his neighbor," and lead to mutual 
distrust and anarchy!— James 5:1-5; Zech. 8:9,10. 

The closing words of Mr. Hewitt's address remind 
us forcibly of Malachi's words (4:6), "He shall 
turn the heart [sentiment]... or else I will come 
and smite the earth with a curse." Here the Lord 
puts an alternative, as Mr. Hewitt suggests; but other 
Scriptures clearly indicate that no such reform will 
occur, and that the "curse" or trouble will surely come. 
How refreshing it is to have the Lord's assurance 
that the coming trouble (in which the groaning creation 
will suffer and groan still more than ever) is but 
a preparation for their introduction to the long promised 
Millennial Kingdom blessings. How the Lord 
links the fire upon the tare-field with the speedy shining 
forth thereafter of the Sun of Righteousness to 
heal and bless all the families of the earth! (Matt. 13:43.) 
How this trouble, in which every man's hand 
shall be against his neighbor, is prophetically connected 
with the building of the great spiritual temple! 
-Zech. 8:9,10. 

All faithful "Watchers" may well lift up their 
heads and rejoice in the evidences which abound on 
every hand corroborative of what the Scriptures so 
clearly show is to be expected now. These evidences 
portend the speedy finishing of the Gospel age "harvest," 
the binding of Satan, and the inauguration of 
the reign of righteousness. Let us be glad and rejoice 
and give glory to God while patiently waiting for the 
consummation of his plans, and seeking to become 
more and more copies of his dear Son and meet for 
the inheritance of the saints in light. 



R2760 : page 52 

GOD'S BLESSING BRINGS RICHES. 



"The blessing of Jehovah itmaketh rich, and 
he addeth no sorrow with it."— Prov. 10:22. 

HOW REASONABLE it seems that those who 



become God's friends, and especially those 

who are adopted into his family as children, should 

be blessed of him in multitudinous ways, in which 

others of mankind, who are aliens, strangers, and foreigners 

to him through wicked works (Col. 1:21), 

should not be blessed. We look back into the past 

and see father Adam, while in divine favor, very rich, 

—the possessor of the whole world, filled with bounties. 

We read of father Abraham, "the friend of 

God," very rich in cattle and goods; and Jacob, altho 

losing all inheritance in his father's estate, was blessed 

of the Lord, so that he became very rich in flocks and 

in herds. So Israel was promised that if as a nation 

they would be obedient to the Lord they should be 

blessed in all of their temporal affairs; their land would 

bring forth bountifully; they would not be afflicted 

with drought or pests; their flocks and herds should 

prosper and multiply exceedingly, and even their 

physical health was provided for, so that God guaranteed 

them that abiding in his favor as a people they 

should not be subject to pestilences, diseases, etc., for 

the Lord himself would be their physician to preserve 

to them health and every prosperity. 

However, with the introduction of the new age, 
the Gospel age, came a great change— not in the divine 

R2761 : page 53 

plan, but in the divine dealings; and henceforth the 

favored of the Lord were not promised earthly blessings 

and good things, nor immunity from sickness 

and pain and persecution; but to the contrary of this, 

they were assured that whoever would be received into 

God's family on the high plane of sonship, begotten 

of the spirit, and, prospectively, heirs of God and joint-heirs 

with Jesus Christ their Lord, would be required 

to pass through experiences of suffering more than 

others; of trials of faith and of patience and of character 

to which others would not be subjected; and 

they were instructed that these adversities should be 

accepted by them as marks of divine favor, as evidences 

that God was dealing with them as with sons, 

and by these experiences fitting and preparing them 

for positions of honor, and untellable blessings in the 

future. (Rom. 8:17; 2 Tim. 2:12; Heb. 12:6-8.) 

"Eye hath not seen, neither hath ear heard, neither 

hath it entered into the heart of man, the things 

which God hath prepared for them that love him; but 

God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit."— 

1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

In harmony with this change of dispensation, we 
find the New Testament declaration to be to the effect 
that those accepted to this high honor of sonship (John 1:12) 
should not expect earthly riches or temporal 
blessings or marks of divine favor, but that, quite to 
the contrary, the Apostle says, "Harken my beloved 



brethren: hath not God [as a rule] chosen the poor of 
this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom 
which he hath promised to them that love him?" 
(James 2:5.) And again he assures us that not many 
great, not many rich,* not many mighty, not many 
wise, according to the course of this world, are to be 
found amongst the called and sanctified sons of God. 
-1 Cor. 1:26-29. 

From the foregoing Scriptures and many others 
we see, not only that those who become the Lord's 
sons are very rarely blessed with temporal riches, but 
we see also that the principle extends still further, 
and that very few who possess earthly riches in advance 
of hearing of the truth are very likely to attain 
the high calling of this Gospel age. This is not because 
God is opposed to riches, for he himself is rich 
above all others. It is rather, we might say, the outworking 
of a natural law or principle which has its 
force in the fact that all mankind, by reason of the 
fall, are selfish. The possession of wealth in combination 
with selfishness leads to a measure of satisfaction 
with present circumstances and conditions unfavorable 
to faith in God's heavenly promises. The wealthy, 
selfish, satisfied soul says to itself, Eat, drink and be 
merry; enjoy your advantages; take your pleasure out 
of these, rather than speculate respecting future advantages 
and future riches, which are intangible, and 
which must be accepted by faith. It is in harmony 
with this that our Lord declared, "How hardly [with 
what difficulty] shall they that have riches enter into 
the Kingdom of God! "--Mark 10:23. 

By this term, the Kingdom of God, our Lord 
evidently did not refer to the earthly nominal church, 
for we are all aware that the rich men find very little 
difficulty in getting into it. Evidently he referred to 
the real Kingdom, the glorified Kingdom which shall 
be established in the end of this age, the Millennial 
Kingdom. It will be difficult for a rich man to obtain 
membership in this glorified body of Christ, to 
which the Kingdom work will be entrusted. But why 
is this so? 

The reason is that God, desiring to select in this 
Gospel age a peculiar people to be the kings and priests 
and judges of the world in the next age, desires to 
select for the rulers and teachers only such as will 
come up to certain tests or requirements of character 
and obedience. One of these requirements is sacrifice 
—self-sacrifice— and hence all of this class now being 
selected are Scripturally designated a priesthood— "a 
royal priesthood," because royalty eventually is to be 
added to their office, partly as a reward for their faithfulness 
as priests in sacrificing the present life, and 
partly to enable them as priests in the future the better 
to serve and bless all the families of the earth. 

The beginning of these terms or conditions of 
this age was with the great Head of the Church, our 



Lord Jesus— he must sacrifice ere he could be made 
the King, and have the power and authority to bless. 
His sacrifice, as is well known, was a comprehensive 
one; it began with the sacrifice of his riches, and ended 
with the sacrifice of his life. "He was rich, yet for our 
sakes became poor, that we through his poverty might 
[eventually, in the Millennial Kingdom] be made 
rich." (2 Cor. 8:9.) His wealth, consisting of 
heavenly glory and, subsequently, of human talents, 
and every kind of good possessions, was all sacrificed, 
including even his reputation, so that the Apostle declares, 
"He made himself of no reputation." His will 
also was sacrificed,— the strongest individual thing 
that any being can possess; as he himself declared, he 
sought not his own will, but the will of the Father 
who sent him. His life, the most precious thing to 
any intelligent creature, was freely laid down, a sacrifice, 
a sin-offering, in harmony with the divine plan, 
on our behalf. -Phil. 2:5-8-Diaglott. 



*Riches, while generally applied to money and physical 
comforts and opulence, may properly enough be applied to any 
valuable possession; as, for instance, one might be rich in talents 
of music or oratory or art; or he might be rich in mental endowment 
which would carry with it weight of influence 
amongst men. 

R2761 : page 54 

But all these sacrifices led, under divine providence 
and promise, to still greater riches, greater honors and 
greater powers, as the Apostle, after reciting how our 
Lord humbled himself and became obedient to death, 
even the death of the cross, declares,— "Wherefore, 
[as a reward for this sacrifice] God hath highly exalted 
him, and hath given him a name that is above 
every name;" he has been exalted "far above angels, 
principalities and powers, and every name that is 
named." He has been given a name more excellent 
than all others, that all men should honor the Son, 
even as they honor the Father. (Phil. 2:9-11.) It 
is by virtue of his sacrifice of riches and honors and 
will and life itself that our dear Redeemer is now the 
great and glorious Royal High Priest, with all power 
in heaven and in earth, which he soon will take to 
himself. (Rev. 1 1:17.) Soon he will exercise it in 
accomplishing the wonderful work which he already 
has begun, and which it is the Father's good pleasure 
that he shall complete; viz., of subduing all things, and 
bringing all sin and rebellion against divine authority 
into subjection, rescuing so many as desire to return 
to harmony with their Creator and his laws, and destroying 
with an everlasting destruction all who love 
and practise sin knowingly and wilfully. 



These, our dear Redeemer's experiences, are set 
before believers as an example; and so many as desire 
during this Gospel age, and under its high calling, are 
permitted to become his followers, and to walk in his 
footsteps— to have fellowship in his sufferings, sharing 
in his sacrifice, that ultimately they may be sharers 
with him in the glorious rewards. As a matter of fact, 
none of these followers have anything of value to sacrifice. 
It cannot be said of them, as of their Redeemer, 
that they were rich and became poor; on the contrary, 
they are all poor as respects everything that could be 
considered true riches. Even their own righteousness 
was as filthy rags, which needed to be replaced with 
the imputed robe of the Savior's righteousness (justification), 
ere they could be invited to be his followers. 

But while none called to the under-priesthood possess 
any real riches, each one possesses something of 
some value in his own estimation; some possess a 
little honor amongst men; some possess a little of 
this world's goods, bringing measurable comforts; 
some possess talents capable of exercise and development; 
each one possesses a will, more or less weak and 
imperfect; and each one possesses a little fragment of 
life which has not yet flickered out. The invitation 
to each would-be royal priest is, that being justified 
by faith through the redemption which is in Christ 
Jesus, he should sacrifice his all, and thus be 
reckoned a joint-sacrificer with the great Redeemer, 
as having fellowship with him in his sufferings, that 
he might also share in his glory. (Rom. 8:17.) 
This is the particular feature of this Gospel age: it is 
the age of sacrifice and self-denial as respects all earthly 
blessings and privileges and advantages. And the object 
or hope inspiring to such sacrifices of present things is, 
that all such shall be made partakers of far greater 
riches of glory, honor, immortality and eternal life, 
in the Kingdom. Thus we have the key to the difference 
between God's dealings with his faithful ones in 
this present age, and his dealings with some of his 
faithful ones in a preceding age. 

From this point of view earthly riches of every 
kind, opulence of money, of influence, of talent, should 
not be despised by the Lord's people, but, on the contrary, 
should be appreciated— not after the worldly 
manner of appreciation, for selfish interests and purposes, 
but because those who possess riches of any 
kind, have that much more than they otherwise would 
have to offer upon the Lord's altar as a sacrifice in his 
service, to glorify his name, to advance his truth, to 
bless his people. But the consecrated should keep 
ever in mind that this is the only value of any kind of 
riches to them: they are not to seek to keep these 
riches, but to seek opportunities for using them wisely, 

R2762 : page 54 



—spending them all to the very last farthing. 

There are some who are rich in talents, and who 
could, if they would, turn those talents into the service 
of the Lord and the Truth; and they make a great 
mistake and lose a precious opportunity if they hold 
them for themselves in any selfish manner or degree. 
There are those who have more or less of the money 
talent, earthly riches, and they make a great mistake 
if they hoard these; for their only value as respects 
the Kingdom, its glories, its riches and its honors, is 
in using them, now. If they hold and hoard their 
earthly riches they are burying their talent, their opportunity, 
instead of using it; and such will demonstrate 
to themselves eventually the meaning of our 
Lord's words, "It is easier for a camel to go through 
a needle's eye* than for a rich man to enter into the 
Kingdom." (Luke 18:25.) He cannot get into the 
Kingdom at all except as he strips himself of his riches, 
—sacrifices them, devotes them to the Lord. 

However, the stripping of oneself of riches, sacrificing 
riches, does not signify the reckless and wasteful 
disposition of them; rather, all riches of every kind 
should be considered consecrated to the Lord at the 
time their possessor consecrates himself and his all to 
God's service; and thenceforth those riches should be 
used, not as his own, but as the Lord's riches, the 



*A small gate in the walls of ancient cities, for the convenience 
of belated travelers after sundown, after the main 
city gates were closed. These needle-eyes were so low that 
camels could enter them only upon their knees and after being 
stripped of their burdens. 

R2762 : page 55 

Lord's talents, to be used according to the steward's 

understanding of the divine will. But certainly no 

steward is faithful who hoards and accumulates to 

hand down selfishly to his own posterity. We are not 

here opposing a reasonable provision being made for 

the steward's household, as the Apostle enjoins (1 Tim. 5:8; 

Rom. 12:17), but we are opposing the 

thought that God has ever authorized his stewards to 

avoid using their stewardship, and to attempt to pass 

that stewardship onward at their death, to others. 

This is one of the fallacies with which many deceive 
themselves, for, as the Scriptures declare, the 
natural mind (heart) is exceedingly deceitful and at 
times misleads the new creature, the new will, the 
new heart. (Jer. 17:9.) It is for this reason that 
God in his Word gives us in so many ways line upon 
line, precept upon precept, that we may know the 
terms of our calling, that they are terms of sacrifice 
and not of acquisitiveness as respects earthly things,— 



that knowing this we may make our calling and our 
election sure by conformity thereto,— by becoming 
copies of God's dear Son, "who was rich [in every 
sense of the word, far beyond our comprehension], 
but who for our sakes became poor [sacrificing it 
all]." 

The Apostle speaks of the deceitfulness of riches; 
and on every hand we may witness this deceitfulness: 
we see how often earthly wealth deceives and misleads 
and corrupts the reasoning powers, and turns aside 
the force of God's Word to those who possess it. We 
see the same in respect to the wealth of influence, how 
those who possess this wealth frequently deceive themselves, 
and hoard it, and refuse to sacrifice it for the 
truth, for the Lord, for his cause. We see the same 
deception operating powerfully in those who possess a 
wealth of talent in any direction; they feel like keeping 
all of it for self, and if not all, the larger and choicer 
parts; they are deceived into thinking this is the right 
course, notwithstanding the Scriptures so plainly declare 
that our privileges in connection with these is 
that of sacrifice. As a whole, then, we daily witness, 
as the Scriptures declare, that those who possess any 
kind of riches, wealth, talent or influence, are rarely 
amongst the sacrificers. We might almost say, Blessed 
are those who are poor in this world's goods, and in 
talents and in influence, for they having practically 
nothing to sacrifice to the Lord but their wills, find it 
easier to comply with the conditions, and we presume 
that the larger proportion of those who will through 
faith inherit the Kingdom will consequently be of this 
poor class, rich in faith only.— Jas. 2:5. 

When we would see a noble example, like that of 
our Lord, who was rich in everything, and who gave 
all, we rejoice in it, and realize that as his sacrifice 
was so great his reward also is proportionately great. 
When we see the noble example of the Apostle Paul, 
who possessing some considerable wealth of ability, 
talent and influence, and possibly of financial means 
also, laid these all, a willing, a glad sacrifice, at the 
feet of the Lord, laying them all down with joy in 
God's service, in the service of the truth, in the service 
of the brethren, it causes our hearts to rejoice, 
and we feel sure that one so rich, and who spent his 
riches so faithfully, will be one to shine very brightly 
in the Kingdom, when it is set up and manifested. 
And so, undoubtedly, it will be with all the royal 
priesthood,— in proportion as they have sacrificed their 
possessions. Those who joyfully endure for the Lord's 
sake, the truth's sake, the greatest shame, the greatest 
ignominy, the greatest trials, the greatest persecutions 
in this present life, and thus have experiences most 
like those of the Master and Pattern, we may be sure 
will in proportion to their faithfulness manifested in 
such sacrifices, have a future great reward;— as the 
Apostle has declared, "star differeth from star in 



glory."- 1 Cor. 15:40-44. 

HEAVENLY VERSUS EARTHLY RICHES. 



We have said that the heavenly riches are to be 
attained in the resurrection, when the Millennial Kingdom 
shall be inaugurated, and the faithful overcomers, 
by their resurrection change, shall be richly endowed 
with all the good things which God hath in reservation 
for them that love him, and who prove their love 
by present-time devotions, sacrifices, etc. But, we 
should notice that there is a foretaste of these heavenly 
blessings granted to the faithful in this present life; 
these heavenly riches granted us now the Apostle 
speaks of as "riches of grace" (Eph. 1:7,18), and 
these grace-riches include faith, hope, and joy in the 
holy spirit and an ability to see and appreciate with 
the eye of faith things actually not seen as yet. The 
Apostle declares that these treasures of wisdom and 
grace— knowledge of divine good things in reservation, 
and the fellowship with God which permits us 
to anticipate and enjoy those blessings in a measure 
now, are all hidden in Christ, "in whom are hid all the 
treasures of wisdom and knowledge." (Col. 2:3.) 
We must come into Christ, as members of his body, 
the true Church, by sacrifice,— before we can have the 
opportunity of even searching for these hidden treasures, 
or of finding any of them. And then, as we 
progress faithfully in our sacrificial service, as priests, 
walking in the footsteps of the great High Priest, we 
find more and more of these true "riches of grace" 
day by day, and year by year, as we progress. 

Moreover, another kind of riches comes to the 
royal priesthood, faithful in performing their self-sacrifices. 

R2762 : page 56 

These are riches of the holy spirit. They 
find as they sacrifice the selfish interests, earthly aims, 
earthly projects, etc., in the service of the Lord and 
the Truth, that they grow more and more in likeness 
to their heavenly Father and to their Lord, and that 
the fruits of the holy spirit abound in them more and 
more— meekness, patience, gentleness, brotherly kindness, 
love. 

Furthermore, they find a peace and a joy to which 
formerly they were strangers, and which the world 
can neither give nor take away. This peace and joy 
come through a realization that having given their all 
to the Lord, all of his exceeding great and precious 
promises belong to them. Now their faith can firmly 
grasp these promises as their own; they can realize 
that as their justification and call were not of themselves, 
but of the Lord, so all their course of sacrifice, 



in harmony with that call, is under divine supervision 
and care, and sure to work out blessings; and that to 
whatever extent they shall work out earthly hardships, 
trials and sufferings, God will proportionately 
make them to work out a far more exceeding and an 
eternal weight of glory in the Kingdom.— 2 Cor. 4:17. 

With this peace of God and confidence in his 
leading and care, they can apply to themselves the 
prophetic statement, "All the steps of a righteous 
man are ordered of the Lord, and he [the righteous 
man] delighteth in his way." (Psa. 37:23.) They 
can delight in this way, be it ever so thorny and narrow 
and rugged, because of their confidence in God's 
love and wisdom, and that he who began a good work 
in them is thus completing it and blessing them with 
experiences which divine wisdom sees will be to their 
profit eventually. Thus the Lord's blessing is upon 
this class; and they realize indeed that, "The blessing 
of the Lord it maketh rich." How rich it makes their 
hearts in the present time— rich in noble sentiments, 
rich in faith, rich in love, rich in good works to all 
men as they have opportunity, especially toward the 
household of faith; and very rich in God's blessing 
and under his providential care, which, if rightly accepted, 
will ultimately make these members of the 
Royal Priesthood heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ their Lord, in an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, 
and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven 
for them.- 1 Pet. 1:4. 

LAODICEA'S COUNTERFEIT RICHES. 



We have been considering the true riches, present 
and future, provided for the true Israel, the Church 
of the first-born, whose names are written in heaven, 

R2763 : page 56 

and whose Head is Christ. But the Scriptures draw 
to our attention the fact that the nominal church of 
this present time, symbolical Laodicea (Rev. 3:17,18), 
claims also to be very rich. "Thou sayest, I am rich 
and increased in goods, and have need of nothing." 
Alas! This seems to be the prevalent condition of nominal 
churchianity on every hand. Only the few in her 
who are Israelites indeed, and who have not yet heard 
and obeyed the voice speaking in this harvest-time, 
and saying, "Come out of her my people, that ye be 
not partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of 
her plagues"— only these very few know of the true 
riches; the remainder are deceiving themselves with a 
counterfeit wealth. They look with pride upon their 
numbers, and count them by millions: they rejoice in 
this wealth of numbers, not realizing that nearly all 



are "tares," not begotten by the good Word of the 
Kingdom;— indeed very few of them know anything 
about the Kingdom at all, not being begotten of the 
Truth, but begotten of error. 

Laodiceans look upon their material prosperity, 
and the numbers of wealthy people associated with 
their confederating denominations, and count their 
money and their donations by millions, and say, We 
are rich as never before. Alas! that they do not realize 
that these are earthly riches of the kind which 
our Lord declares are no evidence of his favor during 
this Gospel age, but rather to the contrary. And 
they see not the true riches which the Lord admires, 
and which are the foretaste of his favor and the coming 
Kingdom wealth. 

And so the Lord declares to Laodicea, "Thou 
knowest not that thou art wretched and miserable and 
poor and blind and naked." She is poor, in that she 
has so little of the Master's spirit, so little of the Truth 
and the spirit of the Truth. The only riches which 
God can recognize are those which he promised to, and 
bestows upon his people in this present time. Laodicea 
is blind, in that the god of this world hath blinded 
her perceptions of God's character and plan and is 
leading her further and further away from confidence 
in his Word, under the guidance of her chosen and 
well-paid lords and masters, the clergy, who under the 
name of Higher Criticism and Evolution are rapidly 
taking away from her every good possession and thing 
which would be estimable in the sight of the Lord, and 
who are thus denuding her, making her naked, taking 
from her the robe of Christ's righteousness, and leading 
her to trust, not in the precious blood of the redemption, 
the death of the Redeemer, but to trust in 
an evolutionary process which needs no Savior, which 
denies an atonement for sin, yea, denies that there is, 
or has been any sin to make atonement for; and claims, 
on the contrary that humanity has ground for pride in 
its own progress, which will be quite sufficient eventually 
to bring to them every desired blessing, without 
any Savior and without his Kingdom, which God has 

R2763 : page 57 

promised as the hope of the groaning creation.— 
Rom. 8:19-23. 

Laodicea is indeed counseled to buy the true gold, 
the true riches of the Lord, and to use eye-salve that 
she may see, and to put on the garment of Christ's 
righteousness, that she may not be put to shame; but 
we have no intimation in the Scripture that she will 
give any heed to this counsel; on the contrary, the 
intimation is that more and more she will become a 
Babel of confusion, and that she will go down with 
the political and financial systems of this present age, 
in the great time of trouble with which this age will 



terminate, and which will fit and prepare mankind for 

the Kingdom of God's dear Son, and its reign of righteousness. 

"When the judgments of the Lord are 

abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will 

learn righteousness."— Isa. 26:9. 

Then, with the new Millennial age, will come a 
new order of things, and no longer will the blessing of 
the Lord entail sacrifice and self-denials, as at the 
present time; because the sacrificing priesthood will 
all have been found and proven and glorified. Then 
the blessing of the Lord will come, as to the Jews, in 
earthly favors and earthly blessings, in proportion as 
they shall be obedient to the laws of the Kingdom and 
to the spirit of those laws. "In that day the righteous 
shall flourish"— flourish in all temporal prosperity, 
and in mental, physical and moral growth, upward 
and still upward in the highway of holiness; in that 
day the evil-doer will receive the stripes, and be at 
the disadvantage; and, if he continue in evil-doing, 
ultimately he will be cut off from amongst the people, 
-in the Second Death. -Isa. 35:8; Psa. 37:9; 
Acts 3:23. 

"Charge them that are rich in this world, that 
they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain 
riches,— but in the living God who giveth us [all his 
people] all things [needful] to their rich enjoyment; 
that they do good; that they be rich in good works, 
liberal, ready to bestow; treasuring up for themselves 
a good preparation for the real life."— 1 Tim. 6:17-19. 



R2763 : page 57 

PARABLE OF THE TEN VIRGINS. 

-MATT. 25:1-13. -FEB. 3.- 

"Watch ye therefore, for ye know neither the day 
nor the hour wherein the Son of Man cometh." 

OF DEEP and special interest to every consecrated 
believer this parable should surely be, 
referring, as it does, to the Lord's true people only— 
the "virgin" or pure class— ignoring the worldly and 
hypocritical, and yet showing that amongst the true 
saints there are two classes, only one of which will enter 
the Kingdom and be the Bride, the Lamb's wife. 
Those who pin their faith to the creeds of "Christendom" 
find little light and comfort in this parable. Those 
creeds teach (contrary to the Scriptures) that death inducts 
the Church to heavenly joys, and all others into 
endless torment. No wonder those who believe those 
creeds seek to deny or at least to forget the Scriptural 
statement that there is "no other name given under 
heaven or among men whereby we must be saved." No 



wonder they seek in generosity of heart to extend God's 

favor, and heaven's protection from eternal misery, to 

hundreds of millions who have never heard of the only 

name, and consequently have never believed in Jesus 

unto justification, as well as to all except the most vicious 

of civilized lands. To such creed-deceived people 

this parable should give such a shock as would thoroughly 

awaken them to search for the truth in God's 

own Word. For to interpret this parable in harmony 

with their creeds would not only cut off for eternal woe 

all but the truly consecrated Christians, but would divide 

these "virgins" (pure ones) into two classes, only 

one of which attains the heavenly Kingdom, and join t-heirship 

with Christ as his Bride. All must see error 

in such a conception of the divine Word and plan, whether 

they have seen the truth on the subject or not. 

For our interpretation of this parable, which we 
believe to be both Scriptural and reasonable, we refer 
our readers to MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., page 91 
and on. 

The Golden Text should not be overlooked;— particularly 
because its real lesson is the very reverse of 
the interpretation usually given it. It is usually quoted 
and considered separate and apart from its context, 
and understood to mean, Watch; because no one will ever 
know anything respecting the second coming of Christ. 
How absurd it would be to tell us to watch for a thing, 
and in the same breath assure us that our watching 
would be useless because none would ever know! 

But this verse taken in connection with the parable 
of the Virgins, as our Lord gave it, and meant it 
to be considered, means much of great interest and importance 
to God's people. It means that all of God's 
people should watch, because if watching faithfully 
they will know of his second coming— it will be distinctly 
announced— not to the world, ignorant of the Bridegroom 
and non-expectant of his second coming— but to 
all the "virgins" (the pure in heart, the truly consecrated, 
the Church). These alone (not the world) are 
called upon to watch and wait for the Lord from heaven, 
the Bridegroom. And the parable shows the necessity 
for this expectancy, watching, and readiness on the 
part of the consecrated;— that only such would be ready 

R2763 : page 58 

for, and share in the great blessing expected. The unready 
were too drowsy spiritually;— overcharged with 
the cares of this life and the deceitfulness of riches. 
This proved that they did not love the Lord enough, 
more than earthly interest, and hence did not sacrifice 
the latter for the spiritual interests; and surely in this 
they are foolish, and will so assert some day. 

The parable belongs to our day. It is now in process 
of fulfilment; and it is but a kindness on the part 
of the "virgins" who are awake that they shake and 



otherwise attempt to arouse the sleeping "virgins" in 
time for them to get the oil in their vessels and make all 
needed preparations, and be among the wise before all 
the wise have gone in to the wedding and the "door" 
of opportunity is shut. This is the meaning of the 
exertions being put forth through the circulation of 
WATCH TOWER literature in every conceivable way. 

R2764 : page 58 

We seek to awaken the sleeping "Virgins." Some of 
them get awake and thank the Lord and his faithful, 
while others are merely angered by our kind endeavors 
and say all manner of evil against us falsely;— thus 
showing that they are not of the kind whom the Lord 
desires shall be members of "the Bride, the Lamb's 
wife."-Rev. 19:7,8. 

The portion or future of the foolish virgins is not 
shown in the parable— except that they, not getting the 
proper supply of the "oil" in season to go in before the 
"door" to this joint-heir class closes, will not be admitted 
to it;— its number being limited, and by that 
time completed. Other Scriptures seem to show us 
that these foolish virgins will pass through the great 
time of trouble with which this age is just about to 
close; and that in it they will be chastened and tested 
and made fit for a good place in the Father's house; 
and that tho they will never be sharers of the Bride's 
portion they will be of "the virgins her companions that 
follow her."-Psa. 45:14; Rev. 7:14-17; 19:9. 



R2764 : page 58 

"TO EVERY MAN ACCORDING TO HIS SEVERAL ABILITY.' 

-MATT. 25:14-30.-FEB. 10.- 

"So, then, everyone of us shall give an account 
of himself before God."— Rom. 14:12. 

IT WAS ON the way from Jericho toward Jerusalem 

that our Lord gave the Parable of the Ten 

Pounds, delivered one each to ten servants. (Luke 19:11,12. 

See our issue of Dec. 1.) The Parable of 

the Talents which we are now considering is a different 

one in several particulars, tho bearing close resemblance 

to the other. It was part of our Lord's teaching to his 

disciples during the few days preceding his crucifixion, 

probably the Tuesday preceding it, on the evening 

journey from Jerusalem to Bethany. This parable 

illustrates to us the differing abilities of God's people 

in respect to his service, and how each is accountable 

according to his ability, and that the same results are 

neither required nor expected from all, but simply faithfulness 



by each in the use of that ability and opportunity 
which he possesses. 

The Revised Version notes the fact that the words, 
"the Kingdom of Heaven," in the opening verse, are 
not found in the ancient MSS., but this does not interfere 
with the thought that it is the Kingdom of Heaven 
in embryo (the Church) that is discussed, and that is 
likened to these servants who receive the talents; for 
this parable, it is to be remembered, followed immediately 
the Parable of the Ten Virgins, which is declared 
to be an illustration of the Kingdom. The Parable of 
the Talents, therefore, merely continues the thought 
respecting the Kingdom class, making these fresh observations 
respecting it. 

Altho a number of servants are implied, yet only 
a sample illustration of three is given, leaving it to be 
inferred that the others were more or less distinctly 
represented in these three, without attempting to show 
or to teach which of the classes would predominate. 
In this respect also this parable corresponds to the Parable 
of the Pounds. This parable was evidently, like 
the other, to prepare the minds of the apostles for our 
Lord's departure from the present life— to the "far 
country," heaven itself, there to appear in the presence 
of God to present on behalf of mankind the sacrifice for 
sins which he was about to accomplish at Calvary; and 
incidentally to be crowned, highly exalted and honored 
far above angels, principalities and powers, at the right 
hand of divine favor, and there to remain till the appointed 
time for him to take possession of his Kingdom 
under the whole heavens, to subdue it and to bring it 
into full accord with the divine government, that God's 
will should be done on earth as it is done in heaven. 

The expression "far country," would give the 
thought of a considerable time to elapse between the 
Master's leaving and his return to establish his Millennial 
Kingdom. Meantime the apostles were to understand 
that they themselves were his servants to whom he 
entrusted his property, and that he would expect them 
to be faithful in guarding all of his interests and affairs, 
and promoting the same according to their several abilities. 
But since the parable covers the long period of 
eighteen hundred years, and looks down to certain servants 
living at the time of the Master's return, it is 
evident that it was intended to include, not the apostles 
only, but, as our Lord's prayer expressed the matter, 
"All those who shall believe on me through their 
word." We are to notice distinctly that the parable 

R2764 : page 59 

does not concern the world; nor do the decisions mentioned 
as taking place at the second coming of our Lord 
in any sense of the word represent decisions respecting 
the world, but merely decisions respecting the Church. 
Nor are we even to understand that the parable includes 



the general "household of faith;" but simply and only 
the specially consecrated servants of the Lord, to whom 
he has committed certain responsibilities; viz., those 
only who have been begotten of the holy spirit. 

In the early Church, following the Pentecostal outpouring 
of the holy spirit, every consecrated believer 
received a gift or talent, and some received many of 
these, as the Apostle says: "The manifestation of the 
spirit [a portion, at least one talent] is given to every 
man [in this consecrated Church] to profit withal." 
Each had a responsibility in proportion as he had talents 
or gifts of the spirit, and hence the Apostle Paul, 
having more than the others, had a greater responsibility 
because he had greater opportunities; and we 
judge that he measured up to these responsibilities in 
a manner most acceptable to the Master. (1 Cor. 14:18.) 
But those gifts must have ceased within a short time 
after the death of the Apostles, because we most clearly 
find that the gifts of the spirit were imparted to believers 
only through the laying on of hands of the apostles 
—that they did not come supernaturally from God 
to every individual,— and that those who possessed the 
gifts themselves, except the apostles, could not communicate 
them to others. -Acts 8:12-20. 

The object of those gifts, as we have already seen, 
was the establishment of the early Church, but with 
its establishment their necessity ceased, and hence the 
gifts ceased in that form, and have since continued with 
the Lord's people in a very different form; that is to 
say, since then the natural gifts or talents which each 
person possesses through birth, education and training 
are reckoned, when he is consecrated to the Lord and 
accepted by him, as being owned or possessed by the 
man's new or holy spirit, and hence are reckoned as 
talents or abilities committed to his care, and for the 
use of which he will be held responsible in the outcome. 
If he remained one of the world he would have other 
responsibilities, but no such as are implied in this 
lesson, which represents only the responsibilities of the 
consecrated servants in the use of their Master's spiritual 
goods. 

We may safely say that there are comparatively 
few five-talent servants amongst the Lord's people: the 
majority of the saints may safely be considered as being 
of the one- and two-talent classes. There are not many 
five-talent people in the world anyway, and it would 
appear that the world, the flesh and the devil bid so 
high for the services of these few that the number of 
them to become the Lord's servants, and to make consecration 
of their five talents fully and exclusively to 
his service, is comparatively small— "not many wise 
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble." 

The parable shows that five-talent people amongst 
the Lord's servants are not to measure themselves with 
others and to say, I have done enough; certainly more 
than A., who has one talent, but as much as B., who 



has two talents. Rather, each disciple is to seek to 

know truthfully just what talents of natural ability and 

opportunity the Master has committed to his care, and 

to seek to use everyone of these as fully, as thoroughly 

and as constantly as possible, so that the results may 

be much fruit, much praise, much service, much honor 

to the Lord. And as this parable should be a check 

upon those servants who have five talents, to hinder 

them from taking a slothful view of the matter so it 

should also be an encouragement to those having fewer 

talents of ability and opportunity, showing them that 

the Lord will not expect as great things from them as 

he would expect from those having greater opportunities 

and greater natural talents. It teaches such that they 

should do with their might what their hands find to 

do, and realize that this reasonable service is what the 

Lord expects and what he proposed to reward in each. 

The servant who had only one talent of ability and opportunity 

should have felt equally his responsibility, 

and might equally have had the Master's approval had 

he been faithful, in which event, no doubt, his one talent 

would have increased to two. 

Our Lord's arrangement of the parable, that the 
person who received the one talent was the one who 
digged in the earth and buried it, should not be understood 
to mean that the one-talented people are more 
likely than others of the Lord's servants with more talents 
to thus neglect and misuse them. So far as observation 
teaches, we might conclude that proportionately 

R2765 : page 59 

as many of the two-talented and five-talented dig in the 

earth and hide their talents, as of those who possess 

only one; and of course their so doing would be proportionately 

more blameworthy than that of the one-talented 

man. Why, then, is the one-talented man 

chosen as an illustration of these talent-burials? We 

answer, that it is to show the responsibility of those 

who have least— that the Lord expects even the least 

of his consecrated people to know of, and to use the talents 

he has in his possession, and that he will not hold 

guiltless even those who have the smallest ability to 

serve him and his brethren and his truth and who neglect 

to use it. As the responsibilities accompanying a 

larger number of talents would be greater, so the losses 

in their case would be greater, and thus the punishment 

more severe. 

"After a long time the lord of those servants cometh 
and reckoneth with them." By these words our 

R2765 : page 60 

Lord gave to the disciples as clear an intimation as was 
proper of the fact that they were not to expect him to 
return and reckon with them in a very few days, a few 



months or a few years; but when they subsequently 
asked him respecting the particular time, he refused 
them, saying that it was not for them to know the times 
and the seasons, which the Father had put in his own 
power. And so for eighteen hundred years the Lord's 
people have been left without clear information on this 
subject. This, however, does not militate against the 
thought that it is the privilege of God's people now 
to know something of the times and seasons, because 
the due time has come in which the Father wishes to 
communicate these;— the time mentioned through the 
Prophet Daniel, when the [truly] wise shall understand, 
as we saw in the preceding lesson.— Dan. 12:10; 1 Thess. 5:4; 
John 16:13. 

There is no intimation in the parable that the disciples 
would die and go to their Lord, and be reckoned 
with and rewarded then, as many believe to have been 
the case. The Scriptures are harmonious and consistent 
with themselves in their teachings, and not only 
declare that "David is not ascended into the heavens," 
and that "no man hath ascended up to heaven" save 
Jesus, but they declare also that our Lord will come a 
second time, to receive his people unto himself and to 
then reward them. The Apostle Paul, who was one of 
these five-talented servants, declares respecting himself, 
"I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course; 
I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for 
me [in reservation, in waiting] a crown of righteousness 
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give me 
in that day, and not to me only, but also unto all them 
that love his appearing."— 2 Tim. 4:7,8; John 3:13; 
14:3; Acts 2:34. 

To our understanding we are now living in "the 
days of the Son of Man," and he is now reckoning with 
his servants in this the day of his revelation. We understand, 
according to the Scriptures, by faith and not 
by sight, that the reckoning was to begin with those 
servants who had fallen asleep, and that "we who are 
alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord" should 
not prevent or hinder them, nor take precedence to 
them in this matter of being reckoned with and rewarded. 
(1 Thess. 4:15-17.) To our understanding, 
as already shown in the MILLENNIAL DAWN series, 1878 
marked the date for our Lord's assumption of Kingly 
authority and his judgment upon Babylon the Great, 
characterizing her as "fallen," and calling for all the 
people of God to come out of her: and that it marked 
also the date for the faithful overcomers of the past to 
have a share in the first resurrection— to enter into the 
joys of their Lord, and hear his words, "Well done, 
good and faithful servants." In harmony with this, 
it is our understanding that all of this class are now 
enjoying the glory, honor and immortality promised 
to the faithful. This work of judging the servants is 
totally distinct from the judging of the world— the 
world's judgment is very different everyway, and is to 



take place during the Millennial age, and is represented 
in the Parable of the Sheep and the Goats, the scene of 
which is located "when the Son of Man shall sit upon 
the throne of his glory," at which time the faithful 
servants of the present age, whose trial is now in progress, 
and whose reckoning and rewards are shown in 
the parable of the lesson, will sit with the Lord in his 
throne as he has promised.— Rev. 3:21. 

As other Scriptures show, "we who are alive and 
remain unto the presence of the Lord" will not be 
omitted from the company of the glorified, altho our 
being alive will not give us precedence to them. The 
inspection and rewarding of the Lord's servants having 
begun in 1878 as respects those that had fallen asleep, 
is since progressing in respect to those who remain: 
these are granted a reasonable time in which to finish 
up their contract of full consecration,— to become ripe 
"wheat"— and to render up their accounts. Each of 
the elect now, as he finishes his course, reports immediately, 
and does not need to "sleep" in death, to wait 
for the coming of the King, but is immediately, in the 
moment of death, changed, "in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye," experiencing fully and instantly the 
first resurrection blessing of glory, honor and immortality 
—in the moment of death. 

Realizing from this view of the parable that the 
Lord's people of today are represented in it, it is for 
each one of the consecrated (while yet it is called day 
—before the night cometh) to make a full and thorough 
inspection of himself: and to determine to what extent 
he has talents, abilities, privileges, opportunities, to 
serve the Lord, and to what extent he is using these; 
and to remember that his share in the reward depends 
upon his faithfulness in the use of his talents. There 
may be instances in which persons of five talents will 
use three of them faithfully in the Lord's service, and 
bury the other two in business and cares of this life — 
"in the earth," in earthly affairs. There may be instances 
in which those who have two talents use one 
for the Lord's service and bury the other one; but the 
fact that our Lord does not give such illustrations would 
lead us to question the probability of such a course. 
Some might plan certain things respecting two talents 
for heavenly things and three for earthly things; or of 
one for earthly things and the other for heavenly things; 
but the result probably would be either that he would 
become thoroughly immersed in the earthly things, and 
bury all his talents there, or else that his heart would 
become so thoroughly infused with the Lord's spirit 

R2765 : page 61 

and the desire to serve his cause that all of his talents 
would be thus employed. This tendency and result is 
implied by our Lord's statement on another occasion: 
"Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." "No man can 



serve two masters." Experience and observation corroborate 

this; and hence as a rule we find that people 

are either cold or hot in spiritual things; either it is the 

Kingdom of heaven first and far above all other considerations, 

demanding and receiving the very best we 

have of time, energy and influence; or else the Kingdom 

of heaven is neglected and forgotten, and time and 

influence are spent in money-getting or other selfish 

and earthly occupations of mind and body. 

The lesson of this to every one of the Lord's consecrated 
people is plain: we are to "seek first [chiefly] 
the Kingdom of God." It is to be our chief concern 
and to receive from us all the time, attention, thought, 
energy, influence and means we have— the things needful 
for the present life being understood to be excepted; 
and our love and zeal will be manifested by the proportion 
of these even, which we are willing to sacrifice 
in the interest of heavenly things. 

The reward given to the faithful servants was the 
same in each case— the entering into the joys of the 
Lord; and we may reasonably understand that this will 
mean that the cup of joy to each will be full. In this, 
too, we have a great encouragement for all, and one 
which perhaps is specially needed by the majority of 
the Lord's servants, who possess only one or two talents 
of opportunity, etc. They have an equally good 
opportunity of entering into the joys of the Lord as 
tho they had five or ten talents; and the reward, "Well 
done, good and faithful servant," will be truly meant 
for, and as fully appreciated by the one as the other. 

The reward to these servants is in full harmony 
with the foregoing application of the parable, and shows 
that during the Millennial age the faithful servants, the 
"elect" of this Gospel age, will be the rulers of the 
world, "joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord" in 
his Kingdom, and upon his throne of rulership; for the 
reward specifies, "Thou has been faithful over a few 
things; I will make thee ruler over many things." If 
the parable were intended to represent the world's 
judgment, such a conclusion would be inappropriate, 
because by the time the world's judgment will have 
ended there will no longer be necessity for rulership in 
this sense; for, as the Apostle declares, Christ shall 
reign [during the Millennium] until he shall have put 
down all authority, etc., and then he shall deliver up 
the Kingdom to God, even the Father. The rule, or 
reign of righteousness, the Mediatorial Kingdom, is to 
be established during the Millennial age,— thus to overthrow 
the rule of unrighteousness now prevailing amongst 
men, and to lift mankind in general out of the present 
condition of sin and death— to deliver as many of them 
as will accept the deliverance from the power of Satan 
into the liberty of sons of God. And with the accomplishment 
of this work the time for all such ruling will 
be at an end; hence this parable is a strong lesson in 
support of the pre-millennial coming of our Lord and 



exaltation of his faithful, the elect Church. 
R2766 : page 61 

The servant who hid his talent in the earth, and 
who failed to use it, endeavored to justify his course 
by blaming the Master with being too hard and exacting. 
And so it is with many, who, having taken upon 
themselves the vows of consecration to the Lord, subsequently 
fail to perform them. They are disposed to 
blame the Lord rather than to blame themselves; and 
this course indicates what their real lack is,— Love. 
They do not love the Lord fully, truly, sufficiently, and 
their course reveals this fact. Had they loved him 
they would have delighted to do to their ability his 
will; and only such are blessed with rewards. 

The punishment of those who failed to perform 
their covenant as servants, who failed to use the talents 
provided for them under this covenant, is shown to be 
great loss;— but not the loss which many suppose, whose 
minds are blinded by the theory that eternal torment 
is the wages for sin, and that it is visited upon all except 
the "overcomers" of this Gospel age. Such claim 
that the unfaithful servant would be delivered over to 
Satan and be tortured in flaming fire, and so blind are 
many of the advocates of this theory that they read all 
this into our Lord's statement in this very parable; but 
instead of mentioning flames of fire, which would surely 
make the place light, our Lord mentions darkness as his 
portion— "outer darkness." Neither does our Lord 
mention the demon-tormentors, generally believed in. 

We offer another and much more reasonable, much 
more consistent, interpretation of our Lord's words. 
The servant who fails to use present privileges of consecration 
and service and sacrifice will find the opportunity 
taken from him. He will have it no more; 
neither will he have any share in the reward given to 
the overcomers;— he will suffer this great loss. He is 
represented as going into "outer darkness," implying 
that he had already been in the light of divine favor, 
blessing, privilege, knowledge of divine things;— that 
he would lose this enlightenment, and that his understanding 
would become darkened as respects spiritual 
things. It is "outer darkness," because it is the darkness 
common to and resting upon the whole world of 
mankind;— only the consecrated, accepted of the Lord, 
being permitted to come fully into the clear light of the 
knowledge of the Lord and of his plan now shining. 
Any others than these, upon whom this light may temporarily 
fall, have it only in a secondary sense, at very 
most, and see not the glorious things themselves, but 
merely, so to speak, their reflections. The unfaithful 

R2766 : page 62 

servant is to be cast completely out of all favor; even 



the reflected light will be obscured from his vision, and 
he will find himself, now or shortly, in the darkness 
of the world as respects the divine plan, work, etc. And 
there he will share with the world in its great time of 
trouble with which this age is about to close, a time of 
trouble which is fittingly pictured in the parable by 
the weeping and gnashing of teeth. 



R2766 : page 62 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



Question.— Is it so that children are not amenable 
to the high calling, and that consequently they should 
be let go, without special religious instruction— into 
the nominal church Sunday Schools, etc.? 

Answer.— Only believers have ever been amenable 
to the high calling of joint-heirship with Christ, and 
to suffering with him. The innocency of childhood 
is in the Scriptures set forth as a beautiful picture, 
and one that is to be emulated by all of the Lord's 
people in spiritual matters— they are to be children 
as respects malice; they are to be simple in their faith 
and love, not given to duplicity, misrepresentation, 
deep scheming, etc. In this sense of the word the 
Lord assures us that we must all become as little children, 
else we cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven. 
But to be as a little child in these respects, and to be 
a little child, are two different matters. The Lord did 
not accept any of the infants of Palestine to be his disciples, 
nor has he called infants to be his disciples since. 

However, the age at which an intelligent faith in 
the Lord might be exercised and the time, therefore, at 
which, after the exercise of that faith, a covenant of 
full consecration to the Lord's service could be intelligently 
entered into, must vary with the individuality 
of the children. We have known some that we considered 
quite competent both to believe and to consecrate 
at as early an age as fourteen, and all we should 
ask of any would be an evidence of their faith and an 
evidence of appreciation of consecration. 

We have a duty to our children, even tho they be 
too young to appreciate matters for themselves. They 
are our children, and under our care, and for us to deliberately 
lead their young feet into the snares of the 
Adversary, and to assist in entangling them in sectarianism, 
when we know how much evil it has done 
us, would be a crime on our part against them and 
against the truth. Every parent should recognize himself 
as having incurred grave responsibilities toward 
his children, not only for their temporal necessities, 
but equally for their mental and moral training; and 



the parents who are most faithful in the discharge of 

this God-appointed responsibility are sure to be the 

ones who are running the race themselves most successfully: 

for they will find that every effort to make 

clear the divine plan to the child will bring clearness 

and force to the parent's mind, and every attempt to 

inculcate the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of holiness, 

the spirit of truth, will be sure to bring with it a blessing, 

not only upon the heart of the child, but upon the 

heart of the parent. And years will show that the 

faithful parents will have reward through their children, 

of joy and peace and comfort, while those parents 

who neglect their children, or who trust them to 

those who are likely to mislead them in spiritual things, 

are pretty sure eventually to reap according as they 

have sown— poor or meager results. 

Question.— Would it be proper for us after withdrawing 
from a church to return to it and commune 
with it? 

Answer.— There is no law to hinder the Christian 
from going anywhere he believes the Lord would have 
him go, and where he believes he can get and do good 
and serve the truth, and feed the Lord's flock, and 
use his influence to the Lord's praise. If therefore 
you feel that your visiting the church from which you 
have withdrawn would have the above beneficial results, 
and if you would be made welcome by the said 
church, we see no reason why you might not, as occasion 
would offer, attend such church. 

However, on the other hand there is something 
to be said. Are you sure that your going would either 
do good or bring good? Are you sure that your influence 
would be favorable to the truth, if invested in 
that manner? Or would it be unfavorable to the truth 
and favorable to error? Are you sure that your attendance 
would furnish you any opportunities for speaking 
the truth and serving it to fellow-members of the 
household of faith? These are questions which each 
of the Lord's people must decide for himself. We 
think that as a general rule denominational lines are 
so closely drawn that there is no opportunity inside 
of them for bringing the truth clearly and fearlessly 
before the attention of the attendants. 

Respecting the taking of communion: It would 
seem to us that to do this regularly would certainly 
be unwise and prejudicial to the truth, because it would 
be favoring what we think is not Scriptural. And 
yet if by accident we happened to be with Christian 
people when they partook of the communion we would 
not feel condemned by our conscience in celebrating the 
Lord's death with them, explaining subsequently to 
our acquaintances what we considered to be the Scriptural 
truth on this subject. But in visiting a nominal 
church we should, if possible, avoid visiting on the 
Sunday when they erroneously celebrate the Lord's 
death out of its memorial season. 



R2766 : page 63 

SIN AND SICKNESS. 



It is frequently asserted by some of the faith-healers 
of the present day that personal sin is the 
cause of all personal sickness, and that if persons who 
are sick will repent and be saved from their sins they 
may expect to be also saved from their sickness and 
diseases; the one only condition being that they shall 
believe that the Lord does heal them in answer to 
prayer. 

The proposition may be true that sin is the general 
cause of sickness, or, rather, that sickness is a 
consequence of sin, in the sense that had not Adam 
sinned death would not have entered into the world, 
neither sickness as an antecedent of death; yet to hold 
that the sickness of the individual is the consequence 
or result of the sin of the individual in every instance, 
and that salvation from sin necessarily carries with it, 
on the exercise of the requisite faith, the healing of 
the body, is a doctrine fraught with error and evil; 
bringing those who come under its influence into great 
mental trouble because they cannot exercise the necessary 
faith for healing, and they therefore count themselves 

R2767 : page 63 

base unbelievers, when they may be exercising 

all the faith that is required of them, and should rejoice 

with joy unspeakable and full of glory,' because 

they are receiving the end of their faith, even the salvation 

of their souls. --1 Pet. 1:8,9. 

It will, therefore, be a desirable thing to disprove 
this unwholesome doctrine, and, in order to do 
so, it will be only necessary to show that the Lord Jesus 
Christ was sick, for he "did no sin" (1 Pet. 2:22), 
"and in him is no sin" (1 John 3:5), and he could boldly 
ask, while he walked the earth, "Which of you convinceth 
me of sin?" (John 8:46), and, therefore, personal 
sin could not have been the cause of sickness in 
him, as it was not in the case of the man born blind, 
and may not be in a thousand other instances. 

Jesus was a very sick man in the garden of Gethsemane. 
Luke, who was a physician, tells us that, 
being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly, and 
his sweat was, as it were, great drops (thromboiclots) 
of blood falling down to the ground. This sickness 
with which Jesus suffered was diapedesis, a sickness 
not very common, and yet frequent enough to 
receive note and attention in the medical works and 



the cyclopedias. In McClintock and Strong's great 
work we have several instances given, under the phrase, 
"bloody sweat," especially that of Charles IX. of 
France, and allusion is made to Dr. Stroud's book on 
"The Physical Cause of the Death of Christ," where 
the matter is scientifically treated.... 

No one can read the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, 
in the original, without being fully convinced that 
(the chapter containing a prophecy of Christ) it is 
intended to present him as one suffering from sickness. 
In the third verse we have the words, "a man of sorrows 
and acquainted with grief." Here the Hebrew 
word for sorrows is "makaboth," and means pains, 
while the word for grief is "choli," and is from the 
verb "chalah," which means to be sick, weak, diseased. 
This word "choli" is the word used when the 
sickness of Hezekiah is spoken of; also when it is 
said, "Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof 
he died (2 Kings 13:14), and in numerous other instances 
of bodily sickness. The same word is used in 
the fourth verse, when it is said, "Surely he hath 
carried our griefs." In Matthew 8:17 this word is 
translated in the Greek asthencias, "infirmities" in 
our version, but it is the word that is used in the singular 
when the sickness of Lazarus is spoken of (John 1 1:4), 
and as a verb in various other instances of unquestionable 
bodily illness. Again, in the tenth verse, 
"he hath put him to grief," where the reading in the 
Hebrew is, "he hath made him sick," as in the margin 
of the Revised Version. 

Thus the proof from the Scriptures is ample that 
Jesus Christ was sick, and so able to sympathize with 
us in our sicknesses and "infirmities" (Heb. 4:15); 
being without sin, personal sin could not have been the 
cause of his illness, and, therefore, may not be of ours. 

W. S. URMY, 
Pastor of Potrero M.E. Church, California. 



page 63 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your recent favor was 
received yesterday. Please accept my most heartfelt 
thanks for your clear and detailed explanation of the 
1881 matter. Altho I felt this to be your understanding 
of the matter, yet several in the meeting have been 
greatly exercised with respect to the question. These 
I now rejoice to be able to comfort and encourage more 
positively than I could before receiving your letter. I 
trust I am not taking up your valuable time unnecessarily 
with my little questions. I felt a little guilty 



after reading your comment on the numerous conventions 
held during the past year, fearing that my correspondence 
may have helped to retard the sixth volume 
of DAWN. I most sincerely trust such has not been 
the case. 

I visited Brother and Sister Davis at , Cal., 

last week, and they asked me to call your attention 
to a statement on page 16, VOL. V., where you 
classify the Quakers with Unitarians, which they fear 
will cause prejudice among the Friends denomination. 
They fully understand your reason for this statement, 
knowing that the Friends you meet in Pennsylvania 
are of that belief; but they are only about one-tenth of 
the denomination. I send by same mail a "Discipline" 
of Iowa Yearly Meeting of Friends, from which you can 
judge of their position with respect to our Lord Jesus 
(page 30), and I am free to confess that I have for 
years held the same view with yourself, having come 
in contact with what I supposed were representative 
Friends, but who I now see were "Hicksite" and "Wilburite" 
Quakers, and representing the "Philadelphia 
Yearly Meeting," one not recognized by the other Yearly 
Meetings as sound in the doctrines of the "Friends." 
I felt sure you would like to know this, for in view of 
the statement appearing so early in the volume, readers 
might feel that you had either misrepresented the matter 
or were misinformed, and therefore they would lack 
confidence in the author and not desire to pursue the 

page 64 

study further. Bro. Davis may write you on the subject 
too. I feel so jealous for the Truth, that I cannot 
bear to have any error, however slight or unimportant 
apparently, go without correction. If I may suggest, 
I think a foot-note in future copies, or a little slip pasted 
in the present edition to the effect that you referred to 
a certain branch of the Friends denomination in your 
classification, would serve to counteract any erroneous 
impression. Dear brother, please do not think I am 
desirous of giving orders to you in any matter. I feel 
that situated as you are, and with your mind so free 
from the suspicions and evil surmisings of people in 
general, even professing Christians, you might possibly 
not see these matters in the light we do who come in 
contact with them. 

I enclose a copy of a publication which truly seems 
a device of the Adversary, written as it is by a person 
of your name, and on the subjects especially treated by 
you, but from so opposite a standpoint. Nevertheless 
"no weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper," 
and the true sheep will not follow the "voice of a 
stranger." Only it makes my heart sad to see such 
things scattered broadcast to further deceive and delude 
any who may be "feeling after God." 

I wish especially to thank you for the article in 



the TOWER on "The Song of Moses and the Lamb." 
Ever since I came into the knowledge of present truth 
I have felt that I would really be satisfied even to go 
into the grave never to be resurrected if only I might 
live long enough to see the character of Jehovah vindicated, 
his infinite wisdom, justice, love and power made 
known to all the world of mankind. How true it is 
that we alone of all the people of the earth are able to 
sing this glorious song of Moses and the Lamb! And 
my heart longs for that blessed time when "the knowledge 
of the Lord shall fill the earth as the waters cover 
the sea." If God has been willing to wait six thousand 
years for his true character to be made manifest, should 
not we be able to wait a few brief years to have our 
motives and lives, now so sadly misunderstood, cleared 
of every misconception? I have recently been reading 
the Bible through, the first time since I began to study 
present truth, and great was my delight at the marvelous 
harmony of every passage with the Divine Plan. Scriptures 
once as unintelligible as if written in Sanscrit now 
flame with light and truth and meaning ! Oh, how 
can I ever praise my Heavenly Father for all his mercies 
to me! I am overwhelmed with the feeling of my 
utter unworthiness to have been called "out of darkness 
into his marvelous light!" Pray for me, dear 
brother, that I may be faithful to my calling and a more 
worthy ambassador for Christ Jesus, "approved unto 
God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly 
dividing the word of truth;" and more than that, one 
who not only hears and knows the Master's will, but 
also obeys it. I desire especially to be more humble, 
more like our Beloved, who had no will but that of his 
Father, for I realize more fully day by day that "this is 
the will of God (concerning me) even my sanctification," 
my complete submission to him in all things, 
if I would be with him and "see him as he is." 

With much Christian love to yourself, and all the 
other faithful ones in the TOWER office, I remain, 

Yours in the love and service of our King, 
G. W. SEIBERT, -California. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have long desired to 
write to you to tell you as best I can how happy I am 
since I have learned of the true Gospel of Christ. I 
hesitated about writing for I felt that perhaps I ought 
not to intrude on your time, even for the few minutes 
that you will take to read these few lines, but I was 
assured by the dear brothers and sisters here in Boston 
that it would be all right, so I write these few lines to 
you at this time. I thank God, through his beloved 
Son every day for the true Gospel which has been revealed 
through the MILLENNIAL DAWN books, and I 
want to thank you, as the instrument in God's hands, 
for writing those books. I cannot tell you what they 



are to me, but when we "see face to face" you will 
know. I often wonder why his truth was made known 
to me, who am the least of all his children, as it seems 
to me, and while I realize that it increases my responsibility, 
yet that is not to be compared with the blessed 
privilege of knowing the true plan of God. 

I am a constant TOWER reader, though you will 
not find my name on the list of subscribers, for the reason 
that I am blind and cannot therefore read for myself, 
and I feel that I ought not to have the TOWERS 
sent to me and be able to make no use of them. They 
are far too precious for that. I have had three volumes 
of DAWN read to me, and am now having the fourth 
and fifth read. I have sent to Scotland to have the first 
volume copies in embossed type for my use. I have 
often wondered if there are any more blind people who 
know the true gospel. Do you know of any? 

Enclosed you will find a small Money Order which 
perhaps will help to send TOWERS or books to some of 
the Lord's poor. Yours faithfully, 

F. B. GOULD,-Massachusetts. 



MR. CHARLES T. RUSSELL, 

DEAR SIR:— Some one kindly sent me a copy of 
your paper of March 15 and April 1, 1900, the contents 
of which I have just read with more than ordinary interest, 
the matter of which is entirely new to me,— a 
revelation. Will you kindly supply me with some tracts 
that I may more fully know whereof you speak. I am 
truly interested. A great deal of the contents of the 
paper now before me I read to another professional gentleman, 
Dr. J. H. Jenkins, whose office is on the same 
floor with mine. He too is interested. 

Yours truly, W. H. WOODSON-Missouri. 



R2767 : page 64 

DEAR BROTHER IN JESUS CHRIST:-Your divine theology 
is certainly a helping hand to me. I hope, dear 
sir, that you will let me have many tracts and ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER for my religious education. I do certainly 
believe that the "little flock" will be an instrument 
by whom all the families of earth will be blessed; 
because all the churches are in a very poor situation 
and the world in great desolation [distress]. May God 
give me opportunity to know more about your divine 
mission. Come to my help and let me take the water 
abundantly in your publications. I am, dear sir, with 
much gratitude 

Very truly yours, 
J. R. VILATTE, Archbishop of the 

Orthodox Catholic Church, 



Canada. 



page 65 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 