From Our Readers
Cancer Treatments  I believe that the item “Treatments Compared” that appeared in the “Watching the World” section (September 22, 1991) was seriously misleading. It implies that people suffering from cancer would benefit just as much from unconventional therapy as they would from treatment at an established medical center. The tenor of The New England Journal of Medicine article upon which your item was based is quite different from your item.
A. R., M.D., United States
Our brief item was accurate, but we did fail to report one key finding of the study, namely, that terminally ill patients receiving conventional medical treatment reported a “significantly better quality of life” than those receiving unorthodox treatments. Nevertheless, as our item showed, neither treatment proved effective in prolonging the patients’ lives. The study thus suggested that a “no-​treatment alternative” for some terminally ill patients be considered. Readers should also note that, according to the researchers themselves, these findings “cannot be generalized to patients with less advanced stages of [cancer].” The authors of the study conclude that some unorthodox treatments “may warrant appropriate investigation” by medical researchers.​—ED.
Eastern European Conventions  I found the series “Lovers of Godly Freedom Rejoice in Eastern Europe” to be very moving. (December 22, 1991) It was as though I could hear the shouts of joy and the applause as our Christian brothers there received new Bible publications in their own languages. Since it was not possible for me to be present at those conventions, I am grateful that you published these articles, which enabled us, in some measure, to be able to share their joy and better appreciate the freedom we enjoy.
M. M., Italy
Flirting  I read the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Avoid the Hurt of Flirting?” (December 8, 1991) It touched my heart, since I had an experience like the one related in the article. One subheading read “Don’t Be Hurt by a Flirt!” That is hard because by the time you realize you are the victim of a flirt, you may already have been hurt. But as the article says, we may have to receive a few bruises and scratches on the way to true love. Thank you for such valuable articles.
S. C. S. M., Brazil
Blood Controversy  I’ve just finished reading the article “Never Say Never!” (September 22, 1991), and I’m in tears as I write this letter. I live in a religiously divided household and have a young daughter. Even though my husband does not oppose my faith now, if a situation arose with our daughter where blood transfusion was an issue, he would. This article reinforced in my mind the need to train our children so that they themselves can take a stand for Bible principles at an early age.
L. W., United States
Wool and Moths  In your article “The Wonder of Wool” (September 22, 1991), you state: “You probably don’t need to be reminded that moths love wool. They lay their eggs so that the newly hatched caterpillars have plenty to eat.” However, the vast majority of moths do not damage wool or any other fabric! That statement will convince people that all moths are a hazard and should be killed.
T. K., England
The article hardly called for the wholesale extermination of moths but simply offered practical suggestions to prevent moth infestation. Interestingly, according to “Grzimek’s Animal Life Encyclopedia,” the types of moths that feed on wool “are very reluctant to fly. Most of the moths which do fly about in houses belong to other, harmless families.”​—ED.

