Jehovah’s Witnesses Around the World​—Brazil
BRAZIL is a giant land in many respects. In both size and population, it is the fifth largest country in the world. It covers nearly half the land area of South America and is the home of more people than all the other countries of that continent combined. Brazil also has the world’s largest rain forest. Through that forest flows the mightiest river on earth​—the Amazon.
Brazil is also a giant in another sense. The number of its publishers of the good news of God’s Kingdom is approaching 400,000, and last year more than 1,000,000 attended the Memorial of Christ’s death. This land therefore especially stands out as far as the Kingdom-preaching work is concerned. Recent experiences illustrate this point.
Serving Where the Need Is Greater
Antonio and his wife made the difficult decision to leave their relatives and a secure, well-paying job in São Paulo to serve where the need for Kingdom proclaimers was greater in the state of Minas Gerais. Their territory included a colony of workers at a sugar refinery. The first day they witnessed there, they started nine Bible studies. Within 18 months, they were conducting more than 40 studies!
At first, meetings were held right in the refinery. However, the new publishers wanted to see a real Kingdom Hall. Hence, a bus was rented to take 75 persons to the nearest congregation. Then came a convention; 45 of the new Bible students attended and were interviewed. Fifteen of these were baptized on that occasion. Needless to say, tears of joy flowed freely!
The same bus company was used for similar trips, and the officials provided special rates. In appreciation, Antonio presented a Bible study aid to the owner of the firm. He agreed to begin studying the Bible that very evening and was baptized after several months of diligent study. At first, his wife was opposed to the study, but in time, her attitude softened. Today she too is a baptized Witness of Jehovah.
In February 1992 a congregation with 22 active publishers was formed. By 1994 this number had increased to 42, with 4 regular pioneers, or full-time preachers of the good news. As a result, Antonio concluded: “My wife and I have seen that if we ‘test Jehovah out,’ as Malachi 3:10 states, he will ‘empty out upon us a blessing until there is no more want.’”
Offering Bible Literature
Perhaps another reason why the preaching work is taking such giant strides in Brazil is that the Witnesses offer Bible literature at every opportunity. For example, one congregation wrote the Watch Tower Society’s branch office asking for 250 copies of the book Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work. Why such a large order?
The letter explained: ‘One of the schools in town has decided to use this book as teaching material in one of the classes. The decision of the school authorities is due to the informal witnessing that has been done by the parents of the students who are Jehovah’s Witnesses and by one of the school supervisors. May Jehovah continue to bless his servants as they provide fine instruction with this book.’ Yes, and may Jehovah continue to bless the fine progress of the Kingdom-preaching work in the giant land of Brazil.
[Box on page 8]
COUNTRY PROFILE
1994 Service Year
PEAK NUMBER WITNESSING: 385,099
RATIO: 1 Witness to 404
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE: 1,018,210
AVERAGE PIONEER PUBLISHERS: 38,348
AVERAGE BIBLE STUDIES: 461,343
NUMBER BAPTIZED: 24,634
NUMBER OF CONGREGATIONS: 5,928
BRANCH OFFICE: CESÁRIO LANGE
[Picture on page 9]
A sound car in use in São Paulo about 1940
[Picture on page 9]
Witnessing in the Botanical Garden in Rio de Janeiro
[Picture on page 9]
Branch office in Cesário Lange

