Seeds Must Be Watered in Order to Grow
 1. What must be watered in order for it to grow?
1 Seeds planted in a garden must be watered in order to grow. The same is true with regard to seeds of truth that are planted in the hearts of people in our territory. (1 Cor. 3:6) We must make return visits and water these figurative seeds using God’s Word if we want them to take root, grow, and flourish.
 2. How can we lay the groundwork for the next visit?
2 Raise a Question: When you prepare your presentation, why not also prepare an interest-arousing question that you could answer on the return visit? Raise it at the conclusion of the initial conversation, and make definite arrangements to return. Many find it beneficial to choose something from the Bible Teach book that will allow them to demonstrate a Bible study.
 3. What information can be included when recording interest?
3 Make a Record: As soon as you leave the initial call, take the time to make a record. Write down the person’s name and address. It is also good to note the date and time you spoke to him, what you talked about, and what literature you placed, if any. Did he say he belonged to a certain religion? Does he have a family? Did he mention his interests and concerns? Such information will help you tailor future conversations. Also write down when you agreed to return and the question you will answer.
 4. When it comes to following up interest, why should we persevere?
4 Persevere: Satan will not rest in his efforts to ‘take away the word’ planted in a person’s heart. (Mark 4:14, 15) Therefore, do not give up if you have difficulty finding the interested person at home again. Could you send a letter or leave a note in the door? One pioneer started a doorstep study with a woman but was unable to find her at home again, so she sent a letter. When the sister eventually found her at home, the woman expressed how deeply touched she was by the personal interest shown to her. As we water seeds of truth, we can experience the joy that comes from seeing them sprout, grow to maturity, and “bear fruit thirtyfold and sixty and a hundred.”—Mark 4:20.

