The Most Important Quality of a Good Teacher
 1. What is the most important quality of a good teacher?
1 What is it that enables someone to be a good Bible teacher? Secular education? Experience? Natural ability? Actually, it is the same quality that is the Law’s fulfillment, that identifies Jesus’ disciples, and that is the most dominant and appealing of Jehovah’s cardinal attributes. (John 13:35; Gal. 5:14; 1 John 4:8) It is love. Good teachers demonstrate love.
 2. Why is it vital for us to have love for people?
2 Love People: The Great Teacher, Jesus, showed love for people, and this motivated them to listen to him. (Luke 5:12, 13; John 13:1; 15:13) If we care about people, we will witness at every opportunity. Obstacles such as persecution and apathy will not deter us. We will show sincere personal interest in those to whom we preach, and we will tailor our approach to meet their concerns. We will be willing to take time not only when we are with each Bible student but also when we are preparing for each study beforehand.
 3. How will love for Bible truths help us in the ministry?
3 Love Bible Truths: Jesus also loved Bible truths and viewed them as treasures. (Matt. 13:52) If we love the truth, we will speak with enthusiasm, and this can stimulate excitement in our listeners. Such love will help us to focus on the valuable information we are imparting rather than on our personal limitations, and we may then be less nervous in the ministry.
 4. How can we cultivate love?
4 Cultivate Love: How can we cultivate love for people? By reflecting on the love that Jehovah and his Son have shown and the dire spiritual condition of people in our territory. (Mark 6:34; 1 John 4:10, 11) Our love for Bible truths will deepen through regular personal study and meditation. Love is an aspect of the fruitage of the spirit. (Gal. 5:22) So we can petition Jehovah for holy spirit and ask him to help us grow in love. (Luke 11:13; 1 John 5:14) Regardless of our secular education, experience in the truth, or natural abilities, we can be an effective Bible teacher by demonstrating love.

