Do You Remember?
Have you found the recent issues of The Watchtower of practical value to you? Then why not test your memory with the following questions?
□ What will Armageddon be like? (Revelation 16:14, 16)
It will not be a nuclear apocalypse or a disaster provoked by humans. No, it is God’s war to end all human wars, to annihilate all those who promote such wars, and to bring in true peace for those who love peace. It will not delay. (Habakkuk 2:3)—4/15, page 17.
□ What kind of wedding honors Jehovah?
A wedding where spiritual aspects dominate over worldly ways will truly honor Jehovah. Christians will enjoy the occasion if they avoid debased worldly customs, superstitions, and excesses; if they do not let it interfere with regular theocratic activities; and if they manifest modesty instead of a showy display.—4/15, page 26.
□ What characterizes a man of integrity?
A man of integrity can be trusted, not just by his fellowman but, more important, by God. Such a person’s purity of heart is seen in his actions. He is free from hypocrisy. He is not devious or corrupt. (2 Corinthians 4:2)—5/1, page 6.
□ Why did Jeremiah say: “Good it is for an able-bodied man that he should carry the yoke during his youth”? (Lamentations 3:27)
Learning to cope with trials while young helps prepare one to meet the challenges of adulthood. (2 Timothy 3:12) The benefits of faithfulness far outweigh any temporary relief that compromise might bring.—5/1, page 32.
□ What was foreshadowed by the appearance of Moses and Elijah in the transfiguration vision?
In the context of the transfiguration, Moses and Elijah were fitting symbols of Jesus’ anointed brothers. That they, as well as Jesus, “appeared with glory” symbolized that faithful anointed Christians would be “glorified together” with Jesus in the heavenly Kingdom arrangement. (Luke 9:30, 31; Romans 8:17; 2 Thessalonians 1:10)—5/15, pages 12, 14.
□ What is God’s “sacred secret”? (1 Corinthians 2:7)
God’s “sacred secret” centers on Jesus Christ. (Ephesians 1:9, 10) However, it is not simply the identification of Jesus as being the promised Messiah. It involves a heavenly government, God’s Messianic Kingdom, and includes the role Jesus is assigned to play in God’s purpose.—6/1, page 13.
□ How should a Christian view advancing age or illness?
Instead of viewing such trials as limiting his service to Jehovah, he should look upon them as an opportunity to increase his reliance on him. He should also remember that the value of a Christian is gauged not only by his level of activity but also by his faith and depth of love. (Mark 12:41-44)—6/1, page 26.
□ How did Jehovah’s use of humans instead of angels to write the Bible show his great wisdom?
If the human element were completely lacking, we might have difficulty grasping the Bible’s message. Also, the Bible has the warmth, variety, and appeal that the human element gives it.—6/15, page 8.
□ What is the secret of family happiness?
The secret lies in the pages of God’s Word, the Bible, and in the application of its principles, such as self-control, recognition of headship, good communication, and love.—6/15, pages 23, 24.
□ How was the healing performed by Jesus far different from what is commonly done by those who claim to have healing powers today?
There was no strong emotional display from the crowds and no dramatic frenzy on the part of Jesus. In addition, Jesus never failed to heal the infirm on the pretext that their offering had not been generous enough or that they lacked faith.—7/1, page 5.
□ How has Jehovah helped his people to have a place in his divine purpose regarding his name and Kingdom?
First, Jehovah entrusted his people with the truth. Second, he gave them his holy spirit. And third, we have our worldwide brotherhood and Jehovah’s organizational arrangement for worship.—7/1, pages 19, 20.
□ What is virtue?
Virtue is moral excellence, goodness, right action and thinking. It is not a passive quality but an active, positive one. Virtue means more than avoiding sin; it means pursuing what is good. (1 Timothy 6:11)—7/15, page 14.
□ What is the most valuable inheritance that parents can pass on to their children?
The most valuable inheritance is their own example of showing love to others. Outstandingly, children need to see and hear their parents express and show genuine love of God in everything they do.—7/15, page 21.
□ What are some essentials for an effective family study?
A family study must be regular. You must ‘buy out the time’ for the study. (Ephesians 5:15-17) Make study periods lively for the children by making the Bible come alive. For children to enjoy it, they must feel involved in it.—8/1, pages 26, 28.

