Pasturage for Sheeplike Ones in Navajo Land
HÓZHÓNÍ, in the language of the Navajo Indians, means “beautiful,” and that is how the Navajo people describe their land. Since 1868 the United States government has apportioned to the Navajo some 24,000 square miles [62,000 sq km] of reservation land in northeastern Arizona, around what is called four corners, where the four states of Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah meet. Monument Valley, made famous by Western movies, is now preserved as a Navajo Tribal Park and attracts tourists from all over the world. The valley features spectacular thousand-foot-high [300 m] red sandstone monoliths that tower in splendid isolation over the high desert plains. Aptly, the Navajo term for the valley means “the space between the rocks.”
The Navajo people as a whole are known for their humble manners, warm hospitality, and close-knit extended families. The 170,000 residents on the reservation live mainly in isolated settlements, following traditional ways. Some still raise sheep and occupy earth-covered log huts called hogans. Navajo arts and crafts have gained widespread popularity. Especially prized are their rugs and blankets with colorful geometric or traditional designs, woven  from sheep’s wool. Equally well-known is the Navajo silver jewelry with turquoise and other natural materials.
Bringing the Good News to Navajo Land
For more than 30 years, Jehovah’s Witnesses have come to Navajo land not just to sightsee but also to bring the good news of God’s Kingdom to the people in this remote area. (Matthew 24:14) Regular and special pioneer ministers of Jehovah’s Witnesses have taken the lead in the preaching work. Many of them have come in response to calls from traveling overseers and local Witnesses to help where the need has been greater. Some have come from congregations nearby, while others, including members of different Native American tribes, have come from various parts of the United States.
These self-sacrificing men and women have compared their ministry here to a missionary assignment. Why? First of all, the native languages are extremely difficult to learn because of their complex sounds, structure, and expressions. Then, the native people, in large measure, have clung to their traditional ways in religion, family structure, and living close to the land. In addition, housing and work are scarce for non-Indians, making it hard for those who have moved in to remain here. Finally, the long history of mistreatment of these people at the hands of the white man has understandably instilled in them a degree of distrust of outsiders.a
At first, when the Witnesses went calling from house to house dressed up and wearing neckties, they were mistaken for Mormons, and many would not open the door. When they switched to wearing more casual attire, they were welcomed in, often for an hour or more. Now the people recognize Jehovah’s Witnesses, even though business attire is once again used in the ministry.
Just getting to the people who live on the Navajo reservation is a real challenge. Driving many miles over unmarked roads that may be rocky, sandy, and muddy is the norm. Naturally, this puts extra wear and tear on the vehicles and the passengers. Vehicles may also get stuck, but passersby are usually ready to lend a helping hand. Calling on interested ones, going to a home Bible study, or taking someone to a Christian meeting often requires a round-trip of several hours. But the Witnesses willingly expend themselves, thus demonstrating their love for the native people.—Compare 1 Thessalonians 2:8.
The Navajo enjoy having Bible discussions. Usually they will gather together the whole family—children, parents, and grandparents—to hear about the hope of a future paradise home for mankind. When asked what he thought Paradise would be like, one Navajo man answered, “Green, with lots of sheep,” reflecting their love of the land and their flocks. They also appreciate Bible literature, showing this at times by donating beads, a bar of soap, canned milk, and the like in support of the Kingdom ministry. One special pioneer obtained some 200 subscriptions to the Watchtower and Awake! magazines in a year, including two from a man on horseback.
Setting Up a “Sheep Camp”
When summer comes, it is time for a Navajo shepherd to move his or her flock to a sheep camp. This summer home for the sheep, chosen for its proximity to green pastures and a good water source, helps the flock to thrive. In a figurative sense, a Kingdom Hall can be likened to such a camp—a spiritual pasturage and a source of waters of truth. People who come can find spiritual nourishment that makes them spiritually healthy and strong.
For some time, meetings were held in a school classroom in Kayenta, Arizona. Then in August 1992, with the help of hundreds of Witness volunteers from several states, a new Kingdom Hall was built in Kayenta. This Kingdom Hall and several others in the region impart a sense of permanence to the preaching work in the minds of the local people. Other Kingdom Halls serving this vast territory include those in Tuba City and Chinle, both on the reservation, one in Keams Canyon on Hopi tribal land within the Navajo reservation, and several others in towns bordering the reservation. What has been the outcome?
Overwhelming Response to the Kingdom Message
In Kayenta more than a dozen local people have been baptized since the Kingdom Hall was built, indicating Jehovah’s blessing on this place of true worship. The hall gives evidence that Jehovah’s Witnesses are here to stay and builds confidence in the Kingdom good news they preach. Recently the first public Bible discourse in the Navajo language was given there. The 40 members of the congregation were pleased to welcome 245 to the talk on the responsibilities of parenthood. With appreciative hearts, one family of eight traveled three hours each way to hear this talk—their first visit ever to a Kingdom Hall.
Another useful tool that Jehovah has provided is the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! in the Navajo language. Translating the brochure into Navajo, an extremely complex language, posed a formidable challenge. The translators collectively spent more than 1,000 hours to ensure that the brochure properly conveys the Kingdom message. Since its release in late 1995, local Witnesses have placed several thousand copies of it, resulting in dozens of Bible studies with truth seekers.
Increasingly, the Navajo language is being used in the ministry as Kingdom publishers learn it. Congregations in the area have begun to use Navajo in the Theocratic Ministry School, and Navajo language classes are held to train the publishers. In addition, the program at local assemblies is also translated into Navajo. All these efforts will surely lead to even greater response on the reservation.
Not to be overlooked among the Kingdom fruitage on this Indian reservation are the sterling spiritual qualities manifested by our Navajo brothers. For seven years, Jimmy and Sandra brought their five children 75 miles [120 km] each way to attend the weekly meetings. The family has fond memories of singing Kingdom songs and studying the Bible together during their long journeys. The parents’ love and zeal for the truth motivated the children to follow their example in becoming dedicated praisers of Jehovah. Four of them now serve as regular pioneers, and Jimmy is an elder. To add to this family’s joy, Jimmy’s sister Elsie recently became the first person who speaks only Navajo to be baptized.
Local shepherds and their flocks add a touch of pastoral serenity to the stone monuments that adorn the Navajo reservation. The prophet Isaiah long ago foretold of Jehovah: “Like a shepherd he will shepherd his own drove. With his arm he will collect together the lambs; and in his bosom he will carry them. Those giving suck he will conduct with care.” (Isaiah 40:11) Through his Fine Shepherd, Jesus Christ, Jehovah is gathering into his spiritual pasturage all those on the Navajo reservation who desire to hear the Kingdom good news and to come in line for his everlasting blessing.
[Footnote]
See May 8, 1948; February 22, 1952; June 22, 1954; and September 8, 1996, issues of Awake!
[Picture on page 24]
Navajo shepherdess hears the good news

