Announcements
● Literature offer for October: Subscriptions for either Awake! or The Watchtower or for both magazines. One-year subscriptions are on a contribution of $5.00 each. Six-month subscriptions are $2.50 each. November: New World Translation with the “Kingdom Come” book for a contribution of $5.00. December: My Book of Bible Stories or You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth for a contribution of $3.00. Small-size Live Forever book is $1.50. January and February: Any 192-page book published prior to 1980 and not printed on better-grade paper for contribution of 50¢.
● New Publications Available:
Holy Scriptures, (Deluxe edition), maroon​—Finnish
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, (Deluxe pocket edition; DLbi25), available in black or maroon​—German, Portuguese
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—Large print (Set of four volumes)—​German
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—With References (Rbi8)—​French
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? (Small size)​—Greek
Sing Praises to Jehovah (Large size)​—Greek
True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It?​—Dutch
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Korean, Sinhalese
Your Youth​—Getting the Best out of It—​Romanian
Watch Tower Publications Index 1986​—French, German
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Jehovah Delivers Those Calling Upon His Name​—Drama (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)​—Indonesian
Jeremiah, Lamentations (set of five cassettes; congregation and public: $7.50; pioneers: $6.25)​—Spanish
● Congregations should begin ordering Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1989 with their October literature order. (See the 1988 Cost List, paragraphs 7-10.) Booklets will be available in Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Iloko, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Samoan, Spanish, Swedish, Tagalog, Turkish, and Vietnamese. Until these booklets are available and shipments are made, they will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Examining the Scriptures booklets are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at 30¢ each, which is the publisher rate. Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1988, may receive one free copy and obtain additional copies at 20¢ each. A separate entry should be made on the monthly remittance form (S-20), showing free copies to pioneers.​—See the 1988 Cost List, paragraphs 23-25.

