Are You Preaching With a Purpose?
1 Jehovah is a God of purpose, and his works are purposeful. This should likewise be true of us, especially with regard to our ministry. Jesus commissioned his disciples to preach the good news for the purpose of a witness. (Matt. 24:14) As we contribute to the fulfillment of this commission, we must also be diligent in following up on all interest shown. This is evident from Jesus’ further words found at Matthew 28:19, 20.
2 Field service reports show that return calls are not being made on all who accept literature. Some may hold back, thinking that only skilled and outgoing publishers are qualified to make return visits. However, it is not as difficult as these publishers may have imagined. But we do need to make our return visits purposeful.
MAKING PURPOSEFUL VISITS
3 When you meet an interested person, it is good to lay the groundwork for your return visit right away. How? Some have found it effective to leave the householder with a question that can be answered on the next visit. Others are able to place literature and highlight a specific point to discuss when they return. Be sure to take note of the householder’s name, the subject discussed, his response, and any literature placed. Then, before making the return visit, review this information and give prayerful thought to what you will say.
4 During the month of October we have a fine opportunity to offer Awake! and Watchtower subscriptions on return visits. While it is true that subscriptions are obtained in our house-to-house ministry, many publishers have been very successful in obtaining subscriptions on return visits. Some who accepted magazines on our initial call may have promised to subscribe or otherwise indicated that they might subscribe. Then there are persons for whom we have Expiring Subscription slips, individuals we have on our magazine route, or people with whom we have studied in the past. Having The Watchtower and Awake! subscriptions can assist in filling their spiritual need.​—Matt. 5:3.
5 If you are returning where you used the current Topic for Conversation, you might say: “When I spoke with you, we discussed mankind’s need for spiritual things and how that need can be met through a study of God’s Word. Notice what benefits come to those who study God’s Word. [Read John 17:3 and comment.] The Watchtower and Awake! are fine instruments in helping us to fill our spiritual need.” Then you might point out a specific item in the magazine you are featuring and proceed to explain the subscription offer. Keep in mind, too, that our purpose in calling is to start Bible studies, so the study arrangement can be explained to them also.
SCHEDULE VISITS
6 Some do not make return visits because they do not schedule a definite time for them. Return visits can be made in the evenings, on weekends, just after completing house-to-house calls, or at other convenient times. Why not set a personal goal of making at least one return visit each week? Seek the aid of those who are more experienced in this aspect of the field service. Feel free to ask your book study conductor for suggestions along these lines. Also, you may want to gain experience by going along with a pioneer or a publisher who does well in this work.
7 The apostle Paul mentioned both planting and watering in connection with the Christian ministry. (1 Cor. 3:6, 7) So we have a responsibility to call back on individuals with the purpose of starting a Bible study. Our joy will certainly increase if we are preaching with a purpose.

