Helping Others Serve Jehovah Whole-Souled
1 Jehovah rightly requires that each one of us serve him whole-souled. (Mark 12:30; Col. 3:23) Although having different capabilities, we individually want to do our very best in serving him.​—Matt. 13:23.
2 Can we be of further assistance to our children in this regard? Are there ways we can provide more encouragement to those with whom we conduct Bible studies? Are there some in the congregation who might be able to improve the quality or quantity of their service if we give them some practical assistance?
HOW TO HELP
3 There are a number of persons who have been regularly attending all congregation meetings. Some have even qualified to start sharing in field service. This is commendable. However, not all have decided to make a dedication and get baptized. Can we help them in this regard? Have we had a heartfelt discussion with them personally? It may be that a frank, kindly review of the article “What Prevents Me From Getting Baptized?” on pages 27-31 of the February 15, 1982, Watchtower will help.
4 There are also those who have been baptized but then hold back from making themselves available for privileges within their abilities and circumstances. Some may be regular publishers who auxiliary pioneer from time to time. Could they perhaps make needed adjustments so as to be regular auxiliary pioneers? Is it possible for some who are regular auxiliary pioneers to become regular pioneers? At times, words of exhortation along with a few practical suggestions from a parent, an elder, or from one already serving as a regular pioneer will motivate such ones to serve to the full extent that their abilities and circumstances allow.​—2 Tim. 4:2.
GIVE ENCOURAGEMENT
5 Others may become qualified for appointment as ministerial servants or elders after responding to the needed encouragement and “reaching out” for such privileges. (1 Tim. 3:1) By taking advantage of practical assistance offered through the Theocratic Ministry School, certain ones can become effective public speakers. Some single elders and ministerial servants have been helped to make the needed adjustments to qualify for the Ministerial Training School. Can you think of other privileges for which some in your family or congregation could possibly qualify if they receive some assistance? In what way might you help them?
6 We should offer Jehovah the best service we can give him. (Rev. 4:11) We want to do his will whole-souled and help others to do likewise. (Eph. 6:6) Those who are responsive to help and encouragement toward serving Jehovah whole-souled can be sure that Jehovah will give “the due reward.”​—Col. 3:24.

