Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 3
Song 193
10 min: Local announcements. Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage magazine activity for second Saturday of month. Suggest appropriate talking points as time allows.
18 min: “Are You Preaching With a Purpose?” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Emphasize the importance of making return visits with the purpose of starting Bible studies. When discussing paragraph 5, demonstrate how subscription offer can be made on a return visit.
17 min: Youths​—Do Not Be Deceived. Talk and interview. Young ones are special target of Satan. He picks on less experienced, seducing them as he did Eve. (Gen. 3:1) Deceives youths by enticements, allurements, temptations. Promotes idea that youths in truth are missing out on something. (Gen. 3:4, 5) Cultivates selfish desire to do own thing, decide for self what is good and bad. Satan makes ways of world, such as sexual immorality, smoking, drug abuse, association with nonbelievers, and worldly entertainment, look attractive. Makes such appear harmless, as fruit on tree appeared to Eve. (Gen. 3:6) What attitude should Christian youths have toward these things, and why? (1 John 2:15-17) Since world is passing away, what goals should youths pursue? (Matt. 6:33; 24:14; 28:19, 20) Jehovah makes provision to protect youths from being deceived: Youth book, School brochure, Awake! feature “Young People Ask,” meetings, assemblies, parents, and elders. Why is a lifetime in Jehovah’s service the best way of life? (Prov. 27:11; Eccl. 12:1) As time permits, interview one or two exemplary youths who have cultivated wholesome desires. Find out what has helped them to resist pressures to conform in school. Highlight need for others to assist youths to remain loyal and not be deceived by the world.
Song 164 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 10
Song 129
10 min: Local announcements, Theocratic News, and accounts report.
20 min: “Conduct Progressive Bible Studies.” Questions and answers. When considering paragraph 4, have experienced pioneer or publisher demonstrate how a Bible study can be terminated. Give number of Bible studies being conducted by congregation. What progress have they made? Warmly encourage all those who are conducting studies to examine the results of each one in the light of this material. Any who need help can speak to service overseer or book study conductor.
15 min: Strengthening Single-Parent Families. Qualified elder conducts interview with three or four single parents. Consider matters realistically. What unique problems do they face? How have they learned to cope with their situation? In what ways has the congregation been supportive? What personal or family goals have been set and how has this aided the family? Be positive and warmly commend them for their contribution to the congregation’s spirituality. Remind all of need to remember such ones in our prayers.​—2 Thess. 1:11, 12.
Song 161 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 17
Song 92
 5 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to share in magazine work on fourth Saturday of month.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Boldly, Yet With Tact.” Question-and-answer coverage. Demonstrate one of the examples cited in paragraph 3, using Reasoning book.
 8 min: “Subscriptions.” Qualified brother should read all paragraphs and intersperse appropriate comments.
12 min: Local needs. Review suggestions for improvement as noted on circuit overseer’s last report.
Song 2 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 24
Song 106
10 min: Local announcements. Discuss introductions in Reasoning book that could be used with Topic for Conversation and would fit local territory. Show why these introductions will be effective.
20 min: “Helping Others Serve Jehovah Whole-Souled.” Discussion by presiding overseer. Have an experienced regular pioneer demonstrate how to have a heart-to-heart talk with a Bible student who regularly attends meetings but holds back from being baptized. Use the February 15, 1982, Watchtower article “What Prevents Me From Getting Baptized?” Interview one or two in full-time service, asking who encouraged and helped them to make adjustments to take up full-time service. Ask what further goals they are working toward.
15 min: “Special Convention Features Unite.” Talk. Expand coverage with comments from audience on the four special convention features covered in article.
Song 78 and concluding prayer.

