Presenting the Good News​—Boldly, Yet With Tact
1 When Peter and John were ordered to stop preaching, they replied: “But as for us, we cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.” (Acts 4:20) What enabled them to speak with such boldness? They “made supplication” and became “filled with the holy spirit and were speaking the word of God with boldness.” (Acts 4:31) Certainly we likewise can be emboldened to preach if we follow their example.
2 But how can we speak with boldness and at the same time be tactful? One dictionary definition of tact is ‘a keen sense of what to do or say in order to avoid offense.’ Establishing a common ground will help us to be tactful. Learning how to reason with people will also enable us to be tactful. What better instrument could we use than Reasoning From the Scriptures to help us be both bold and tactful.
BEING BALANCED
3 Maintaining a balance between boldness and tactfulness is important in getting the preaching work accomplished successfully. For example, how could we address those who raise the question, ‘Is it not true that there is good in all religions?’ A direct but tactful reply is found on page 323 of the Reasoning book. Also, if someone raises a question as to why we repeatedly call on persons who are not Jehovah’s Witnesses and who have their own faith, we can give a bold but tactful reply as outlined on page 206 of the Reasoning book. Some people ask why Jehovah’s Witnesses do not get involved in things to help make the community a better place to live. Several fine points are presented on pages 207 and 208 that will enable us to speak boldly but with tact.
EXAMPLES
4 Peter said we should be ‘always ready to make a defense before those demanding a reason for our hope.’ He then added that we should ‘do so together with a mild temper and deep respect.’ (1 Pet. 3:15) Yes, Peter recognized the need to be bold but also to use tact. The success of publishers following this method is reported in the Society’s publications.​—w86 4/1 pp. 6-7; w86 8/1 pp. 21, 24; yb87 pp. 53-4.
5 Relying on Jehovah in prayer, as many examples highlight, will enable us to receive the help of the holy spirit, thus strengthening us to speak with boldness and tact.​—Acts 5:29.

