VOL. XXIX. NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS. 

The Nova Scotia Convention 339 

Pride, Ingratitude, Hypocrisy, Rebellion 340 

A Murderer of the Brethren 340 

"Just for Today" (Poem) 342 

Love in Return for Treachery 342 

Victory for the Right 343 

"The Lord is My Shepherd" 344 

"My Sheep Follow Me" 345 

"Green Pastures and Still Waters" 346 

Evil Speaking— Busy-Bodying— Truth-Hiding 348 

"Suffering as a Busy-Body" 349 

A Truth-Telling Obligation 350 

Don't Tell or You are a Tell-Tale 351 

Public Ministries of the Truth 352 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



NEW BIBLES FURTHER DELAYED 



We hope to begin shipping the New Bibles about Dec. 1st. 
BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS 



FRIENDS WRITING approvingly to journals publishing 
Brother Russell's sermons, should word their letters so that if 
they were published the public would know to whose sermons 
they refer. 

1909--MOTTO CARDS--1909 



These are very handsome, made specially for our use. 
Velvety green card with inset flowers and text, and with a 
calendar pad, and a copy of "the Vow." Those preferring 
not to have the Vow can tear it out without damaging the 
calendar. Price, 15 cents each, includes packing and postage. 

COLPORTEUR BAGS AND DAWN-MOBILES 



Dear Sister Brown of Washington City, finding that canvas 
bags, to hang on the shoulder and under the coat, are a 
great convenience to Colporteurs, has gladly assumed the 
service of supplying these to the regular Colporteurs of our 
list free. She has supplied us with a lot, which we will be 
glad to forward to those not yet supplied. 

Brother Cole's kind offer of Dawn-Mobiles free to Colporteur 
Sisters is still open. Others desiring to purchase the 
device may remit $2.50 for one, to be sent charges collect. 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS-Leather, 50c; Cloth, 15c. 



R4274 : page 339 



THE NOVA SCOTIA CONVENTION 

THE JOURNEY from Allegheny to Halifax and back 
was approximately 3000 miles— a long distance to 
go to a Convention where only comparatively a 
small number could be expected. However, the Nova 
Scotia friends were anxious for a Convention, as were 
also some of those at Boston born in Nova Scotia. This 
helps to account for the fact that 75 of the Boston friends 
attended. From various parts of Nova Scotia about 125 
more completed the total of 200 in attendance. Everything 
considered this was an excellent turnout. We 
had a very enjoyable time and parted company, longing 
for the time when "those of like precious faith" will be 
forever with the Lord and with each other. 

The Convention had been in session two days by 
the time of our arrival and continued two days more. 
The chairman was Brother Marchant, and discourses 
were given by Brothers Streeter, Bridges, Barker, Brenneisen, 
MacMillan and Russell on various features of 
the Divine Plan. Seventeen symbolized their consecration 
by water immersion, and when it came to the closing 
service— the LOVE FEAST— the blessings seemed 
to overflow out of all our hearts. The experience was 
both a solemn and happifying one, well calculated to 
remind us all of the perfect union with our Lord, in 
which we hope to join in the General Assembly of the 
Church of the First-Borns. 

The largest attendance at the Convention was, of 
course, on the occasion of the discourse to the public, 
on "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." The audience 
was variously estimated above 2000, but we accepted 
the most conservative estimate of 1200, and felt very 
glad that that number of people was privileged to hear 

R4275 : page 339 

of the "good tidings of great joy." The audience was 
a very intelligent one. 

A GRAND TIME AT TRURO 

The Truro friends bespoke the day following the 
Convention, and on its acceptance made considerable 
preparation. From the Halifax Convention a train-load 
of 140 went to Truro, a distance of about one hundred 
miles. Their presence was very gratifying to all concerned. 
On arrival we had time for a Colporteur meeting 
before noon, all participating, though the total 
number of Colporteurs present was twenty-five. In 
the afternoon we had a symposium on "The Principal 
Thing," participated in by sixteen brethren, to each of 
whom was allotted ten minutes, and between whom 
were divided the various items of interest pertaining to 
the Christian character, and what should be put on and 



what should be put off. 

The High School chapel had been secured for the 
evening meeting, to which the public was invited by 
liberal advertising. It was the largest available auditorium, 
and it was crowded, over 600 being seated, 
while more than 100 stood during the two hours' 
services. Many of those familiar with the subject gave 
place to the people of the city by attending an overflow 
meeting. We believe that we never had any more 
thoughtful and attentive hearing. We trust that some 
good seed was sown in some good hearts. At the adjournment 
of the meeting at 10:30 p.m., a special train 
took back the friends who had come from Halifax and 
vicinity and Boston, while another train bore ourself 
and others in the opposite direction. The scene at the 
depot was very inspiring. Inside and outside the 
songs arose, "God be with you till we meet again," and 
"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts." The experiences 
of the day will long be remembered by us. 

THE GATHERING AT BANGOR 

A ride from 11:00 p.m. until 1:30 p.m. the next day 
brought us to Bangor, where we had accepted another 
invitation for a stop-over. We were heartily welcomed 
and generously entertained. The afternoon session for 
the interested was attended by about seventy, who had 
gathered from various districts around about, some of 
them residents of Quebec. The evening session for the 
public as in the Universalist meeting-house and there 
was an attendance of about 700, who gave strictest attention, 
and many of them indicated their endorsement 
of the presentation during the service, as well as 
afterward. 

More goodbys and then a midnight train, which 
brought us to Boston the next morning and from there 
a ride of a day and a night returned us safely to Allegheny, 
weary but very thankful to the Lord for the 

privilege of service we had enjoyed and from the encouragement 
we had received from the loving zeal manifested 
by so many of the dear friends. 



R4275 : page 340 

PRIDE, INGRATITUDE, HYPOCRISY, REBELLION 

-2 SAMUEL 15:l-12.-NOVEMBER l.~ 

Golden Text:— "Honor thy Father and thy Mother, 
that thy days may be long in the land which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee."-Exod. 20:12. 

LESSONS may be drawn from the lives of the ignoble, as 
well as from those of the noble. As the poet says:— 



"Lives of great men all remind us, 
We should make our lives sublime, 
And, departing, leave behind us 
Footprints on the sands of time." 

This being so, then surely it is true also that the footprints 
of the evil-doers on life's pathway have lessons for us 
also, indicating to us which paths should be shunned, which 
elements of character should be restrained, which ambitions 
should be curbed. Following this course of instruction the 
divine Word holds up before the Spiritual Israelites not only 
noble precepts and counsels and examples of heroic devotion 
to truth and righteousness, but illustrations also of the course 
of evil-doers. Our lesson today belongs to this latter class. 
It considers Absalom, the son of King David, who at the time 
of this lesson was presumably nearly thirty years of age. His 
father, the Lord's anointed king over Israel, his mother, the 
daughter of a king of a neighboring realm, Absalom inherited 
princely qualities and manners and, being very beautiful, 
became a center of Israelitish pride. "In all Israel there 
was none to be so much praised for his beauty. From the 
sole of his foot, even to the crown of his head, there was no 
blemish in him"; and the hair of his head is a proverb to this 
day. 

It is worthy of note that those who are highly favored 
by nature, richly endowed in appearance or mental ability, 
are subject to temptations to a far greater degree than their 
fellows who are less talented, less handsome. Their besetting 
weakness is apt to be pride, self-esteem, to which ambition 
is apt to lend a helping hand. Thinking of Absalom 
and his beauty and his high position in the kingdom, reminds 
us of Lucifer and the glorious description given of him in the 
Scriptures— his high position and honor and his pride and 
ambition and the downfall to which they led. The very 
suggestion of these two characters, from this standpoint 
should bring a thrill of fear to the hearts of all who realize 
that we today of Spiritual Israel are princes, highly favored 
of our Father, the Great King, and greatly blessed with the 
beauty and perfection which come to us through our justification 
and greatly honored of our Father in the gracious 
hopes set before us in the Gospel of glory, honor and immortality, 
and greatly blessed also in the light of divine 
revelation granted to us, which gives us a wisdom superior to 
that of the world. 

What if these blessings and mercies and favors should 
have their wrong effect upon us and bring us eventually to 
disaster, as was the case with Absalom and with Lucifer? 
The thought is sufficiently appalling to remind us of the 
Apostle's words, "Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of 
entering into his rest [of becoming joint-heirs with our Redeemer], 
any of us should seem to come short of it"— 
through a lack of loyalty, a lack of allegiance, a lack of faith, 
a lack of humility. 

A MURDERER OF THE BRETHREN 



It will be remembered that David's eldest son was Amnon, 
and that he had defiled his half-sister Tamar, the full 
sister of Absalom. King David, sorely vexed at the matter, 
appears to have been at a loss as to what manner of punishment 
he should properly meet out for the offense, so that two 
years passed without any being inflicted. Then Absalom 
took upon himself to be his sister's avenger. He made a 
feast, to which were invited all the King's children by his 
several wives. In the height of the feast, in disregard of the 
rules of etiquette and the claims of natural affection, Absalom 
slew his brother and then fled, from fear of justice, 
which, under their code, centered in his father, the King. 
What lesson is there in this experience for us? What should 
we copy? What avoid? In Spiritual Israel we are all 
princes, sons of the Great King, who is also the Judge. The 
lesson to us would properly be that the authority and responsibility 
for meeting out justice is not in our ambitions, 
but with the Father. 

As the Scriptures declare, "Vengeance is mine; I will 
repay, saith the Lord." We are not to wait what seems to us 
a proper length of time, and then, if we see no divine punishment 
for what we consider to be no longer tolerable, to take 
the matter in our own hands— to murder one another. Nay, 
the command of our Great Teacher is, "A new commandment 
I give unto you, that ye love one another, even as I have 
loved you." The lesson for us to learn is expressed in the 
Master's words, See to the beam in thine own eye, rather 
than put thyself to too much inconvenience examining the 
mote that is in thy brother's eye. To his own Master he 
standeth or falleth. 

The parallel would not imply that literal murder would 
here be accomplished amongst the Lord's children. No, thank 
God! The world is too far advanced in civilization to make 
such a course practicable; but where the Absalom spirit is— 
the spirit of hatred, anger, envy, bitterness-strife is also. 
There is a modern method of assassination by the use of 
slanderous words, by insinuations, by the shrugging of the 
shoulders, etc. And this modern kind of murder is oftenest 
committed in the presence of the members of the royal family, 
the heavenly brotherhood. How terrible! do we say? Let us 
take heed that such blood-guiltiness, such "works of the flesh 
and the devil," be not upon us, else we shall never inherit 
the Kingdom. 

THE UNGRATEFUL SON-TRAITOROUS 

Absalom remained for three years at the court of his 
grandfather, Talmai, king of Geshun in Syria. By the murder 
of his elder brother he had put himself next to the throne of 
Israel, heir-apparent, and this, possibly, was considerably his 
inspiring motive in the crime, although he affected that the 
crime was committed in defense of justice and principle. 
Alas! how treacherous is the human heart! How frequently 
do we find double motives operating therein! We see the 
advantage of those who, as children of God, follow implicitly 



the Father's Word and leave all the results to him. They 

thus show their faith in God's power, as well as in God's 

justice, and thus, as the Apostle intimates, they show that 

they have become partakers of a holy spirit of wisdom— 

"wisdom from above; first pure, then peaceable, easy of entreatment, 

full of mercy and good fruits," a spirit of wisdom 

which leaves in the Lord's hands his own matters and trusts 

fully to his care. This is indeed "The spirit of a sound mind." 

Let us, dear brethren of the Royal Spiritual Family, apply 

R4276 : page 341 

this principle in all of our dealings and thus receive thereby 
increasing blessings. 

But Absalom realized that as an exiled prince his 
chances for acceptance as king of Israel would be comparatively 
small, in the event of his father's death. He therefore 
instituted an ingenious scheme by which his case was brought 
to his father's notice under most favorable conditions, and 
finally a respite or forgiveness or an invitation to return to 
his homeland was sent to him. As a continued showing of 
disfavor, his father, loving him the while, refused for two 
years to invite his wayward son to a personal visit and fellowship. 
Meantime the ambitious murderer skilfully managed 
his affairs so that, as the Scriptures declare, he "stole" the 
hearts of the men of Israel. He did not openly plot mischief 
against his father, the king, nor speak vilely respecting him, 
nor manifest any antagonism; he was too deep, too adroit, 
too wise with earthly wisdom for such a course. He stole 
the hearts of the people away from the king to himself by 
feigning extreme humility and extreme zeal for justice, and 
by careful attention to his personal appearance and by attention 
to those in influential positions. He got up early, 
contrary to the usage of princes, and went forth to the King's 
gate, where he could see the people who, some justly and 
some unjustly no doubt, were awaiting the king, hoping for 
contracts and decisions in their favor, etc. These, beholding 
the handsome and elegantly-dressed prince, bowed themselves 
to the ground after the manner of the east, only to be 
lifted up by the hands and kissed and told with affected 
modesty and love that they should not do that; that it was a 
king's business to serve his people and that the prince was 
merely sorry, so sorry, that it was not in his power to do for 
them all and more than they asked. 

Thus for two years Absalom, the hypocrite and sycophant, 
endeavored (and was considerably successful in so 
doing) to draw to himself the love, the loyalty of the nation, 
which had belonged to his father David as the Lord's anointed. 
Evidently the young man was leaning to his own understanding 
and forgetting, if he ever knew, that the Lord God was 
the Ruler of that nation, and he alone had the power to 
designate who should be and who should not be his representative 
upon the throne. 

ABSALOM'S OPEN REBELLION 



Our text says, "After forty years," but scholars are 
agreed that this is a copyist's blunder and that it should 
read "four years." Some ancient authorities read this "four 
years"; so does Josephus. Feeling sure that his mock humility, 
combined with his handsome appearance, gentle manners 
and affected love for the people and for justice, worked successfully 
on the minds of the people, Absalom was ready for 
his next step— open rebellion against his father, the king of 
the nation and the appointee of divine providence. Surely 
he did not realize his situation in the odds of divine power 
against him. Continuing his practice of hypocrisy he requested 
of his father the privilege of visiting the neighboring 
city of Hebron, which had been the capital before Jerusalem 
was taken. 

He said he desired to do sacrifice there in fulfilment of 
a vow. He affected to be very humble and very religious, 
while his heart certainly was far from the Lord. "Do men 
gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles?" The king granted 
the request, which included the privilege of taking a certain 
number of companions and chief people from Jerusalem, 
without anything amiss being thought of it. What worldly 
wisdom this young man had! And how ignominiously his 
mock humility stands out to his discredit! And how his ingratitude 
to his father, and his lack of every element of principle 
and righteousness are conspicuous! For us, dear friends, 
to see in ourselves anything in any degree or measure apparently 
approaching such a picture, or in our course anything 
in any degree corresponding to this, should be to horrify 
us, to rebuke us, to quench the kindling fire. 

Into the conspiracy was drawn King David's most valued 
counselor, Ahithophel, whose presence with the prince as 
one of his friends on the occasion would mean a tower of 
strength to his position and the attainment of his ambition. 
Many of the people, deceived for years, were drawn into this 
conspiracy. Besides, Absalom had carefully appointed men 
throughout the various tribes and various parts of the 
land district, who were posted for his designs and in full 
sympathy with them, and whose business it was to create a 
stampede in his favor, and to help by expressing evil insinuations 
against the king and expressing hopes of wonderful 
things, if Absalom took the kingship. These were to congratulate 
the tribes that they now had a most worthy king 
in Absalom, and to explain to them that when the trumpets 
were heard blowing this meant not that Absalom aspired to 
the kingship, but that he already was king. 

Alas, that history shows so many perfidious characters 
like Absalom! And alas, dear friends, let us remember that 
while we have become New Creatures in Christ, we still have 
to contend with the mean, perfidious dispositions that were 
ours according to the flesh! Let us remember, too, that "we 
wrestle not with flesh and blood" merely, but additionally 
"with principalities and powers and wicked spirits in high 
positions." Let us on the contrary remember the Apostle's 
words, "Humble yourselves, therefore, brethren, under the 
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time."— 
1 Pet. 5:6. 



"My soul, be on thy guard, 
Ten thousand foes arise; 
The hosts of sin are pressing hard 
To draw thee from the prize. 

"O watch and fight and pray, 
The battle ne'er give o'er; 
Renew the conflict every day, 
And help divine implore." 

To those about to enter, or who have entered the narrow 
way, as well as to those who have already been on it for a 
time, there comes a suggestion that we must "mark well the 
pathway and make straight paths for our feet, lest that which 
is lame be turned out of the way." We are all lame according 
to the flesh; some more, some less, but all need to observe 
the heavenly course and to walk circumspectly, seeing that 
pride and ambition are the greatest of foes to humanity and 
faith. We are reminded here of one feature in the story of 
"Pilgrim's Progress": When Christian and Hopeful had 
escaped from the dungeon of Giant Despair and returned to 
the Highway leading to the Celestial City, they erected a 
monument near the entrance to Bypath Meadow, which had 
led them astray. On the monument they put the following 
words, "Over this stile is the way to Doubting Castle, which 
is kept by Giant Despair. He despises the King of the 
Celestial Country and seeks to destroy his holy Pilgrims." 

Satan is the great giant who through these many centuries 
seeks to draw us away from the narrow path, away 

R4276 : page 342 

from full confidence in God and away from reliance on God's 
power and his wisdom and his Truth, by which alone we can 
ever become heirs of the Kingdom. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

While fully commending the propriety of honor to 
earthly parents, and appreciating the Lord's promise of blessing 
to such as obey it, we have in mind that the Great King 
Eternal, the Creator, has adopted us into his family and 
given us the spirit of sonship whereby we cry, "Abba, Father." 
He has given us "exceeding great and precious promises, that 
by these we might become partakers of the divine nature" 
and sharers with our heavenly brother Jesus in his Messianic 
Kingdom. How we should honor him! How it should be 
the chief endeavor of life to us to glorify our Father in 
heaven! How we should hearken to his words and keep 
them before us— "If ye love me, keep my commandments!" 
How we should realize that the end of his commandment is 
Love— out of a pure heart, fervently! How we should realize 
that hereby we know that we love God, if we keep his commandments 
—and his commandments are not grievous unto 
us, if we delight to do his will! Of this character are the 



sons who, as copies of the Redeemer, will be the heirs of God, 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord in his Kingdom. Let 
us make no mistake, but remember that the "Well-done" 
blessing will be given only to those who attain such a character 
development. 



R4283 : page 342 

"JUST FOR TODAY" 

"Just for to-day!" O depths of faith, 

I need to help me say, 

"Thy Will be done"— "Thou leadest me,' 

Just step by step today. 

I do not know tomorrow's ills 

Or joys— which may befall; 

But whatsoever may betide, 

Thy grace will cover all. 

"Just for today!" O blessed thought 

That cheers my fainting heart! 

I cannot wander far from thee 

If I but do my part, 

Which is to trust and never fear 

What man may do or say, 

But only "look to thee in prayer" 

And trust, "Just for today!" 

"Just for today!" How many saints, 

Now gone to their reward, 

Have trod this narrow path of faith 

By "Leaning on the Lord," 

Not knowing what each day might bring 

Of joys or trials severe; 

Not even caring, for by faith 

They knew the Lord was near! 

"Just for today!" Yea, all his flock, 
His "Body," these "Last days" 
Rejoice to follow in his steps, 
And lift their hearts in praise. 
For well we know "a little while" 
Is all we have to stay. 
How glad we are he helps us pray, 
"Dear Lord, just for today!" 

"Just for today!" This "Day of Trial," 

When Satan seeks to sift; 

When God permits "such polishings" 

We praise him for "the Gift" 

Of One who's mighty to direct 

The work, till he shall say 

"Enough! the Jewel shines! 'Tis mine! 

I'll gather it today!" 



"Just for today!" Then, brethren dear, 

Be neither weak nor faint, 

But "watch and pray" to be kept free 

From sin's dread power and taint 

That ye with Christ may "live and reign" 

Till sin and death shall cease, 

And Earth shall have her Jubilee 

Of Everlasting Peace! 

W. Homer Lee. 



R4277 : page 342 

LOVE IN RETURN FOR TREACHERY 

-II. SAMUEL 18:24-33.-NOVEMBER 8.- 

Golden Text:— "A foolish son is a 
grief to his father."— Prov. 17:25. 

KING DAVID, thoroughly unsuspecting Absalom's duplicity, 
was completely taken by surprise with the 
proclamation that Absalom was King of Israel, with 
Hebron as his capital. "To the pure all things are pure," 
writes the Apostle, and as David's heart was guileless towards 
his son, it was far from his thought to imagine such 
deceit and treachery as had been practised against him in a 
cunning and underhanded manner for two years preceding 
the opening battle. 

Hearing that Absalom had started on his march of 
twenty miles toward Jerusalem, intent upon the capture of 
his father and the overthrow of his kingdom, King David 
hastily retreated, accompanied by his bodyguard of 600 men 
and a comparatively small number of people who manifested 
sympathy for him and went with him to share his fortunes. 
Doubtless several motives combined to lead up to this decision 
to retreat. (1) He wished to avoid, especially in his 
capital, the horrors of civil war. (2) He was overwhelmed 
with grief that his antagonist, his enemy, was his own son. 
(3) The evidences were plentiful about him that Absalom 
had stolen the hearts of the people and that his former 
friends had become his enemies, who now jeered at his discomfiture, 
and anticipated with evident pleasure the oncoming 
of Absalom and the establishment of his kingdom. "God 
is not in all his thoughts," says the inspired writer. (Psa. 10:4.) 
So evidently the people of Israel failed to think of 
what would be the Lord's will in the matter, and this was 
their great mistake. 

That must have been the darkest day of King David's 
eventful life. Accompanied by his bodyguard, most of whom 
were foreigners— and of his own nation comparatively few 
with him— he fled from his own family and the capital city 
of his kingdom, which he had established, and from the 
people in whose interests he had given the best years of his 



life in harmony with the divine anointing. He fled from the 
face of the people who some years before had sung his 
praises as their deliverer from the hand of the Philistines— 
"Saul hath slain his thousands, but David his tens of 

R4277 : page 343 

thousands." Poor old man! The street rabble cursed him 
and threw stones and dirt at him. Amongst the persecutors 
was one of Saul's sons, to whom David had shown great 
kindness, sparing his life and providing for his maintenance 
and comfort. Here certainly was an occasion for the trial 
of David's faith and patience and love. What he would have 
done in earlier life we cannot tell. His history in every 
place shows him to have been a man of well-balanced mind, 
but his chief protection was his possession of a Spirit of a 
sound mind, the spirit of consecration to the Lord, the spirit 
of faith and trust and loving devotion. Instead of threatening 
the mob or returning railing for railing, or in any way 
defending himself, King David gave instructions to his guard 
that no harm should be done to those who were speaking 
evil of him, slandering, smiting. "The cup which my father 
hath poured for me, shall I not drink it," were our Master's 
words in his dying hour (John 18:11), and we can see his 
spirit exemplified in King David, who typified him in some 
respects. 

It is supposed that the fourth Psalm and portions of the 
third were written from the standpoint of David's experiences 
as an exile from his capital. Dean Stanley says, "It has 
been conjectured with much propriety that as the first sleep 
of that evening was commemorated in the fourth Psalm, so in 
the third is expressed the feeling of David's thankfulness at 
the final close of that twenty-four hours." The king's objective 
point was a fortified city, Mahanaim, on the east side 
of Jordan; but the little army camped on the west side for 
the night. 

ABSALOM THE HEARTLESS 

Starting from Hebron with 200 men, Absalom's army 
made rapid increase, the population evidently rising en masse 
to share his sedition. Alas for the weakness of humanity. 
This scene reminds us of our Lord's experience, of his 
triumphal entry into Jerusalem, the multitudes shouting 
Hosanna to the Son of David, and five days later shouting, 
Away with him, crucify him, release unto us Barabbas. They 
were Jews in both cases; but we have no reason to suppose 
that they were more fickle than others of our race. 

Absalom had a triumphal entry into Jerusalem and 
quite probably was intoxicated with the success. The records 
of his doings, of the various ways in which he endeavored to 
cast dishonor upon his father and to arouse the bitter prejudice 
of the people about him, all correspond with the vain, 
treacherous, ignoble character which we see displayed in this 
young man of large opportunities. We, who belong to the 
King's sons of a higher plane, should search our hearts diligently 



and scrutinize critically our every thought and word 

and act to make sure that we are thoroughly loyal to the 

Lord, our Father, the Great King; that we are not self-seeking, 

nor humble merely in outward appearance, but humble 

of heart, and that we are fully desirous of doing the Father's 

will, and that his will is not grievous to us, but that we can 

sincerely say, "I delight to do thy will, O my God."— Psa. 40:8. 

VICTORY FOR THE RIGHT 

For three months the rebellion seemed to grow and 
prosper. The seeds of slander and disloyalty which Absalom 
had so carefully sowed through others, while quiet himself, 
had taken deep root in the hearts of many, who joined their 
cause with Absalom as rebels against the Lord and his 
anointed. The army of Absalom was increased rapidly from 
various quarters, while few came to the cause of King David. 
The size of Absalom's army is not stated, but can be conjectured 
from the fact that more than 20,000 wee slain, while 
apparently the great mass was discomfited and fled in the 
battle of the Wood of Ephraim. What may have been David's 
sentiments during these three months of trial of faith and 
love, we can merely conjecture; but we have every reason to 
believe that he was a victor along all these lines. His 
patience certainly was manifested. His faith must have held 
secure to the Divine promises that the Lord would not take 
from him his sure mercies; but that he would deliver him out 
of all evil. And as for his love, even for his wicked, treacherous 
son, it surely was very great, as we shall see. 

The attack was evidently led by Absalom and his army, 
while David's forces were divided into three little bands under 
three of his able generals. Apparently with purpose they 
drew the battle into the woods, where their smaller forces 
would have the advantage over the attacking party. The 
result of the battle was the complete defeat of Absalom's 
forces, and the death of the latter. Riding on his mule 
through the woods, his head was caught between the forks 
of a branch, his mule going on, leaving him hanging by the 
head while the army was in rout. One of King David's 
soldiers found him, but would not kill him because the King 
had strictly charged all the soldiers before they left for the 
battle that they should do Absalom no harm. But when the 
soldier reported the matter to Joab, the King's chief general, 
the latter without hesitation slew the traitor, and at his command 
he was buried under a huge pile of stones. 

"IS THE YOUNG MAN ABSALOM SAFE?" 

King David had proposed going with his army, but wiser 
counsel prevailed, for because of his advancing age (about 
62 years), and because of his grief, and because of his love 
for his enemy, he would not be so competent as others to 
have charge of the battle. Conforming himself to the advice 
of his generals and counselors, he remained at Mahanaim, 
waiting near the gate for tidings from the battlefield to be 
brought by couriers, runners. On a lookout, a watchman 



perceived one of the runners, and, recognizing him by his 
movements, announced that it was Ahimaaz. King David at 
once remarked, He is a good man and undoubtedly will have 
good tidings for us. (v. 27.) What a lesson there is in that 
very expression! As our Lord said, "A good man, out of the 
good treasure of his heart, bringeth forth good things." 
(Matt. 12:35.) On the other hand, from a bitter heart proceed 
bitter words, evil speaking, injurious arrows. Our lives 
should be so that all of our friends and acquaintances would 
be ready to say of us, He is a good man; his message will 
have something of consolation in it. He is never a strife-breeder, 
nor a heart-wounder, nor a betrayer of confidences. 

When the runner reached the King, he prostrated himself 
to the King, saying, "All is well." This was indeed good 
tidings to the King, but we note his love for his dishonoring, 
treacherous, enmitous son, evidenced by his first inquiry, "Is 
the young man Absalom safe?" Some may consider that the 
King had a love for his son to the extent of weakness. 
We will not dispute that, but we will hold that if he must 
err on the one side or the other, it was far more pleasing to 
the Lord that he should love his enemy too much rather than 
too little. That loving expression gives evidence that the 
King had under divine discipline learned considerable of the 
"Love divine, all love excelling." If King David loved and 
pitied Absalom in his rebellious condition, how much more 

R4278 : page 344 

intently he must have loved him when he was in harmony; 
and so, if God so loved us while we were yet sinners that he 
gave his Son to die for us, how much more does he now love 
us since we are no longer aliens and strangers, but brought 
nigh by the precious blood and begotten of his holy Spirit 
through consecration, sanctification! (Rom. 5:8.) It does 
us good to see an illustration of great earthly love, because 
it pictures favorably to us the great lesson that the Master 
impressed by the words, "The Father himself loveth you." 

With such an illustration before us of David's love for 
his son, we may safely surmise that to some extent he misrepresented 
the sentiments of his own heart during the two 
years after Absalom had been permitted to return from his 
foreign exile. The King refused to see him during that time, 
and thus possibly encouraged Absalom's defiance and hatred. 
We mention this because we believe there is a lesson in it 
for many parents. It has seemed to us frequently that for 
some reason parents are disposed to treat their children 
much more harshly than they really feel, and thus misrepresent 
to their children their real heart attitude of affection. 
Whatever severity or austerity may be necessary, whatever 
chastisements appropriate in dealing with children, all should 
be done in such a manner as to fully assure them always 
of the parent's love, and that the punishments inflicted are 
given with a view to duty, and for the good of the 
children. Justice is excellent, Wisdom is valuable, punishments 
are necessary, but above all, "Love is the principal 
thing." Let us, therefore, judge ourselves along the lines of 



this divine standard— our acts, our words, our very thoughts. 
Whatever acts, words or thoughts will not fully square with 
the purest of love will be injurious to us as well as to those 
upon whom they are exercised. 

"O ABSALOM, MY SON, MY SON!" 

The good messenger broke the news as gently as possible 
to the King. He knew of the general rout of the enemy 
and of the concourse in connection with Absalom; but instead 
of telling all that he knew and, drawing upon his imagination 
for details, his goodness of heart led him to say 
little except that there had been a victory and that it seemed 
a great tumult, but did not know all of the particulars. 
Presently Cushi, a second runner, came, announcing the 
death of Absalom. King David's heart was bowed with 
great grief. This was what he evidently had feared. He betook 
himself to a room in the tower, on the way sobbing, 
"O, my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God 
I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!" Of these 
words one writer says, "There is not in all of the Old Testament 
a passage of greater pathos than this. The simple 
beauty of the narrative is exquisite; we are irresistibly reminded 
of him who, while he beheld the rebellious city of 
Jerusalem and thought of the destruction it was bringing 
upon itself, wept over it."— Luke 19:41. 

The expression, "Would God I had died for thee," finds 
two parallels in the Scriptures. Moses, Israel's mediator 
under the Law Covenant, gave vent to a similar expression 
when the people had come under divine displeasure and 
were threatened of the Lord because of their sin. St. Paul 
gave utterance to a similar sentiment when he said, "I could 
wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren, 
my kinsmen, according to the flesh." I could wish that 
I might be separated from membership in the glorious 
Church of Christ, and have my share with the earthly restitution 
class, if by the sacrifice I could bring to my kinsmen 
the great blessings of the Gospel privileges which they are 
missing. (Exod. 32:32; Rom. 9:3.) We are reminded here 
of the words of Longfellow, the poet:— 

"There is no far nor near, there is neither there nor here; 
There is neither soon nor late, in the Chamber over the Gate, 

Nor any long ago, 

Nor any cry of human woe, 
'O Absalom, my son!' 

"That 'tis a common grief, bringeth but sweet relief; 
Ours is the bitterest loss, ours is the heaviest cross; 

And forever the cry will be, 

'Would God I had died for thee, 
O Absalom, my son!" 

If in Absalom's perverse course of vanity, treacherous 
sedition, and in its ruinous end we find a lesson respecting 
the undesirable, evil, godless way, in King David's course 



we find the opposite lesson of faith and submission and 
growth in grace, knowledge and love. In a previous lesson 
we have noted the fact that David committed a most awful 
crime, violating three of the divine commands most wantonly 
and inexcusably— coveting his neighbor's wife, committing 
adultery with her, and indirectly murdering her wronged 
husband. The Scriptures most pointedly condemn those sins, 
and intimate that the severe experiences which we have just 
recounted were permitted of the Lord to come upon him as 
retributive justice. Yet David's recognition of his sin and his 
penitence for it testify distinctly that at heart he was not a 
murderer and not an adulterer. The Lord who looketh at 
the heart approved him ultimately, while reprobating his 
misdeeds and permitting him to suffer therefor. 

We can draw a great lesson and a profitable one from 
the lives of these two men without copying either of them. 
We are not to feel that it is necessary that the man who 
would preach temperance should be able to say, I was once 
a drunkard in the gutter; neither is it necessary for us to 
follow David into his sins in order to profit by the lessons 
taught us by his experiences. 

"Happy the man who learns to trace 
The leadings of Jehovah's grace." 



R4278 : page 344 

"THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD" 

-PSALM 23. -NOVEMBER 15.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord is my Shepherd; 
I shall not want."— Psalm 23:1. 

OF ALL the beautiful symbolic pictures which the Lord 
gave us through the Prophet David, none seems 
more forceful than that of the Psalm which constitutes 
our lesson. The eastern shepherd and his love and care 
for his sheep are given us as an illustration of our heavenly 
Father's care over us. It is true that our dear Redeemer was 
sent forth as the Good Shepherd who gave his life for the 
sheep, and by his death opened the door into the sheep-fold 
of divine love and favor and rest and peace. This was a 
favorite picture that our Lord Jesus gave us of himself: "I 
know my sheep, and am known of mine"; "My sheep hear 
my voice, and they follow me"; "A stranger will they not 

R4278 : page 345 

follow, for they know not the voice of a stranger." The 
Apostle followed the same thought when speaking of our 
Lord's return. He refers to him as the Good Shepherd of 
the flock: "For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now 
returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls." 



(1 Pet. 2:25.) The same thought is maintained when the 
elders of the Church are referred to as pastors and "overseers 
of the Church of God. "--Acts 20:28. 

But while it is refreshing for us to take a comprehensive 
view of the divine favor and care manifested in provisions 
made for our welfare as the Lord's sheep, it is well 
that we should ever keep in mind that the under-shepherds 
do not own the flock, and that their value to the flock as 
overseers consists in their faithfulness in making known to 
the sheep the message of the Great Shepherd and, to the extent 
of their ability, communicating his tone and his spirit 
with his Word. The faithful of these, like the Apostle, may 
urge, "And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord."— 
1 Thess. 1:6. 

On the other hand the sheep are called upon to mark 
the spirit of the under-shepherds, whether or not it comports 
with that of the Chief Shepherd, so that they be not led 
astray. They are to try the spirits of those who pose as 
pastors or under-shepherds, to note whether they be of God 
or whether they speak of themselves; whether their words 
and deeds are according to love or according to selfishness. 
They are enjoined to note these under-shepherds who feed 
upon the flock, but do not feed the flock. 

Examining our text critically, we perceive that the 
Shepherd is not any of the under-shepherds, nor even our 
Lord Jesus, but the heavenly Father. The Hebrew word 
here rendered Lord is Jehovah. This fact greatly enhances 
the value of the entire picture. While it is proper for us to 
love all the sheep and the "under-shepherds" and the 
"Good Shepherd" of the flock, it adds to our joy to know who 
is the "Great Shepherd" and to hear the "Good Shepherd," 
his Son, assure the sheep of the Father's love, saying, "The 
Father himself loveth you." How wonderful that the heavenly 
Father, surrounded by the sinless angelic hosts, should feel 
an interest and a care for his human sheep of the earthly 
plane, who, through Adam's disobedience, were plunged into 
death; and how precious to us is the knowledge that at great 
cost he sent his Son to be our "Good Shepherd," and to 
bring back to the divine fold all of the sheep that are desirous 
to return ! 

"OTHER SHEEP I HAVE" 

Our Lord Jesus declares, "Other sheep I have which are 
not of this fold; them also I must bring, that there shall be 
one fold and one Shepherd"— ultimately. Those other sheep 
we understand to be the Restitution flock, which, during the 

R4279 : page 345 

Millennial Age, the Lord will shepherd, gathering to his 

right hand of favor the willing, obedient class, who will ultimately 

be ushered into the blessings he has provided for the 

good sheep. The wayward goats he will ultimately destroy 

in the Second Death. We are glad, indeed, that the light of 

Present Truth shows us clearly that the thousands of millions 



of heathen and ignorant that have gone down into the prison-house 
of death are neither to suffer eternally nor to be hopelessly 
destroyed, but are to be awakened and granted full 
opportunity to come to a knowledge of the "Good Shepherd" 
and to be guided by him into the path of life, by the following 
of which, with his assistance, they may be fully recovered 
from all the imperfections entailed upon them by the fall. 

But we are specially glad to know of the "little flock" 
which the Lord is now selecting from the world, and we are 
specially glad to be privileged to join its numbers now and 
our Redeemer-Shepherd" through evil report and through 
good report," whithersoever he may lead us in the "narrow 
way" of self-sacrifice. We rejoice that we hear his encouraging 
voice; that our present trials and difficulties are all foreseen; 
that he knoweth the way that we take, and that he is 
able and willing to make all things abound to our highest 
good. It gives us special comfort to have this assurance that 
the "Trial of our faith is much more precious than that of 
gold"; and that as the metalurgist would carefully watch 
the gold tried in the fire, lest it should be destroyed by too 
intense a heat, so our Lord, our Shepherd, will watch over 
the interests of those that are his, and not suffer us to be 
tried above that we are able, but with every temptation will 
provide a way of escape. And if, perchance, our pathway 
may entail special trials, we have the "Good Shepherd's" 
assurance that these should be considered as "light afflictions" 
in comparison with the blessings to which they lead; that if 
rightly received they will work out for us "A far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." 

"MY SHEEP FOLLOW ME" 

Our lesson relates, not to the flock of the future, but to 
the one of the present— the "little flock" which the Lord, 
during this Gospel Age, is now gathering out of every nation, 
people, kindred and tongue. It is the Father's flock, and his 
Son, our Redeemer, represents him, as he tells us, "As I hear, 
I speak"; "I came to do the will of my Father in heaven." 
Thus the Shepherd's Son fully and completely represents the 
Great Shepherd; as he says, "All mine are thine, and thine 
are mine." And again, "Thine they were, and thou gavest 
them me." 

The wealth of our relationship to the "Great Shepherd" 
and his Son increases in our appreciation in proportion as 
we grow in knowledge. As our Redeemer said, "This is life 
eternal, that they might know thee and Jesus Christ, whom 
thou hast sent."— John 17:3. 

"No good thing will he withhold 

From sheep which stray not from his fold." 

How comforting is the declaration, "I shall not want!" 
Our Lord illustrates this lesson by pointing out that a kind 
earthly father would not give a stone instead of bread, nor 
a serpent instead of fish, and so he assures us that our 
heavenly Father, much more loving and tender, will withhold 



from us nothing that will be for our good. We are to remember, 
however, that it is not as human beings that he 
does this, but as "New Creatures" in Christ Jesus. It is not 
the justified believer merely that is a member of this Little 
Flock at the present time, but the sanctified believer, fully 
consecrated to walk in the "Good Shepherd's" footsteps, to 
hear his voice and follow him. Our Lord informed us at the 
start that following him as his disciples, as his sheep of the 
Little Flock now being selected, must signify to us, as to him, 
worldly disfavor and opposition, not only from the prince of 
darkness, but also from those deluded by him and under the 
sway of his spirit of anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife, backbiting 
slander, evil-speaking, etc. And in addition to these 
things we are to expect to contend with our own blemishes 
and weaknesses. Such a picture of the "narrow way" would 
indeed have terrified us had it not been for our Shepherd's 

R4279 : page 346 

assurance of succor in every time of need, and his assurance 
that these trials to the flesh rightly received would constitute 
a part of our development in the spirit and preparation 
for the "Rest that remaineth for the people of God." 

"I shall not want" may be applied to the necessities of 
the present life. We are assured that "No good thing will 
he withhold from us;" but he specially means that we shall 
not want, not lack the disciplines, the trials, the instructions, 
the encouragements, the reproofs, and the assistance necessary 
to our attainment to all "The glorious things that God 
hath in reservation for those that love him." The only condition 
connected with this promise is that we shall abide in 
his love, abide in his flock, continue to hearken to his voice 
and to follow his directions. How dangerous then to all of 
the true sheep would be any measure of worldly ambition, 
pride or self-esteem! How necessary that the heart should 
be right, desirous of knowing and obeying the Shepherd's 
voice! With what care should the sheep scrutinize the motives 
which actuate their daily conduct, their words and the 
thoughts of their hearts! 

"GREEN PASTURES AND STILL WATERS" 

Professor G. A. Smith says, "A Syrian or an Arabian 
pasture is very different from the narrow meadows and 
fenced hillsides with which we are familiar. It is vast, and 
often virtually boundless. It has to be so, for by far the 
greater part of it is desert— that is, land not absolutely barren, 
but refreshed by rain for only a few months, and through 
the rest of the year abandoned to the pitiless sun that sucks 
all life out of the soil. The landscape the Psalmist saw 
seemed to him to reflect the mingled wildness and beauty of 
his own life. To him human life was just this wilderness of 
terrible contrasts, where the light is so bright, but the 
shadows the darker and more treacherous; where the pasture 
is rich, but scattered in the wrinkles of vast deserts; where 
the paths are illusive, yet man's passion flies swift and 



straight to its revenge; where all is separation and disorder, 
yet law sweeps inexorable, and a man is hunted down to 
death by his bloodguiltiness." 

More and more as "New Creatures" we are learning to 
appreciate the barrenness of worldly hopes and ambitions 
and knowledge. And more and more we should be giving 
heed to the leadings of the "Good Shepherd," who is guiding 
his flock of "New Creatures" for their spiritual refreshment 
through the labyrinth of the "present evil world." Those 
sheep which keep nearest to the Shepherd secure the fattest 
and richest experiences and refreshments. On the contrary, 
the sheep which stray looking for pastures green on their 
own account, or following the voice of false shepherds, are 
the ones that are likely to become hungry and eat of the 
poisonous growths and fall into the pitfalls of sin and be 
devoured by the ravenous beasts of passion and worldliness. 
Happy is the sheep who learns to know the voice of the true 
Shepherd, and whose faith is such that he follows closely 
and not afar off! 

LYING DOWN IN GREEN PASTURES 

To lie down is to be at rest, to be happy. This is the 
privilege of all the Lord's true sheep. Outwardly they may 
be distressed and "on the run," assailed by the world, the 
flesh and the Adversary, but as "New Creatures" they may be 
at rest, at peace, because of their nearness to the Lord, the 
Shepherd, and because of their faith in his overruling providence, 
which is able to make "all things work together for 
good." "Great peace have they that love thy law, and nothing 
shall offend (stumble) them." These let the "peace of 
God rule in their hearts. ..and are thankful." It is to 
these that our Lord's words apply, "My peace I give unto 
you.... Let not your hearts be troubled, neither let them 
be afraid." 

This rest, this peace of heart, is absolutely essential to 
our development as "New Creatures," even as the crystals 
are deposited from the liquids when they are quiet and not 
when they are in agitation. So the crystalline character 
which God is developing in us absolutely demands that a 
condition of rest, peace, quietness of heart, shall be attained; 
and to the attainment of this condition patience, faith and love, 
the chief graces of the spirit, are necessary. 

THE LABYRINTH OF LIFE 

"A labyrinth is a species of structure full of intricate 
passages and windings, so that when once entered it is next 
to impossible for an individual to extricate himself without 
a guide. The one in ancient Egypt, near Lake Moeris, was 
composed of twelve great palaces containing, according to 
Herodotus, three thousand chambers and halls. The palaces 
were connected by courts, around which ran a vast number 
of most intricate passages. Around the whole was a wall 
with only one entrance." 

"Some years ago," writes Hawthorne, "a minister was 



rambling in the famous labyrinth of Henry VIII, at Hampton 
Court near London, where the common children's puzzle is 
wrought out on a large scale by paths between high and 
thick evergreen hedges. He wandered about if for a time, 
but when the time for closing drew near, with all his efforts 
he could not find his way out, and he feared that he might 
have to remain all night. At last he looked up, and saw a 
man in the tower in the center of the labyrinth who had 
been watching him all the time, and waiting to catch his 
attention. The eye above could see all so hidden from the 
man within, and soon guided him out of his difficulties. 

R4280 : page 346 

Visiting this labyrinth with Deacon Olney, we purchased a 
chart for our guide, remembering my friend's experience. 
When the time came for us to find our way out, we took the 
chart, and by careful study and exactness in following the 
designated way, we threaded the mazes of the labyrinth with 
success. Life is such a labyrinth. No person knows enough 
to guide his course unaided. He cannot see where the paths 
lead. The picture of the future is a sealed book to all." 

One of the important lessons for every sheep to learn is 
need of the Shepherd's care and guidance through the labyrinth 
of life. "Who is sufficient for these things," writes the 
Apostle. Then he declares, "Our sufficiency is of God"— in 
Christ. He who redeemed us has gone the way before us 
and directed that we walk in his steps. Those who become 
so wise in their own conceits that they fancy there are nearer 
ways and shorter cuts and more flowery ways to Paradise 
are deceiving themselves. If those who recognize the 
message and are walking in the Master's footsteps and 
are walking circumspectly, neglect these and become overcharged 
with the world and earthly ambitions and joys and 
toys, they are surely unwisely selling the glorious heavenly 
birthright for a mess of earthly pottage. On the contrary, he 
who carefully follows the Master, experiences the truth of 
the declaration, "He restoreth my soul." Some find their 

R4280 : page 347 

spiritual strength refreshed as they walk in the paths of 
righteousness in which the Lord leads. He leads them "for 
his name's sake." This is one of the considerations. Our 
Lord, the Shepherd, has undertaken to do a shepherding 
work; to gather a flock. His promise is involved; his honor 
is at stake! We may be sure that not only because of his 
love for us will he guide us aright, but because it would be 
a dishonor to him to make the slightest mistake in respect to 
our guidance. He is the Faithful Shepherd. The angelic 
hosts are watching and learning lessons in respect to all 
this shepherding of the flock through the narrow way. 
"Which things the angels desire to look into."— 1 Pet. 1:12. 

"THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH" 



This valley was entered by our race because of our first 
parents' disobedience. We have been in the valley more than 
6000 years. The shadow of death has been over the human 
family, and its accompaniments of sickness, pain and sorrow 
have extended to every creature, so that the Apostle truly 
said, "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain 
together, waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God"— 
waiting for the uplifting power of the Millennial Age, waiting 
for the sons of glory, Jesus Christ and his Church, to bring the 
promised Restitution and uplifting out of "the valley of the 
shadow of death" back to the heights of light and love and 
the divine likeness. 

The fear of evil, of trouble, of disaster hangs over the 
world and is accentuated by its ignorance of God and of the 
future. Satan, taking advantage of this spirit of fear in the 
fallen race, has so terrorized mankind with horrible pictures 
of purgatory and eternal torment as to thoroughly separate 
the human heart, if possible, from its Creator, while feigning 
to be its Shepherd. Under the influence of "doctrines of 
devils," the Adversary has made God's character and his 
Book repulsive to mankind in general and well-nigh quenched 
their love, while fanning their fears. 

Our text represents the true sheep as saying, "I will fear 
no evil." How appropriate; how true! Weak and poor and 
insufficient and surrounded by foes, we nevertheless need 
not fear, and the developed sheep does not fear what the 
demons may seek to do, knowing that "all power in heaven 
and earth" is in the hands of our Shepherd King, and that 
he is directing our ways, and has guaranteed that our every 
experience shall work out a blessing, and that in permitting 
trials he merely designs our correction and instruction in 
righteousness and to draw us nearer to himself and make us 
copies of his Son, to the intent that by the First Resurrection 
change he may take us to himself and give us a share in the 
Millennial Kingdom. Ah! how true it is that we do not fear 
—because the Shepherd is with us! We have his promise, 
"Lo, I am with you, even to the end of the age." And furthermore 
we have the light of his Word, showing that the Shepherd 
is to be present with his sheep and to care for them and 
develop them. 

"THY ROD AND THY STAFF COMFORT ME" 

The shepherd's rod or club was of hard wood, sometimes 
open and preferably of the shape of a golf stick, except 
that it was shorter and much heavier. With it the shepherd 
was prepared to defend the flock, combating every foe. 
The staff was lighter and more like a cane and longer, with 
a crook at the end. With its point the shepherd at times 
prodded the sheep that were careless, and with the hook he 
sometimes helped out one that had stumbled into the ditch, 
by putting the crook under its forelegs. Our Shepherd, too, 
has a rod for our enemies and a staff for his sheep— the one 
for our protection, the other for our relief and assistance and 
correction. How glad we are to know that all power is committed 
unto him in heaven and in earth and that under his 



protecting care nothing shall by any means harm us! What 
a comfort is here! No wonder that under such circumstances 
the sheep may enjoy "the peace of God which passeth all 
understanding," resting themselves, comforting themselves in 
the assurance that all things shall be overruled for their 
eternal welfare ! 

"THOU PREPAREST A TABLE FOR ME" 

The picture of the shepherd and the sheep has been 
gradually fading, and now is in the past. Instead of pastures 
and the water-brooks we now have the table and the cup. 
We hear the under-shepherds say, "This is the Bread which 
came down from heaven, and this cup is the blood of the 
New Covenant." He whose name is the Truth gave us his 
flesh to eat. He sacrificed his earthly interests that we might 
partake of them through faith and be justified thereby and 
appropriate to ourselves more and more the benefits of his 
sacrifice. He passes to us the cup of his suffering, his shame, 
his ignominy, his death, saying, "Drink ye all"— drink it all. 
By thus appropriating the merits of his sacrifice and participating 
with him in his sufferings we are his sheep; or, in 
another figure, we are the branches of the True Vine; or, 
under another figure, we are members of his Body and he 
the Head; or, under another figure, he is our Bridegroom 
and we his Bride. This provision is made for us in the 
presence of our enemies. 

"Marvel not if the world hate you," said our Master. 
Yet even in the presence of the opposition of the world and 
our Adversary and all of the besetments of the hosts of 
demons, we are privileged to partake of these rich blessings 
and privileges! Yea, even in the presence of our besetments 
of the flesh, which are also our enemies, we can feast 
with our Lord and naught can make us afraid. All this has 
been true throughout the Gospel Age, but it is all accentuated 
now in this harvest time by reason of our Lord's 
presence in the consummation of the age. 

In harmony with this promise of the Scriptures, to all 
who open their hearts to receive him, he comes in and sympathizes 
with them. Yea, he girds himself as a servant and 
comes in and serves us, setting before us rich things from his 
storehouse— things new and old. Under this service all the 
old truths become fresh and appetizing, refreshing and 
strengthening. And new truths are ours, fitting to the peculiar 
time in which we are living and the special trials and 
tests now due to come upon the Lord's faithful brethren. 
They are ushered into the eternal Father's presence, where 
is fulness of joy forevermore. 

MY HEAD ANOINTED, MY CUP OVERRUNS 

Let us not spoil this beautiful picture with any thought 
of anointing a sheep's head, etc., but rather take the higher 
and grander and nobler view that our Lord Jesus is the 
Christ, the Anointed; and that his anointing was typified by 
the anointing of Aaron with precious oil (which typified the 



holy Spirit), which ran down his beard and unto the skirts 
of his garment. Let us think of this as the holy Spirit of 
Pentecost, which has anointed all the sheep which have come 

R4280 : page 348 

into the fold and the Body of Christ. Let us appreciate 
this anointing and abide under it, allowing it more and more 
to be what the Apostle terms an unction from the Holy One, 
affecting our every talent and power and bringing them all 
into subjection to the divine law of love. 

"Let my eyes see Jesus only; 

Let my feet run in his ways; 

Let my hands perform his bidding; 

Let my tongue speak forth his praise." 

"My cup runneth over." Our Master's cup was one of 
suffering, ignominy, shame and death. We partake of it. It 
becomes our cup also; but he promises us a new cup of joy 
and rejoicing, which he will share with us fully in the 
Kingdom. That cup of joy and peace and divine favor and 
blessing our Master partook of by faith. And we now also 
have the same cup full to overflowing; but we cannot appreciate 
it fully until we shall be changed and made like 
our Head and share his glory. By faith we can enjoy it now 
and realize that it is full to overflowing. And our joys in 
the eternal future will be exceedingly and abundantly more 
than we could have asked or thought. 

"GOODNESS AND MERCY PURSUE ME" 

"Surely goodness and mercy shall pursue me all the 
days of my life." This appears to be the stricter translation 
and it contains a beautiful thought. These sheep of the 
Lord's "little flock"— these "New Creatures" of Christ Jesus, 
instead of being pursued by fears and terrors and trapped 
and ensnared, are following the Good Shepherd and hearkening 
to his voice; and, according to his promise, God's goodness 
and mercy are pursuing them, keeping after them, watching 
over them, assisting them, caring for them, upholding 
them in trials. These are the messengers of the Lord, of 
which the Apostle wrote, "Are they not all ministering spirits, 
sent forth to minister unto those who shall be heirs of salvation?" 
Surely this is so. Looking back we can praise the 
way in which goodness and mercy have pursued us, never 
leaving us! 

"Angels watch him on his way 

And aid with kindly arm; 

And Satan, seeking out his prey, 

May hate, but cannot harm. 

O, child of God; O, glory's heir; 

How rich a lot is thine!" 

The conclusion of the whole matter— the end of the 



journey, is what? To occupy a place in the heavenly 

mansions in our Father's house! What a glorious consummation 

to the grandest of all hopes! Why should we murmur 

or complain at the roughness of the journey which will 

bring us to such a glorious goal? Let us say with the 

Psalmist:— 

"What shall I render unto the Lord my God for all his 
benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and 
call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto 
the Most High!" 



R4281 : page 348 

EVIL SPEAKING-BUSY-BOD YING-TRUTH-HIDING 

"Speak evil of no man." (Titus 3:2.) "Let none of you 
suffer as a busy-body in other men's matters." (1 Pet. 3:16.) 
"Speaking the truth in love."— Eph. 4:15. 

ALL Christians who have made advancement in the 

development of the graces and fruits of the 

Lord's Spirit accept as true the texts of 

Scripture cited. They cheerfully admit the correctness 

of the points these texts set forth, and agree that it is 

their duty and the duty of all Christian people to very 

carefully, very rigidly follow these divine instructions. 

But, strange to say, it appears that in the majority of 

minds the reasoning faculties become more or less entangled 

so that very wrong constructions are put upon 

the words of heavenly wisdom. The result is that many 

of the Lord's dear people find the Episcopal confession 

fitting to them. "We have done those things which we 

ought not to have done, and we have left undone those 

things which we ought to have done." One peculiar 

feature connected with the matter is that some of the 

Lord's dear people, sincerely desirous of doing his will 

and naught else, after making blunders and getting into 

a great mess of trouble, fail to discern wherein they 

erred; hence with them the experience has brought no 

lesson, and instead of being helps and bright-shining 

lights they are stumbling-blocks to a considerable degree 

and thus offset largely the good they desire to do, 

or perhaps really do accomplish. It will be clearly understood, 

then, that the object of this dissertation is not 

to hurt, wound, offend, but to assist the members of the 

Body of Christ to accomplish more fully the essence of 

their covenant with the Lord and the desire of their 

hearts. 

"WHAT IS EVIL SPEAKING?" 

We answer: That to speak anything that is derogatory 
respecting another, to tell things uncomplimentary 
of them, is evil speaking. Some have the impression 



that evil speaking is lying and consider that speaking 
the truth is always in order. This is a misconception. 
The speaking of anything that is prejudicial to the 
character of another, whether it be truth or falsehood, 
is evil speaking in the proper acceptance of that term. 
The Lord's Spirit, as well as his Word, forbids evil 
speaking because the Lord's Spirit is the spirit of love 
and kindness, and evil speaking, true or false, is repudiated 
by love, is contrary to love, is born of some evil 
motive, either busy-bodying and gossiping, or, worse 
still, malice, envy or strife, and all of these the Apostle 
designates in his list of "the works of the Devil." 

It is said that there are "exceptions to every rule," 
and so there are to this one. For instance, if you were 
a witness to a murder, a theft, or any other heinous 
crime, it would be a duty to society to speak of the evil, 
to report it to the proper authorities, the mayor, chief 
of police, or whoever. This would be evil speaking, it 
is true, but this is an exceptional case and requires exceptional 
treatment. It does not, therefore, imply any 
wrong motive on your part in respect to the wrong-doer 
—anger, hatred, malice or strife, but is called for 
by the interests of society and your appreciation of the 
spirit of love to them. Indeed, in some States the law 
holds a silent witness as jointly responsible with the 
principal offender. In the Church also there is an exception 
noted in the Scriptures, namely, that if the 
trespass be of sufficient importance and likely to break 
our fellowship with the offender we may go to him and 
discuss the matter with him alone— not with a view of 
judging him, condemning him, etc., but with the object 
of helping the brother out of some view of matters or 
course of conduct that seems to us to be wrong, sinful, 

R4281 : page 349 

contrary to the Word of God. Before going to him or 
her, we are to make self-examination to see that we are 
not in a fault-finding mood, and that the matter is one 
that really concerns us, either in our personal relationship 
to the brother or in our mutual relationship to the 
members of the Church of Christ, whose interest we 
believe might be injured by the brother's course. We 
should go kindly and with the hope in our hearts that 
the matter which seemed strange and in violation of 
God's Word might prove upon explanation to be nothing 
of the kind. 

We are to go hoping that in any event the Lord will 
bless our mission, not to the injury of the brother or 
sister, but to his or her comfort, succor, deliverance 
from what we believe to be a wrong course. It is only 
after we have taken this step and the wrong course is 
persisted in, either to our injury or to the injury of the 
Church— only then are we permitted to speak to another 
of the thing which we consider to be an evil. Even then 
the speaking must be done in the presence of the accused, 



that he may have the fullest opportunity to present 

his view of the matter, as set forth in the Scriptures 

in Matt. 18:15-17 and explained in detail in DAWN-STUDIES, 

Vol. VI. If it were not so pitiable and so 

grievous an error it would be amusing to note how some 

conscientious brethren and sisters dodge this matter of 

evil speaking and seemingly its point entirely. For 

instance, one of these may say to another, "I have just 

heard something about Sister C which shocked me fearfully. 

I do not know what to think about it. I should 

like to have your advice, but of course I could not tell 

you what the matter is, for that would be evil speaking, 

which, as the Lord's follower, I would not be privileged 

to speak and you would not be privileged to hear." Poor, 

silly sheep ! Such seem not to discern that they are at 

the time engaged in the very worst kind of evil speaking. 

In nine cases out of ten, if they would tell all that 

they know, the impression upon their auditor would not 

be one-tenth as bad as the one given. This serious 

error, which is doing so much harm in the whole world 

and amongst the Lord's people, is an evidence of two 

things: (1) A lack of reasoning power, (2) a lack of 

the spirit of love. 

We are trying in this article to correct the first defect 
and to help some to reason more correctly; but it 
is not ours to help them over the second defect, their 
lack of love, which really lies at the foundation of the 
wrong. If they had loved the sister of whom they had 
heard the evil report, they would never have breathed 
a word of it to another soul, but would have gone 
directly to the condemned one in love and with a hope 
that the report was false, and would have told her, as a 
friend and as the spirit of love would prompt, all that 
they had heard or seen or misunderstood, and would 
have assured her that they hoped there was some explanation 
of it; but in no event should any hint of the 
matter escape them. 

"SUFFERING AS A BUSY-BODY" 

There are generally two sides to a matter. In 
nearly every instance in which one person violates the 
command, "Speak evil of no man," assistance is rendered 
by the one to whom the evil is told. He or she "draws 
the matter out" by questions or hints or suggestions or 
looks of interest or encouraging comments, etc. Undoubtedly 
such a hearer of evil is in the Lord's sight 
equally guilty with the speaker of the evil. The difficulty 
with both is that they lack the spirit of love, 
which the Apostle refers to, saying, "Charity thinketh 
no evil," but "covereth a multitude of faults." The first 
intimation that something scandalous or unkind is 
about to be said respecting another should lead us to 
shrink back and feel the fear and realize that the Adversary 
is near to assist in any evil work. The wise course, 
as already seen, would be to say promptly, "My dear 



Sister or Brother, excuse me, but are not you and I both 
the Lord's children, and can we not please God better 
and advance our own spiritual welfare more by giving 
heed to his Word and developing in our own hearts and 
minds the spirit of love, instead of back-biting and devouring 
one another? Let us think of each other's 

R4282 : page 349 

good traits, good qualities, as the Apostle would have 
us do." If such a proper course lose you the friendship 
of anyone it will be to your advantage, for if he or she 
were right-minded such kindly treatment would be helpful, 
and you would be at once advised that they fully 
agree with you and are also striving in the same 
direction. 

How often have we heard people say, "Yes, indeed, 
I wish that I had never heard it! It has caused me a 
deal of trouble and suffering." These are the people 
mentioned by the Apostle— who are suffering as busy-bodies 
in other men's matters, contrary to the divine 
direction and the spirit of love. They are getting their 
deserts, and the chances are that they will do spiritual 
injury to themselves and also do spiritual injury to 
others through their busy-bodying. Few of us have 
time enough to attend to all of the affairs of the 
world and still give proper attention to our own. 
"Sweep before your own door" has become a proverb, 
the intimation being that those who pay great attention 
to their neighbors' affairs are neglecting home duties 
and responsibilities and that they are likely to get themselves 
into trouble in so doing. The Christian of advanced 
experience emphasizes the fact that he has 
quite a sufficiency of knowledge of evil in himself and 
his environment without making special search for the 
weaknesses and blemishes of others or for their liberties, 
which perhaps to him seem to be sin; as in the 
Apostle's case when he speaks of some who "Crept in 
to spy out our liberties." We may be sure that all to 
whom the Apostle referred were in a dangerous position 
by reason of their busy-bodying, and we may be equally 
sure that the same principle will always hold good. 
However good our intentions, none will be crowned for 
striving unlawfully.— 2 Tim. 2:5. 

There are some so constituted that it is second 
nature for them to attempt to regulate everybody else 
according to their own ideals and standards, forgetful 
of the fact stated by the Apostle, "To his own Master 
every servant stands or falls." Our limitations respecting 
what we may and may not do by way of interference 
in the affairs of others are very many. To some 
in olden times it was a terrible sin to eat meat 
such as was generally sold in public because it was 
previously offered to an idol. The Apostle took a larger, 
broader, truer view of the subject when he declared that 
the idol was nothing anyway, recognizing the fact that 



the offering of the meat to the idol could do the meat 
no harm. There were some, however, ready to spy in 
such matters and to busy-body themselves with other 
men's affairs, and some of these were perhaps stumbled 
by reason of their busy-bodying tendencies. The fact 
that the Apostle was very willing to yield to these weaker 
brethren and say that he would abstain from meat 
entirely does not prove that he was wrong and they 
right. It merely proves that he was large-hearted 

R4282 : page 350 

enough to forego his own liberties— which were in no 
wise condemned in the Scriptures— for their sakes because 
of their weaknesses, their lack of logic, and their 
weakness along the lines of busy-bodying. Our Lord 
addressed busy-bodies when he suggested that they 
were like the man who went to his neighbor and desired 
to help him to get a mote out of his eye, without being 
aware of the fact that he had a whole beam in his own 
eye. Jesus said to such, "First pluck out the beam out 
of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to 
pluck out the mote out of thy brother's eye."— Luke 6:42. 

A TRUTH-TELLING OBLIGATION 

We have already pointed out that it is not permissible 
even to tell the truth where it would be slanderous 
or injurious or calculated to bring dishonor to our 
neighbor; that to tell the truth under such circumstances 
would be evil speaking from the Scriptural 
standpoint and forbidden, not only by the Word of the 
Lord, but by the spirit of love for the brethren, and 
that it would be wrong even to listen to such a statement, 
and that rather the one attempting such evil-speaking 
should be in love rebuked and helped to overcome 
the weakness. But there is a truth-telling which 
is in harmony with love. If a scandal-monger and 
back-biter and slanderer and evil-speaker has disclosed 
some matter to us, it is our duty not to repeat 
the matter and not even hint of it to others, but it is our 
duty to tell the matter and all that we know about 
it to the one who has been slandered, vilified, spoken 
against. Why is it our duty to do this? We answer, 
that the same spirit of love which would prompt us not 
to speak derogatively of another to others should 
prompt us to tell the aggrieved one the facts: (1) It 
will put him on his guard and assist him in overtaking 
the falsehood or misrepresentation, and all lovers of 
the truth and righteousness should be glad to assist in 
such a manner. (2) It would be very helpful, doubtless, 
to the slanderers, evil-speakers; a practical lesson 
would thus be brought home to them, and they might 
learn before it was too late for learning, that they are 
still cultivating the works of the flesh and the devil, 
which must be eradicated from their hearts before they 



would be ready for the glorious change of the First 
Resurrection and a share with Christ in glory, honor 
and immortality. (3) This course would be profitable 
to ourselves because it would assist in developing in 
each true courage on the side of right, on the side of 
truth, the Lord's side, and against the side of the devil, 
the side of slander and evil speaking. 

Strange to say, something in our crooked heads or 
something of the Adversary's deception at times leads 
some of the Lord's true people into a very wrong course 
in respect to this matter. For instance, a case came 
under our observation recently which illustrates this: 
Mr. A communicated "lovingly" some slanderous information 
to Mrs. B respecting Mrs. C. Mrs. B "lovingly" 
heard the awful news and then communicated with Mrs. 
D, saying that she had heard some awful things about 
Mrs. C and was greatly distressed thereby. Mrs. D, 
intimately acquainted with Mrs. C, assured Mrs. B that 
there was certainly no foundation for any evil speaking. 
Mrs. B said that she would like to tell Mrs. D the whole 
of it, but dared not do so, as it would be evil speaking. 
Mrs. D urged that in any event Mrs. B should go to 
Mrs. C and tell her the evil things that had been spoken 
about her and give her the name of her traducer, so that 
she might go to him in harmony with Matt. 18:15-17; 
but dear Mrs. B was horrified at the suggestion and 
declared that not for her life would she be so untrue to 
Mr. A, and thus "speak evil" of him. 

Now notice the mistakes made all through these 
transactions: (1) Mr. A began the matter as a back-biter, 
speaking evil of Mrs. C. (2) Mrs. B, in listening 
to that and not rebuking it promptly and before allowing 
it to proceed, was a partaker in the guilt. (3) Mrs. 
B became a slanderer and evil-speaker and back-biter 
on her own account when she communicated the slander 
in vague terms to Mrs. D. It matters not that she did 
not go into details. She gave the bad impression, 
possibly a much worse impression than if she had told 
all that had been told to her. (4) Mrs. D was possibly 
at fault also in listening at all to the slanders, but she 
took the right course in attempting the defence of one 
who had not been heard, and in urging that the whole 
matter be taken at once to Mrs. C that she might know 
of the evil that was being done her in the robbery of her 
good name by Mr. A. (5) Mrs. B's suggestion that 
she would be "evil speaking" in taking this open, aboveboard 
course shows that she labored under serious misapprehension 
of the points of equity. She was partaker 
with the thief in his robbery of a reputation. (Psa. 50:18.) 
The reputation of another had been stolen and 
she was helping to secrete the thief. Yet, as we say, 
the delusions of our twisted minds and the cunning of 
the Adversary get some of the Lord's people into these 
difficulties so that they take unwittingly the side of the 
Adversary, who puts light for darkness and darkness 
for light. Mrs. B "would not for the world" expose Mr. 



A, believing that in so doing she would be "evil speaking." 
What sophistry! The very opposite of the truth! 
That was the one and only time she should have told 
the matter, apologizing at the same time for her own 
share in the sin. The person against whom the evil 
was spoken is the one and the only one to whom it 
should have been mentioned at all, and as for Mr. A, if 
it turned out to be discreditable to him and he lost 
some of his prestige thereby, it might mean the greatest 
blessing that had ever come to him and might recover 
him from the snare of the Adversary, which, if not recovered 
from, would most assuredly hinder his entrance 
into the Kingdom. 

ANOTHER PRACTICAL ILLUSTRATION 

Here is another instance which came under our observation 
and which illustrates the awful danger of this 
pernicious principle of "evil speaking," slandering, 
back-biting and the subtle forms it may take and the 
great danger to be accomplished. 

Mrs. V took offense at Mr. W. (It matters not for 
this illustration whether there was ground for the 
offense or not.) Being very conscientious she felt that 
she could not tell the circumstance to her friends; and 
indeed probably another consideration weighed in this 
matter. She felt that to tell the truth would not serve 
her purposes, as many would doubtless consider that 
the wrong and blame belonged to herself. Under the 
Adversary's guidance, of which doubtless she was unconscious, 
she began to slander Mr. W in a pantomime 
way— by looking hurt, acting offended and disconsolate. 
As she foreknew, this led her friends to question 
her: What is your trouble? Indirectly and with apparent 
unwillingness she intimated that Mr. W was the 
source of her grief, but that it was too deep for her to 
mention and that she was too noble to speak evil even 
with a cause. Promptly her friends, X, Y and Z, took 

R4283 : page 351 

the bait, rallied to her support and, true to human 

nature, struggled to see which could be the chief busy-body. 

Incidentally we point out that they should have 

remembered the Scriptures cited at the head of this 

article and should have given Mrs. V the Scriptural advice, 

Go to Mr. W and deal with him along the lines of 

Matt. 18:15-17. They should not have picked, meddled, 

busy-bodied, and, in violating this divine rule, they 

suffered the consequences. These well-meaning busy-bodies, 

X, Y and Z, began the system of "investigation," 

declaring to their own hearts and each other that it was 

the love of God alone which was prompting them to 

help a poor Sister. We will not question the honesty 

of their claim, but content ourselves with pointing out 

that their love was not properly exercised along 



Scriptural lines. They began with Mrs. V— Did Mr. W 

do thus or so? Mrs. V's conscience would not allow 

her to say, "Yes," because their surmise had quite overshot 

the mark of any grievance she could have claimed. 

But she was in the humor to crave sympathy and to forward 

her designs of bringing contumely upon Mr. W, 

hence she merely sighed and looked sad and refused to 

answer Yes or No. The busy-bodies, X, Y and Z, held 

a consultation and concluded that the reason she did 

not answer their question was that her trouble was far 

worse than anything of which they had dreamed. 

Again they approached Mrs. V with sympathy and condolences, 

telling her that they knew now that it was 

worse than she had first suggested and that they had 

concluded that it must be something even worse than 

they could even imagine or suggest. 

Mrs. V was somewhat shocked that her method of 
slander by insinuation and silence had succeeded so far 
beyond her original intention. But she felt that she 
could not go back on the matter now and tell the sympathizers, 
X, Y and Z, the plain, simple truth, because 
then they would forever lose confidence in her and discern 
that by her methods she deceived them. Thus 
from step to step Mrs. V became involved and her conscience 
injured until finally she felt that her only course 
to preserve her standing with her friends, X, Y and Z, 
was to take the position that their worst insinuations 
respecting Mr. W were well founded. Her conscience 
squirmed for a time, but love of sympathy and of the 
esteem of others and the fear that the truth would cause 
the loss of these, bound her hand and foot to the falsehood 
which she had acted and slander which she had 
suggested by action, insinuation and silence. The result 
was that for a time all four of those ladies were in 
great danger of losing the Truth and going into outer 
darkness— yea, into the Second Death. 

I am glad that we do not have to record such an outcome, 
but the dangers were certainly sufficiently thrilling 
for all concerned. How promptly all of that evil 
condition could have been nipped in the bud. When 
Mrs. V was overtaken in the fault and began to slander 
Mr. W by intimation, her friends, X, Y and Z, should 
have remembered the Apostle's words; Ye that are 
spiritual restore such an one in a spirit of meekness, 
remembering yourselves also, lest ye should be tempted. 
(Gal. 6:1.) If Mrs. V had refused to be restored and 
continued her process of vilification by conduct, these 
friends, acting along the lines of the Golden Rule, 
should have gone to Mr. W and told him of the matter, 
Mrs. V's conduct, insinuations, etc. What a great help 
this proper Golden-Rule course would have been to Mrs. 
V, Mr. W and the three friends! How it would have 
saved them from the Adversary's snare, which for a 
time enwrapped them and caused them a spiritual 
blight. 



DON'T TELL OR YOU ARE A TELL-TALE 

Mark those persons who request you to keep secrets 
from those to whom they properly belong. We do not 
mean by this that there are no proper secrets in business, 
in the family, etc., but we do mean that if anyone 
has a tale to tell us derogatory to another, and first attempts 
to bind our reason and judgment with a vow of 
secrecy, it is time for us to be on guard against that 
person, and to tell him or her in no uncertain terms that 
we believe that such an attempt to bind our conscience 
or judgment in advance is belittling to us and ignoble 
to him. Let us tell such in kindly terms that their ways 
are ways of darkness, whether they are aware of the 
fact or not; and that we decline to be a companion in 
the dark ways which their language intimates, and that 
we advise them to come out of the dark into more honest 
methods and practices. Let us tell them this in such 
a manner as will wound them as little as possible, but 
in such a manner as will settle it for all time as between 
them and us and that we do not wish to have their dark 
secrets— we do not wish to be sharers in their slanders 
and back-biting and "evil speaking" and thieving of 
reputation. 

Fear of being called a tell-tale has been the Adversary's 
method for secreting wrongs these many years, 
and not infrequently it is used as a lash to hinder "overcomers" 
from doing their duty. They must overcome 
this, and must learn that it is a sin not to tell the truth 
to the right person for fear of offending a slanderer, 
equally as wrong as to tell a slander to the wrong 
person. 

This is a part of the overcoming, the victory which 
love and justice gain in our hearts. We must learn to 
pay no attention to the world's false standards and 
sneers of "tell-tale" and to pay every attention to the 
divine standard, the Golden Rule. It is the duty of 
every clerk or employee to make known to his employer 
any matter of consequence seriously affecting his interests, 
either financial or moral, as according to the 
Golden Rule he would wish that employer to do to him 
if their situation in life were reversed. It is the duty 
of every one hearing slander and defamation of a 
friend's reputation to give that friend the fullest information 
respecting the matter, just as much as under 
common law it would be his duty to report the matter 
if he were a witness to a theft of material goods. Fear 
of consequences must not hinder our faithfulness to 
this divine principle, this Golden Rule. 

Let us fix it in our minds as an inviolable element 
of the Golden Rule by which we are bound, that if evil 
speakings come to our knowledge without our being 
in any sense a party to them or able to prevent them we 
will always and promptly bring the matter to the attention 
of the brother or sister or person whose name or 
reputation is traduced and will tell that person all that 



has been heard and the name of our informant, and everything 

else that will enable him or her to pursue the 

traducer, according to the instructions in Matt. 18:15-17. 

Whoever fails to see this, the proper course of a 

Christian, fails to appreciate, we think, the Golden Rule, 

which is binding upon all the disciples of Christ. 



R4276 : page 351 

"The Father himself loveth you." 

"Have faith in God." 

"Keep yourselves in the love of God." 

"The Lord will judge [correct] his people." 

"All the wicked will he destroy." 

"Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth." 

"Faint not when reproved of him." 

"The Lord doth prove you whether you do love." 

"Love is the fulfilling of the Law." 

"He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God." 

"He shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty." 

"He that hateth his brother is in darkness." 

"Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer." 

"Anger, malice, hatred, strife, evil-speaking, are 

works of the flesh and of the devil." "Put off all these.' 
"Love is the principal thing." 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY 