Do You Remember?
Have you read recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points.
● What is ‘the spirit that returns to God’ when a person dies?
It is the active force of life, an impersonal force that activates both animal and human souls. It can be likened to electrical power that activates all kinds of electrical motors.—P. 6.
● How many copies of the Watchtower and Awake! magazines have been published and distributed in the past twenty years to carry to all people the good news of God’s kingdom?
More than 1,300,000,000 copies of The Watchtower in 74 languages, and more than 1,100,000,000 copies of Awake! in 26 languages. Laid end to end, they would circle the globe fourteen times.—Pp. 21, 22.
● How many hours did Jehovah’s witnesses devote to preaching the Kingdom message during their 1967 service year?
183,995,180 hours. That means that, on an average, each Witness devoted 168 hours to this service during the year.—P. 27.
● Why did God warn the Israelites to have nothing to do with the pagan inhabitants of the Promised Land?
To protect them against being ensnared in false worship. Though they might begin with apparently harmless social courtesies, these could lead to their eating things sacrificed to false gods.—P. 47.
● Why are Jehovah’s witnesses the target of bitter persecution in the African nation of Malawi?
It is because Jehovah’s witnesses refuse to violate their Christian neutrality and buy political membership cards in Malawi’s Congress Party. As Christians, they are “no part of the world.”—Pp. 72, 73.
● What are some common fallacies that parents should avoid in the training of their children?
The idea that their children are “little angels”; the Bible shows that all are born with a tendency to do what is bad. The belief that it is a kindness to give to their children all the things the parents did not have when they were young; it is wiser to give gifts in proportion to the child’s ability to appreciate them and use them properly.—Pp. 80, 81.
● Upon what false assumption is the claim made that Mary is the mother of God?
It is based on the wrong assumption that Jesus is God. The Bible teaches that Jesus is the Son of God, so Mary was the earthly mother of God’s Son.—P. 104.
● Whom does the Assyrian king Sennacherib picture today?
Satan the Devil.—P. 141.
● The destruction of sacred pillars of false worship in Hezekiah’s day fits what aspect of the work of Jehovah’s witnesses today?
It fits the polemic aspect of their work of exposing the war-mongering, nationalistic, idol-worshiping leaders of false religion as being rejected by Jehovah.—P. 151.
● Why do true Christians avoid Easter celebrations and customs?
Easter is rooted in paganism and ancient sex worship.—P. 168.
● What are two qualities that Christians must cultivate in order to avoid thinking more of themselves than necessary?
Submissiveness and humility.—P. 182.
● What is “the resurrection on the last day” of which Martha spoke at John 11:24, and when does it take place?
It is the general resurrection in which thousands of millions will be brought from their tombs to earthly life. It takes place after the battle of Armageddon.—P. 200.
● What can be done to prevent festive occasions from degrading into revelries?
Sensual dances and loud, noisy music should be avoided. A reasonable hour should be set for the festivities to end. Keep conversation upbuilding, in harmony with Bible principles.—Pp. 215, 216.
● Why is Melchizedek, the ancient king-priest of Salem, important to us today?
He is a prophetic figure of Jehovah’s heavenly King and great High Priest, Jesus Christ.—Pp. 235, 240.

