Kingdom News No. 17
Has Religion Betrayed God and Man?
To be faithful to God and to man—
● Religion should be a real force for peace on earth.
● It should truly aid people to live clean lives.
● It should set the example in being free from greed.
Most religions claim to do this. But have they proved true to their claim?
Instead, what if there has been betrayal? Then you owe it to yourself to learn the facts.
DO THE WORLD’S RELIGIONS SHARE BLAME FOR BLOODSHED?
The Bible says: “If anyone makes the statement: ‘I love God,’ and yet is hating his brother, he is a liar.—1 John 4:20.
Compare that scripture with this statement by noted Protestant clergyman Harry Emerson Fosdick: “With one corner of our mouth we have praised the Prince of Peace and with the other we have glorified war.”
Typical is what happened in World War I:
Roman Catholic Cardinal Amette of Paris told soldiers fighting in the French army: “The Almighty God is on our side. . . . God will give us the victory.”
On the opposite side, the Roman Catholic archbishop of Cologne told German soldiers: “God is with us in this fight . . . and he will give us the victory.”
(Quoted in the Belgian newspaper “La Dernière Heure.”)
In more recent times we see news headlines like those at the right.
Catholic Poll Finds Clergy Pro-Viet War
NEW YORK, POST, SEPT. 7, 1967
CHURCHES INVEST IN MILITARY FIRMS
DAILY TELEGRAPH (Australia), Jan. 7, 1972
Lutherans Promise Support, Even to War, Of U.S. Steps in Crisis
STAR, 1950
Wednesday, March 2, 1949
Baptist World Leader Warns U.S. to Keep Arms Strength
Rev. Johnson Says ‘Physical Force Is Only Thing Russia Understands’
SAN FRANCISCO NEWS, March 2, 1949
Nazi Army Praised
German Catholic Bishops Loyal
NEW YORK POST Aug. 27, 1940
Is the record of non-Christian religions better? No. They too have supported bloodspilling on a major scale. Their members often kill one another over political issues.
HAVE THE WORLD’S RELIGIONS UPHELD HIGH MORALS?
The Bible says: “Make no mistake: no fornicator . . . none who are guilty either of adultery or of homosexual perversion, no thieves . . . or swindlers, will possess the kingdom of God.”—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10, NE.
Are the world’s religions free from guilt? No; even among religious people those practices have increased at a shocking rate.
Ask yourself: ‘Suppose everyone lived like members of my religion? Would that eliminate crime, dishonest business practices and immorality?’
When, in fact, did you last hear of a religion removing members who insist on practicing such things? Instead, what is happening is shown in the news clippings at the left.
SEPTEMBER 25, 1964
Pre-marital sex can be O.K.
OTAWA, CANADAZ
Is Homosexuality Wicked? Episcopal Priests Say No
NEWS, NOV. 29 1967
Bishop wants sex made legal at 14
AUCKLAND STAR (New Zealand), July 11, 1972
Archbishop: Many of our clergy are homosexual
THE ADVERTISER (Australia), April 19, 1973
ARE THEY FREE FROM THE LOVE OF MONEY?
The Bible says: “Its priests teach for hire, its prophets divine for money; yet they lean upon the Lord and say, ‘Is not the Lord in the midst of us?’” But Jesus Christ told his disciples: “You received free, give free.”—Micah 3:11, RS; Matthew 10:8.
What do you see today? Think: ‘How often has a religious leader come to my home to discuss God and his purposes? On the other hand, how many times have they asked me for money, perhaps even refusing religious services unless money was paid?
The truth is that religious organizations are often among the greatest holders of wealth. Costly religious buildings tower over areas where their members live in stark poverty and hunger.
What Does All This Mean?
The facts show that the world’s religions have proved hypocritical, false to God, grossly misrepresenting him. They have also betrayed mankind’s interests. To what will this lead?
God Will Destroy All False Religion Soon
God has given the world’s religions a long time to prove what they are. Today we see their rotten fruitage all over the earth.
The Bible shows that God’s day for accounting is now at hand. For the honor of His own name; which has long been slandered, and for the eternal good of all persons who love righteousness, God must and will act. What will he do?
His inspired Word compares the world empire of false religion to a grossly immoral woman named “Babylon the Great.” She is “richly adorned,” living in “shameless luxury.” In her is found the ‘blood of all earth’s slaughtered.’ God sentences her to be “burned with fire,” completely destroyed. (See Revelation chapters 17 and 18.) This destruction will come from the very political powers that she has dominated for so long. What does this mean for you?
Time Now to Seek Safety
God’s warning call is: ‘Get out of Babylon the Great if you do not want to receive her plagues.’ (Revelation 18:1-4) We are now in the “last days” of this present world system. (2 Timothy 3:1-5) To escape the fate that awaits hypocritical false religion, you need to cut all ties with it. But that is not all. You must practice true worship. Where can it be found?
True Worship Honors God, Upholds His Word
In over 200 lands there is a society of persons who detest the hypocrisy and deception practiced by false religion. They courageously uphold God’s Word the Bible, practice it and work for the lasting good of their fellowman. In honor of God’s name, they are known as Jehovah’s witnesses. But are they really different from other religions?
True Worship Is Free
Jehovah’s witnesses believe Jesus’ words, “You received free, give free.” They freely give their time to aid others to learn the truth from God’s Word the Bible. You can receive such help at home through a personal Bible study, free of cost. You are welcome at their Kingdom Hall meetings; no collection plate is ever passed.
True Religion Changes People
Hundreds of thousands of persons world wide have been helped to bring their lives into harmony with God’s Word. Though from all races, nationalities and backgrounds, Jehovah’s witnesses are united. They no longer hate and kill; instead, they really love one another. They have learned how to put away immoral practices and to lead clean and happy lives. They have not betrayed either God or their fellowman; they would rather die than do that. They have a sure hope for the future: life in a clean, peaceful, parklike earth under God’s Kingdom government.
What Will You Do?
Do you sincerely want to know the truth about your Creator? Do you want life in peace and righteousness for yourself and those you love?
Only persons who practice true worship will survive the fast-approaching destruction of this wicked system with its religion that betrays God and man.
Avail yourself now of the opportunity to get the knowledge that leads to survival and gain life in God’s righteous new order.
Contact Jehovah’s witnesses in your area. And, to obtain the helpful book here illustrated, “True Peace and Security—From What Source?”, mail this coupon.
[ ] Please send me, postpaid, the 192-page book “True Peace and Security—From What Source?” Hard bound; easy-to-read type. I am enclosing 25 cents.
[ ] Please arrange for a qualified person to visit me, free of charge, to aid me to get better acquainted with the Bible.
[Picture on page 4]
True Peace and Security—From What Source?

