
A World Without War​—You Can See It




 1-4. (a) Why is this an urgent time of decision? (b) What is required if one is to make a proper decision?
THE inspiring prophecy of Isaiah chapter 2 is indeed finding its fulfillment in our days. A world without war is near at hand. Already millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses around the earth have beaten “their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks.” Though they come from every nation and background, they have learned to overcome any former prejudice and hatred, and they have learned the ways of the God of true peace, Jehovah. (Isaiah 2:4) Because of this peace-​loving stand, they shared the experience of the concentration camps with the Jews (1933-45).
2 As bright as the prospects are for the future, they are not bright for all. Jehovah will not wait endlessly for all men to beat their swords into plowshares. There are those who are unwilling to do so. The psalmist leaves no doubt as to the fate of such ones: “For evil men will be cut off, but those who look to the LORD​—they shall inherit the land. A little longer and there will be no wicked man; you will look at where he was​—he will be gone.” (Psalm 37:9, 10) Yes, in the very near future, Jehovah will act, ‘putting a stop to wars throughout the earth.’​—Psalm 46:9-11 (46:8-10, NW).
3 The same prophecy of Jesus that gave the sign of the last days also highlighted the nearness of God’s intervention. Jesus said: “This generation will by no means pass away until all these things occur.” (Matthew 24:34; Luke 21:24, NW) That indicates that now is the time of decision for all mankind! Now, in these last days, or “end of days,” (JP) we must choose whether we will ‘go up to the mountain of Jehovah’ to be ‘instructed in His ways’ or not. But as we have seen from this discussion, much is involved in coming to know the true God, ‘in being instructed in His ways, in walking in His paths.’ (Isaiah 2:2, 3, NW, Ta) Doing so is not simply a matter of reading a brochure or taking a short study course. It involves much deeper instruction that affects one’s whole way of life. Would you like to know more about the God of peace?
4 Jehovah’s Witnesses stand ready to help you to make such a serious investigation. We encourage you to continue examining this subject in all earnestness, that you too may be among those ‘going up to the mountain of Jehovah, being instructed in His ways.’ For further help, contact Jehovah’s Witnesses at a Kingdom Hall or a branch office near you. The satisfying result is well expressed by the prophet Micah: “And they will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble.” May you too come to be among those who “walk in the name of Jehovah . . . forever” in a world without war!​—Micah 4:4, 5, NW.




