Have You Ever Wondered—
Do We Really Need Religion?
“Religion? Who needs it?” A lot of people seem to be saying this nowadays. In France, only 15 percent of the population regularly attend church. In the Federal Republic of Germany, over a six-year period, nearly one and a half million people asked to be taken off the official church lists. Similar trends are reported in other lands.
Many church members attend christenings, marriages and funerals, but very little else. The limited influence of religion was shown by a recent Gallup poll in America. This revealed that three out of four of the population do not consciously connect religion with their judgments of right and wrong.
Do you feel that religion is just out-of-date in this scientific, free-living 20th century? Many do. Others say it is positively harmful, pointing to the active involvement of some religions in revolutionary movements, and the way religious differences contribute to instability in places like Northern Ireland and the Middle East.
Yes, “Do we really need religion?” is a valid question. However, before answering it, some background information will be helpful.
WHY HAS RELIGION LASTED SO LONG?
In all honesty, it must be admitted that throughout history many religions have greatly added to the burdens of the people. Yet, for the most part, these people have tenaciously clung to their systems of worship. The “World Book Encyclopedia” states: “There has never been a people that did not have some form of religion.” Why? Because man has an instinctive need to worship.
What about the modern trend away from religion? Well, although religion has come under an unprecedented propaganda barrage, belief in God survives. Even in Russia, where for many years atheism has been State policy, belief in God is far from dead.
True, many have turned their backs on religion. But have these people really overcome their instinctive need for religion? Often, no. Is it not true that even unbelievers, in moments of great crisis, will try to pray to God? Historians have also noticed that people who reject traditional religions often turn to substitutes. For example, many show the same faith in science or nationalism that earlier generations showed in God. Even the treatment given to certain “pop idols” and sports heroes looks suspiciously like religious adoration.
Hence, history shows that we have a built-in need to worship. But is this the whole story?
WHAT IS THE REAL REASON WHY WE NEED RELIGION?
The real reason we need religion is this: God exists, he made us with the need to worship and he truly wants us to worship him.​—Ps. 100:2, 3.
Some find the very idea of God’s existence old-fashioned. Yet many of today’s most educated people believe in him. Dr. Wernher von Braun, described as “the greatest rocket expert in the world,” said: “It is as difficult for me to understand a scientist who does not acknowledge the presence of a superior rationality behind the existence of the universe, as it is to comprehend a theologian who would deny the advances of science.”
God exists. Our very instinct for worship proves this. Evidence can also be seen in our well-designed earth. And he has revealed himself to us by means of the Bible. If you have difficulty accepting these facts, we encourage you to examine the evidence carefully. The publishers of this magazine will be happy to help you to do so.
WHAT ABOUT THE HARM RELIGION HAS DONE?
It cannot be denied that some religions have caused great harm. In Jesus’ day, the scribes and Pharisees were very religious. They were also oppressive and hypocritical and did much damage in the name of religion. But Jesus Christ was different. He taught the truth.
Similarly, the apostle Peter showed that in later years, so-called Christian sects would appear and oppress people. “On account of these the way of the truth will be spoken of abusively.” (2 Pet. 2:1, 2) Nevertheless, “the way of the truth” would still exist. As in Jesus’ day, anyone today who is willing to examine the facts in the light of the Bible can find where the true religion is.
WHAT CAN THIS MEAN FOR YOU?
Those who share in pure worship of God enjoy real benefits. In the midst of life’s perplexities, they will benefit from the Book that God has provided to guide mankind. “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.” (2 Tim. 3:16) If sincerely applied, Bible principles can bring genuine satisfaction. These can help to produce a happier homelife and even aid you in getting along better with others. In this darkening world, the Bible is ‘a lamp to their foot, and a light to their roadway.’ (Ps. 119:105) Also, they can take their problems to God in prayer, with confidence that he will hear and will help them.​—1 John 5:14.
Furthermore, new horizons open up for the future. They learn that the present chaotic world “is passing away . . . but he that does the will of God remains forever.” (1 John 2:17) Soon, God has promised, there will be something completely new: “There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.”​—2 Pet. 3:13.
Too idealistic? Not if we accept the facts. Really, we owe it to ourselves to examine the evidence to see how we can share in such blessings. Yes, we do need true religion.

