Why the Upsurge in Occultism?
SCIENTIFIC thinking in this 20th century has disabused the minds of people of many superstitions, and for this they are grateful. There still are, however, many facts that seem to defy any adequate scientific explanation. This is true of the occult, involving practices “hidden” from the understanding of people in general.
Consider Uri Geller, the Israeli mystic. When he appeared on German television, some very strange things took place. As a result, Geller invited all who wished to participate in his experiments to select a broken watch or clock, spoon or fork. Then, on a predetermined date, at a precise time, they were to close their eyes and concentrate on him.
The following day, the newspaper Bild Zeitung headlined sensational happenings. Old clocks had started to tick again, spoons and forks had become twisted and bent, light bulbs had exploded.
What forces were at work? Is it possible for us to identify them? Seeking answers to these intriguing questions, persons who study mysticism, witchcraft and other paranormal activities are rapidly increasing in numbers.
Filling a Need
It is not surprising to find young people in the forefront of mystic exploration. Young minds are naturally imaginative. There is, however, a deeper reason for their involvement, identified by one of the principal witches in the British Isles, Lois Bourne. In her book Witch Amongst Us she states: “Due to the decline in organised religion, and the fact that science cannot always explain observed phenomena there has been a recent resurgence of interest in the occult and associated world, with people seeking different answers to the same questions. Young people are turning towards paganism in an effort to satisfy their longing for answers to the mystery of life, and it is possible that some of them are being drawn into the vacuum of the seedy fringes of the occult world with all its inherent dangers.”
Yes, science and the churches too have failed to offer satisfying explanations for supernatural phenomena. And they have left many feeling empty in their quest for the meaning of life. Yet questions demand answers. For an increasing number of young people today one apparent way of getting the answers is to explore the occult. As they do so, the “inherent dangers” are either deliberately played down or ignored.
Death and the Supernatural
Following the death of a loved one is a particular time of stress. Lacking accurate knowledge, grief-stricken relatives often explore every avenue to make personal contact once again. Séances with mediums are the most common means employed.
Many prominent statesmen have been caught up in this sphere of occultism. Mackenzie King, wartime prime minister of Canada, is well known for his occult pursuits. He claimed to receive guidance, not only from his deceased mother, but also from prominent dead people, including President F. D. Roosevelt of the United States. British premier Arthur Balfour (famous for the “Balfour Declaration” on Palestine in 1917) also conducted such spiritistic experiments for the greater part of his life, following the tragic death of his fiancée.
For an increasing number of people today, interest in the occult is viewed as a harmless pastime, a fascinating one. But it can lead to serious problems that are often unsuspected by those who are lured by the occult.

