Relief Provisions Reflect Christian Love
“HAVE love for the whole association of brothers,” the apostle Peter urged his fellow Christians. (1 Peter 2:17) Such love was to reach across racial, social, and national boundaries, drawing people together in genuine brotherhood. When material need arose among the early Christians, love motivated many to give contributions to the apostles for distribution to those in need. The record says that “they had all things in common.”​—Acts 2:41-45; 4:32.
Such love was manifest when the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, at the end of 1991, invited several branches of the Watch Tower Society in Western Europe to provide food and clothing for their needy brothers in Eastern Europe, including parts of the former Soviet Union. We here present a series of reports from some of the branches involved.
Sweden
On December 5, 1991, a letter explaining the need was mailed to all 348 congregations in Sweden. The response was immediate. Within a few days, the first semitrailer was on its way to St. Petersburg, Russia, loaded with 15 tons of flour, cooking fat, tinned beef, dried milk, and the like. Local Jehovah’s Witnesses unloaded the truck and quickly distributed the 750 packages to those in need. Later, two more semitrailers carried food to Russia. In all, more than 51.5 tons were shipped from Sweden.
The willingness to donate clothes and shoes surpassed all expectations. Stacks of packages of clothing accumulated rapidly in the Kingdom Halls. Many Christians donated clothes from their closets. Others bought new items. One brother bought five suits. When the surprised storekeeper learned of the purpose, he donated five more suits. Another brother bought a box of socks, gloves, and scarves. When he explained the purpose, the owner offered him 30 new suits for the price of two. A sports shopkeeper donated 100 pairs of new shoes and boots.
All this material was then brought to the branch for sorting, repacking, and loading. Clothing​—equivalent to what 40 semitrailers would hold—​filled large areas at the branch! Brothers and sisters worked for weeks sorting it into stacks for men, women, and children and packing it in cartons. Fifteen different semitrailers were used to carry the clothing safely to Russia, Ukraine, and Estonia.
A brother who drove one of the Society’s trucks eight times to the former Soviet Union said: “The reception our brothers gave us at the destinations was a great reward. They hugged and kissed us, and despite their scanty means, they gave us a fine lesson in Christian generosity.”
Finland
Despite Finland’s severe recession, widespread unemployment, and economic problems, the willingness among the approximately 18,000 Finnish brothers to help their brothers in the former Soviet Union has been great. They sent over 58 tons of food in 4,850 cartons to St. Petersburg, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Kaliningrad. They also filled up empty space in trucks with 420 cubic feet [12 cu m] of clothing. Some 25 used cars and vans were also donated for use in the Kingdom work.
Some of the food boxes reached a congregation of 14 publishers in Slanti in the St. Petersburg area. They expressed great appreciation in a letter. “We have ten older sisters in our congregation. Many of us are seriously ill and cannot stand in lines for hours to get food. Our heavenly Father, however, gives us no reason to be discouraged in these difficult times but fills our hearts with joy. We conduct 43 home Bible studies.” When a sister in St. Petersburg got her relief parcel, she was so moved that she cried for two hours before opening it.
Denmark
In this small country at the gateway of the Baltic Sea, some 16,000 Witnesses of Jehovah got together and sent to Ukraine 19 trucks containing 64 tons of food in 4,200 boxes; 4,600 boxes of high quality clothes; and 2,269 pairs of new shoes. A brother in Germany let the branch use five trucks, which he then donated to the brothers in Ukraine. On returning home, one of the drivers said: “We discovered that we brought more back than we had taken. The love and the spirit of sacrifice shown by our Ukrainian brothers greatly strengthened our faith.”
The drivers had to watch out for robbers along the roads in the former Soviet Union. A few days before one of the Danish trucks passed through, a robbery had taken place on that route. A convoy of five trucks with food from another relief organization had been stopped by robbers using helicopters and submachine guns. They took all five trucks, leaving the drivers at the roadside. Despite such danger, all supplies from the Danish branch reached the brothers safely. In return, they had a driver take home the following note, written with great difficulty in English: “Dear Danish brothers and sisters: We have received your aid. Jehovah will reward you.”
The Netherlands
The Netherlands branch sent 52 tons of food in 2,600 parcels. They were delivered to Ukraine in two different convoys. Each time the six trucks were left behind, as they were donated by brothers in Germany for the Kingdom work in the East. Ukrainian brothers forwarded most of the food to Moscow, Siberia, and other places where there was great need. Moreover, 26,000 cubic feet [736 cu m] of clothes and shoes were donated by the Dutch brothers. They were brought to Lviv in Ukraine on 11 trucks in a convoy escorted by a private car.
After a long ride through Germany and Poland, the convoy passed smoothly through Ukraine customs, and reached the outskirts of Lviv at 3:00 a.m. The drivers report: “In a short time, a force of 140 brothers was on hand to unload the trucks. Before starting the work, these humble brothers showed their reliance on Jehovah, offering a united prayer. When the task was finished, they again assembled for a prayer of thanks to Jehovah. After enjoying the hospitality of the local brothers, who gave abundantly of the little they had, we were escorted to the main road, where they offered a prayer at the roadside before taking leave of us.
“During the long ride home, there was much to think back on​—the hospitality of the brothers in Germany and Poland, and that of our brothers in Lviv; their strong faith and prayerful attitude; their hospitality in providing accommodations and food while being in needy circumstances themselves; their display of unity and closeness; and their gratitude. We also thought of our brothers and sisters back home, who had given so generously.”
Switzerland
The Swiss branch opens its report by quoting from James 2:15, 16: “If a brother or a sister is in a naked state and lacking the food sufficient for the day, yet a certain one of you says to them: ‘Go in peace, keep warm and well fed,’ but you do not give them the necessities for their body, of what benefit is it?” Then the report goes on: “This Scripture came to mind when the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses invited us to provide material help to our needy brothers.
“At once everyone got busy! In just two days, 12 tons of food in 600 parcels were sent to Ukraine with three trucks from Germany, which were to be donated to the work there. The news that all had arrived safely caused great joy among our brothers here. Meanwhile, the congregations collected clothing, and soon our branch was inundated with cartons, suitcases, and bags! Those containing children’s wear included some toys from Swiss children for unknown friends in the far North. Quite a few chocolate bars found their way between layers of clothing too.”
How was all of this to be delivered? The report says: “The branch in France came to our aid by putting two semitrailers and four drivers at our disposal. In addition, one truck from our branch and four more belonging to local brothers were needed for hauling the 72 tons to Ukraine.” The convoy, 500 feet [150 m] long, safely reached the depot in Lviv, where about a hundred local brothers waited to unload the trucks. The drivers reported that the language barrier was no obstacle because their faces reflected deep appreciation.
Austria
The Austrian brothers sent 48.5 tons of food, 5,114 cartons of clothes, and 6,700 pairs of shoes to Lviv and Uzhgorod in Ukraine. They also sent 7 tons of food, 1,418 boxes of clothes, and 465 pairs of shoes to Belgrade, Mostar, Osijek, Sarajevo, and Zagreb in former Yugoslavia. The branch report says: “We had 12 loaded semitrailers, traveling 21,000 miles [34,000 km]. Most of this transporting was done by a brother and his son who have a trucking business.”
Regarding donated clothing, the report continues: “We used an Assembly Hall as the central depot. Truckload upon truckload kept pouring in, until there was no more room. As in the days of Moses, the people had to be restrained from bringing any more. (Exodus 36:6) Even some persons who are not Witnesses of Jehovah donated money, ‘because,’ they said, ‘this way we know that the persons in need will get it.’ We also got much needed empty cartons from worldly firms without cost.” The brothers and sisters who sorted and packed everything were from 9 to 80 years of age. They even tried to match the proper tie and shirt to each suit.
The report states: “The authorities in Austria and on the borders have been very helpful in making the various relief transports possible and in issuing the necessary papers so that all the deliveries could be made with less difficulty.”
Italy
From Rome as much as 188 tons of food were sent in two big truck convoys across Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Poland to the former Soviet Union. Each convoy team included six drivers, a mechanic, an auto electrician, an interpreter, a forwarding agent, a cook, a doctor, a convoy leader in a jeep, and a brother with a camper.
The food was acquired from seven suppliers. The branch reports: “When our suppliers heard the reason for the initiative, some of them wished to participate. Several hundred pounds [kg] of pasta and rice, as well as the packing boxes, were donated by worldly suppliers. Still others donated snow tires for the trucks or offered to contribute money.
“The brothers in Italy appreciated this opportunity to help. Children wanted to contribute too. A five-year-old boy sent a small contribution that he hoped would buy ‘a tin of tuna as high as the sky for the brothers in Russia.’ For her good grades in school, a little girl received money from her grandparents to buy a present for her parents. ‘But,’ she wrote, ‘when I realized that many of my brothers do not have all the good things to eat that I have, I thought that the best present that I could buy my parents was to help those brothers.’ She put a considerable sum of money in the contribution box. ‘I hope to continue getting good grades, so that I will be able to send more money,’ she said.” The branch report concludes by saying that the letters of warm appreciation from the brothers in Ukraine, the many words of appreciation of the Italian brothers, and the fine experiences in preparing and delivering the supplies were moving, encouraging, and unifying.
Food for Thousands of Delegates
The first international convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the former Soviet Union was held at the Kirov Stadium in St. Petersburg in Russia, June 26-28, 1992. This milestone convention, with the theme “Light Bearers,” was attended by over 46,200 delegates from 28 countries. It offered another opportunity to display Christian love “for the whole association of brothers.”​—1 Peter 2:17.
Tons of food from Denmark, Finland, Sweden, and other lands in Western Europe were handed out free to thousands of convention delegates from the former U.S.S.R., to be consumed during the convention. As they left the convention after the final session, they were also given a food parcel with provisions for their journey home.
The reports mentioned here show that the giving has not been going one way​—eastward—​only. There has been an interchange of giving. Food and clothing eastward, yes, but westward innumerable heartwarming expressions of love and faith-inspiring experiences reflecting the perseverance and faithfulness of thousands of Jehovah’s worshipers during decades of pressure and hardship. Thus, both sides have experienced the truth of Jesus’ words: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”​—Acts 20:35.
[Diagram/​Picture on page 21]
1. From Finland: St. Petersburg, Russia; Tallinn and Tartu, Estonia; Riga, Latvia; Vilnius and Kaunas, Lithuania; Kaliningrad, Russia; Petrozavodsk, Karelia
2. From the Netherlands: Lviv, Ukraine
3. From Sweden: St. Petersburg, Russia; Lviv, Ukraine; Nevinnomyssk, Russia
4. From Denmark: St. Petersburg, Russia; Lviv, Ukraine
5. From Austria: Lviv, Ukraine; Belgrade, Mostar, Osijek, Sarajevo, Zagreb (in former Yugoslavia)
6. From Switzerland: Lviv, Ukraine
7. From Italy: Lviv, Ukraine
[Pictures on page 23]
Cartons of clothes in Sweden branch
Loading relief provisions
Food items in one parcel
Bacon and ham from Denmark
Convoy of 11 trucks and 1 car
Parcels and suitcases at Austria branch
Unloading truck at Lviv, Ukraine

