“Good Morning! Do You Know What God’s Name Is?”
AT THE branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Brazil, the following letter was received from 12-year-old twin sisters in the city of Fortaleza:
“Back in 1990 when we were in fifth grade, our school organized a science, art, and cultural fair. We explained to the teacher that we wanted our presentation to be different from what the other students were planning to prepare. Since she had heard us talk about Jehovah and the Bible before, she suggested: ‘Then you can write about your God!’
“We saw this as an opportunity to give a witness and decided to put together an exhibit with Bible literature that focused on Jehovah’s name. We prepared an enlarged reproduction of the words of Psalm 83:18 and glued it to a picture of an open Bible. Also, we placed on a table different Bible translations containing the name Jehovah. On the same table, we displayed an assortment of Bible literature. At the end of the table, we set up a VCR and TV set to show visitors one example where the name Jehovah was used in a very popular movie.
“During the fair, when a person came to our table, we would say: ‘Good morning! Do you know what God’s name is?’ After giving the visitor an opportunity to respond, we continued: ‘Look here! Several Bible translations show that his name is Jehovah,’ pointing out the name in different Bibles, such as that of João Ferreira de Almeida, The Jerusalem Bible, and the New World Translation. Then we played the scene where the movie’s main character highlights Jehovah as the name of God. When people showed interest, we gave them a magazine or a tract with more information.
“One of the youths who came to our table asked for the book Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work. Our teacher examined the book Making Your Family Life Happy and exclaimed: ‘My! What an interesting book!’ By the end of the fair, we had placed 7 books, 18 tracts, and 67 magazines. We were awarded third place at the fair. But above all, we were very happy for the privilege of making known the divine name, Jehovah.”

