Cooperation With the School System
Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that a good education is one of the most important legacies that can be given to children. But who primarily is responsible for a child’s education? Is it only the teachers in school?
Some people apparently think so. However, children are born to parents and are part of families. They are not products of the State or of any institutions of government. Hence, parents have the God-given responsibility to decide what their young will be taught.
Yet, at the same time, schoolteachers provide a very much appreciated, valuable service. And we realize that in these days of deteriorating discipline, their job is not an easy one. What can parents do to cooperate with them?
Cooperation of Parents
To begin with, it is important that parents become acquainted with their children’s teachers​—making arrangements to meet and talk with them. The meeting should certainly not be for the purpose of confrontation, but rather to see how both parents and teachers can cooperate to help in the child’s development. Parents are happy to listen when the teacher talks as well as to communicate clearly what they want for their children.
In such a meeting the Witness father or mother should let the teacher know that the parents expect proper Christian conduct from their children, and that if the children misbehave, they want to be informed. The parents also should give assurance that they will support the teacher in whatever reasonable discipline is administered, even reinforcing it at home.
Other ways that parents can help: Make sure children get a good breakfast before they leave for school. See that their homework is complete and that they have all their books with them. Always show respect for school regulations and expect the children to respect these as well. Get the children to talk at home about school activities and any problems they may encounter there.
In its publication Helping Children Make Career Plans: Tips for Parents, the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare tells parents how they might motivate their young ones to study: “Help your child understand how very important her or his school work will be in later job decisions. Show them how such subjects as reading, arithmetic, and communications are used in almost all occupations. In short, help them understand that there are more important reasons for going to school than simply going to school.”
We sincerely hope that the information in this brochure will contribute toward pleasant cooperation between school authorities and families of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Blurb on page 30]
Parents have the primary responsibility for teaching their young
[Picture on page 31]
Witness parents are encouraged to get acquainted with their children’s teachers

