Our View of the Future
A Bible prophecy that profoundly affects our outlook on life is that found at Revelation 21:3 and 4. It reads: “God himself will be with [mankind]. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”
Repeatedly the Bible describes a better world of God’s creation. “There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to [God’s] promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.”​—2 Peter 3:13; Psalm 37:9-11, 29; Isaiah 11:6-9; 35:5, 6.
Jehovah’s Witnesses believe the fulfillment of this promise to be the only solution to mankind’s problems, as Jesus indicated when he taught his disciples to pray: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matthew 6:10) In our belief, God’s Kingdom is a real government. (Isaiah 9:6, 7) It is the only government that can eliminate from the earth all the conditions that produce human distress and bring lasting peace.
What the coming of God’s Kingdom will mean for all present-day governments is stated in another Bible prophecy: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself . . . will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”​—Daniel 2:44.
Since we are convinced that this change is quite near, our young people believe it is realistic to prepare for a lifelong career that is in harmony with our belief in the reality of God’s Kingdom. Our principal aim is to tell people about the bright future ahead. We really do look forward to the passing of present sorrows and troubles and to surviving to enjoy the blessings God has in store for those who serve Him. God’s sure promise is: “The world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.”​—1 John 2:17.
Separate From the World
As one might expect, this view of the future also had a significant effect on the first Christians. It caused them to be a distinctive people, separate from the world. As historian E. G. Hardy noted in his book Christianity and the Roman Government: “The Christians were strangers and pilgrims in the world around them; their citizenship was in heaven; the kingdom to which they looked was not of this world. The consequent want of interest in public affairs came thus from the outset to be a noticeable feature in Christianity.”
Jesus made it clear that their separateness would be an outstanding characteristic of his disciples. “They are no part of the world,” he said. (John 17:16; 15:19) In keeping with this principle, Jehovah’s Witnesses try to be “no part of the world.” That does not mean, of course, that we advocate becoming hermits, shutting ourselves off from the world. We are sincerely interested in the welfare of others in the community and in the schools. Our young ones want to contribute to class activities in a helpful way.
At the same time, however, we believe the Bible makes it clear that “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.” (1 John 5:19; John 12:31; 2 Corinthians 4:4) As a result, we are concerned about the adverse effect that the world’s influence can have on our children. Often the world glamorizes life-styles that we believe to be unwholesome. And the schools are affected. So, to the extent possible, Jehovah’s Witnesses want their children to avoid such harmful influences.
[Blurb on page 6]
“The world is passing away . . . but he that does the will of God remains forever.”​—1 John 2:17
[Picture on page 7]
Witness children want to contribute what they can to class activities

