The Moral Principles We Follow
Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that the dramatic change in views on morality has had a bad influence on young people. As you are aware, a so-called new morality has taken hold since the 1960’s. England’s Bishop of Woolwich, one of its early proponents, claimed: “Nothing can of itself always be labelled as ‘wrong.’” We do not agree with that, but we want to make it clear that we do not choose to argue with those who do. We simply want to explain what moral principles we follow and why we do so.
Joseph Fletcher, a prominent professor of theology in the United States, said of the new morality: “There is nothing against extra-marital sex as such, in this ethic, and in some cases it is good.” And Frederic C. Wood, an assistant professor of religion in the United States, explained to students: “There are no laws attached to sex. I repeat: absolutely no laws. There is nothing which you ought to do, or ought not to do.”​—Theology Today, October 1965, page 396.
Though such views on morality may be popular, Jehovah’s Witnesses consider them contrary to the Bible and hence improper. Our Bible-based position is reflected in our 1976 book Your Youth​—Getting the Best out of It, which considers how moral principles affect conduct. Interestingly, after having it reviewed by 100 students 12 to 19 years of age, a researcher wrote in criticism: “Moral standards like the ones expressed in your book might have worked at one time, but I doubt they would work now. This generation is more enlightened than any before.”
However, it does not seem to us that adopting the new moral standards has made young people “more enlightened.” In a recent study of more than 160,000 young people 13 to 15 years of age, 41 percent of the boys and 21 percent of the girls had engaged in sexual intercourse. And of those 16 to 18 years of age, nearly three quarters of the boys and half the girls had done so. But what have been the consequences?
An epidemic of adolescent pregnancies. About one in ten teenage girls in the United States gets pregnant each year​—some 1,250,000 annually. Of these, close to 600,000 have their babies​—the rest have abortions. Also, millions of young people each year contract a venereal disease, including the feared herpes. Consequently, we believe there is good reason not to view these social conditions as the product of ‘enlightenment.’
Sound Moral Principles
There is much confusion regarding what moral principles to teach young people. Teachers frequently lament the lack of clear conviction about this. We realize that some teachers wish that they had more freedom to teach their students the sound moral principles found in the Bible. As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we sincerely believe that the Bible’s teaching regarding morality has a truly wholesome effect.
Witness parents begin early to teach the Bible’s moral principles to their young ones, often using as a teaching aid Your Youth​—Getting the Best out of It. If you wish, one of your Witness students will be happy to provide you with a copy. It will acquaint you with the moral principles we follow, giving more details regarding our views on the following matters.
Premarital Sex: We believe that, without exception, premarital sexual intercourse, which is fornication, is wrong; it is immoral. The Bible commands: “Flee from fornication.” (1 Corinthians 6:18) “Abstain from fornication.” (1 Thessalonians 4:3) It is our view that premarital sex is a serious offense against God. “God will judge fornicators and adulterers,” the Scriptures say.​—Hebrews 13:4; Revelation 21:8.
Homosexuality: We also believe that homosexuality is morally wrong. Note what the Bible says about both women and men homosexuals: “God gave them up to disgraceful sexual appetites, for both their females changed the natural use of themselves into one contrary to nature; and likewise even the males left the natural use of the female and became violently inflamed in their lust toward one another, males with males, working what is obscene.”​—Romans 1:26, 27; 1 Corinthians 6:9-11.
Alcoholic Beverages: Alcoholic beverages are foods and, in their place, can be beneficial. (Psalm 104:14, 15; 1 Timothy 5:23) Yet they can be, and often are, abused. We believe, as the Bible emphasizes, that overindulgence in them is a serious moral wrong. (Proverbs 20:1; 23:29-35; 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10) We also respect the wisdom of authorities that make laws to restrict the use of alcoholic beverages by young persons, and we cooperate with these laws.
Drugs: We do not use addictive and habit-forming drugs for pleasure, such as marijuana, heroin, cocaine, LSD, betel nut and tobacco, to name just a few. Jehovah’s Witnesses believe it is wrong, for mere selfish gratification, to damage their body with substances that cause addiction or alter the mind, since the Bible urges: “Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh.”​—2 Corinthians 7:1.
Obscene Language: We consider the use of obscenities improper; they are not in keeping with the Bible command: “Let fornication and uncleanness of every sort or greediness not even be mentioned among you, . . . nor foolish talking nor obscene jesting, things which are not becoming.”​—Ephesians 5:3, 4.
Respect for Authority: In keeping with Bible principles, we expect our young people to be respectful of all duly constituted authority, including schoolteachers. (Romans 13:1-7; 1 Peter 2:13-17) Jehovah God, for whom our young ones are taught deep reverence, says that we should be honest and truthful and should care for others.​—Hebrews 13:18; Colossians 3:9; Ephesians 4:25; Matthew 7:12.
Value of Bible Principles
We have found that following the Bible’s moral principles has greatly improved the lives of our people. Though we have our share of problems and our children are certainly not perfect, yet for the most part we have been freed from such vices as stealing, lying, cheating and the hurting of others. To the extent that we and our children obey God’s laws, to that extent we are not troubled by the epidemics of venereal disease, unwed mothers, illegitimate children and abortions, nor by heartbreak and plagued consciences. We believe that the early American president John Adams was right when he called the Bible “the best book in the world.” We also believe President Abraham Lincoln was correct in saying that by accepting the Bible “you will live and die a happier and better man.”
Yet, as you are aware, there is a lot of peer pressure on children to do what the Bible counsels against, namely, ‘to run in a course to a low sink of debauchery.’ And when some do not, others “are puzzled and go on speaking abusively of [them].” (1 Peter 4:4) Our young ones are at times ridiculed and even laughed at because they do not engage in such activity as premarital sex or the like. So we appreciate it when teachers support our children’s efforts to adhere to Bible principles, thus giving encouragement to our young ones who are trying to live by these principles.
You will find that our young people do not feel deprived because of the Bible’s moral restrictions. On the contrary, one Witness youth, in comparing his life with that of his schoolmates, said: “The only thing I’ve missed out on is a lot of trouble.” As we view it, the requirements of Almighty God are for our protection, and we only benefit by heeding them.​—Psalm 19:7-11.
[Blurb on page 11]
‘By accepting the Bible you will live and die a better man.’​—Abraham Lincoln
[Picture on page 8]
A book that considers how moral principles affect conduct. Witness parents use it to instruct their children
[Picture on page 9]
Along with the new morality came an increase of social problems
[Picture on page 9]
Witness parents begin early to teach the Bible’s moral principles to their young

