From Our Readers
Awake! Improved  I recently found a copy of the April 8, 1994, Awake! in my screen door. Wow! What has happened? You have created an up-​to-​date, informative “90’s” publication. I find the transition staggering, and for the first time, I actually read the articles. (I would normally think, ‘Oh, they were here again,’ and toss it.) There was something there for everyone. I particularly enjoyed the articles on cancer and on “Canada’s Magnificent ‘Moving Roadway.’” You are on the right track. Keep up the good work, and I promise I won’t throw out any more copies until I read them.
D. G., United States
Geographic Mix-​Up  In your October 22, 1994, articles about missionaries, entitled “Moving West Into Europe,” you state that Boniface “dared to fell the sacred oak of Thor” at Geismar, near Göttingen, Germany. As far as I know, the Geismar in question is not near Göttingen but near Fritzlar.
A. L., Germany
You are quite correct. It turns out that there are two places called Geismar, and we got them confused. Thanks for pointing out the error.​—ED.
Religion and War  Your October 22, 1994, series “When Religion Takes Sides in War” discussed what you perceive as a failure on the part of Catholic leaders to condemn war outright. But history reveals otherwise. At the outset of Hitler’s persecution of German Jews, Cardinal Faulhaber of Munich preached sermons in which he defended the Jews. Other heroic clerics condemned outright the Nazi laws which forbade intermarriage between “Aryans” and Jews. After the outbreak of World War II in Europe, Hitler closed Catholic schools, suppressed the Catholic press, and, in Poland, closed all convents, monasteries, and seminaries.
J. L., United States
The articles were based on fair and reputable sources. For example, the book “German Catholics and Hitler’s Wars” was written by Gordon C. Zahn, who is a Catholic professor. Frankly, the evidence is overwhelming that, at least in the early stages, the Catholic hierarchy gave overall support to the Nazi party. This does not mean that there were not some individual Catholic clerics who stood up against the Nazis. But these were clearly exceptions.​—ED.
Breast-​Feeding  Your article “Breast-​Feeding Basics” (August 22, 1994) went beyond your previous articles on the subject. Most times, fathers leave it up to their wives to succeed or not. But your article actually told fathers and other family members what they could do to help make breast-​feeding a success.
D. D., United States
I had the wonderful experience of breast-​feeding each of my two children. There were initial problems, such as soreness, but with encouragement from my sister and advice from my doctor, I overcame the difficulty. I would encourage every mother who can to breast-​feed her baby, as the deep bonding between mother and child is a fascinating experience one never forgets.
U. B., Germany
Mystery Ailment  Having been a reader of your magazines since age five, I really appreciated the article “Guam’s Mystery Diseases.” (August 8, 1994) My mother, who was a faithful servant of God up to her death in 1972, was a victim of this disease. I want to thank you for the information and the thorough explanation you gave. I have shared this issue with my family and friends to show the value of your magazine.
W. A., United States

