Safely Exploring the World Beneath the Waves
By Awake! correspondent in Australia
THERE is a fascinating world that comparatively few people have seen firsthand. It lies just below the surface of the sea. It is the world beneath the waves, ready for you to explore. ‘How safe is such a trip?’ you may ask. ‘Do I need to be a strong swimmer before I can visit this fascinating underwater world? And am I excluded if I cannot swim at all?’
Two Modes of Exploration
Two basic methods of exploring the underwater world are popular​—snorkeling and scuba diving.a
A snorkel is a device consisting of a bent tube that fits into the swimmer’s mouth and projects above the water when he swims facedown on the surface of the water with his face submerged. It enables the swimmer to breathe without lifting his head out of the water for air. A mask protects his eyes.
Scuba, on the other hand, refers to equipment consisting of a cylinder or cylinders containing compressed air attached to a breathing apparatus. So scuba diving is obviously for those interested in going well below the surface, is much more complicated, and can be quite expensive.
The simpler and far less expensive recreation of snorkeling will enable you to see the exquisite delights of the underwater world even from the surface. This is how one enthusiastic snorkeler describes his first experience: “I still remember vividly the first time I snorkeled through a massive school of thousands of little fish, when I was a lad of just 14. The fish seemed to form a living tunnel for me as I glided through. Their silvery bodies caught the sun, creating a beautiful effect. I was in ecstasy. And so began a lifelong love affair with snorkeling.”
But Is It Really Safe?
An enthusiast who has safely enjoyed snorkeling for more than 20 years suggests that the most dangerous thing about it is the drive down to the beach! When in the water, safety depends more on the person than on the activity. If you are not a competent swimmer, you should not venture beyond calm, shallow water, and you should never go beyond your depth. In fact, there can be much to see in just four feet [a meter] of water. As you gain skill and confidence, you will be able to go safely into deeper water, but even then you should always have a capable companion with you. Most experienced divers make it a rule never to venture far from shore or into deep water alone. And apart from the safety factor, it is more relaxing and enjoyable to share the experience of snorkeling with a companion.
It is true that breathing through a snorkel with your face underwater may take a little getting used to, but if you persevere, you will find that it is not really difficult. Some beginners practice in a swimming pool or in the shallows at the seaside where there are no waves. Some even practice in a bathtub.
Equipment You Will Need
The equipment needed for snorkeling is relatively simple and is not expensive: a face mask, two diving fins (flippers), and the snorkel itself. Of course, if you plan to snorkel in the wintertime or in water too cold for normal swimming, you will probably require a wet suit, and this will increase expenses considerably. Let’s consider just the three basic items needed to begin.
The mask should fit well, be watertight, and feel comfortable. It must also have an equalizer, that is, a series of recesses allowing you to pinch your nose from outside the mask. The reason for this will be explained later. The mask should have a good field of vision, and it should be of low volume, meaning that the glass should be close to your face, minimizing the volume of air inside. The most comfortable masks are made of silicone. It is even possible nowadays to get visually corrected face masks for those who are nearsighted.
Next come the fins, one for each foot. They are usually made of rubber and are paddlelike devices worn on the feet to give speed in swimming. There are two kinds to choose from: the full-​foot type and the open-​heel design. If you need footwear because of walking across barnacle-​covered rocks or shallow coral beds before reaching deeper water, then you will need the open-​heel variety. This enables you simply to slip your flippers on over your footwear and begin snorkeling. The full-​foot fin fits directly onto your foot and can be used if no other footwear is required in addition to the flipper.
Finally, the snorkel itself. A simple J-shaped snorkel is best, especially for the beginner, since the most important feature is ease of breathing. One manual on diving suggests that the most acceptable type should have a bore of at least 3/4-inch [2 cm] diameter and be 12 to 14 inches [30 to 35 cm] long.
Helpful Hints for Using a Snorkel
As already explained, the snorkel allows you to breathe while swimming on the surface of the water without raising your head. What about diving below the surface? This is also possible, but first you will need to take a good, deep breath. Of course, water will get into the snorkel once it goes beneath the surface. Maybe you have seen that when a diver rises to the surface, a spout of water often shoots up from his snorkel. This is called the blast method of clearing out the water. It is actually quite easy to learn but requires a sharp puff of air, so you must surface with sufficient air still in your lungs if you are to clear the snorkel successfully.
Some consider the displacement method better, but it takes a little more practice. How does this method work? As you approach the surface after your dive, look straight up. The tip of your snorkel should now be pointing slightly downward. With your head in this position, it will only take a small puff of air to displace the water that has filled your snorkel. Keep your head in this position until your face is about to break surface. At that moment, swing your face down and breathe out. The cleared snorkel will remain clear, and you will find you can breathe effortlessly.
Do not be alarmed if you occasionally get water in the snorkel from a passing wave even while you are still on the surface. If this should happen, simply give a firm blast of air, and the snorkel will be cleared of all water.
Enjoy Your Snorkeling
While on the surface, try to learn to breathe steadily​—in deeply, then out firmly. Your lungs will feel the benefit of this. Remember that the secret of enjoyable snorkeling is, not how far or fast you swim, but how much you see and explore as you go along. When you do wish to dive below the surface, learn to relax and conserve as much oxygen as possible, for then you will be able to stay down longer. But do not try to set any records of endurance!
As you glide along, let your arms drift lazily by your side. Use your flippers only, with long, steady strokes, keeping your knees slightly bent. At first, it will take concentration to do this effortlessly and smoothly, but after a short time, it will become automatic. But what should you do if your mask keeps fogging up? A simple way to prevent this is to rub a little saliva on the glass before putting the mask on. Just rinse the saliva off after a moment or two, and you will find that the glass will stay clear for quite a long time.
Sometimes you may feel pain in your middle ear during a dive. This is called middle-​ear squeeze. It is caused by a pressure differential across your eardrums. Usually, it begins after you have descended three to six feet [1-2 m]. Do not ignore this pain and continue to descend, hoping that it will improve. It will get worse the deeper you go, and you could even burst an eardrum. The divers’ journal Padi Diver Manual recommends that pressure be equalized every few feet [every meter or less] before any pain is felt. This is done by pinching your nose and gently blowing. This is why an equalizer needs to be on the mask, so that you can squeeze your nose while the mask is still fitted. With experience, this procedure becomes quite easy, almost second nature. Once pain is felt, though, it is best to come up to the surface, for after discomfort begins, continued efforts to equalize will be ineffective.
As a form of recreation, snorkeling is wholesome, educational, and exhilarating. For practically all age groups, it is an excellent way to combine exercise, fresh air, and sunshine. Just learning to recognize and identify the names of even a small number of the underwater sea creatures makes snorkeling a challenge for those so inclined. Nevertheless, for most, like Tony, just back from snorkeling in Fiji, the sheer delight of “being in another world of breathtaking colors” is what it is all about. His friend Lena agrees: “I was so excited by the beauty that surrounded me that I forgot where I was!”
What About Scuba Diving?
For those who are good swimmers and are enticed by the wonders of deeper water or who perhaps want to try underwater photography, scuba diving is the next step. If you keep in good health, take good care of your equipment, and follow basic rules, you may enter the water with confidence. However, you should never go scuba diving without first having taken a proper course and, if required, having obtained a license through a reputable instructor. Even then, you should not exceed the depth limits that your license permits. And always dive with a companion. In some countries, such as Australia, the law requires that you pass a diving-​oriented medical examination before beginning such a course.
Scuba equipment can be quite expensive. In addition to the basic equipment used for snorkeling​—face mask, fins, and snorkel—​you will almost certainly need a wet suit, except perhaps in warm, tropical waters. You will also need a buoyancy-​control device, a weight belt, a knife, a breathing apparatus (with a spare for your companion should he get into difficulties with his air supply), and a scuba tank. You also must have essential instruments, such as a diving watch, a depth gage, and a submersible pressure gage for your tank so that you know how much air you have. In many popular diving spots, this equipment can readily be rented, which often proves more economical than purchasing your own if you do not dive frequently.
Respect for the Ocean and Its Creatures
“I was snorkeling on a reef near Caloundra on the Queensland Sunshine Coast, watching a colorful butterfly fish from about six feet [2 m] away,” recounts snorkel-​enthusiast Peter. “Then, suddenly, a shiny steel shaft shot into view and stopped with a violent thud. The little fish struggled in vain​—it was impaled through the gills against a rock. The lad responsible admitted that he had killed the pretty fish just for target practice! It was too small to eat.” Unfortunately, such thoughtless acts are increasing throughout the world.
Pollution too has left its mark. Popular spots often end up as little more than rubbish dumps, littered with plastic bags and used drink cans. Even destructive chemical effluent is becoming an increasing problem in some lands. As the junk and rubbish increase, the fish move elsewhere, and the coral dies.
It is a good habit always to wear gloves when scuba diving. Even then, it pays to be cautious as to what you touch. For example, the ever-​present sea urchin sports needlelike spines able to penetrate unprotected hands. And the glamorous butterfly cod, though small, seems to be warning, ‘Not too close. This is my territory!’ as it proudly flaunts its vivid red and white stripes. Deceptively nestled among its frills are long spines covered with venomous mucus. Just brushing against them can be painful.
Other creatures defy the eyes. The weedy sea dragon, for example, is a genius at camouflage. It looks just like a piece of vegetation, challenging any diver’s keenness of eye. In contrast, the exquisite, vivid colors of the nudibranch, a sea slug, simply grab your attention. But is this a tempting morsel? Would-​be predators soon learn differently, for it is armed with some nasty chemicals.
Many Rewarding Sights
For snorkeler and scuba diver alike, the ocean is indeed rich with life. Coral reefs are a panorama of countless creatures and colors no more than a few slow strokes of one’s fins away. “The exhilaration of being surrounded by colorful fish of all shapes and sizes, some feeding out of your hand, is hard to equal. It is a very moving experience,” said one diver. Then he added: “To be there as one of them, while suspended almost impervious to gravity, is quite unreal.”
Therefore, if you ever get a chance to go snorkeling or scuba diving, remember that it can be done quite safely if you take the simple precautions recommended by experienced divers. Perhaps one day you too may enjoy this enriching experience of exploring the beauty of the world beneath the waves.
[Footnotes]
“Scuba” is an acronym derived from the initial letters of “self-​contained underwater breathing apparatus.” The current international flag to warn of the presence of scuba divers is the white-​blue alpha flag. Some countries still use the red flag with a white stripe, as shown above.
[Picture on page 16]
Butterfly cod
[Picture on page 17]
Flamingo tongue
[Picture on page 17]
Blue tang
[Picture on page 17]
Nudibranch on coral
[Picture Credit Line on page 15]
By courtesy of Australian International Public Affairs

