The Bible’s Viewpoint
What Is the Meaning of Life?
“DARWINISTS ARGUE THAT NATURAL SELECTION IS A SUFFICIENT EXPLANATION OF ORGANIC LIFE. YET IT SEEMS COMMON SENSE THAT, IF AN ORGANISM MOVES TOWARDS GREATER COMPLEXITY, SELF-​CONSCIOUSNESS AND INTELLIGENCE, THEN IT IS BECAUSE THOSE QUALITIES ARE DESIRED.”​—DYLAN THOMAS (1914-53, WELSH POET AND AUTHOR).
THE quest for the meaning of life is not new. It has preoccupied the minds of the curious for centuries. A recent poll shows that it is on the minds of New Zealanders, more so today than ten years ago. Forty-​nine percent of the population 15 years of age and older, says the report published in the Listener, “thought about the meaning of life often,” up from 32 percent when a similar survey was conducted in 1985.
New Zealanders seem to be expressing feelings shared by people of other nations. Continues the Listener: “The increasing tendency to question the significance of our existence may indicate that we are more anxious now than we were in the 80s, less certain of direction.”
Evidently, answers given by evolutionists to the universal question, Why are we here? are not satisfying to a growing number of people. Can the Bible supply the moral compass needed to find meaning in one’s life?
“Primary Motivational Force”
Of all earth’s creatures, only man ponders the purpose of life. Do you know why? The Bible gives one reason at Ecclesiastes 3:11. Concerning the Creator, it says: “He has given men a sense of time past and future.” (The New English Bible) Although all living things tend to cling to life, it seems that man is unique in having a concept of time​—past, present, and future. Man can meditate on the past and look toward the future, planning for it, yes, even strongly desiring to share in it. And he can become frustrated when he cannot realize his dreams about the future because of the transitory nature of his short life span.
Thus, man alone asks the questions, Why am I here? Where am I going? Psychiatrist Viktor Frankl wrote: “The striving to find a meaning in one’s life is the primary motivational force in man. . . . There is nothing in the world, I venture to say, that would so effectively help one to survive even the worst conditions, as the knowledge that there is a meaning in one’s life.”
Solomon’s Discovery Confirmed by Jesus
The need to find meaning in life intrigued the ancients. Let us turn the pages of history back three thousand years to the kingdom of Israel under the rule of Solomon. Of him, the Queen of Sheba said: “True has the word proved to be that I heard in my own land about your matters and about your wisdom. And I did not put faith in the words until I had come that my own eyes might see; and, look! I had not been told the half. You have surpassed in wisdom and prosperity the things heard to which I listened.”​—1 Kings 10:6, 7.
In writing the Bible book of Ecclesiastes, King Solomon informed his readers of the results of an experiment that he conducted to illuminate the purpose of life. It was an experiment in opportunities to enjoy life that fit a typical king of the ancient East. In Ec chapter 2, verses 1-10, he painted a life of pleasure that is hardly conceivable today. He tried everything that life offered in the way of material riches and fleshly pleasures. What was his assessment of the meaningfulness of such pursuits? His answer should startle the overconfident.
When he looked back on all these things, his judgment was often negative. They were futile, a waste of time. He wrote: “I, even I, turned toward all the works of mine that my hands had done and toward the hard work that I had worked hard to accomplish, and, look! everything was vanity and a striving after wind, and there was nothing of advantage under the sun.”​—Ecclesiastes 2:11.
He concluded that, at best, earthly pleasures bring only temporary pleasure. Even human wisdom cannot deliver man from the pain and anguish of life.
Jesus Christ concluded similarly when, in response to a man’s undue concern over a material inheritance, he said to the listening crowd: “Keep your eyes open and guard against every sort of covetousness, because even when a person has an abundance his life does not result from the things he possesses.”​—Luke 12:15.
Only Jehovah God can totally overcome human frailty in everyday life and give wise purpose to man’s actions. Thus, life without God is futile. As recorded at Ecclesiastes 12:13, Solomon explained: “The conclusion of the matter, everything having been heard, is: Fear the true God and keep his commandments. For this is the whole obligation of man.”
Discovering the Meaning of Life
Solomon’s verdict that life’s meaning cannot be divorced from a wholesome fear of God was repeatedly confirmed by Jesus Christ. “It is written,” Jesus said, quoting God’s Word, “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matthew 4:4; Deuteronomy 8:3) Yes, for one’s life to be fulfilling, the spiritual dimension cannot be ignored. Of himself, Jesus said further: “My food is for me to do the will of him that sent me and to finish his work.” (John 4:34) Obediently serving his heavenly Father was a source of joy and satisfaction. It nourished him. It gave purpose to his life.
Therefore, can life reach its full potential without God? No! Interestingly, historian Arnold Toynbee once wrote: “The true purpose of a higher religion is to radiate the spiritual counsels and truths that are its essence into as many souls as it can reach, in order that each of these souls may be enabled thereby to fulfil the true end of Man. Man’s true end is to glorify God and to enjoy Him for ever.” The prophet Malachi expressed God’s view: “You  people will again certainly see the distinction between a righteous one and a wicked one, between one serving God and one who has not served him.”​—Malachi 3:18.
[Picture on page 26]
“The Thinker,” by Rodin
[Credit Line]
Scala/​Art Resource, N.Y.

