From Our Readers
Help for the Dying  Thank you for the series of articles on “Help for the Dying.” (October 22, 1991) It arrived at exactly the right time. I am a nurse, and every day I am in contact with terminally ill patients. As a Christian, I have long wondered if it was necessary to combat death by every means possible. The articles helped me to understand God’s view of the matter.
C. C., Italy
My mother has cancer. When the doctor told me, ‘It’s too late to help her now,’ I went to pieces and thought of suicide! But one of Jehovah’s Witnesses encouraged me to resume my study of the Bible. I also obtained a copy of the articles on “Help for the Dying.” Now I truly understand the scripture that says, that it is ‘not that we have loved God but that he loved us.’ (1 John 4:10) I will now try hard to become one of Jehovah’s servants.
S. M., Japan
Clutter  A thousand thanks for your lovely article “When Clutter Gets Out Of Control.” (August 8, 1991) During my 12 years of marriage, I have struggled with packed, bulging closets in which nothing could ever be found! (I had all sorts of reasons to hang on to things.) After reading your article, I was able to pile up a nice heap of stuffed rubbish bags. My cleaned-​up closets smiled on me as they had seldom done before. I will post the article visibly in my closet to prevent it from ever becoming a mess again!
L. W., Netherlands
My mother, my sister, and I went on an away-​with-​clutter campaign. We went through our wardrobe and gave away a lot of clothing. My heartfelt gratitude for the article.
Z. M., Jamaica
Confirmation  Thank you for the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint . . . Confirmation​—Is It a Christian Requirement?” (August 8, 1991) I began studying the Scriptures a short time ago, but I still had questions about baptism. I have a two-​month-​old daughter, and with the help of that article, I can finally understand that there is no support in the Scriptures for baptizing an infant.
J. M. S., Brazil
Humidifiers  Allow me to comment on the item “Problems With Humidifiers” that appeared in “Watching the World.” (September 22, 1991) It is a pity you did not state that these illnesses are only transmitted by humidifiers without filters.
S. G., Germany
Demineralizing filters do reduce the risk of contaminating the air with minute particles of minerals, such as aluminum, lead, or asbestos. Even so, experts recommend that filters be changed regularly and that the machine itself be subjected to a rigorous routine of thorough cleaning.​—ED.
Estrogen Replacement  Thank you for the article “Estrogen Replacement Therapy​—Is It for You?” (September 22, 1991) It came just in time. My doctor had just suggested that I be placed on estrogen. How happy I was to be able to read about this subject in detail the following day.
M. R. S., United States
For the past two years, I have had severe hot flashes and other symptoms. My doctor prescribed medication, but it had terrible side effects, such as headaches. I tried to do my own research and finally decided to write you and suggest an article on this subject. The very next week, I opened Awake!, and there was a clear and understandable explanation of estrogen replacement therapy. I’m sure the article will help many women.
B. S., United States

