Young People Ask . . .
How Can I Cope With Poverty?
GREGORY, a youth from Eastern Europe, thought himself quite poor. He couldn’t afford expensive clothes or hi-​fi systems like some Western youths. In time, Gregory became frustrated with conditions in his own country, and he immigrated to Austria.
Thousands of miles away lived Loyiso, a youth from a rural village in southern Africa. Dwelling in a small hut with his family, Loyiso envied the youths in a nearby town who enjoyed marvelous “luxuries”​—running water and electricity.
Nevertheless, Loyiso and Gregory would be viewed as rich by an African youth named Vasco. Threatened by a local civil war, Vasco walked many miles through dangerous African bush simply to survive.
“Poverty” is thus a relative term, meaning different things in various lands and cultures. One English dictionary defines “poverty” as anything from “extreme want of necessities to an absence of material comforts.” It is sobering to realize that no matter how poor you may be, there are likely others who suffer even greater deprivations. Still, when you do not have decent clothes to wear to school or when you lack such basics as running water, it may be of little comfort to be told that others are worse off than you are.
The Bible therefore does not glamorize being poor. Rather, it realistically acknowledges: “The ruin of the lowly ones is their poverty.” (Proverbs 10:15) A previous article, though, showed that a youth can avoid some of the pitfalls of poverty, such as delinquent behavior.a With effort, you can cultivate a healthy and hopeful attitude. What, though, are some other ways to deal with the day-​to-​day pressures of being poor?
The Snare of Envy
“It wouldn’t be so bad if we were all poor,” complains a 17-​year-​old African youth named Zanele. “But when you see others on TV or elsewhere that have so much more than you do, it is a hard thing to take.”
Zanele’s feelings are hardly surprising, considering the vast economic and social gulf that separates people today. And in view of the way the media shamelessly flaunt wealth and materialism, you may likewise suffer a pang of envy when you see how wealthier youths live. (James 4:5) Nevertheless, a German proverb warns: “Envy eats nothing but its own heart.”​—Compare Proverbs 14:30.
Of course, it is not necessarily wrong to seek better living conditions. But poverty is a trademark of Satan’s corrupt system of things, and only God can​—and will—​correct the world’s injustices. If you live in an economically deprived land, there may be little you can do to improve your situation. And even if economic opportunities exist, recall Solomon’s words at Ecclesiastes 4:4: “I have also learned why people work so hard to succeed: it is because they envy the thing their neighbors have. But it is useless. It is like chasing the wind.”​—Today’s English Version.
When your goal is wealth at any price, you can easily find yourself tempted to compromise your moral standards. Also, circumstances beyond your control can quickly deplete your hard-​earned money​—leaving you poorer than ever. Proverbs 23:4, 5 thus warns: “Do not toil to gain riches. . . . Have you caused your eyes to glance at it, when it is nothing? For without fail it makes wings for itself like those of an eagle and flies away toward the heavens.”
Assess Your Assets
Does this mean, then, that you should simply surrender to hopelessness? Definitely not! One positive step you can take is to focus, not on your deprivations, but on your assets. True, you may have few possessions. But in his book Relationships, Dr. Tony Lake notes that “someone who is poor in financial terms may have other resources, such as a loving family, friendly neighbours or a happy place to live.” Really, such assets are more valuable than money! A proverb says: “Better is a dish of vegetables where there is love than a manger-​fed bull and hatred along with it.” (Proverbs 15:17) Christian youths have yet another valuable asset: the support of “the whole association of brothers.”​—1 Peter 2:17.
Perhaps you can also try viewing your material possessions in a more positive light. Granted, you may live in a simple, perhaps even primitive, home. You may wear old, worn, or patched clothing. And you may long for a less monotonous diet. But do you need stylish clothes or an elaborate home to please God? Do you need fancy meals to stay alive and in good health? Of course not! As the apostle Paul said: “If we have food and clothes, that should be enough for us.”​—1 Timothy 6:8, TEV.
Eldred, a South African man who grew up in a family of little means, says: “We just accepted that the family was living on a tight budget and that we could not get all we wanted.” Eldred recalls that when his school trousers became threadbare, his mother would simply patch them up. In time, there would almost be more patches than original material left! “I had to endure a bit of teasing,” admits Eldred. “But the main thing was that our clothes were clean and functional.”
Thriftiness at Home
You can also take practical steps to improve your situation. The Bible speaks of those who foolishly “spend their money as fast as they get it.” (Proverbs 21:20, TEV) Show yourself wise, then, by being careful not to waste food, money, or any household asset. (Compare John 6:12.) Gambling, abuse of alcoholic beverages, smoking​—these are habits that not only waste money but that bring God’s disfavor. (2 Corinthians 7:1) If other family members are acting unwisely in these regards, set an example for them by your own conduct.​—Compare 1 Timothy 4:12.
Another way to contribute to your family’s welfare is to help your parents around the home. Volunteer to help with cooking, cleaning, repairs, and gardening. Doing so will give you a satisfying feeling of accomplishment.
Extra Income
Some youths are able to make a direct contribution to the family income by having a part-​time job. Loyiso, mentioned earlier, sold vegetables; he grew them on a little piece of land behind his home. The fresh produce also served to help feed his family. “He that is cultivating his own ground will have his sufficiency of bread,” says Proverbs 28:19. Loyiso found these words to be true.
Some youths have taken the initiative to sell clothing, food, and firewood. Others make simple household repairs, run errands, or baby-​sit.
School and Poverty
According to the 1989 Britannica Book of the Year, many poorer youths saw “little to gain by staying in school.” Educational facilities in many countries are often cramped and insufficiently equipped. And when youths weigh poor job prospects against some of the quick but illegal ways to make money, some lose all desire to go to school.
A lack of schooling, however, simply tightens the grip of poverty. It may take self-​discipline, but you are wise to stay in school! Consider the municipality of Howrah, a slum in Calcutta, India. There 800,000 people live in abject poverty. Most of the children work at menial tasks during the day; yet, many are attending night school to get an education. So even if going to school is difficult, do not quit. School can help you develop communication and thinking abilities​—skills that could someday help you get a job.
Looking Ahead
“The rich one and the one of little means have met each other. The Maker of them all is Jehovah.” (Proverbs 22:2) That fact has helped thousands of young Witnesses of Jehovah to cope successfully with poverty. They appreciate that happiness depends, not on owning material things, but on making friends with Jehovah God, who welcomes all who want to serve him​—rich or poor. God offers the hope of life in a future new world that will be free of grinding poverty.​—2 Peter 3:13; Revelation 21:3, 4.
In the meantime, use your resources wisely. Look to the future. Lay up spiritual treasures. (Matthew 6:19-21) View coping with poverty as a challenge​—one you can successfully meet.
[Footnotes]
See our January 22, 1992, issue.
[Pictures on page 26]
Wishing will not improve your situation, but hard work in school can

