Will There Ever Be a World Without Loneliness?
“THERE is no solution to loneliness. It’s just a normal part of life. . . . Loneliness is not bad or shameful; it just exists, always has and always will.” Thus one writer expressed her pessimism about ever being free of loneliness. Many agree.
As life is today, one must accept the fact that not all will enjoy warm family relationships. Also, circumstances may prevent a person from having the completely full relationship with others he may desire. But there is sound reason for believing that it will not always be this way.
World Change Near
“Why is my generation so hungry for love?” recently asked Yale graduate and writer Christopher Edwards, who added: “I believe the answer is simply this: we, as a people, seem to have forgotten how to care about each other.” Is that significant?
Students of Bible prophecy recall that Jesus foretold that among conditions marking “the conclusion of the system of things” would be: “The love of the greater number will cool off.” (Matt. 24:12) And with regard to identifying marks of the “last days,” the apostle Paul wrote: “Know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves . . . having no natural affection, not open to any agreement.” (2 Tim. 3:1-3) These attitudes are outstandingly characteristic of this generation. This means that a world change is near. But how will it take place?
Cold, Heartless Society to Be Removed
The world of today is very similar in makeup to an ancient “world” described by the Bible as being “filled with violence.” (Gen. 6:11) That world existed over 4,000 years ago and scientific discoverya has confirmed the truthfulness of the Bible’s statement: “The world of that time suffered destruction when it was deluged with water.”​—2 Pet. 3:6.
On the basis of that act of God, the Bible points to the future, saying: “By the same word the heavens and the earth that are now are stored up for fire and are being reserved to the day of judgment and of destruction of the ungodly men. But there are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.” (2 Pet. 3:7, 13) Just as only godly Noah and his family remained on earth, so only unselfish persons, those who have a relationship with God, will remain as part of the “new earth.” These will be saved into a world where kindness and love will flourish.
A World Filled with Love
An inviting description of the “salvation” that God will bring “to those fearing him” is found in the 85th Psalm, verses 9-12: Ps 85:9-12 “Surely his salvation is near to those fearing him . . . As for loving-kindness and trueness, they have met each other; righteousness and peace​—they have kissed each other. Trueness itself will sprout out of the very earth, and righteousness itself will look down from the very heavens. Also, Jehovah, for his part, will give what is good, and our own land will give its yield.”
How heartwarming to think that, rather than cold efficiency, “loving-kindness” will permeate earthly society! Suspicion and doubt among persons will give way to “trueness.” Deception and the selfish using of others, which is so evident in today’s world, will be replaced by “righteousness and peace,” which, symbolically speaking, will “kiss each other.”
With such qualities filling the hearts of those then living, would it seem to you there would be any loneliness? On the contrary, human relationships will reach levels of happiness and satisfaction previously not dreamed of. Furthermore, such friendships will have the prospect of lasting eternally.​—1 John 2:17.
Enjoy Preview Now
Response to God’s counsel regarding peace is even now producing good results in the congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Observers, though often differing with the theology of the Witnesses, have almost unanimously praised the genuine warmth and love that is apparent among them. Catholic writer William J. Whalen, in the magazine U.S. Catholic of January 1979, wrote: “In this country and around the world a large percentage of Witnesses have come from Roman Catholic backgrounds. What attraction does the sect have for Catholics? . . . The size and impersonality of many [Catholic] parishes contrast with the intimacy and friendliness of a kingdom hall. The Witness congregation does provide a sense of community that a huge Catholic parish cannot match.”
Five years earlier, in the book Religious Movement in Contemporary America (1974) L. R. Cooper wrote: “In their own congregational life Witnesses form a genuine community of trust and acceptance.” Certainly “trust and acceptance” are vital to establish meaningful relationships.
Hundreds of thousands of lonely persons​—of all ages and backgrounds—​have associated with the congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses and found genuine friendship. In so doing they have found something more than friends. They have found within these congregations the identifying mark of genuine Christianity. Jesus Christ describes it at John chapter 13, verse 35: “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”
They soon realize, however, that these people do not limit their love to fellow believers. They love their neighbors, too, so they help others to learn about the marvelous hope set forth in the Bible for a world free from loneliness.
Would you like to associate with people who have that kind of loving concern for others? Why not get in touch with Jehovah’s Witnesses or write to us. You have everything to gain by such an inquiry. The only thing you chance to lose is loneliness.
[Footnotes]
See Is the Bible Really the Word of God?, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, chapter 3, “Was There an Earth-wide Flood?”

