Increase Your Joy in Preaching
1 The joy of sharing the good news​—are you experiencing it in your ministry? If we are not careful, the wicked world around us could make us timid about preaching, causing us to lose our joy. Working in unresponsive territory could also dampen our spirit. What practical steps can we take to increase our joy in preaching?
2 Be Positive: Maintaining a positive attitude really helps. One way to do that is by meditating on our grand privilege of being “God’s fellow workers.” (1 Cor. 3:9) Jesus too is with us in accomplishing this work. (Matt. 28:20) And he backs us up with an army of angels. (Matt. 13:41, 49) We can be assured, then, that our efforts are divinely directed. (Rev. 14:6, 7) So despite how some humans may react to our work, the heavenly response is one of great rejoicing!
3 Prepare Well: Good preparation also contributes to our joy. Getting ready for the ministry need not entail a lot of work. It takes just a few minutes to consider a talking point from the current magazines or the month’s literature offer. Pick a presentation from “What to Say About the Magazines,” in Our Kingdom Ministry. Consult the January 2002 insert, “Suggested Field Service Presentations,” or look in the Reasoning book for an effective introduction. If you are stymied by an objection that householders commonly raise, prepare a reply that will acknowledge their comment and direct attention to an interest-arousing subject. The Reasoning book is very helpful in doing this. Using these aids will give us the confidence we need to preach with joy.
4 Pray Earnestly: Prayer is essential for lasting joy. Since we are doing Jehovah’s work, we need to beseech him for his spirit, one fruit of which is joy. (Gal. 5:22) Jehovah will give us strength to continue preaching. (Phil. 4:13) Praying about our ministry can help us keep the right perspective when we have negative experiences. (Acts 13:52; 1 Pet. 4:13, 14) If we feel intimidated, prayer can help us to persist boldly and cheerfully.​—Acts 4:31.
5 Create Opportunities: Of course, our ministry is more joyful when we are able to find people and witness to them. Altering your schedule to call from house to house at a different hour, perhaps in the late afternoon or early evening, may result in more success. You encounter people every time you walk down the street, go shopping, ride a bus, or stroll in the park. Why not prepare a brief conversation starter and take the initiative to approach those who appear to be friendly? Or you may work at a secular job or go to public school, where you converse daily with others. You might get a chance to give a witness by simply raising a Scriptural subject that stirs some interest. Good suggestions are found on the first page of the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. Any of these efforts could do much to increase one’s level of joy in preaching.
6 Since joy helps us to endure, how vital it is to maintain it! By doing so, we will reap a large reward when this never-to-be-repeated work comes to its conclusion. That prospect in itself can increase our joy in preaching.​—Matt. 25:21.

