Joyfully United With Jehovah and His Son
The Most Important Event of the Year Is to Be Observed on March 28
1 By observing the Lord’s Evening Meal after sundown on March 28, 2002, we display our joyful unity with Jehovah God and Jesus Christ. On that very special occasion, the remnant of anointed Christians will enjoy the special “sharing” that they have with other Kingdom heirs, with the Father, and with his Son. (1 John 1:3; Eph. 1:11, 12) Millions of the “other sheep” will reflect on their wonderful privilege to be united with Jehovah and his Son, being of one heart and mind with them in accomplishing God’s work!​—John 10:16.
2 Working Together in a Close Relationship: Jehovah and Jesus have always been joyfully united. They enjoyed close association for aeons before the creation of man. (Mic. 5:2) A deep bond of tender affection thus developed between the two of them. As wisdom personified, this firstborn Son in his prehuman existence could say: “I came to be the one [Jehovah] was specially fond of day by day, I being glad before him all the time.” (Prov. 8:30) Spending countless ages in intimate association with the Source of love had a profound effect on God’s Son!​—1 John 4:8.
3 With mankind’s need of redemption in mind, Jehovah chose his only-begotten Son, who was especially fond of humans, to provide the ransom sacrifice, which offers our only hope. (Prov. 8:31) Just as Jehovah and his Son are united in carrying out one purpose, we remain united with them and with one another in bonds of strong love, joyfully doing God’s will.
4 Showing Our Heartfelt Appreciation: By being present at the Memorial and listening carefully and respectfully, we can demonstrate our genuine appreciation for both Jehovah’s love and his Son’s sacrifice for us. Highlighted will be Jesus’ loving example, his faithfulness to death in providing the ransom, and his rulership as King of God’s established Kingdom, as well as the blessings that the Kingdom will bring to mankind. We will also be reminded of the need to manifest our faith continually, zealously working in harmony with Jehovah’s will as “fellow workers in the truth.”​—3 John 8; Jas. 2:17.
5 Helping Others to Share With Us: The body of elders should make a special effort to encourage all inactive Witnesses in the territory to attend the Memorial of Christ’s death. (Matt. 18:12, 13) Make a list of those to be called on so that none are overlooked and all are personally invited.
6 Do you know of others who might come to the Memorial? Take the initiative to build up their appreciation for this occasion. Warmly invite them, and make them feel wanted. Let us do our utmost to invite to this most important event of the year all our Bible students and other interested people, as well as family members and acquaintances. The benefits of the ransom remain available to all who learn “the excelling value of the knowledge of Christ Jesus.” (Phil. 3:8) Those exercising faith in Christ’s sacrifice can gain the firm hope of everlasting life.​—John 3:16.
7 Never underestimate the effect that the Memorial can have on sincere ones. Two years ago in the island country of Papua New Guinea, 11 interested persons traveled in a small boat for 17 hours through rough seas in order to be present. Why? They said: “We wanted to celebrate Christ’s Memorial with fellow worshipers of Jehovah; so the trip was all worth it.” Think of the zeal shown by those interested ones and of their appreciation for being joyfully united with Jehovah, his Son, and the Christian brotherhood!
8 Offer a Bible study to all interested ones. Encourage them to attend congregation meetings regularly and to share with others the truths they are learning. Help them to ‘walk in the light’ and to ‘practice the truth’ by applying Bible principles in their life. (1 John 1:6, 7) Assist them to develop a close relationship with Jehovah and to continue growing in appreciation for the privilege of unitedly doing his will.
9 What a wonderful privilege it is to be joyfully united “in one spirit, with one soul striving side by side for the faith of the good news”! (Phil. 1:27, 28) Let us look forward to our sweet fellowship together at the Memorial on March 28, ever thankful to Jehovah and his Son!​—Luke 22:19.

