“Be Rich in Fine Works”
1 During the final years of his zealous ministry, the apostle Paul worked closely with Timothy and Titus. To each of them, he wrote similar words of encouragement. He told Titus that “those who have believed God” ought to “keep their minds on maintaining fine works.” (Titus 3:8) He told Timothy that those who rest their hope on God should “be rich in fine works.” (1 Tim. 6:17, 18) This is excellent advice for all of us! But what will motivate us to perform fine works in our lives? And what specific works might we perform in the days ahead?
2 The motivation for being rich in right works springs from our belief in and love for Jehovah and from the wonderful hope that he has given us. (1 Tim. 6:19; Titus 2:11) Especially during this time of the year, we are reminded that Jehovah sent his Son to the earth so that Jesus could vindicate his Father and provide the way to life for all deserving humans. (Matt. 20:28; John 3:16) This will be made very clear at the Memorial observance of Christ’s death on March 28. In response to the hope we have of gaining life everlasting, are we not motivated to do all we can to “be rich in fine works”? Of course we are! What works might we perform now?
3 Fine Works to Do in March and Beyond: Certainly, we will attend the Memorial​—the most important event of the year for Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide. (Luke 22:19) But we want to share the joy of that occasion with as many as possible. Look at the service report in the 2002 Yearbook, and you will see that last year in many lands around the earth, the Memorial attendance was three, four, five, or more times the number of publishers. Surely it took diligent effort on the part of all in the congregations to make an extensive distribution of Memorial invitations throughout their territory. Therefore, we want to spend as much time as we can between now and March 28 inviting people to the Memorial, helping them learn about the hope of salvation.
4 By the time April arrives, we may begin to enjoy extra daylight hours and more favorable weather. How can we put these advantages to good use in being “rich in fine works”? By continuing to have an enthusiastic share in the work of preaching the good news, being “zealous for fine works.” (Titus 2:14; Matt. 24:14) If you were not able to auxiliary pioneer in March, can you do so in April and/​or May? If you are pioneering in March, can you continue?
5 Some who work secularly find that they can spend an hour or so in service on the way to work, doing street witnessing or calling on people who work at businesses that are open early in the morning. Others schedule part of their lunch hour to witness. Some have found it possible to conduct a Bible study during that period with a fellow worker. Many sisters who are housewives have been able to set aside time for the field ministry while their children are in school. By getting up a little earlier some days to care for their domestic chores, they have more time during the day for the preaching and teaching work.​—Eph. 5:15, 16.
6 Even if you are not in a position to auxiliary pioneer, it may be that you can work out a personal schedule to have a greater share in the ministry, doing all you can “to work at good, to be rich in fine works, to be liberal, ready to share” the truth with others.​—1 Tim. 6:18.
7 Remember the Fine Work of Disciple Making: Each year there are interested ones who come to the Memorial. Would it be possible for some in the congregation to give attention to those who attend but who are not now studying? Could return visits be made on them with a view to helping them make spiritual progress? It may be that some of these Memorial attenders are relatives of Witnesses. Others may be individuals who studied in the past and who only need some encouragement to resume studying and to attend meetings on a regular basis. What joy it would bring us to see them become active servants of Jehovah along with us!
8 With an increased share in the ministry during March and beyond, we are very likely going to find more interested people on whom to call back. Try to leave them with a question. Then promise to share the answer on the next call. When we do this, the way will be paved for a return visit. The sooner we can make the return visit, the better. If we have not been able to start a study on the initial call, we want to try to start one on the very next visit if at all possible.
9 When we engage in street witnessing, we should be conscious of trying to start conversations with people. Many publishers have been given names, addresses, and telephone numbers by interested people whom they have met while doing street work. If the individual contacted does not live in your territory, obtain the Please Follow Up (S-43) form at the Kingdom Hall, fill it out, and give it to the congregation secretary, who will pass it on to the congregation in whose territory the person lives. If the secretary is not able to do so, he will forward it to the branch office for handling. In this way, the interest can be cultivated.
10 If a telephone number is obtained but not an address, then make a return visit by phoning the individual. Prepare ahead of time what you want to discuss. Have your Reasoning book handy for quick reference. Some are having fine success studying with individuals over the telephone, including those whom they have had a hard time finding at home. A sister started asking for telephone numbers from interested women whom she met in the door-to-door ministry, and as a result she was able to start two Bible studies.
11 Cooperate With the Elders in Helping Inactive Ones: The elders are very interested in giving loving attention to these. Quite a number of such ones, on their own initiative, have already resumed attending congregation meetings. They realize the need to seek close association with Jehovah’s organization in order to have the spiritual security described in Psalm 91. Some of these are now ready to share in the field service again. If others who are inactive attend the Memorial this month, they may welcome having a personal Bible study. Should that be the case, the elders will work out the arrangements for someone to study with those who desire help. If you are invited to assist in this way, your cooperation will be greatly appreciated.​—Rom. 15:1, 2.
12 Keep “Maintaining Fine Works”: Many who have shared in auxiliary pioneer service for a month or more have found that their field activity increased in succeeding months. They met interested people on whom they felt the need to call back. This motivated them to put forth extra effort to get out in field service more often in order to contact the interested ones again. Some started studies, and that helped them to have an even greater share in the ministry.
13 Still others found so much joy in doing more in the preaching and disciple-making work that they were motivated to analyze their priorities. As a result, some were able to cut back on secular work and become continuous auxiliary pioneers. Others have been able to enter the regular pioneer service. They were able to rest their hope more fully on God and not on things the world has to offer. They found that being “liberal, ready to share,” brought rich blessings from Jehovah and strengthened their hope of enjoying “the real life.” (1 Tim. 6:18, 19) Of course, as more take up the pioneer service, the whole congregation benefits. Pioneers are prone to talk about their experiences and invite others to share in the ministry with them, and this generates a heightened spiritual atmosphere in the congregation.
14 May all of us “be rich in fine works” during this Memorial season and beyond by increasing our share in the Christian ministry. Let us show our appreciation for what Jehovah has done in giving us the hope of living forever in a righteous new earth.​—2 Pet. 3:13.

