“Gifts in Men” Eagerly Shepherd God’s Flock
1 What a loving provision Jehovah has made through his Son in providing “gifts in men”! (Eph. 4:8, 11, 12) They have multiple responsibilities, including actively and eagerly shepherding the flock of God. (1 Pet. 5:2, 3) All of us benefit from this much-needed provision. Whether some are encountering difficulties, are newly associated, have certain weaknesses, or have gone astray, these men have a keen personal interest in the spiritual welfare of all.​—Phil. 2:4; 1 Thess. 5:12-14.
2 When disturbing world events cause a measure of apprehension, these undershepherds prove to be “like a hiding place from the wind and a place of concealment from the rainstorm.” When we are weary or loaded down and feel the need for comfort, they refresh us, “like streams of water in a waterless country” or “like the shadow of a heavy crag in an exhausted land.”​—Isa. 32:2.
3 Encouraging the Inactive: The elders make a special effort to encourage those who have become irregular or inactive, helping them to return to regular participation in all congregation activity. Loving shepherding calls have helped many to attend congregation meetings regularly and become built up spiritually to the point where they are sharing again in the field ministry. All such efforts on the part of the elders reflect Jehovah’s loving care and the active leadership of Jesus Christ. He set the pattern of showing such concern for any of his sheep who may have strayed or got lost.​—Matt. 18:12-14; John 10:16, 27-29.
4 The undershepherds look for signs that indicate when some may be faltering spiritually. Any who show signs of discouragement, who become irregular in attending meetings, or who slow down in field service are likely in need of spiritual assistance. The elders are eager to help any who begin to display a tendency toward worldly dress and grooming or who develop a critical attitude toward the congregation. With genuine interest and tender affection, concerned overseers willingly ‘impart their own souls’ in efforts to help such ones rekindle their love for Jehovah.​—1 Thess. 2:8.
5 In the past, some dedicated Christians have lost contact with the congregation, lapsing into spiritual inactivity because they have become overwhelmed by health problems, economic setbacks, or family pressures. Without being critical, the elders kindly give assurance that Jehovah cares for all his sheep and will sustain them through hard times. (Ps. 55:22; 1 Pet. 5:7) Alert shepherds of the flock can help them to realize that if they ‘draw close to God, he will draw close to them,’ giving comfort and refreshment.​—Jas. 4:8; Ps. 23:3, 4.
6 Valuing the Infirm: Loving undershepherds are also concerned about those who could be overlooked. Associated with every congregation are some who are infirm, confined to nursing homes, or otherwise incapacitated. Their share in proclaiming the Kingdom message is understandably limited because of their circumstances. Perhaps their opportunity to speak out may come only through contacts with visitors, other patients, or caregivers. Nevertheless, whatever they are able to do is viewed as a valuable contribution to the overall preaching work. (Matt. 25:15) Even if they witness for just 15 minutes, this should be reported, and they will continue to be counted as regular Kingdom publishers.
7 The “gifts in men” are especially aware of the spiritual needs of their brothers at this time of the year​—Memorial season. What a fitting time for the elders to make a special effort to help all who have strayed to experience once again the joy and peace of mind that come with warm association in the congregation! We rejoice when we see such ones “related to us in the faith” present at congregation meetings and out in the ministry, reaffirming their faith in the ransom sacrifice.​—Gal. 6:10; Luke 15:4-7; John 10:11, 14.

