VOL. XXI. SEPTEMBER 1, 1900. No. 17. 



CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 259 

The Chicago Love Feast " 

Southern Presbyterians Disappointed " 

Poem: Gather All Thy Children Home 260 

"Do Ye Even So to Them" 261 

Is the Golden Rule Incumbent? 262 

Divine Strength Perfected in 

Human Weakness 263 

Watching and Its Reward 268 

"Be Ye Doers of the Word" 271 

A View of "Bible House" 272 

Two Conventions 258 

page 258 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



TRACT No. 50 is the German translation of No. 49, "Which 
Is The True Gospel?" Copies have been sent to our entire list, 
as usual. You have German friends or neighbors to whom 
these may be acceptable. Order additional copies as desired. 



SARATOGA SPRINGS, NY. CONVENTION--SEPT. 4 AND 5. 

Friends of the truth residing in the vicinity of Saratoga 
Springs, N.Y., advise us that a Floral Fete will be held 
there Sept. 3-6, which will have very low rates of railroad fare 
from all points in New York and New England. They request 
a gathering of the friends of that vicinity,— and as many others 
as can conveniently meet with them on Sept. 4 and 5. The 
Editor has promised to attend on the 4th, and if possible to remain 
also the 5th. Purchase Excursion tickets to Floral Fete. 

Comfortable accommodations can be secured at one dollar a 
day including board. Notify the WATCH TOWER office at once 
by postal card, when you will arrive, by what road, and how 
many will be of your party. On arrival go at once to the New 
Prohibition Hall, No. 464-1/2 Broadway.— But first look out for 
the Reception Committee at the door of the "Ladies' Waiting 
Room," displaying a copy of the WATCH TOWER. 



DALLAS, TEXAS, CONVENTION-SEPT. 29,30, OCT. 1. 

We merely remind the friends of Texas and vicinity of the 
date as above, reserving particulars for next issue. 



CONVENTION OPPORTUNITIES FOR SYMBOLIC BAPTISM. 

This is a feature in all conventions. Robes, towels, etc., 
are supplied, and the use of baptistry secured. 



"HE THAT HATH NO MONEY-COME YE!" 

At all Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society Conventions provision 
is made for the free entertainment of the Lord's "brethren" 
able to attend, but unable to pay for hotel accommodations. 
In notifying us of your coming, mention if the Lord's providence 
has made it expedient for you to accept the free hospitality. 



R2686 : page 259 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE CHICAGO LOVE FEAST. 



A LOVE FEAST from beginning to end! This 
was the public expression of many, and 
apparently the sentiment of all in attendance. Our 
Lord surely poured us out a grand spiritual blessing 
and refreshment. Surely if any went away empty it 
was in part or in whole his own fault. None of our 
conventions ever exhibited more love for the Lord and 
his truth and his brethren. Indeed each succeeding 
one seems just a little better than its predecessors, 
however grand they were. And may we not expect 
this, as we approach nearer and nearer in our journey 
toward "The General Assembly and Church of the 
First-borns?" It would be but reasonable that the 
ripening of the hearts of a larger number should be 
more and more manifest in the exhibited fruits of 
the spirit. 
The Chicago Convention was announced as a— 

CONVENTION OF BELIEVERS IN THE ATONEMENT 
THROUGH 

"THE PRECIOUS BLOOD OF CHRIST,"-"A RANSOM FOR ALL, 
AND IN HIS 
MILLENNIAL KINGDOM. 

It lasted for three days, continuously— except 
for intermissions for food and rest— and was followed 
by a colporteurs' session in the interest of those already 
in that service, or about to enter it. 

The attendance was the best we have ever had;— 
three important items contributing: (1) Chicago's 
large population and the goodly number already interested 
in the truth there. (2) The city's central 
location. (3) The unusually low rates of railroad 
fare granted from every direction and over all roads. 
The number in attendance was estimated at between 
500 and 600, and of these about 300 were from outside 
Chicago. 

We had a grand time! The Lord be praised! 
May the blessing so abundantly poured out not only 
be lasting in its effect upon those who received it, but 
may it overflow from them upon the brethren at their 
various homes, and thus become wide-spread. We 
know well that we had the loving thoughts and earnest 
prayers of many thousands not privileged to meet 
with us. Eighty-two symbolized their consecration 
to death by water baptism (46 brothers, 36 sisters). 
It was a grand sight, such as is seldom witnessed on 
earth. We may be sure that our Lord, the great Chief 
Reaper, and the saints who have already joined him 
"beyond the vail," and also our guardian angels who 
continually minister unto those who shall be heirs of 
salvation, looked upon that scene with deep interest, as 
did some three hundred brethren in the flesh who 
were witnesses. 

SOUTHERN PRESBYTERIANS TROUBLED. 



The split between Northern and Southern Presbyterians 
during the Civil war made of them practically 
two distinct bodies or denominations. The 
troubles and suggestions respecting the Confession 
of Faith have all been amongst the Northern brethren, 
until lately. However, at the last "General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church (South)" a petition 
was received from the Presbytery of Brazos, Texas, requesting 
that the Assembly "modify the statements 
of the Confession regarding the eternal damnation of 
non-elect infants." 

The resolution was strangled in committee which 
reported adversely to any discussion of the Confession, 
fearing no doubt that the question once opened never 
would close. The representatives of the Brazos Presbytery 
asked an amendment to the Confession reading 
thus:— "All dying in infancy are elect infants, and 

R2687 : page 260 

are regenerated," etc., Chapter 10, paragraph 3. 

Note now the shrewd but dishonest treatment of 
that petition (formulated by the committee and adopted 
by the Assembly) in these words,— "We recommend 
that the prayer of the overture be declined, inasmuch 
as the present language of the Confession cannot, by 
any fair interpretation, be construed as teaching that 
any of those who die in infancy are lost." 

Let us read over this paragraph 3, Chapter 10, of 
the Confession and see whether or not the Brazos 
brethren and humanity in general have mis-read it. 
Here it is: "Elect infants, dying in infancy, are regenerated, 
and saved by Christ through the Spirit, 
who worketh when, and where, and how he pleaseth. 
So also are all other elect persons who are incapable of 
being outwardly called by the ministry of the Word." 

If the General Assembly were sincere in averring 
that in their judgment these words do not teach that 
there are non-elect infants who dying in infancy are 
lost, then it follows that these brethren have totally 
repudiated the doctrine of election taught in other 
paragraphs of their Confession of Faith. For if all 
infants are elect, or if the election does not take place 
until after the period of infancy, then they must deny 
all that Calvinism stands for in the way of Predestination 
and Foreordination. Otherwise they would be 
forced to the position that only elect persons die in 
infancy and hence must assume that God specially 
intervenes to prevent the non-elect from dying in 
infancy, specially supervising the deaths of the 
millions of infants dying annually from infanticide, 
lack of care, etc. 

But to think of the General Assembly taking any 



of the above positions would be altogether unreasonable, 

and hence we are unwillingly forced to think of 

their resolution as lacking in honesty, lacking in truthfulness, 

which they no doubt excused on the Jesuitical 

plea that— It is right to do wrong if thereby you can 

serve God and the Church. However, the Church is 

not served by this false statement, even if a sect is 

thereby held together a little longer. The true Church 

"whose names are written in heaven," and which 

will eventually include all the truly "elect" "little 

flock," is never benefited or served by error or falsehood; 

but, as our Lord declared, only by the truth— 

"Sanctify them through thy truth, thy Word is truth." 

Nor is God served or honored by such false representations 

of his Word and plan. 

Furthermore, the specification of "elect infants" 
implies that the framers of this Confession had in 
mind non-elect infants who die in infancy, whose fate 
they left to be implied by the intelligent reader, who, 
if he accepted this Westminster Confession as a whole, 
would believe in elect and non-elect adults, and coupling 
this with the specifications of the same Confession 
on predestination would conclude that every non-elect 
adult must at one time have been a non-elect infant, 
who dying in infancy would have died non-elect and 
unregenerated and unsaved by Christ through the 
spirit who worked not upon them at any time nor anywhere 
nor anyhow, because he pleased not so to do, 
they being non-elect. 

One would suppose that our dear Presbyterian 
friends, finding themselves in such inextricable confusion 
on this doctrine of election, and yet finding much 
on the subject in the Bible, would be ready, yes anxiously 
and hungrily waiting for the reasonable Bible-solution 
of the subject presented in Millennial Dawn. 
Yet comparatively few of them seem to be so. The 
only reasonable explanation is that the majority are 
not sufficiently honest with themselves and with each 
other, and with God and his Word. They do not 
sufficiently love the truth— error is preferred. They 
do not hunger and thirst after right. Hence also the 
comparatively few who are "sanctified through the 
truth"— the large number failing to make their calling 
and election sure, because unsanctified by reason 
of their false doctrines. 

THE "BIBLE HOUSE," ALLEGHENY. 



Friends of the cause naturally feel a deep interest 
in everything connected in any manner with the harvest 
work. We have frequently been urged to publish 
the Editor's picture either in the DAWNS or in these 
columns; but have as persistently refused. It is the 
truth rather than its servant that should be honored 



and proclaimed. There is too much disposition to 

credit truth to the preacher, forgetful that all truth is 

of God, who uses one or another servant in its proclamation 

as it may please him. 

However, when requested to publish a photo of 
our work-shop, the "Bible House," we could think of 
no reasonable objection, and hence it appears on the 
last page of this issue. The third floor is the chapel 
in which Sunday and other services are held. On the 
top floor, centre, is the Editor's study: his usual seat 
being near the window at the head of the spiral fire 
escape. 



R2688 : page 260 

GATHER ALL THY CHILDREN HOME. 



Heavenly Father, Holy One! 
May thy will in me be done; 
Make my heart submissive, meek, 
Let me ne'er mine own way seek! 
Loving Savior, I would be 
Ever more and more like thee, 
Free from pride and self-desire, 
Fervent with a holy fire. 

Blessed Lord, thy saints defend, 
Watching o'er them to the end; 
Day by day their faith increase, 
Keep them in thy perfect peace. 
Comfort, strengthen, guide and bless, 
Lead them through the wilderness; 
And when thy due time shall come, 
Gather all thy children home! — G.W.S. 



R2688 : page 261 

"DO YE EVEN SO TO THEM." 



"All things whatsoever ye would that men should 
do to you, do ye even so to them."— Matt. 7:12. 

WHATEVER THE TESTS we apply, Jesus and 
his teachings are seen to tower above all 
others. For instance, we are frequently told that the 
Golden Rule is found in the writings of Confucius as 
well as in the New Testament, and that this is a proof 
that Confucius was a teacher equal in rank with Jesus, 



and equally sent of God. And no doubt many of 
those who give this report do so in all honesty; for 
the fact is that many Christians have never seen the 
depth and scope of the Golden Rule given by Jesus, 
and misunderstand it to be the same as the maxim by 
Confucius, which much resembles it. There is a wide 
distinction, however, and in comparison the words of 
Confucius might be termed a brazen rule. His maxim 
is, "Do not do to others what you would not wish 
them to do to you." We repeat that this is as much 
as the majority of Christians have ever seen in the 
Golden Rule given by our Lord. 

We would be glad to see the maxim of Confucius 
received and acted upon throughout the whole world 
by every creature, and undoubtedly the result would 
be a great blessing to mankind— a great improvement 
over present conditions, in which almost everybody 
except the saints who seek to walk in the footsteps 
of the Lord are continually doing every day the very 
things which they would not wish their neighbors to 
do to them. But even tho so great a reformation could 
be brought about, it would still leave much to be desired; 
it would still leave the world far from the condition 
suggested by our Lord's prayer, "Thy will be 
done on earth, as it is done in heaven." For men 
might, through policy or for other reasons, deal justly 
with each other, refraining from the doing of such 
things as they would not wish done to them, and with 
all that their hearts might be very full of selfishness, 
meanness, covetousness, etc., and very far from the 
condition of love. 

But when we note the comprehensiveness of our 
Lord's Golden Rule, we find it is absolutely a love-rule; 
and that it leaves nothing to be desired: nothing could 
possibly be added to it; it is complete. It is not merely 
a negative law: "Thou shalt not" do an injury; it is 
a positive law: "Thou shalt" do good. Thou shalt 
do thy neighbor all the good, all the kindness, all the 
service, that thou wouldst have him do to thee. This 
law, which the Apostle calls "the law of liberty," the 
perfect law, this Golden Rule for life, has no parallel 
anywhere, in any writings, and could not possibly 
have a superior,— a grander sentiment could not possibly 
be expressed. But how few there are who rightly 
appreciate and love this rule, and use it daily in the 
measurement of their own conduct! As already noted, 
the majority, even of the best people in the world, 
the vast majority of Christians, fail to discern its 
lengths and its breadths, and consider it merely an 
injunction not to do injury to others. How few, then, 
joyfully and appreciatively grasp its sentiment, and 
seek from the heart to conform their lives thereto— 
none but the saints, none but the "elect," we may be 
sure, are thus in heart-harmony with the essence and 
spirit of their Heavenly Father's law of Love. 

There might be danger of some of the Lord's people 



using this rule amiss and to their injury, by being 

overgenerous toward others and not sufficiently careful 

of themselves; but such instances are very rare, 

because in our entire race the general result of the 

fall has been to crowd out love and benevolence, and 

to fill us with selfishness. So much is this the case 

that it has become a worldly proverb that "Self-preservation 

is the first rule of life;" that self is always 

to be number one, and to be cared for well and thoroughly 

before others are to be even considered. 

Even after we have been begotten of the holy 
spirit, as new creatures, after the transforming of our 
minds has begun, we all know from experience that 
the selfishness of the old nature is so deep-grained that 
it is likely to hold its own with us to the very end of 
life. We have, however, known of some who, in their 
desire to conform themselves fully to the Lord's will, 
have taken an extreme view of this Golden Rule, and 
have understood it as tho it said, "Thou shalt do to 
thy neighbor as he shall wish thee to do to him"— not 
noticing that this would be a very different rule, and 
one which might operate very unfavorably in every 
way. While few are in danger of making a mistake 
in this direction, many are inclined to reason on the 
matter from this standpoint, and to say: We could 
not possibly carry out this Golden Rule in the ordinary 
affairs of life, because, for instance, if I were to 
do to my neighbor as I should wish him to do to me, 
I should sell him a five-dollar pair of shoes for one 
dollar; or a twenty-dollar suit of clothes for five dollars; 
or what he might want of wheat or oats at half 
the usual price. And if I adopted such a rule with 
one, I should properly adopt it with all, and this would 
soon mean bankruptcy in my business; so, evidently, 
the Golden Rule cannot be used in human affairs at 
the present time. 

But we answer that this is a mistaken view of the 
Golden Rule, and whoever examines it should see 
that the difficulty probably lies in the selfishness of 
his own heart. He thinks his neighbor might expect 
goods at less than cost, because he thinks that he himself 
would be willing to receive goods at less than cost 
from his neighbor. The application of the Golden 
Rule should show him his difficulty; should teach him 

R2688 : page 262 

the lesson that when he goes to his neighbor to buy 
shoes he must do to his neighbor as he would that his 
neighbor should do to him: he must pay his neighbor 
a reasonable price for his shoes; a reasonable, living 
profit. And likewise in every other transaction: the 
Golden Rule teaches us that we should be willing to 
pay the farmer for his produce, and the manufacturer 
for his, as we would think just if we were the manufacturer 
and making the sale. Likewise, if we were 



making the sale, we should not think of charging our 

customers a larger profit than we would think reasonable 

if they were the sellers and we the customers. 

Whoever of the Lord's people, therefore, gets thoroughly 

into the way of using this Golden Rule in all of life's 

affairs will certainly find that it will elevate their conceptions 

of justice, righteousness, equity; and these 

godlike qualities will become more and more developed 

in them, as parts of their characters, until 

they will obey them not merely because of their 

harmony with the Master's Golden Rule, but because 

they will recognize their true beauty and grandeur, 

and because their hearts will be in harmony with 

them. 

But this rule, while thus inculcating justice, goes 
beyond this and inculcates benevolence;— such benevolence 
and so much of it as we, with properly balanced 
minds would be disposed to ask of others if we were 
the ones in need, in straits. O how grandly rounded 
out in spiritual character would all of the Lord's true 
saints become, under the influence of this Golden Rule! 
It would not only affect the actions of life, making 
them first just toward all with whom they had dealings, 
then, benevolently disposed toward all needing their 
assistance to whatever degree they were able to render 
assistance without doing injury to others,— and, 
additionally, the same law in force would extend also 
to their every word. Under the regulations of this 
golden measurement how few bitter or angry or slanderous 
words would be used— for how few would like to 
have others use such to or of them— to speak to them 
in anger and with bitterness and rancor, or to slander 
them. No wonder the Apostle tells us that those who 
have put on Christ must put off all these— anger, malice, 
hatred, strife, envy, slanders, etc. Additionally, 
this Golden Rule would lead to kind words, gentle 
actions, considerate demeanor; for who would not 
wish such from his neighbor? As the Apostle again 
declares, we are to put on as Christian graces,— gentleness, 
meekness, patience, longsuffering, brotherly 
kindness, love. -Col. 3:8-10,12-15. 

This Golden Rule, beginning with the outward 
actions, and progressing to our words, would very 
quickly extend to our thoughts; and as we would not 
wish to have others think ungenerously or meanly of 
us, nor put a bad construction on our every act of life, 
but would rather that they would view our words and 
deeds generously and lovingly, so we in turn would 

R2689 : page 262 

find, that under the influence of this Golden Rule, 
our thoughts of others would become more generous, 
more noble, less suspicious, etc. 

This Golden Rule is assuredly the divine law 
which our dear Redeemer expressed in other words 



at another time, saying, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor 
as thyself." We may safely consider, therefore, 
that the one rule interprets the other, and that to love 
our neighbor as ourselves signifies that we should love 
him and do for him as we ourselves would wish him 
to love us and to do for us. And we could not understand 
it to mean more than this. God expects of 
us that we will make reasonable provision for ourselves 
and for those for whom, by legal or natural ties, we 
are responsible— our families, our relatives, as the 
Apostle says: "He that provideth not for his own, 
and especially they of his own house, hath denied the 
faith and is worse than an unbeliever."— 1 Tim. 5:8. 
Evidently, therefore, our own households are our 
first charge and responsibility, and must have reasonable 
attention before we could hope to do for our neighbors. 
This would indeed be putting a difference between 
our neighbor and ourselves, and between our 
neighbor's family and our own family, but the matter 
is well adjusted by the Golden Rule, rightly interpreted, 
which requires of us that we shall do for our 
neighbor, in his want and extremity, as we would have 
him do for us, were we in his circumstances and he 
in ours. And our minds being leveled up to a plane 
of justice, we should expect that if we were in distress 
our neighbor would first make reasonable provision 
for his own family, and not give to us to the injury 
or deprivation of those more immediately and more 
closely dependent upon him. 

IS THE GOLDEN RULE INCUMBENT? 



But some one may inquire: Is it necessary for us 
as Christians to attempt to carry out this Golden Rule 
in our daily lives? When we see that very few even 
of Christian people appreciate the rule, or to any extent 
seek to carry it out, may we not consider that it 
is a very good rule, but that its observance is not made 
incumbent upon us, and that our attainment of eternal 
life and heavenly glory are not linked with the observance 
of this Golden Rule? May we not consider 
it rather as a good standard to have in mind as the 
perfect law, but consider that we are not to live up to 
that standard in any sense of the word? 

We answer that this Golden Rule was the one by 
which our dear Redeemer's every action was measured, 
the one according to which he lived, and under 

R2689 : page 263 

which he laid down his life on our behalf, and it is 
essential to and incumbent upon all those who would 
be his disciples, his followers. All who hope to become 
his joint-heirs in the Kingdom are required to 



walk in his footsteps as he set us an example (1 Pet. 2:21), 
or, as another Apostle declares, God has foreordained 
to have an elect Church to be joint-heirs in 
the Kingdom with Christ, but he has equally foreordained 
that none shall ultimately be acceptable as 
members of that glorified Church except such as shall, 
in the present life, become copies of God's dear Son, 
our Lord Jesus: and to copy him means to copy the 
Golden Rule, which was exemplified in him and in 
his course. It follows, therefore, that whoever expects 
to share the Kingdom must give diligence to the 
formation of character, and that this Golden Rule is 
necessary in such formation of character— to develop 
in us not the principles of equity, or justice only, but 
also the spirit of love, of unselfishly doing good to 
others.— Rom. 8:29. 

DIVINE STRENGTH PERFECTED IN HUMAN WEAKNESS. 



But here again comes in the question, How can 
those who by nature are fallen and imperfect, and full of 
inherited selfishness and meanness, ever hope to keep 
this Golden Rule, which is the full measure of a perfect 
man's obedience, and which, with all his well-doing 
and sacrificing, was not more than fulfilled by 
our Lord Jesus himself? How could we hope to be 
approved as keepers of this Golden Rule, in the sight 
of him who can read, not only the outward conduct, 
but also the thoughts and intents of our hearts? 

We answer that here comes to our relief the 
gracious arrangement which God has provided for this 
Gospel age, viz., justification by faith. Our justification 
not only covers "the sins that are past" (Rom. 3:25), 
and makes us acceptable to God in Christ, so 
that we can offer ourselves as living sacrifices upon 
his altar, but, more than this, it stands with 
us all the way down the journey of life, and according 
to God's grace in Christ it compensates for, 
or makes up for us all of our unintentional deficiencies, 
so that, as the Apostle says, "The righteousness of 
the Law [expressed in the Golden Rule] is fulfilled 
in us who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit." 
-Rom. 8:4. 

Since we are not all alike fallen, not all alike selfish, 
it follows that some walk much nearer to the 
spirit of the divine Law, attain much closer to the 
measurement required by the Golden Rule, than can 
others; yet no fallen creature can walk fully up to the 
requirements of the Golden Rule, so long as handicapped 
by the various weaknesses of the flesh: and 
here the grace of God in Christ makes up our deficiencies; 
those who are able to follow the pattern most 
closely are still far from following it absolutely, and 
consequently need to have the merit of the precious 



blood of Christ imputed to them to make up for their 
shortcomings; and those who are still more fallen, 
and who, with their very best efforts, are still further 
from measuring up to the grand standard of the 
Golden Rule, need that much more of God's grace to 
compensate for their deficiencies. Hence the Apostle 
declares that where sin and imperfection abound 
the most, there God's grace correspondingly abounds 
the more; so that to those who are in Christ and seek 
to walk in his footsteps, who are in their hearts measuring 
themselves with the Golden Rule, and seeking 
to the best of their ability to live up to its requirements, 
may be succeeding variously in their endeavors, 
from the worldly standpoint; but from the divine 
standpoint all such are reckoned as having their blemishes 
fully covered with the merit of our dear Redeemer's 
sacrifice, and that therefore the righteousness 
of the Law, its true meaning, its spirit, and the true 
measure of the Golden Rule, is reckoned as fulfilled 
in them to divine acceptance,— perfectly. 

But it is not merely to have this Golden Rule thus 
reckonedly fulfilled in us for a day or for a week or 
for a month that counts us "overcomers," but that 
we shall faithfully continue to walk as closely in the 
Lord's footsteps as we may be able, faithfully continuing 
to use his Golden Rule to the best of our ability; 
and that we shall do this day by day and year by 
year with continued and increasing zeal, until our 
Master, watching the process of development of character, 
shall say, It is enough; the character is fixed; 
the love for righteousness is permanent and thoroughly 
developed; the spirit of love is indelibly marked, and 
altho there still remain in the flesh traces of selfishness, 
yet they are dim and faint in comparison with 
the original mark, and give good evidence of victory 
gained, not in the flesh, but in the heart, in the will. 

"They shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in 
that day when I make up my jewels."— Mai. 3:17. 

ANOTHER SERIOUS ERROR MADE BY SOME IN APPLYING 
THE GOLDEN RULE TO LIFE. 



Undoubtedly the Golden Rule has, to a considerable 
extent, exercised an influence over even worldly 
people (nominal Christians), where such have come 
more in contact with the true saints who endeavor with 
more or less zeal to recognize and to use the Golden 
Rule in the measurement of their daily conduct, without 
their being keepers of it as a rule, or even professing 
so to do. And even amongst Christians who have 
given themselves to the Lord, and who fully desire 
that his will in every particular shall be done in them, 

R2689 : page 264 



and who recognize this Golden Rule as a grand expression 
of the divine will, we believe there are serious 
misapprehensions respecting the proper manner 
of its use. For instance, among the noblest of the 
Lord's people are some who say, We will turn our 
backs on society and worldly enjoyments, and devote 
what time we have at our disposal to the improvement 
of the fallen— to moral reforms, social reforms, financial 
reforms, the reforming of drunkards, etc. And 
still others, imbued with the same spirit, and with the 
same desire to fulfil this Golden Rule, say, We will 
leave home and friends, and go into far-off lands as 
missionaries, to preach Christ to the heathen. 

We are bound to appreciate such noble sentiments, 
whether we can agree with the conclusions as to 
methods of work, etc., or not. We love the noble 
principle which, if not in every instance, at least in 
many cases, lies at the foundation of such sacrifices of 
time, influence, convenience, etc.: it is an outworking 
of the Golden Rule in these dear friends, saying to 
themselves and to others, If we were in the slums or 
in heathen degradation, we should wish that some of 
God's children would come to us, to lift us up and enlighten 
us, and hence we should do so to others, even 
as we would, if our conditions were altered, that they 
should do to us. 

This is sound reasoning and a proper application 
of the Golden Rule, and yet also, we believe, a mistaken 
or wrong one. One of the first lessons that the 
Christian is called upon to learn in the School of 
Christ is, that his judgment is defective; that not only 
our physical powers have degenerated through the 
fall, but that likewise our mental powers have suffered; 
so that the whole world today is not only unsound of 
body, but also unsound of mind, unsound of judgment. 

R2690 : page 264 

The primary lessons of God's children in the school 
of Christ are to the effect that we all lack wisdom, and 
that for this very reason he has provided his Book, 
the Bible,— "that the man of God may be thoroughly 
furnished."— 2 Tim. 3:16,17. 

We are taught in the Book that the work of salvation 
is one too great for humanity itself, and that 
therefore God has undertaken the work; we are taught 
that he has not left the matter to operate itself at random, 
neither has he left it to our imperfect judgments 
and puny efforts: we are taught that the great Savior 
of the world planned his work "from the foundation 
of the world," and yet that it was four thousand 
years and more before he took the first great step for 
its accomplishment, namely, the giving of his Son to 
be the redemption price of Adam and his race (1 Pet. 1:20); 
we are taught that having begun this work of 



salvation God has not abandoned it, and does not intend 

to abandon it, but that eventually "he shall bring 

forth judgment [trial] unto victory;"— and that eventually 

our Lord Jesus shall see the fruit of the travail 

of his soul on man's behalf, and shall be satisfied;— 

that eventually the knowledge of the Lord shall fill 

the whole earth, and all shall know him from the least 

to the greatest; that eventually he shall bring in everlasting 

righteousness, so that the time shall ultimately 

come when all the families of the earth shall be blessed 

with the knowledge of God's goodness and grace, and 

with an opportunity to benefit thereby; that eventually 

whosoever will not obey the great Prophet-King 

shall be cut off from amongst the people in the Second 

Death; that eventually there shall be no more dying, 

no more sighing, no more crying, no more pain there, 

because the former things of Adamic sin and its penalty 

and blight shall have been done away.— Isa. 14:24,27; 

55:11; Matt. 12:20; Isa. 53:11; 11:9; Jer. 31:34; 

Acts 3:19-23; Rev. 21:3,4. 

But many of God's dear people overlook these 
gracious provisions and promises of his Word, and 
partaking to a considerable extent of the spirit of love 
they forget that God's love is still greater than their 
own, even as God's wisdom is greater than theirs; 
hence they lose sight of the fact that the entire plan 
of salvation is of God, and that he has not abandoned 
it to others, but will carry it out himself in his own 
due time. It is because they forget this that they 
become burdened with the weight of responsibility, 
and feel as tho the salvation of the world rested upon 
themselves,— and, impressed with this feeling of self-importance 
and forgetfulness of God's Word, they 
go into the mission work, slum work, and to the 
heathen. They forget, and are greatly disadvantaged 
by so doing, that God has already declared, "As the 
heavens are higher than the earth, so are my plans 
higher than your plans, and my ways higher than 
your ways."— Isa. 55:8,9. 

As a consequence of this oversight and misdirection 
of effort, these dear friends are doing works now 
which God intends shall be done in a future age, and 
which can and will be done then to very much better 
advantage every way. God has appointed the Millennial 
age for this work of lifting up the weak, opening 
the blind eyes of the barbarians, and unstopping 
their dull ears to hear the message of divine grace. 
God has appointed that when his time for this great 
work, in which he is more interested than any of his 
creatures possibly could be, will come, the conditions 
will be favorable to the success of his plan, which he 
guarantees us will succeed, and will bring blessing to 
all the families of the earth, and will enlighten every 
man born into the world.— Gal. 3:16,29; John 1:9; 
Acts 3:19-21. 

God's Word informs those who seek his counsel, 



R2690 : page 265 

that at that time Satan shall be bound so that he may 

deceive the nations no more, as he is now doing (Rev. 20:1-3): 

that during that period of Satan's restraint 

those whom he now blinds (2 Cor. 4:4) with various 

false doctrines, sophistries, superstitions, etc., will be 

freed from these, and have the eyes and ears of their 

understanding opened. It informs us also, that at 

that time he will establish as the King over all the 

earth his honored agent, who gave his life as a ransom 

for mankind; and that our Lord Jesus will establish 

the Kingdom of God amongst men, a Kingdom 

not merely in name, but also in power and in fact; one 

which shall rule the world, forcibly putting down sin, 

oppression, ignorance, superstition, darkness; and 

raising up righteousness, truth, and every good principle 

and influence for the blessing and uplifting of 

those whom he purchased with his precious blood. 

It informs us that under his beneficent reign all evil 

shall be subdued, that even death shall be conquered: 

and that all mankind, freed from the Adamic sentence 

of death, may, if they will, then attain unto eternal 

life and full human perfection, and that only the wilful 

sinners against light and opportunity will be utterly 

destroyed in the Second Death.— 1 Cor. 15:24-28; 

2Thess. 1:8,9; Acts 3:23. 

The same Word instructs us that the Lord's plan for 
the present age does not purpose the conversion of the 
world; nor its salvation in any sense of the word; nor 
its uplifting; but that his plan, on the contrary, is 
simply the development of the Church, the foreordained 
and predestinated number, a "little flock," who must 
all be selected from amongst men, and every one of 
them be copies of God's dear Son. (Rom. 8:29.) It 
also informs us that this work of God in this age is 
the work in which we are invited to be co-workers 
together with God. It points out to us that this is 
the work of the Bride— to make herself ready for the 
marriage (Rev. 19:7); that the special work in this 
present time consists not only in the "calling" of the 
Church, but also in the building up of one another, 
among the called ones, in the most holy faith;— helping 
one another to perfect holiness in the reverence 
of the Lord,— showing us that a large part of our work 
is in our own hearts, cleansing ourselves from all 
filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, helping one 
another to make our calling and our election sure, by 
perfecting in our hearts the Golden Rule.— 2 Cor. 7:1; 
Jude 20. 

But overlooking the particular service marked out 
for those who would be co-workers with God in this 
age, our dear friends, now criticised, misuse their Golden 
Rule, by applying it outside of the class for which 
the Lord intended it in this age. It will be applicable 



to all the heathen world and the sub-stratum of society 
in the Millennial age, but now it is applicable chiefly 
to the household of faith. True, if we could accomplish 
all that the Lord would have us accomplish for 
the household of faith, it would then be very proper 
for us to extend our efforts to the heathen and lower 
strata of society, rather than to sit down in idleness; 
but so far from finding that we have not enough to 
engage our time in the household of faith, we find 
that we are in the harvest-time of the age, and that 
the harvest is great and the laborers are few, and that 
there is much more than enough to engage all our 
time and energies among the "brethren" whom the 
Lord our God has called. Hence the Golden Rule 
calls us to be exercised chiefly amongst these, and not 
amongst those whom the Lord our God has not yet 
called, but who are left, in the divine plan, for a calling 
and blessing of another kind in the next age— the 
Millennial age. 

Looking back we see that our dear Master, who 
gave the Golden Rule, observed it in the manner we 
are now advocating. Living in the end of the Jewish 
age, and knowing that the divine favors and blessings 
at that time were confined to fleshly Israel, our Lord, 
with a full appreciation of the Golden Rule, nevertheless 
used it in strict harmony with the Father's plan; 
and accordingly instructed his twelve apostles also, 
saying, "Go ye not into the way of the Gentiles, and 
into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not; for I am 
not sent save to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." 
(Matt. 10:5,6; 15:24,26.) Likewise the apostles understood 
that while, at the death of Christ, the middle 
wall of partition, which had heretofore separated divine 
favor from other nations, was now broken down, so 
that, so far as God was concerned, the Gospel message 
was open to every creature,— nevertheless, that every 
creature had not open ears for the Gospel, and that 
according to the Lord's plan he would not open their 
ears until his due time, the Millennial age, and hence 
it was that the apostles sought for the class to whom 
the present message, the high calling for the Church, 
was intended,— "He that hath an ear, let him hear." 

Pursuing this policy of searching for those who 
had ears to hear, the Apostle Paul, sent by the Lord 
to be the great messenger of grace to the Gentiles, 
did not say within himself (as some of our dear missionary 
friends seem to say within themselves), I will 
seek out the most illiterate and degraded people in 
the world, that I may lift them up. Had this been 
the Apostle's sentiment he doubtless would have hastened, 
with his coadjutors, southward from Jerusalem 
into darkest Africa, or eastward from Jerusalem into 
India, with its hundreds of millions, and still further 
eastward into China, with its hundreds of millions, 
in utter ignorance of God and steeped in superstition. 



R2691 : page 266 

But the Apostle had made a better study of the divine 

plan, and knew that the times of restitution, the Millennial 

age, was set apart by God for this general uplift 

of mankind; and that it would be a waste of effort 

to undertake to do that work in advance of God's cooperation; 

in advance of his time and in advance of 

his arrangements, which his wisdom foresaw would be 

necessary to the accomplishment of that work. 

The Apostle reasoned, on the contrary, "God hath 
appointed a day in the which he will judge the world 
in righteousness" (Acts 17:31), and that appointed 
day is a future day, the Millennial day; and if God 
has appointed that day to be the time for the 
world's judgment, it would be folly on my part to attempt 
to bring in a judgment of the world sooner than 
God intends it, even if I were able to do so. He reasoned, 
further, that if God has appointed a future day 
forjudging the world in general, then the world in 
general is not on trial or under judgment in the present 
Gospel day, and hence might just as well be left 
in their heathen darkness a little longer, as God already 
had left them in heathen darkness for more than four 
thousand years;— and he reasoned wisely, logically. 
He was instructed of the Lord, and hence he had the 
spirit of a sound mind, and did not attempt to do an 
utterly impossible and hence a foolish thing. He did 
not attempt to be either wiser or more loving than 
the Heavenly Father, but trusting to the Heavenly 
Father's wisdom and love he sought to know the will 
of God now, in this present age, that he might thus 
be an ambassador for God and a co-worker together 
with him. 

Nor was he left in darkness. He was instructed 
of the Lord, and he in turn instructs us, that the work 
of the present age is the work of preparing the judges 
of the world, who, when the great day of the world's 
judgment or trial shall have dawned, will be prepared 
to execute judgment and justice in the world, and to 
bless with a righteous rule all the families of the earth. 
He informs us that the saints now being tried (judged), 
tested and developed in character are undergoing this 
severe process, and are required to walk in the "narrow 
way," to the intent that they may be fit to be instruments 
of God forjudging the world in righteousness 
when the due time for that judgment shall have come. 
(1 Cor. 6:2,3.) Consequently, we find that the Apostle's 
energies, so far from being directed to the substratum 
of society, the heathen and the barbarians, 
were directed to the very opposite class. He sought 
the best people in the world; the most moral people 
and the most intelligent; the people most advanced in 
every sense of the word— believing, and rightly, that 
the reasonable and gracious plan of God would commend 
itself better to such than to the sodden and benighted 



and stupefied and degraded minds of the barbarian 

heathen. Conservatively, the Apostle first 

sought the intelligent classes of Asia Minor, and after 

having gone through various cities (not attempting 

nor expecting to convert the people en masse, but 

merely hoping, in harmony with the divine program, 

to find a few, a little flock, and to establish these in 

principles of righteousness and in the School of Christ, 

to learn of him and to develop character, and to be 

prepared for the future work of judgeship and joint-heirship 

with Christ in the Kingdom)— the Apostle 

pressed on to find still others who had "ears to hear." 

The declaration of the Scriptures is that he and 
his company purposed to go into Asia, but that under 
divine providence he seemed to be hindered from going 
there, and that then God specially directed him 
in a dream, and sent him into Europe with the message 
—sending him, not to barbarians, but to the most 
enlightened and most cultured people of the then civilized 
world, the people of Greece. (Acts 16:7-10.) 
And we remember that later on the Lord sent the 
Apostle to Rome, telling him in advance that this was 
his purpose, and seemingly in order to keep the Apostle 
in Rome he was sent there a prisoner, yet for three 
years was permitted to have full liberty to preach 
Christ to as many as had ears to hear. And let us 
not forget a circumstance which occurred in connection 
with the journey to Rome, when the Apostle was shipwrecked 
on the Island of Mileta. (Acts 28:1-10.) He 
found there a people who, so far as we are able to 
judge, were on the average better prepared for the 
truth than the Chinese, Malays, etc., and of these the 
record says, "The barbarians showed us no little kindness." 
We might suppose that barbarians who were 
disposed to be kind and generous to people who were 
shipwrecked on their coast, would be a rather more 
favorable class to approach with the gospel of Christ 
than cannibals, to whom missionaries of to-day frequently 

go- 

And yet what do we find as the result of the 
Apostle's stay in the midst of that people all that winter? 
Do we read that he left several flourishing little 
missions? Do we read that he preached day and night 
unto the barbarians? Not a word of it; no mention 
is made of the slightest effort to reach them. The 
Apostle seemingly knew that they were too degraded 
to have any ear to hear the Christian message, or to 
be called with the high calling which God during this 
age is sending forth, to gather the Bride for his Son. 
We have every reason to believe that the Apostle made 
no effort whatever to make known the Gospel of Christ 
to those heathen people. Quite possibly while he 
was there forcibly detained in their midst, and unable 
to reach those who would have an ear to hear the good 

R2691 : page 267 



tidings, he may have attempted to suggest to them 

certain moral reforms, or how to live more comfortably, 

or something else that would come within the 

range of their measure of intelligence. But apparently 

he had no thought whatever that the gospel 

"High Calling" was for such, and hence the Golden 

Rule, operating in his life and governing his conduct, 

was limited accordingly— limited to act in harmony 

with the divine revelation and the divine plan. 

Why is it that the example of Jesus and his inspired 
apostles is overlooked by so many of our dear 
Christian friends to-day? Why is it that they use 
their Golden Rule without respect to the divine plan 
and divine promise? We answer, It is because some 
of them are leaning to their own understanding, instead 
of seeking the divine Word, and to be taught 
of God; they think they know what ought to be done 
without inquiring of God's Word, and they are going 
about to do what they think should be done, rather 
than seeking to follow heaven's directions and Apostolic 
example. Many of them, indeed, are not self-conceited 
to the extent of being careless respecting 
advice; indeed, many of them are quite lacking in 
thought on their own part, and only too willing and 
too anxious to take advice of others; but they are 
not sufficiently careful where they get the advice. 

They say to themselves, We belong to the Presbyterian 
body: look at its millions; look at its education; 
look at its influence. Or, We belong to the 
Methodist body: look at its numbers, influence, etc., 
etc. The same is true of the others. And then they 
ask, Is it possible that all these wise and learned men 
should be mistaken? Do they not all advocate that 
we should thus go out to preach the gospel amongst 
the heathen? Yes, we answer; this is a part of the 
delusion: many of the great and worldly-wise have 
adopted a theory, and are attempting to operate the 
Golden Rule wholly outside of and in utter neglect of 
the divine plan. Their theory is that God's Kingdom 
has come, and they point to the civilized nations of 
Europe and America as evidences and proofs that 
God's Kingdom has come, and they say, What all 
zealous Christians should now do is to convert the 
Chinese nation, the Japanese nation, India, and all the 
tribes of the earth, that these also may become Christian 
nations like those of Europe and America, and 
thus the whole world will become God's Kingdom. 

But we answer, This is false, utterly false; the 
nations of Europe and America are not God's Kingdom, 
notwithstanding the fact that they claim to be 
Christian nations, and that they put upon their coins 
that their monarchs reign by the grace of God. They 
are all, at best and at most, "kingdoms of this world," 
under the control of Satan, "the prince of this world." 
(John 14:30.) These are the kingdoms which at the 



advent of Christ's Kingdom he declares shall be broken 
in pieces as a potter's vessel, as being utterly unfit 
for his service, and utterly out of harmony with the 
principles of righteousness which will be established 
in his Kingdom.— Rev. 2:26,27; Dan. 2:45. 

Alas! if these kingdoms of so-called Christendom 
be the fulfilment of our dear Redeemer's prayer which 
he taught us as his disciples, "Thy Kingdom come; 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven"— 
if we must accept these as God's Kingdom, if we must 
think of their rule as being God's will done on earth 
as it is done in heaven— then some of us are greatly 
disappointed, for we find that God's will is very little 
done on earth, and consequently heaven, if no better 
than this, must be a pandemonium in comparison to 
what we had hoped for. 

But we are not mistaken; the Lord's Word everywhere 
teaches that the present Gospel age is for the 
selection of the Kingdom class, the saints, who by and 
by, in God's due time, shall be joint-heirs with Christ 
in his Kingdom, and inheritors with him of the great 
promises made to Father Abraham, that this seed, 
Christ (head and body-Gal. 3: 16,29), shall bless all 
the families of the earth, as God's Kingdom bringing 
in everlasting righteousness. Would to God that we 
could assist to some extent in opening the blinded eyes 
of Christendom on this subject: and yet we could not 
hope to render any assistance to the general mass of 
churchianity,— for it is the divine plan that not the 
"tares," but only the "wheat," shall now understand. 
-Dan. 12:10; 1 Thes. 5:3-5. 

All we can hope for is that those who are the 
Lord's true saints are not, and never have been, fully 

R2692 : page 267 

satisfied with the position in which they are, and the 
work which they are doing; but realize a heart-hunger 
for something better, more satisfactory, and more in 
harmony with the divine character and power— that 
these who have ears, and who have already heard to 
some extent the true gospel, might now hear the true 
ring of the Shepherd's voice, and thus be called away 
from Babylon and its confusion of error, its jargon of 
contradiction and insincerity, to the green pastures 
and still waters of divine truth— present truth— that 
thus separated (delivered from Babylon's bondage) 
they might be more fully united with the Shepherd 
himself, and become co-workers together with God in 
his work, learning to exercise the Golden Rule in their 
own hearts, in their own lives, and to help others of 
the household of faith and the Bride of Christ to do 
the same. 

Nor are we to overlook the fact that while the 
present Gospel message is for the highest types of 
men, it appeals specially to the middle class of these 



—the humble but intelligent rather than the rich or 
great. "Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in 
thy sight. "-Matt. 11:25,26. 



R2692 : page 268 

WATCHING AND ITS REWARD. 

-LUKE 12:35-46.-SEPT. 23.- 

GOLDEN TEXT: -"Watch and pray, that ye 
enter not into temptation."— Matt. 26:41. 

PRAYER IS GOOD; it is absolutely indispensable 

to Christian life. It means, not only a 

living faith, but a growing faith. Experience will prove 

that neglect of either private prayer (Matt. 6:6) or 

prayer in the congregation of the Lord's people (Acts 12:12; 

1:14; 16:13; 1 Cor. 11:4,5; 14:13,14) is sure to 

lead to leanness of soul and lukewarmness in respect 

to spiritual things— unfaithfulness, coldness, death. 

On the contrary, communion with the Lord in prayer 

brings increased confidence in the Lord's supervision 

of our affairs; increased faith in all the exceeding great 

and precious promises of his Word; increased realization 

of his leadings, past and present; increased love for all 

the brethren of Christ, and increased solicitude for their 

welfare and spiritual progress. Prayer is thus closely 

and actively identified with progress in spiritual things, 

progress in the fruits of the spirit, toward God, the 

brethren, and all men. 

Our Golden Text suggests, however, that more than 
praying is necessary. Praying that does not fully represent 
the sentiments of the heart is apt very quickly 
to degenerate into a mere form of words— drawing nigh 
to the Lord with the lips while the heart is far from 
him,— perhaps enwrapped in business or pleasure or 
sin. Whoever, therefore, would make progress in the 
spiritual way must not only pray with the spirit and 
with the understanding, but he must also watch— against 
the sinful tendencies of his own flesh— self-gratification, 
selfishness; also against the allurements of the world 
toward so-called worldly pleasures, worldly ambitions, 
honor amongst men, the love of money, etc.; also 
against the wiles of the Adversary, whose deceitful attacks 
usually come upon the Lord's people as "an angel 
of light"— to deceive them into forms and ceremonies 
of Churchianity, substituting before the mind 
and affections and consecrated intentions, human sentiments 
and methods and works and objectives, as instead 
of "the hope set before us in the Gospel" (Col. 1:23) 
and its various exceeding great and precious 
promises, by whose incentive the Lord has called us to 
walk and to run, by faith and not by sight, following in 



the footsteps of our Redeemer. 

Our lesson itself deals particularly with the watching; 
but in harmony with the Golden Text we know 
that all true watchers must also be prayers, and that 
all fervent prayers will also be watchers. Prayer represents 
the faith; watching represents the works which 
must accompany it, so long as it is a living faith; for, 
as the Apostle declares, Faith without works is dead- 
it speedily loses its vitality, its value, its very existence. 

Our Lord gave a parable, as was his custom in 
teaching, to illustrate this lesson of the necessity for 
watchfulness. 

A wealthy householder is represented as absent for 
a considerable portion of the night at a wedding -feast, 
and expecting on his return that the servants of the 
household would be awake and alert to receive him and 
any company he might bring with him. It was expected 
of such servants that they would not only not 
retire to bed, but that they would not even get drowsy. 
To give their master a proper reception they should be 
thoroughly awake, quick to hear and to respond to his 
knock, and to "open unto him immediately." Hence, 
in the parable, such servants are represented as having 
their loins girt about and their lamps burning brightly. 
The custom of Orientals at that time was to wear long, 
loose, flowing robes. These, when they were resting, 
were loosened at the girdle, but when attending to business 
they were drawn tightly at the waist with a girdle 
or belt, preventing them from interfering with proper 
service. Lamps, which were the mode of illumination, 
were also necessary in the night, and should not be 
permitted to grow dim, but be trimmed as necessity 
required. 

Our Lord points out that such faithful servants 
would be appreciated by their master, and that he would 
give them a reward— he would honor them by treating 
them as his friends, and bring forth to them of the good 
things from his pantry. He would indeed gird himself 
as a servant and serve these faithful ones: and for 
the master of the house to do this would imply the 
bringing forth of the very best that he possessed. But 
in order to fulfil the conditions and be thus acceptable 
to their master they must be ready in whatever hour 
of the night he might come. 

The parable, without question, refers to the second 
coming of our Lord Jesus, and points out to all of his 
faithful servants the proper attitude of watchfulness 
and preparation to receive him at whatever time his 
second advent should occur. It also indicates that it 
was the Lord's good pleasure not to reveal definitely 
and positively to his people when to expect his arrival, 
but rather that all the way down through this night-time 
which we designate the Gospel age, and which 
must necessarily precede the morning of the Millennial 
day, they should be continually awake, alert, waiting 
for him, ready to receive him at any moment. They 



should have the loins of their minds girt up and be 
active in thought, in word and in deed, in every matter 
pertaining to the Master's service, that they might be 
approved of him;— the lamp of the divine Word, so 
necessary to their enlightenment, should be with them, 
and well supplied with the oil of the holy spirit— and 
well trimmed, in the sense of rightly dividing the word 
of truth, and seeking to understand through it their 
proper attitude of heart and conduct, to be pleasing to 
their Master. 

R2692 : page 269 

The parable is a very simple one, and could scarcely 
be misapprehended by the class for whom all parables 
are intended— the consecrated Church. These realize 
at once that the central thought with them, as the Lord's 
servants, must be such readiness of heart and mind 
and character as will be pleasing to the Master when 
he shall come to gather his "jewels,"— his watching, 
faithful servants. This thought of the return of the 
Lord, and of the blessings which he has promised to his 
faithful ones at that time, is the great incentive set before 
the called ones of this Gospel age. It is for the 
Master's favor and the consequent exaltation with him 
to a share in his Kingdom, then to be established, and 
a share in the great work of blessing the world of mankind, 
then to be accomplished, that all of the saints are 
seeking, watching, praying, striving. 

Well has the Apostle said, "He that hath this hope 
in him purifieth himself even as he [the looked-for 
Master] is pure." It is this hope that leads the faithful 
servants continually to the lamp of the divine Word, 
to trim it and to thereby keep themselves thoroughly 
awake, quick of ear and quick of eye in respect to any 
and every thing relating to the will of the expected 
Master, and such conditions of heart-purity and robes 
of righteousness as would be pleasing and acceptable 
in his sight at his arrival. 

Let all watchers fully appreciate this parable, and 
be on guard against every ensnarement of the Adversary, 
and against the stupefying influence of the world 
and its spirit, and against the selfishness and weaknesses 
of his own flesh; and let each put on the graces 
of the spirit, and assist his fellow-servants in these preparations, 
that thus an entrance may be ministered to 
him into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, 
Jesus Christ.-2 Pet. 1:4-12. 

What great blindness and spiritual stupor respecting 
so simple a parable is manifested by many who are 
regarded as teachers in nominal Zion, in respect to this 
lesson! Note the interpretation of it offered by one of 
the leading "Helps to Sunday School teachers." The 
writer evidently is not so blind as to fail to see that the 
parable relates in some manner to the second coming 
of our Lord; but he is so blinded by misconceptions, 



R2693 : page 269 

false doctrines, etc., as to give the following as an 
explanation:— 

"The comings of the Lord are ever unexpected to 
us,— his coming at death, his coming to judge the world, 
his coming in his Kingdom, his coming in the harvest-times 
of men, his coming in the crises of our lives, his 
coming with opportunities and open doors, his coming 
with the power of the holy spirit." 

This blind teacher thus believes in seven comings 
of Christ, additional to his first coming eighteen centuries 
ago. More than this, the words we quote signify 
that the writer believes that a coming of Christ 
occurs every time a death occurs (or possibly he limited 
this to the death of his saints; but other teachers of 
the same school of darkness, when preaching funeral 
sermons, are accustomed to announce the Lord's coming 
in the death, not only of saints, but of pretty nearly 
everybody). This writer further claims a coming of 
Christ in all the crises as well as in all the opportunities 
of human life. He evidently believes (may we 
not say, dreams?— he surely is not awake, and surely 
his lamp is not trimmed and burning, nor the loins of 
his mind girt about) that there are millions of comings 
of Christ. Moreover, speaking (in his dreams) as a 
mouthpiece of the great Adversary, he speaks of the 
harvest-time of men— evidently to direct attention away 
from the Master's explanation that the harvest-time 
will be "the end of this age," in the which he himself 
will be the great Chief Reaper, and will associate with 
him his faithful servants in the work of gathering the 
wheat (his faithful) into his barn (the spiritual condition). 
-Matt. 13:30. 

Note another method of wresting the Scriptures, 
and of attracting the minds of the Lord's people away 
from the great truth everywhere set forth in the Scriptures, 
and particularly enunciated in this parable, viz., 
the second coming of our Lord as King, and the duty 
of all his faithful ones to be ready, expecting and joyously 
waiting for that event. This perversion and 
wresting of the Scriptures is in the interest of temperance, 
and represents the watching as implying temperance 
work, thus: "Not only those who are laboring and 
praying for temperance reform, but the young people 
especially, should be wide awake and watchful in regard 
to temperance. They should watch the effect of strong 
drink upon others. They should watch its effect upon 
the community. They should be on their guard against 
the smallest beginnings of the habit of using intoxicating 
liquors. They should watch for opportunities of 
helping on the cause of temperance by word and by example, 
in public and in private." 

Is it any wonder we hear the Master prophesy respecting 
the unfaithfulness amongst his professed people 



at this time, saying, "When the Son of Man cometh, 

shall he find the faith on the earth?" The form of the 

question implies the answer, No; he will not find the 

faith flourishing in the earth,— not predominating. 

Other Scriptures, however, assure us that at the time 

of his coming he will find a little flock of faithful watchers 

—not many great, wise or learned, but chiefly "the 

poor of this world, rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom." 

As for Babylon in general, she is saying, with louder 

voice than ever, Have we not done! done! done! Are 

we not rich and increased in goods! Are we not compassing 

sea and land to make proselytes! 

R2693 : page 270 

But the Master will say, Thou art poor and blind 
and miserable and naked, and knowest it not! (Rev. 3:17.) 
Thy colleges, of which thou dost boast, are 
they not the very hot-beds of infidelity, denying my 
Word— denying that my work was perfect in the beginning, 
and that present conditions of sin and degradation 
and death are the penalties of violation of my 
righteous law; denying also the value of my sacrifice 
for sins, given that the heavenly Father might be just 
and yet the justifier of him that believeth in me; denying 
that holy men of old spake and wrote as they were 
moved by the holy spirit, and claiming a superior wisdom 
as "higher critics," by which they determine that 
myself and my chosen and inspired apostles were ignorant 
and incompetent and deceived, when we quoted 
the words of the prophets and applied them; denying 
also my second coming, to gather my little flock, the 
Church, to associate them with me in the Kingdom 
promised through the prophets, which shortly shall 
bless all the families of the earth; claiming, on the contrary, 
that all things continue as they were from the beginning, 
—that a process of evolution is in progress, 
and that no Redeemer, no redemption and no restitution 
are necessary— some of them going so far as to claim 
that no personal deity is necessary, but that what they 
call the laws of evolution are the creator, preserver and 
savior of the race. 

Is it any wonder that under such false teachings 
in high places, and the same teachings repeated 
with more or less of ability throughout the length and 
breadth of Babylon— is it any wonder that my people 
are "perishing for lack of knowledge"? (Hos. 4:6.) 
They have "hidden the key of knowledge," and not 
only fail to enter into the privileges and opportunities 
of this Gospel age and its call, but them that would enter 
in they hinder by their false teachings and misrepresentations, 
putting darkness for light, and light for 
darkness. -Luke 11:52; 2 Pet. 2:1; 3:3,4; Amos 8:11; 
Matt. 23:13; Isa. 5:20. 

Alas! that any whose eyes of understanding have 
been opened in any degree should be deluded into supposing 



that he can do God service by cooperating with 
Babylon in any measure, sense or degree. Surely they 
are under the blinding and stupefying influence of the 
Adversary when they do not hear sharply and distinctly 
the Lord's message to all of his true people at this 
time, to come out of Babylon and be not partakers of 
her sins, her errors, her false teachings, and the crime 
implied in these, and on account of which severe scourgings 
are coming upon Babylon, and will fall with special 
severity upon those who had known better, and who for 
any reason have refused to obey the voice of him that 
speaketh from heaven— our present Lord, King, Bridegroom. 
-Heb. 12:25-27; Rev. 18:4. 

Our Lord applied the parable in few words, saying, 
"Be ye, therefore, ready also, for the Son of Man 
cometh at an hour that ye think not." That is to say, 
watchfulness for the great event of the King's return 
would be absolutely indispensable, and would constitute 
a mark or indication of those worthy to be called 
true servants or "brethren." We are not to make the 
mistake of supposing our Lord to mean, Watch incessantly, 
for you will not know when I do come. This 
would be an absurdity. The central thought of the 
parable is that the faithful servants, awake and watching 
at the proper time, will hear the knock, will recognize 
the Lord's presence, will open to him, in the sense 
of believing and accepting his presence, and will be rewarded 
by him in the time of his presence by being 
supplied special knowledge respecting heavenly things 
which would be "meat in due season" to their comfort 
and joy. All who are faithfully watching shall know 
when the event occurs, so surely as those who do not 
watch shall not know. 

The Apostle Paul speaks of this same great event 
and of the same class of watchers, designating them 
brethren; and after explaining that the second coming 
of our Lord would be upon the world as a thief and a 
snare, and that the world will not escape certain trouble 
and overthrow of their systems and politics, he explains 
that, on the contrary, "Ye brethren, are not in darkness, 
that that day should overtake you as a thief"— 
you have your lamps trimmed and burning. As he 
further explains, the brethren worthy to know and to 
escape the troubles incidental to that time do not sleep, 
as do others; they are watchful; they are alert, and 
because thus alert they know of the Bridegroom's arrival, 
of which the world knows not; and in the time 
of his presence these brethren are fed with special 
spiritual food, which the world knows not of. The 
Master himself is sending forth, at the hands of his 
servants, the needed meat in due season, things new 
and old for the strengthening of his household for this 
present time of trial and for the perfecting of the saints 
for the work of ministry, to which he has called them. 
-1 Thess. 5:1-6. 



TO WHOM DOES THE PARABLE SPECIALLY APPLY? 



This was Peter's question. He wondered whether 
or not the Lord meant that the specially chosen twelve 
apostles were these servants who must watch and wait 
for him at his second coming, or whether the parable 
was of general application, and meant that everybody 
should watch. Our Lord did not answer this question 
directly, for to have done so would have been contrary 
to the divine plan; to have answered directly, to have 
shown that our Lord was not coming in the early watches 
of the Gospel night, would thus have been in contradiction 

R2693 : page 271 

of the very teaching of the parable, that he 

must be watched for all through the Gospel night. 

Evading this feature of Peter's question our Lord embraces 
the opportunity to give some further instruction, 
and explains to Peter and to us all that at that time, 
"then," i.e., at the time of his return, his second advent, 
he would look out and appoint a steward for the 
dispensing of spiritual food to the household of faith; 
and that a special blessing would be with that steward 
in the event of his faithfulness, and that he would be 
removed from the stewardship in the event of unfaithfulness. 
Faithfulness on the part of this steward 
would imply larger and continued service in dispensing 

R2694: page 271 

the meat to the household of faith at that time. But 

unfaithfulness on his part, and a disposition to tyrannize 

the household, would be sure to result in his being 

cut off from further opportunities for serving the household, 

and lead to his having a severe experience with 

the unbelievers in the time of trouble then to come 

upon the world. And altho it is not stated, it is fairly 

inferable that such an one being deposed from stewardship, 

another would take his place, subject to similar 

terms and conditions as to faithfulness. 

In certain senses of the word, and in certain respects, 
every child of God is a steward— a steward of 
his own talents, opportunities, privileges, abilities in 
the Lord's service; and each one is to recognize that 
his responsibilities as a steward in these respects is 
toward the Master who gave him the talents, and who 
will require at his hands an account thereof— an increase 
by reason of proper use. We are not, therefore, 
to understand our Lord's answer to Peter to imply that 
none of the household but the one are in any sense of 
the word regarded as stewards. Such an interpretation 
would be in conflict with numerous Scriptures. We 
are to notice that the stewardship mentioned is not a 



stewardship of talents and opportunities, but a stewardship 
of spiritual food merely. 

Neither does it imply that in the end of this age, 
and at the time of our Lord's presence and the sending 
forth of meat in due season that the special steward 
alone will have to do with the dispensing of the food 
for the household, for, as shown in Matthew's account 
of this parable (Matt. 24:45-51), there are "fellow-servants" 
whose duty and privilege it will be to cooperate 
with this steward in the dispensing of the viands, the 
feeding of the household of faith. The thought would 
seem to be that in the interest of the household, and 
for its comfort and joy and blessing, the Master at an 
appropriate time would furnish to some one of his servants 
a key to the precious things of his Word, thus 
providing bountifully "things new and old" for the 
sustenance and joy of the household, and minister these 
through numerous fellow-servants, as well as through 
the one to whom the key of this stewardship would be 
specially entrusted. 

In this connection we are to remember that every 
stewardship brings with it weighty responsibilities, and 
while such responsibilities are not to be shirked, neither 
are any of them to be undertaken lightly, without appreciating 
the fact that every one who becomes a servant 
of the household of faith has thereby a larger degree 
of responsibility, not only toward the household, 
but toward the Master of the house, from whom comes 
every commission. And every servant is to remember 
that unfaithfulness would surely lead to his removal, 
even as every manifestation of humble faithfulness on 
his part will endear him to the Master and to every 
faithful member of the household, and imply his continuance 
in the service until the Master shall say, 
"Well done, good and faithful servant; enter into the 
joys of thy Lord." 



R2694: page 271 

REVIEW OF THIRD QUARTER.-SEPT. 30. 



"Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your 
own selves."— Jas. 1:22. 



Reviews are frequently profitable, and especially 
so when conducted in the light of this Golden Text; 
with a view to noting to what extent we have heard 
the voice of the Son of Man, and to what extent we 
have been obedient to his messages. To fancy ourselves 
as making spiritual progress merely by gaining 



information respecting the Lord, his miracles, his teachings, 
etc., is to get the nut and crack it and drop the 
kernel, the thing of real value. 

It is in harmony with this thought that our Lord 
declared, "The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of 
Man, and they that hear shall live." The dead are 
the entire human family, all of whom must hear the 
voice, the teaching of this great Prophet, whom the 
Father has sent, not only to redeem, but also to restore 
so many of the human family as will accept his favors 
upon his terms. All must hear eventually, but comparatively 
few have the hearing ears at the present time. 
The prince of this world blinds the mind, closes and 
stupefies the ear, or makes what may be heard of no 
effect through traditions of men, or through hardness 
and selfishness of the hearer's own heart. Blessed are 
our eyes if, seeing and hearing of the Lord's grace 
and goodness toward us and toward all of his creatures, 
we at once fall into obedience to the spirit of the great 
Teacher's instructions. In so doing we will have passed 
from death unto life— gradually, until, under the ministry 
of the great Prophet, as sharers in the first resurrection, 
we shall be perfected and possess life in perfection, 
yea, life more abundantly,— immortality. 



page 273 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 


