





CHAPTER 123
Praying When Deeply Grieved

MATTHEW 26:30, 36-46  MARK 14:26, 32-42  LUKE 22:39-46  JOHN 18:1
           JESUS IN THE GARDEN OF GETHSEMANE

           HIS SWEAT IS AS DROPS OF BLOOD






Jesus finishes praying with his faithful apostles. Then, ‘after singing praises, they go out to the Mount of Olives.’ (Mark 14:26) They head eastward to a garden called Gethsemane, where Jesus is accustomed to going.
Once they arrive at this pleasant spot among the olive trees, Jesus leaves eight of the apostles behind. Perhaps they remain near the garden’s entrance, for he tells them: “Sit down here while I go over there and pray.” Taking along three apostles​—Peter, James, and John—​Jesus goes farther into the garden. He becomes greatly troubled and tells the three: “I am deeply grieved, even to death. Stay here and keep on the watch with me.”​—Matthew 26:36-38.
Going some distance away from them, Jesus ‘falls to the ground and begins praying.’ What is he praying to God about at this intense moment? He prays: “Father, all things are possible for you; remove this cup from me. Yet, not what I want, but what you want.” (Mark 14:35, 36) What does he mean? Is he backing away from his role as Ransomer? No!
Jesus has observed from heaven the extreme suffering of others put to death by the Romans. Now as a human, who has tender feelings and who can feel pain, Jesus is not looking forward to what awaits him. More important, though, he is in agony because he senses that his dying like a despicable criminal might bring reproach on his Father’s name. In a few hours, he will be hanged on a stake as if he were a blasphemer against God.
After praying at length, Jesus returns and finds the three apostles sleeping. He says to Peter: “Could you not so much as keep on the watch for one hour with me? Keep on the watch and pray continually, so that you may not enter into temptation.” Jesus realizes that the apostles too have been under stress, and it is late. He adds: “The spirit, of course, is eager, but the flesh is weak.”​—Matthew 26:40, 41.
Then Jesus goes off a second time and asks that God remove from him “this cup.” On returning, he once again finds the three apostles asleep, when they should have been praying that they not enter into temptation. When Jesus speaks to them, they do “not know what to answer him.” (Mark 14:40) A third time Jesus goes off, and he bends down on his knees to pray.
Jesus is deeply concerned about the reproach that his death as a criminal will bring on his Father’s name. Jehovah is hearing his Son’s prayers, though, and at one point God sends an angel to strengthen him. Even so, Jesus does not stop supplicating his Father, but he keeps “praying more earnestly.” The emotional stress is enormous. What a weight is on Jesus’ shoulders! His own eternal life and that of believing humans is at stake. In fact, his ‘sweat becomes as drops of blood falling to the ground.’​—Luke 22:44.
When Jesus returns the third time to his apostles, he again finds them sleeping. “At such a time as this,” he says, “you are sleeping and resting! Look! The hour has drawn near for the Son of man to be betrayed into the hands of sinners. Get up, let us go. Look! My betrayer has drawn near.”​—Matthew 26:45, 46.



HIS SWEAT IS AS DROPS OF BLOOD
Physician Luke does not explain how Jesus’ sweat “became as drops of blood.” (Luke 22:44) Luke may have been speaking illustratively, that the sweat resembled blood dripping from a wound. An alternate idea was offered by Dr. William D. Edwards in The Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA): “Although this is a very rare phenomenon, bloody sweat (hematidrosis . . . ) may occur in highly emotional states . . . As a result of hemorrhage into the sweat glands, the skin becomes fragile and tender.”


            After leaving the upper room, where does Jesus lead the apostles?

            What are three apostles doing while Jesus prays?

            That Jesus’ sweat becomes as drops of blood indicates what about his feelings?




