Follow the Example Set by Jesus
 1. What example did Jesus set?
1 When we participate in the disciple-making work, we must keep in mind that our example can have a powerful effect on those who observe us. Jesus taught by word and deed. Those observing him could see his zeal, his love for people, his focused desire to sanctify his Father’s name, and his determination to accomplish his Father’s will.​—1 Pet. 2:21.
 2. In what ways can our example affect those working with us in the ministry?
2 While in the House-to-House Ministry: As with Jesus, our example influences those who are working along with us. Newer and less experienced publishers who see us zealously engaging in the ministry will think about the quality of their share in the preaching work. When they observe our joy and genuine interest in others, they will be reminded of the importance of demonstrating such qualities in their ministry. When they notice our diligence in using the Scriptures, in making return visits, and in conducting Bible studies, they will be motivated to do the same.
 3. How may our example instruct Bible students, and what may they learn?
3 When Conducting Bible Studies: Our Bible students will especially observe our conduct. For example, though we may explain to them the importance of preparing for the study, looking up the scriptures, and underlining key points, they will notice whether we are prepared. (Rom. 2:21) If we are punctual for our appointment to study with them, they will be less inclined to let other activities interfere with their Bible study. They will also no doubt take note of our self-sacrificing disposition for the ministry and our resolute faith. It is not surprising that students of those who closely follow the example of Jesus often become zealous, productive evangelizers.
 4. When we attend congregation meetings, what is taught by our example?
4 When Attending Congregation Meetings: All those forming part of the Christian congregation have a part in teaching by example at congregation meetings. Interested ones who begin attending meetings benefit from the good example they observe in the congregation. They will notice the warm brotherhood, Christian unity, and modest dress and grooming. (Ps. 133:1) Our example of loyal attendance at congregation meetings and our public declaration of our faith while there will also be noticed. A visitor at one of our meetings observed how quickly a small girl was able to find a cited verse in her own Bible and how attentively she followed the reading. Her example moved him to request a Bible study.
 5. Why should we never underestimate the value of our example?
5 The Scriptures encourage us to imitate the positive example of one another. (Phil. 3:17; Heb. 13:7) Therefore, we should remember that if we closely follow the example set by Jesus, it will be observed by others and can influence them in a positive way. Realizing this, may we take to heart the words found at 1 Timothy 4:16: “Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching.”

