Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting September 10
Song 225
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the September 15 Watchtower and the September Awake! In each case, the magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one magazine is featured.
15 min: Question Box. Audience discussion to be handled by an elder. As time permits, read and discuss the cited scriptures.
20 min: “Follow the Example Set by Jesus.”a Invite audience to relate how they have benefited from the good example of others.
Song 130 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 17
Song 60
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: How Did We Do Last Year? Service overseer reviews the past service year, focusing on the good things accomplished in the ministry. Give appropriate commendation. Mention one or two areas that need attention during the new service year. Comment on the activity of the pioneers, commending them for their good work. Relate the good results achieved from efforts to assist inactive ones.
20 min: A United Brotherhood. Talk and audience discussion based on chapter 16 of Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will.
Song 74 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 24
Song 162
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Use the Know the Bible Tract to Start Bible Studies in October. The offer for October is the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. Where interest is shown, the Know the Bible tract may be used to start a Bible study. Briefly discuss the tract after having attendants distribute one copy, if available, to everyone in attendance. Explain that the tract may be considered with the householder in whole or in part either on the initial call or when you return. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the October 1 Watchtower and the October Awake! In one demonstration, the publisher leaves the tract after the householder refuses the magazines. In the other demonstration, after the householder accepts the magazines, the publisher gives him the tract, discusses page 5 with him, refers to the coupon for the Bible Teach book on page 6, and offers to return with the book.
Song 222 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 1
Song 88
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for September.
15 min: Branch Letter. Talk and audience discussion based on the letter appearing on the front page of this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. Invite audience to relate local experiences from the recent campaign to invite people to attend the “Follow the Christ!” District Convention.
20 min: “Reaching Out in Our Ministry.”b Include comments from brothers and sisters who are reaching out, and have them explain how they continue to look for ways to reach out in their ministry. One or two comments may be arranged in advance.
Song 102 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

