R608 : page 1 

VOL. V. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL AND MAY, 1884. 
NO. 9. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 
101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 



we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



R608 : page 1 

THE DELAY of the last two issues has been unavoidable; a 
variety of circumstances rendered it so. We hope the readers will 
excuse it. The same circumstances will still further delay the long- 
promised book, MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN, but we are doing the 
best we can. 



CHANGE OF ADDRESS. 

We have removed our business office to NO. 44 FEDERAL ST., 
ALLEGHENY CITY, PA. Hereafter all mail matter should be 
directed to the new office, but MONEY ORDERS should be made 
payable at Pittsburgh, Pa. 



page 1 

ROBBING THE MAILS. 

Some one in P.O. employ has discovered that we often get letters 
containing money, and has been robbing us lately. The only SAFE 
way, therefore, will be for you to send by P.O. MONEY ORDERS, 
or REGISTERED LETTERS, or BANK DRAFTS. Please 
remember this. 



R608 : page 1 

APRIL AND MAY. 

Our removal and other circumstances have so far delayed us, that 
we think it prudent to omit one number and let this one do for the 
two months. This will help to get matters straight in our office, and 
each subscriber can reckon his subscription as paying for one 
month ahead so that it will be no pecuniary loss to any of you. 



R608 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The central point of interest during this month was the 
commemoration on the night of the 8th inst., of the death of Christ 



our Passover— slain for us. This has always been an interesting 
occasion, and this last was no exception, as indicated by our own 
experience here and the letters received from every direction from 
those of like precious faith. 

In some places only two or three assembled, in others more, and 
some isolated individuals alone, but the general testimony is that 
the Master was present at least in spirit; and for aught we know was 
personally present. All seem to have felt, "It is good for us to be 
here." 

The church at this place had a precious season, several from other 
parts making it convenient to be with us. The little company 
numbered about a hundred, and while we partook of the symbols of 
the body and blood of the Lamb of God-"our Passover"-we called 
to remembrance the import of the ceremony —the necessity that 
whoever would be of the first-born must be under the blood and 
must eat or appropriate the slain Lamb. The thought was 
impressive, too, that we not only partake of Christ Jesus' merit, but 
that, as shown in the supper, we commune with or share with him 
as members of the body broken, being made members or parts of 
the same loaf. We heard his words to those who asked for a place in 
the kingdom, "Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of?" 
And with them we answered, By the help of God we are able; and 
we heard the Master's response, "Ye shall indeed drink of the cup"— 
ye shall indeed share in my sufferings and be privileged to fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ: "Drink ye all of it." 

We tried to realize the privilege we enjoy during this Gospel age, in 
that we are permitted to share in the sacrifice without which we 
could not hope to be accounted worthy to sit with him in his throne. 
(Rom. 8:17.) After supper we sang a hymn and went to our homes 
remembering the scenes and incidents of the night and following 
day over eighteen hundred years ago, and rejoiced to realize that the 
sufferings of Christ are nearly ended and the glory to follow almost 
begun. 

Many letters recently received ask for preaching, and truly the 
laborers are few. Pray ye the Lord of the harvest to send forth 
laborers into his vineyard, and as you earnestly pray you will come 
to the point where you will say, Lord cannot I do something?-Lord 
send me. Whoever seeks will find, and to those who knock a door 
of opportunity will open. Unwillingness to serve in an obscure and 
small way is the trouble with many. In the Lord's army as in earthly 
ones there are more privates than captains and corporals needed. 
Let us fall into line, put on the uniform of a Christian life, and 
engage in whatever branch of the service we find opportunity. If 
faithful in lesser things we may be advanced to service requiring 
still greater self-denial and sacrifice. Let each seek to put into active 
service whatever talents he possess; thus he will prove himself a 
good and faithful servant, and enter the joys of his Lord. 

page 1 



We present below extracts from 



SOME INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Peoria, Ills., April 11, 1884. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:— Your welcome letter received. I lecture 
twice Sunday and expect large audiences. Have made more visits 
and acquaintances than usual, and as usual found a few willing to 
listen, if not to hear. 

Mrs. A. celebrated the Passover with me, using the elements, bread 
and wine. Although such a celebration had always greatly affected 
both of us as used in the nominal church, yet the two alone using 
Christ's words and symbols on the anniversary, enjoyed the feast as 
never before. We are so glad you suggested the observance even to 
the ones or twos. Our experience is, that upon proper preparation so 
as not to partake "unworthily" (not discerning the Lord's body) 
great benefit is received. For a day previous we read the proper 
Scriptures and ZION'S WATCH TOWER comments, and while 
communing we read, gave thanks, and conversed on the subjects 
connected. I hope none of the saints are so poorly instructed that 
they cannot think the thoughts, utter the thanks, and speak of 
Christ's work and glory in proper words. We are strengthened and 
rejoiced, having partaken of the bread— truth; and of the wine— the 
cup the Lord offers us. 

As a result of the examination that the celebration calls up, I shall 
endeavor to be more fully alive to every opportunity to preach the 
gospel— even to the ones or twos. I thank God that I am willing to 
use the talents entrusted to me. A minuter search for the few grains 
of wheat in the mass of chaff I have often resolved to make. I must 
do more visiting and feeding of saints. It cannot be so very hard to 
part with the deaf and sightless, saying, "Nevertheless the kingdom 
of heaven has drawn near unto you." A few more rebuffs daily I can 
bear and I MUST. 

Requesting your prayers, I am 

Yours in Christ, 

J. B. AD ANSON. 

P.S. I have my chart on the street in front of the house I board in, 
and many assemble around it; many talks and precious seasons 
when we find heart ears. 



March 5, 1884. 

EDITOR OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER: -Dear Sir-I am learning 
more and more of the plan of our Creator for the redemption of the 
world, and I am so glad that you sent us "Food for Thinking 
Christians," for it was what I wanted. I was a member of the 
Congregationalist church but not in sympathy with its teachings. I 



longed for something better. I thank God that I have it now. I am 
resting in Jesus and I am trying to let others know of the better way. 
My little book has been out a good share of the time, and it has 
been the means of setting some to thinking. I am all alone in this 
way of thinking, not even my husband sympathizes with me, and I 
suppose that I am considered very singular, but I am willing to 
suffer for the truth's sake. The papers that I received for distribution 
I have sent to those I thought would read and think too. Being an 
invalid, I seldom get away from home, so I do not know what effect 
they had. After having done all that lies in my power I am willing 
to let it rest in God's hand. I am nearly sixty years old, and am glad 
that I have found the truth even at this late hour. I ask an interest in 
the prayers of God's people, for I do believe in prayer. I want to be 
found among the faithful, not only on account of a future reward, 
but for the joy it gives me here to know that I am doing God's will. 
