Announcements
HELPING PRISONERS TO SECURE FREEDOM
A full measure of freedom from sickness, sorrow, corruption, false religion, sin and death is unknown in human history since the rebellion in Eden. But Jehovah God has provided a great Liberator, Christ Jesus, who opens the way for men to gain true freedom in a new world, now close at hand. “The creation itself also will be set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God.” (Rom. 8:21, NW) Right now persons of good will everywhere are moving steadily toward that complete freedom. How? By acquainting themselves with the free Word of God, which is the truth that breaks the shackles of false ideas, superstitions and teachings binding them. During September Jehovah’s witnesses will help human prisoners move toward the glorious field of freedom by presenting at each home the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures and a bound book, on a contribution of only $2.
OBTAIN CONVENTION RELEASES
The New World Society Assembly at Yankee Stadium brought forth many new and helpful publications. Above all, you will want to obtain the following three. (1) New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures, 864 pages, includes Genesis to Ruth. It is complete with appendix, drawings and maps. Green leatherette binding, only $1.50 a copy. (2) “New Heavens and a New Earth”, 384 pages. A Bible study aid containing 22 chapters; illustrated; has a chart of outstanding historical dates; subject and scripture indexes. Gold embossed, dark-blue binding, only 50 cents a copy. (3) “Make Sure of All Things”, 416 pages. This is a Bible handbook that deals with 70 major topics. Each is first defined and its origin shown. Then, under subheadings dealing with various aspects of that topic, Scripture texts are quoted without comment that show what the Bible teaches regarding the subject. Brown cloth binding, only 75 cents a copy. All three publications may be had for only $2.75. Write today.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 4: “Walk in the Name of Jehovah Our God for Ever,” ¶1-19.
Week of October 11: “Walk in the Name of Jehovah Our God for Ever,” ¶20-44.

