Kingdom Hall Stoning Protested
CHRIST JESUS foretold that his followers would “be hated by all the nations on account of my name”. (Matt. 24:9, NW) Among the ways in which this hatred manifests itself is by the stoning of the Kingdom Halls of Jehovah’s witnesses. However, not all people who note such stonings approve of them. Men of good will, lovers of righteousness and of freedom of worship, often strongly protest such acts of bigotry and intolerance. For example, on April 23, 1953, the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses in Easton, Pennsylvania, was stoned for the second time, and that while a congregational meeting was in progress. The Easton Express said editorially:
VANDALISM OR BIGOTRY
“It might have been just a release of unbridled young energy, which often results in what adults term ‘vandalism’, that caused the stoning of windows at Kingdom Hall, Easton, during a congregational meeting of Jehovah’s witnesses Thursday night. But inasmuch as it was the second such occurrence, one might ponder the possibility of a deeper and more serious motive, despite the fact that youngsters apparently were involved. A juvenile who expresses prejudice against minority religions and races usually is reflecting prejudices transmitted by adults or environment.
“To apprehend and punish the children involved in the Kingdom Hall stoning incidents would be of no avail, if religious minority prejudices are at the base of this action. It might be a signal of a broader social ill, with the remedy lying in adult education. The Witnesses are a quiet minority sect, entitled to the same constitutional protections as any other faith; it is their right to worship in any manner they choose, as long as it does not infringe on the rights or impede the free movement of others. Parents who believe in the American way will impress this basic tenet of freedom on the minds of their children.”
The stoning of the Easton Kingdom Hall caused one Jewish businessman to offer a reward of $100 for information leading to the arrest of the guilty persons. Reporting on both the incident and this offer the Easton Express stated:
“Flying glass sprayed the interior of the hall, the missiles endangering worshipers. There has been an indignant community reaction to the assault. Mr. Malkin said he is offering the reward solely ‘in the interest of preservation of human rights and freedoms. Outrages of this type against minorities cannot be allowed to go unchallenged,’ he declared. ‘The future security of America is based on the maintenance of individual and minority freedoms. If this sort of thing can happen to the Jehovah’s Witnesses, it could happen to any church or religious group. If those who perpetrated this outrage are caught and punished, it will be the best thing that ever happened to Easton.’”
It is apparent that Mr. Malkin is familiar with recent world history. How so? Because one of the very first groups to be suppressed by Adolf Hitler was Jehovah’s witnesses.

