Five Special Talks for January
The new book “Let Your Kingdom Come” will provide the basis for five special talks to be given in the congregations during January. Although many of the brothers will have already read the new book through by that time, these animated discussions should not only cultivate a deeper appreciation for the “Kingdom Come” book on the part of all the brothers, but also will be encouraging to newly interested ones who perhaps have not taken the time personally to read the book through.
Since there will be five Sundays this January, most congregations should be able to arrange to present the five talks during this one month. Of course, if it should be necessary for some congregations to exchange speakers, they can stagger the beginning of the series, which would mean that some congregations will begin the series on January 10 and end on February 7. Also, those congregations attending a circuit assembly or having the visit of the circuit overseer during January will need to make appropriate adjustments.
This is the only notice that will be given regarding this series of special talks. We encourage the elders to act immediately in making necessary arrangements so that the assigned speakers will have sufficient time to prepare well so as to present the material in a fine way. Only qualified speakers should be selected to give these talks. In some cases ministerial servants could be used, if there is a need and they are capable speakers.
The titles of the five talks are as follows:
1—“What God’s Kingdom Means for Our Earth” (Chap. 1-4)
2—“The Messianic King of God’s Kingdom” (Chap. 5-8)
3—“Kingdom Servants Conquer by Their Faith” (Chap. 9-11)
4—“The ‘Last Days’ and God’s Kingdom—Now!” (Chap. 12-14)
5—“Rewards for Loyally Advocating God’s Kingdom” (Chap. 15-18)
No outlines will be provided for these talks, but the speakers will want to stick closely to the material presented in the assigned chapters of the “Kingdom Come” book. A speaker may wish to refer to specific points in the book during his presentation and may include the audience to some extent in the discussion. However, the information should be presented basically as a discourse and should not be merely a summary nor given as a book review. A week before these talks commence, all in the congregation should be reminded to bring their personal copies of the book to these meetings. Please see what was stated in Our Kingdom Service for November 1980 regarding the special series of talks given on the Happiness book.

