Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 1
Song 4
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Be Zealous in Spreading Life-giving Knowledge.” Questions and answers, to be handled by an elder.
15 min: “The House-to-House Challenge.” Service overseer or another elder conduct question-and-answer coverage of May 15, 1981, Watchtower article. Consider local situation and attitudes that call for perseverance. Highlight Scriptural and practical solutions. Enthusiastically encourage regular participation in field ministry.
10 min: “Five Special Talks for January.” Discuss article and outline local arrangements. Remind all of weekend field service.
Song 10 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 8
Song 51
 8 min: Local announcements, including accounts report.
10 min: “Presenting the Good News—With Boldness.” Question-and-answer coverage of material. Consider as many scriptures as time will allow. Highlight principle taught by each experience.
15 min: “Proper Decorum as a Christian.” Talk, with some audience participation. Elders should apply material, having in mind local trends or problems. Encourage young and old to avoid casual view.
12 min: Information on page one dealing with new all-time publisher peak should be considered by service overseer. Also discuss congregation field service report for month of October. Compare with monthly report from previous year. Remind all to record activity and turn in report. Encourage family participation in magazine work on second Saturday of month.
Song 8 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 15
Song 65
 8 min: Appropriate Announcements, local announcements and Theocratic News.
15 min: “Remember Those Who Are Taking the Lead.” Question-and-answer coverage of material. Allow time to read and discuss selected scriptures and make application to local needs.
15 min: Elders can arrange locally or give talk from July 1, 1981, Watchtower article, “I Want To.”
 7 min: Local experiences as a result of sharing in service on first Sunday or second Saturday of month. Arrange in advance for several to be presented.
Song 117 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 22
Song 1
 5 min: Local announcements. Include field service arrangements for weekend.
10 min: Offering Magazines. Discuss with audience talking points from latest issues. Prepare two brief demonstrations on how magazines can be presented using different articles. Encourage all to share in magazine work on fourth Saturday of month.
15 min: “The End of All Badness” and “A New Paradise on Earth.” Discuss with several young children Stories 114 and 115 from Bible Stories book.
15 min: “Let’s Get Acquainted.” Interview two or three young publishers on how they became acquainted with the truth. Encourage congregation to take initiative in getting to know one another, thus creating warm family spirit.
Song 64 and prayer.

