Presenting the Good News—With Boldness
1 The Kingdom message is unique. Thus, at appropriate times, the circumstances in which we preach require boldness. Evidently with this in mind the apostle Paul made frequent reference to the need for bold persistence in speaking the Word of God. (Eph. 6:18-20; 1 Thess. 2:2) Like first-century witnesses, we must not allow apathy, fear of men or opposition to cause us to become timid or hesitant in presenting Kingdom truths.—Acts 4:29-31; 28:30, 31.
OVERCOMING OBSTACLES
2 At times it may seem difficult or inconvenient to reach a certain home or individual with our message. Will we boldly persist? While out in the door-to-door work, a sister asked a woman whether anyone was living in a certain downstairs apartment since she had never located anyone there before. The woman tried to dissuade the sister from calling at the apartment, stating that the man who lived there was busy. Our sister tactfully persisted and was able to speak with the young man who lived there. He had never talked with Witnesses before and readily agreed to study with a brother in the congregation. Before long, he was attending meetings and participating in the field ministry.
3 Being bold does not mean being rude, self-reliant or presumptuous. It does involve determination and tactful persistence so as to take advantage of every appropriate occasion to preach. When we are motivated by a genuine love of God and neighbor, we can speak the truth with boldness.—Acts 26:24-26.
OCCASIONS FOR SHOWING BOLDNESS
4 Are you hesitant about making return visits, perhaps fearing that you will be turned away? That is how one couple felt, even though they had located a young woman who expressed interest in the Bible’s message. However, at a congregation meeting, they received encouragement to follow up interest and therefore decided to call back. Imagine their joy when this woman welcomed them and informed them that she and her neighbor had been studying the Bible on their own. They had prayed to God for help and in a matter of days had received the first visit from this couple. The two women eagerly accepted a Bible study and made excellent progress. How happy this Witness couple must be that they took courage and returned!
5 The conditions under which we preach the “good news” will not always be favorable or easy. But when confronted with indifference or outright ridicule because of our stand for the truth, we will need to speak up with boldness, yet doing so with mildness and deep respect. (1 Pet. 3:15) This will honor Jehovah’s name and may work for the salvation of honest-hearted ones who listen.

