Earth’s Future—In Whose Hands?
“GLOBAL WARMING presents the greatest test we humans have yet faced,” asserted the October 2007 edition of National Geographic. If we are to meet that challenge successfully, said the magazine, we need to “move quickly and decisively—and with a maturity we’ve rarely shown as a society or a species.”
Will such maturity rise to the fore? Working against it are many factors: apathy, greed, ignorance, vested interests, the scramble for wealth in developing lands, and the business-as-usual philosophy of millions who want to maintain a high-energy-consuming lifestyle.
An ancient prophet of God gives us a realistic appraisal of our capacity to solve our ethical, social, and governmental problems. He wrote: “To earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” (Jeremiah 10:23) Mankind’s tragic history underscores those words. And today, although armed with significant developments in science and technology, we are faced with previously unimaginable threats. So how confident can we be that tomorrow will be better?
It is true that there has been a lot of talk about tackling climate change and other harmful trends, but little has been done. For example, how did the nations respond in 2007 when the Northwest Passage opened up for navigation for the first time? An editorial in New Scientist magazine answers: “With an unseemly scramble to lay claim to the exposed chunks of continental shelf so they [could] drill for more oil and gas.”
Nearly 2,000 years ago, the Bible accurately foretold that humans would reach the point where they would be “ruining the earth.” (Revelation 11:18) Clearly, the world needs both a leader who has the wisdom and power to achieve the desired goals and subjects who will submit to him. Could a sincere and brilliant political leader or scientist fill that role? The Bible answers: “Do not put your trust in nobles, nor in the son of earthling man, to whom no salvation belongs.”—Psalm 146:3.
Earth’s Future—In Good Hands!
There is only one Leader who can successfully address the problems confronting the world. Concerning him, the Bible foretold: “Upon him the spirit of Jehovah [God] must settle down, the spirit of wisdom and of understanding, the spirit of counsel and of mightiness, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah . . . With righteousness he must judge the lowly ones, . . . and with the spirit of his lips he will put the wicked one to death.”—Isaiah 11:2-5.
Who is that One? He is none other than Jesus Christ, who lovingly laid down his life in our behalf. (John 3:16) Now a mighty spirit entity, Jesus has been authorized and empowered by God to rule over the earth.—Daniel 7:13, 14; Revelation 11:15.
Contributing to Jesus’ qualifications is his vast knowledge of God’s creation, which he acquired before coming to earth. In fact, untold aeons ago when God formed the physical universe, Jesus was his “master worker.” (Proverbs 8:22-31) Think about that: Jesus, the very one who helped make the earth and all living things, will take the lead in undoing the damage caused by human folly.
Who will Christ’s subjects be? They will be truly meek and righteous people, ones who know the true God, Jehovah, and obey Jesus Christ as Ruler. (Psalm 37:11, 29; 2 Thessalonians 1:7, 8) Jesus said that they “will inherit the earth,” which will be transformed into a paradise.—Matthew 5:5; Isaiah 11:6-9; Luke 23:43.
How can you put yourself in line to share in the fulfillment of the Bible’s promises? Jesus himself answers: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”—John 17:3.
Yes, our planet may appear to be in peril, but its continued existence as a home for mankind is not in doubt. Rather, peril awaits those who continue to show disrespect for God’s creation and who refuse to obey Jesus Christ. Hence, Jehovah’s Witnesses encourage you to take in the knowledge that leads to everlasting life.
[Box on page 8]
BEYOND THE REACH OF SCIENCE
  Knowing full well the risks involved, millions of people harm their minds and bodies by using recreational drugs, abusing alcohol, and smoking tobacco. To them, life is anything but a sacred gift from God. (Psalm 36:9; 2 Corinthians 7:1) Regrettably, a similar godless attitude toward the earth has contributed to its woes.
  What, then, is the solution? Can it be found in science and secular education? Not really. What is essentially a spiritual problem calls for a spiritual solution. The Bible acknowledges this fact. Hence, it promises that the time will come when humans “will not do any harm or cause any ruin” to the earth because it will be “filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.”—Isaiah 11:9.
[Picture on page 8, 9]
Under Christ’s rule the righteous will share in making the earth into a global paradise

