“Thank You for Your Great Love for People”
BY AWAKE! WRITER IN RUSSIA
▪ In the eastern Siberian city of Chita, a congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses used a school classroom for Christian meetings until they moved into their new Kingdom Hall. Because the Witnesses kept the classroom clean, made repairs, and were kind and courteous, the school directors wrote a letter of appreciation to the congregation.
In part, it said: “Thank you for your great love for people, which is evident to everyone you meet, and for your missionary and humanitarian activities among the general population. We will never forget the impressions gained during the years we have worked together, which demonstrate that those believing in God are decent, conscientious, kind and, most of all, goal-oriented people with faith and a purpose in life.” Jehovah’s Witnesses appreciate those sentiments.
▪ Approximately 3,500 miles [5,500 km] west of Chita, a representative of the Russia branch of Jehovah’s Witnesses was invited to a special ceremony hosted by the administration of the district of St. Petersburg. The reason? After the snow has melted each year, local Witnesses help to clean up the litter that has accumulated on a 40-mile [60 km] stretch of road not far from the branch. Showing appreciation for this community spirit, an official formally presented a certificate of merit to the branch representative. The audience heartily applauded. Interestingly, when a host speaker at the ceremony mispronounced the divine name, Jehovah, several non-Witnesses in attendance quickly corrected him, showing that they were familiar with both God’s name and the people known by it.
The main reason for this familiarity is the public ministry of Jehovah’s Witnesses, of whom there are approximately 150,000 in Russia. It is their goal to continue showing a “great love for people” by sharing the Bible’s comforting message with all who will hear.—Matthew 22:39.
[Picture on page 29]
The Russia branch received a certificate of merit

