VOL. XVI. OCTOBER 1, 1895. No. 19. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 222 

Views from the Tower 223 

The Typical Red Heifer 225 

Pittsburg Prophetic Conference 227 

Your Safety in the Coming Trouble 229 

Bible Study: The Triumph of Gideon 23 1 

Bible Study: Ruth's Choice 231 

Encouraging Letters 232 

page 222 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1871 : page 222 

WE RENEW our thanks to the dear friends who send us news 
clippings from all over the world. We have but little time for general 
reading, yet feel the necessity of being thoroughly informed. Of course 
but few of the items are even referred to in the TOWER; but many others, 
nevertheless, are very useful and highly appreciated. We much 
prefer clippings to whole papers; but please give name and date of 
paper from which clipped. 



DAWN VOL. II. IN SWEDISH AND IN DANO-NORWEGIAN. 

These volumes are now ready. Orders sent in now will be filled in 
rotation as received. 

Although the cost of these foreign translations is much greater than 
the English, because the demand is less and the editions smaller, yet 



the price of MILLENNIAL DAWN in the German, Swedish and Dano-Norwegian 

languages will be uniform with the English. Some warm-hearted 

friends of the Truth, knowing that the English editions are 

sold at cost, and realizing that the foreign editions would cost nearly 

double, because smaller, volunteered to pay the difference through the 

Tract Fund, so that the foreigners, who often are less able to purchase, 

might have the benefit of the low prices of the English. Their donation 

amounts to four hundred and twenty dollars on each foreign 

volume. 



R1870 : page 223 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



BOTH the United Presbyterian and the Lutheran 
young people are organizing after the manner of 
the Epworth Leaguers. The latter are styled the Luther 
League. About 100,000 are already enrolled. Their 
motto is— "Non-Synodical, Strictly Conservative, and 
Thoroughly Lutheran." 

It is almost as difficult for sectarians to get free from 
their denominational bondages as for a leopard to change 
his spots. The Christian Endeavor movement was the 
purest and freest, and at least took the name of Christ. 
But all efforts to make either "worldings" or Christian 
"babes" into Christian free-men by means of organization 
and rules must always prove futile. The only Christian 
freemen are those who are no longer "babes tossed about 
by every wind of doctrine," but who, feeding first as 
babes upon the sincere milk of the Word, have grown thereby 
in grace and knowledge and love, and who by use of the 
strong meat of God's Word have had their senses exercised 
and have become strong freemen in Christ— free from 
the world and its spirit, and free from self; reckonedly dead 
to all such influences, and alive to God and his will, and in 
bondage only to God's will through him who bought them 
with his own precious blood. And we have the Lord's 
assurance that this class, being selected during this Gospel 
age, will in all be but a "little flock." 



The usual triennial conclave of the Protestant Episcopal 
Church of the United States will open October 2 in 
Minneapolis. 

It was at a similar Convention of this same religious 
body that the proposition for a Protestant Union or Confederacy 
was first extended to other Protestant denominations. 
This proposition is still under consideration, 
especially by the Presbyterian Assembly. 

The coming Convention will attract more than ordinary 
attention, for it proposes a number of important steps 



in connection with its organization. (1) It is proposed 
that the triennial Conventions shall be superseded by 
General Synods, which shall meet triennially. (2) It 
proposes to have two divisions or "houses" hereafter— a 
House of Bishops and a House of Delegates— similar to the 
two houses of Congress and of Parliament. (3) It is proposed 
to elect one of the Bishops to be their chief or President, 
who shall be known as "Primus"— which signifies, 
one who is first. The Scottish Episcopal Church has 
long had such an officer, who presides, and is otherwise 
privileged. 

This movement is quite significant in connection with 
the Protestant confederacy which the Scriptures clearly indicate 
will take place. (See our issue for Dec. 1881— now 
out of print.) It will make ready for the "Image" to 
"speak" promptly as soon as it receives the "life" of 
Apostolic succession and supposed "authority."— 
Rev. 13:15. 



Sept. 20 was the twenty-fifth anniversary of the fall of 
Papacy's temporal power. Roman Catholics everywhere 
are being urged to pray for the restoration of temporal 
sovereignty. A statement is going the rounds of the press 
to the effect that, in view of the bankrupt condition of the 
Italian treasury, the plan of proposing to purchase the freedom 
of Rome and some surrounding territory for the 
Papacy for $1,000,000,000 is being seriously considered. 

On Scriptural grounds we doubt the success of this 
project. Our expectation is that the present government 
of Rome will continue in some form or degree until utter 
collapse and anarchy shall put an end to all government, 
political and religious, in the great time of trouble which 

R1870 : page 224 

prepares for the better conditions symbolically called the 
"new heavens and new earth." 



Professor Treitschke, lecturing recently before the 
Berlin University, said: 

"Reverence, called by Goethe the ultimate object of 
all moral education, is vanishing most alarmingly in the new 
generation. They respect nothing, neither God, nor the 
barriers which nature has set up between the sexes, nor 
patriotism, which by them is made to give way to the mercenary 
desires of a race bent on enjoyment only. Education, 
extended to all, becomes more and more shallow. The deep 
thought of the ancients is despised, and only that which 
serves the purposes of the near future finds favor. Every 
one talks about everything, guided by the newspapers and 
encyclopedias, consequently the creative power of intellect 
becomes rare. Science, once tempted to be too profound, 



now loses itself in platitudes; only a few noble giants of 
original thought continue to stand out among the underwood 
of mere gatherers of notes. Taste has degenerated, 
the love of truth has given way to a morbid love of actualities. 
Hence a wax figure often gains more applause than a 
work of art. The people lead an empty life, which they 
seek to fill out by killing time in giving undue attention to 
sport and betting. When we think of the manner in which 
the heroes of public games and of the circus are overrated, 
we are filled with loathing." 

Thus we see that the trend is the same in the monarchies 
of Europe as in this Republic. By inspiration the great 
Apostle Paul gave a still clearer and truer picture of nominal 
Christendom, saying:— 

"In the last days perilous times shall come. For men 
shall be lovers of their own selves [selfish], covetous, boasters, 
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, 
unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, 
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, 
traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than 
lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying 
the power thereof: from such turn away."— 2 Tim. 3:1-5. 



"A curious mode of worship was introduced by the 
Salvation Army at Detroit recently. A lecture was delivered 
by two "captains," on the analysis and dissection of 
the devil's body, the parts being pride, whiskey, etc., immediately 
after which the lights were suddenly extinguished, 
and the form of his Satanic Majesty was brought out, made of 
paper, and colored to suggest the analytic description. Red 
lights were thrown upon the stage to represent the fire of 
hell, and horns, hoofs and tail were terrible in appearance. 
A red bonnet decorated with roses represented pride, while 
cards and liquor indicated ruin and destruction. The 
effigy was then set on fire, amid shrieks and yells which reminded 
the beholders of Milton's Pandemonium." 

Alas! how many of the "babes in Christ" are ignorant 
of Satan's devices; and do not see that the great 
Adversary might even help along such a sham battle against 
himself, if thereby he could fasten the more firmly upon 
the consciences of the people the errors [doctrines of devils] 
which are keeping them from real love and worship toward 
God. The Lord's prescription for holiness— "Sanctify 
them through thy truth, thy Word is truth"— is far better, 
more successful, than this and all other unscriptural methods. 
This is the Chinese method of serving God by using fireworks 
to scare off the devil. But Satan is too subtle to 
be thus dealt with. 



A New York journal reports that at a meeting of the 
S.S. Missionary Association of the Presbyterian Church 
held in Detroit not long since "The Presbyterian Board 



of Publication was severely scored for the alleged antiquated 
and attenuated tracts that it sends out. A committee was 
appointed to draw up resolutions asking the Board for a 
higher grade of tracts." 

A Sister suggests that "possibly the live and good-sized 
Old Theology Tracts going all over the world from the 
WATCH TOWER office have something to do with this discontent. 
Ordinary tracts are so stupid that intelligent 

R1871 : page 224 

people feel offended if handed one. The O.T. Tracts are 
always crisp and fresh because full of the spirit of the Truth 
—index fingers pointing and referring constantly and truly 
to the Word of God." 

Many are finding this sort of "Silent Evangelism" a 
blessing to themselves and to others and orders are coming 
for "more tracts" from every quarter of the world. For 
instance, since our last issue we have sent tracts and DAWNS 
to the following foreign countries: viz., England; Scotland; 
Denmark; Germany; Sweden; Jamaica, West Indies; 
Cape Colony, S. Africa; New South Wales, Australia; 
and Colombia, Central America. The reading matter 
sent out amounted to five hundred and twenty-five copies 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN besides over ten hundred thousand 
pages of Old Theology Tracts. 

Our readers who are of German extraction will be 
pleased to learn that a Sister in the Lord, a representative 
of the TOWER TRACT SOCIETY in Berlin, Germany, 
reports favorably respecting a new method adopted lately 
to gain the attention of consecrated Germans. A Berlin 
journal has recently given her a most excellent notice of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, and she is finding quite a number willing 
to hear. She now has seventy-five copies of DAWN 
loaned in Berlin. 

Next week a Brother starts for Sweden, and in about a 
month two others will start for Switzerland, all seeking to 
carry to their native lands the gospel of "a ransom for all." 
The tract and colporteur work all over the United States 
progresses valiantly. 



A strong movement is on foot amongst Methodists seeking 
"lay -representation at the Annual Conferences." A 
circular has been issued from Baltimore, Md., claiming to 
voice the sentiments of 2,500,000 Methodists who demand 
this reform. The ministers do not favor it, desiring to keep 
the power in their own hands. An additional reform urged 
is that the laymen should have a voice in the election of 
Presiding Elders; and that the latter be given equal powers 
with Bishops. 

R1871 : page 225 

This is part of the general tendency toward equal 



rights and privileges. As it increases, the M.E. Bishops 
will wish that they could put forward the claim of "divine 
authority through Apostolic succession," as is claimed by 
Episcopalians and Roman and Greek Catholics. This will 
tend to draw them toward a general Protestant Confederacy 
possessed of the ability to make the claims and exercise 
the Apostolic authority coveted. 



A Baptist division of the Boy's Brigade went "into 
camp" at May's Landing near Philadelphia during September. 
Some boys of the town "raided them for fun," 
and the young Baptists who had put on carnal armor were 
"forced to defend themselves" with their bayonets, and 
murder was narrowly averted. Warfare for the Lord according 
to unauthorized methods is, and always will be, dangerous. 
"All they that take to the sword shall perish by 
the sword." 



At the Presbyterian Ministers' Association meeting, in 
Philadelphia, Sept. 16, it was decided not to permit the 
discussion of the question: "Is the Presbyterian Church 
firmly established in the Confession of Faith, and, if not, 
whither is she drifting?" They all knew that she is not 
firmly established upon it, and that she is drifting into four 
factions— (1) The "higher criticism" or infidelity party; 

(2) the form-of-godliness-social-club-no-doctrine party; 

(3) the well-intentioned-but-superstitious party, ever learning 
but never able to come to a knowledge of the truth, 
because they are looking backward to the dim lights of 
human tradition; (4) the children of the light and of the 

day, who, looking in the direction of the sun of righteousness, 

are beginning to get rays of the Millennial dawning; 

and who are compelled to "come out of her" because, 

with present light, they can no longer stay where their presence 

means the misrepresentation of God's Word and 

character as well as their own stultification. The ministers, 

therefore, very wisely, concluded that they needed no information 

on the subject; and that the opening of their 

mouths on the subject would hasten the dissolution already 

in progress. But the sooner it comes the better for the 

fourth class mentioned. 



R1871 : page 225 

THE TYPICAL RED HEIFER. 

-NUMBERS 19.- 

A BROTHER not very long in the truth sends us a 
little tract bearing the title, "The Red Heifer 



Type of Sanctification, by J. H. G.," and inquires what 
we think of it. 

We reply: The application is quite incorrect; but 
the tract itself is not likely either to benefit or injure any 
one. The danger of injury would chiefly be that as an 
entering wedge it might lead to more serious errors; and 
in a general way of course even the most insignificant error 
may hide some truth and thus prove an open switch for 
Satan to use in side-tracking us, should our hearts ever get 
out of harmony with the Lord and his plan. 

The writer of the little tract falls into the very common 
mistake of failing to note that the Jewish code respecting 
sacrifices divided them (1) into sacrifices for two 
distinct classes,— the Levites (the High priest's household), 
and all Israel (the general congregation excepting the 
Levites); and (2) into sacrifices of two distinct times; viz., 
those of the Day of Atonement, and those of the year 
following the Day of Atonement. This is the key to the 
understanding of the types of Leviticus, and without it no 
one can obtain clear or consistent views. 

The High Priest and under Priests (consecrated to 
sacrifice) represent Christ and the Church, the royal priesthood. 
The Levites (consecrated to service, not to sacrifice) 
represent believers in this Gospel Age— the household 
of faith. 

The Day of Atonement, in which the sacrifices for all 
sins were made (the bullock and the goat for sin-offerings, 
together with their accompanying burnt offerings), represented 
this Gospel Age, beginning with the great and all 
important sacrifice of Christ, and finished with the "filling 
up of that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ" 
by the royal priesthood, the members of his body. (Col. 1:24.) 
At the close of this Great Day of Atonement 
(the Gospel Age) the Great High Priest (head and body) 
will come forth and bless the people who desire to be God's 
people (represented by all Israel except the tribe of Levi), 
and the effect will be to lift them from the dust and grant 
them forgiveness and restitution. 

The sacrifices and offerings of the people after the Day 
of Atonement, and based upon its work, represent penances 
for shortcomings after being cleansed by the great 
Atonement, and thank offerings, pledges, vows, etc., which 
the world will offer during the Millennium or "times of 
restitution." 

The Red Heifer was not only not one of the Day of 
Atonement (or Gospel age) sacrifices, but it should not be 
counted a "sacrifice" at all; for only those animals were 
sacrifices of which a portion was placed upon God's altar. 
The High Priest killed all the sacrifices of the Atonement 
Day; but Aaron, the High Priest then, had nothing to do 
with the killing and burning of the Red Heifer. All 
sacrifices were killed in the "court of the Tabernacle," 

R1872 : page 225 

but the Red Heifer was killed outside the camp. The priests 



killed the sacrifices, but they did not kill the Red Heifer. 

We thus prove most positively that the Red Heifer represented 

neither Christ nor his Church, the "better sacrifices" 

R1872: page 226 

of this Gospel age. And as the time for the righteous 
to suffer "without the camp" will end with the close of 
the Gospel age, we cannot apply the killing and burning 
of the Red Heifer as a type of anything that will occur 
in the Millennium. What then did that heifer represent? 

It represented a class of people who died ignominiously; 
for "outside the camp" is used to represent ignominy, 
worldly disapproval or detestation. (Heb. 13:13.) The 
ancient worthies, whose faithfulness unto death outside the 
camp is recorded in Heb. 11:32-38, was just such a class 
as the one we are seeking,— represented in the Red Heifer 
burned without the camp, whose ashes served to purify 
those contaminated or unclean through association with 
death. 

It represented a class of people not of the Gospel 
Church, but who in God's sight were justified, and by faith, 
as is represented by the fact that the heifer was without 
blemish and completely red— the color which represents 
the blood of Christ. All this well represents the worthies 
of Heb. 1 1:32-38. By faith they looked forward to the 
atonement for sin which God had promised; they caught 
a glimpse of Christ's day and were glad; they "endured 
as seeing him who is invisible," and "pleased God" 
(Heb. 11:5,27,39), and hence must have been justified, 
even though (the sin-offering not yet having been made) 
they could not be received into the liberties of sons of 
God.-Gal. 4:4-7; Heb. 3:5,6. 

In that it never wore a yoke it represented a class of 
free men, just such as are mentioned in Heb. 1 1 ; for although 
some of those were born under the Law, and some 
before it, yet since all are mentioned together as equally 
approved in God's sight, and since we know that "by the 
deeds of the Law no flesh shall be justified in God's sight," 
therefore we are bound to conclude that all these were 
reckoned as free from the bondage of the Law, and accepted 
by faith with Abraham, under the Abrahamic covenant, 
and not as under the "yoke" of the Law, which condemned 
all who ever attempted justification under it- 
Gal. 5:1; Acts 15:10. 

The priest did not kill the Red Heifer: one of the 
under-priests merely sprinkled some of its blood toward 
the Tabernacle door: thus typically showing that the lives 
and deaths of the class represented pointed toward the 
Tabernacle, its door [Christ] and the atoning sacrifices 
to come. "They drank of the spiritual Rock [Christ] 
which followed them," and their lives given (their blood) 
pointed toward Him. 

The "worthies" of Heb. 11, although equally as 
faithful as the "overcomers" of the Gospel age, could not 
be counted as sharers in the sufferings of Christ and joint-heirs 



of his glory. The great Creator has chosen to prepare 
some vessels to more honor and some to less honor; 
and some that resist the moulding and shaping influences 
of the great Potter will be neither, but will be vessels for 
destruction, unfit for his service in any capacity. (2 Tim. 2:20; 
Rom. 9:21,22.) The vessels for less honor were 
selected first, "until John" the baptizer, who was one of 
the chief of the ancient worthies, the house of servants; 
and yet the least one in the house of sons, the vessels unto 
greatest honor, is greater than he.— Matt. 11:11. 

Christ Jesus our Lord was the first, the Head, the 
Leader of his elect Church, his body, which must follow 
his footsteps of suffering to glory, before others can be 
blessed. After the great antitypical Day of Atonement is 
ended, the sufferings of Christ finished, and the glorious 
reign begun, then the faithful worthies of the past shall be 
blessed, "God having foreseen some better things for us, that 
they without us should not be made perfect."— Heb. 1 1:40. 

The sin offering of Christ has laid up a great store 
of grace, merit, not only for his Church, but for all the 
families of the earth; and it will be the work of the Royal 
Priesthood to dispense that grace to those of earth's families 
who, when they come to a clear knowledge of the 
truth, obediently apply for forgiveness and help. 

The faithfulness of the ancient worthies, even unto 
death, could not take away sin, and could not be presented 
before God as a sin offering, nor as a sacrifice at 
all, the altar [Christ] not having yet been set up. (Matt. 23:19.) 
But the faithfulness of the ancient worthies did 
yield some results (represented in the ashes of the Red 
Heifer)— it yielded a store of valuable experiences to them, 
by means of which those beautiful graces of character were 
produced which also adorn "the sons of God," who have 
now received the spirit of adoption. The Lord thus 
wrought in them the blessed fruits of holiness, though they 
could not be recognized as "sons," nor made partakers 
of the divine nature, nor joint-heirs with Christ, because 
not called to be vessels of the highest honor. They have 
thus "laid up in store" (1 Tim. 6:19), as the result 
of their fiery experiences (represented in the ashes of 
the burned heifer), characters precious in God's sight, 
which he intends by and by to use for the blessing of the 
world, after the Day of Atonement is ended. This is represented 
in the ashes of the heifer carefully gathered into 
a clean place for use in the purifying of the people who 
become defiled after having been cleansed with the atonement 
of the "better sacrifices" of the Atonement Day. 

When the spiritual Kingdom has been set up, when 
the First Resurrection has taken place at the end of the 
Gospel age, then these "worthies" of the past will be 
blessed (Heb. 11:40,35), and enjoy a "better resurrection" 
than the world in general, in that theirs will be an instantaneous 
raising up from death to human perfection and life 
everlasting; while others of the world, even if obedient, 
must come up slowly to perfection, step by step. Then, 
too, as perfect men they will be the superiors and natural 



leaders of the world, and, according to promise, Christ will 
make them chiefs or "princes in all the earth." (Psa. 45:16.) 
They will be the seen representatives (Luke 13:28) 
of God's Kingdom, while Christ and the Church, the 
real spiritual rulers, will be unseen.— 1 Tim. 6:16; Heb. 1:3; 
1 John 3:2. 

R1872: page 227 

Then, like the ashes of the heifer laid up in a clean 
place, the results of the painful experiences of the "worthies" 
will be a store of blessing, instruction, and help to these 
"Princes." And each pardoned one who would be 
cleansed perfectly must not only cleanse himself with water 
(truth) but must also have applied to him the instructions 
of these "Princes;" represented by the ashes of the heifer 
in water applied with "hyssop," which represented "purging" 
or cleansing. -Ex. 12:22; Lev. 14:4,49; Psa. 51:7; 
Heb. 9:19. 

The cleansing was from all death-defilements— dead 
bodies, graves or the bones of the dead,— thus indicating 
that the agency through which men shall be fully cleansed 
from death and its degradation, lifted up in restitution, 
will be this work, of these whom the Lord for this purpose, 
shall "make princes in all the earth." 



R1872: page 227 

PITTSBURG PROPHETIC CONFERENCE. 



THE announcement has been very generally made that 
there will be a Prophetic Conference at Pittsburg in 
October; and quite a number of TOWER readers are 
inquiring what part the Editor will take in the Conference. 
We answer that we have nothing to do with it; and as an 
explanation lay before our readers an article on the subject 
by the Editor published in a Pittsburg paper July 25, last. 

Mr. Editor:— With others of your readers I have 
been interested in the announcement of a prophetic 
conference, soon to be held in our city. I cogitate upon 
the projects as follows: 

That the Scriptures teach that our Redeemer will 
"come again" at the close of this Gospel Age cannot be 
disputed. That he comes to inaugurate a reign of righteousness 
in which the saints of the present age will be the 
kings and priests (rulers and instructors) to bless and lift 
up out of ignorance and sin and death whosoever wills of 
the at present "groaning creation," (Rom. 8:19-22; Rev. 20:6) 
should not be disputed by any who have studied the 
Bible and who have intelligently united in the Lord's 
prayer, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as 
it is done in heaven." 



This being the case, all Christian people should be 
interested in "conference" on the subject; in order that 
nothing that God has declared by the mouth of his holy 
prophets, bearing upon this subject, should be overlooked. 
(Acts 3:19-21.) And such a "conference" could scarcely 
fail to have the Lord's blessing and to bring clearer views 
of the subject to all concerned. 

But, sir, all who know the history of these "Prophetic 
Conferences," held from time to time in the past, know 
very well that no real conference is proposed. The true 
idea of conference is discussion, examination, consultation; 
but if the proposed "conference" shall resemble those in 
which some of the same gentlemen took part in the past, 
there will be no opportunity for conference; every utterance 
will be shaped and trimmed beforehand, by a committee 
so as to prevent conference. For instance, at the New 
York Prophetic Conference some years ago, when Mr. Charles 
MacKay, of Scotland, an invited and announced speaker, 
was asked to present his MS. to the critical committee, it 

R1873 : page 227 

was feared he would be hindered from speaking because he 
had no MS. prepared, not being used to "cut and dried" 
conferences in Scotland. He explained that he usually 
spoke extemporaneously, but would confine himself strictly 
to the Bible testimony; and he was then permitted to be 
the one exception to the rule. 

But, mark you, sir, my objection is not to the character 
of the meeting, as it is proposed, but merely to its misleading 
name; for "those who pay the piper have the right to 
choose the music." If, therefore the present program be 
maintained, I beg to suggest that the promoters would reflect 
much more credit upon themselves as straightforward, candid 
men, by calling their meeting a "Pre-millennialist 
Convention," which would be a truth-telling name, whereas 
"Prophetic Conference" is misleading. But lest it 
be said that I am prejudging the coming conference, 
which may be held upon different lines, we note the 
fact that it has already been announced that "fools" 
and "cranks" are not connected with the movement. 
This clearly implies that they have already fixed their 
standard and decided who are the wise and who the 
foolish. Perhaps they forget, however, that much of the 
wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, and that in 
their day our Lord and his prophets and apostles were all 
accounted "fools" and "cranks;" and that the same 
worldly estimate will continue to the end of this age. (See 
1 Cor. 1:18; 2:14; 3:18; 4:10,13,14; Acts 17:18.) 
I very much fear that if Jesus and Paul and Peter were to 
attempt to join this "conference," they would be hustled 
out as "cranks." Yet, to those who have ears, "The 
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy," and there 
can be no understanding of the prophets without it. 

I object to the word "prophetic," as well as to the 
word "conference," as inappropriately used. Those who will 



attend the meeting will not only find that it will be a conference 
at which there will be no conference, no discussion, 
no hearing of "the other side," but they will find the very 
prophecies mentioned by St. Peter (Acts 3:19-21) almost 
ignored. Why? Because, forsooth, some of God's people 
who denominate themselves "Second Adventists" have 
made themselves foolish in the sight of the world by 
defective interpretations of the prophecies. Agreeing with 
"Second Adventists" respecting the manner of Christ's 
second coming (the writer differs widely, and he believes 
Scripturally, from both), they want to mark themselves out 
as entirely separate from them respecting the interpreting 
of prophetic times and seasons; and they therefore are 
obliged to pass by the prophecies which abound with figures, 
periods, etc.— especially Daniel's. But why then use the 
word prophetic? 

In one of your issues I notice that the views of the 
conference are already fixed in several respects which I 
consider erroneous. I therefore criticize them, briefly, 
and thus afford the coming "conference" an opportunity 
to examine its faith afresh, in the light of the Scriptures 
which I shall cite. 

They do not pretend to fix the time of the Lord's 
second coming. They hold that of that event no man 
knows the date nor will any ever know beforehand. They 
feel positive of this because of the Lord's statement in St. 

R1873 : page 228 

Mark 13:32. But they overlook the fact that if our Lord 
meant to tell us that no man would ever know he did not 
so state himself. And since he included himself and the angels, 
it would equally imply that neither he nor the angels would 
ever know, which would be an absurdity; for our Lord 
could not come a second time without knowing it some 
time previously. The time was unknown then and was to 
so continue until God's due time for making it known; for 
"the Lord God doeth nothing but he revealeth it to his 
servants the prophets." And this is all clearly stated and 
explained in Daniel 12:9,10. 

If the times and seasons of prophecy give them no 
light, why do they surmise that the event is nigh? Is it not 
with them a guess in the dark? If they have not trimmed 
their lamps, and gotten more light on the subject than had 
those who have vaguely looked and hoped for the Lord for 
eighteen centuries, why do they think the great event near? 
(Matt. 25:1-13.) Do they not see that the repeated injunction, 
"Watch!" implies that the "wise virgins" did 
not know, but were to watch in order that in due time 
they might know? Wherein would be the necessity of watching 
for an event that would be known to them no sooner 
nor more surely than to others? Does not the command, 
"Watch!" imply that at the proper time the watchers will 
be rewarded by a knowledge which the unwatching will 
nothave?-l Thes. 5:1-3,4-6. 

These Christian friends have a fixed belief respecting 



the manner of Christ's second coming, which we believe 

it would advantage them to refix more in harmony 

with reason and Scripture. They believe that he will come 

literally, but by that they mean that they expect him 

again in the flesh. Do they forget that when he "was 

made flesh" at his first advent it meant the laying aside 

of the superior glory and honor of the spirit nature, a 

humbling of himself to "the form of a servant;" and that, 

thus, he who was "rich" as a spirit being, became "poor" 

when he became "the man" Christ Jesus? How can they 

think of his body as being marred and yet being of transcendent 

beauty? How can they expect to see those scars for 

all eternity and yet expect that things of the present time 

will no more be remembered? How can they suppose that 

the Lord has the same wounded body without supposing 

that the saints also in their resurrection will have deformed 

and sin-scarred bodies, such as they have at present? 

Surely they admit that Christ finished the work for which 
it was necessary for him to take man's nature; viz., "for the 
suffering of death," that he might give his flesh "for the 
life of the world." (John 6:51.) How can they think he 
is still flesh and will come a second time as a flesh-being? 
Surely they will admit that "him hath God highly exalted" 
again. (Phil. 2:8,9.) Surely they will admit that he was 
"put to death in the flesh but quickened (made alive) in 
spirit." Do they not remember, also, that "flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God"? How then 
can they expect a flesh and blood Christ to be the great 
King and to set up the great Kingdom promised? 

Do they not remember that one apostle explains 
that "it doth not yet appear what we shall be," but that 
"when he shall appear we shall be like him, and see him as 
he is?"— not he like us, that we might see him as he was.— 
1 John 3:2. 

Do they not remember that another apostle declares 
that the church must be "changed" by resurrection power, 
from animal bodies to spiritual bodies, in order that she 
may be united to the Lord in the Kingdom which flesh 
and blood cannot inherit?- 1 Cor. 15:44,49-53. 

Do they not remember that after his resurrection our 
Lord not only showed the apostles that he was alive again, 
but proved to them that he was no longer "the man Christ 
Jesus who gave himself a ransom," but the King of Glory 
—a spirit being. He proved this by showing them that he 
was no longer limited to human conditions. He came into 
the room where they were met, while the doors were 
shut. He vanished from their sight when the interview 
was ended. Indeed, they saw but little of him during the 
forty days after his resurrection, and the world saw him not 
at all. And during his interviews with his disciples he 
showed himself in various forms or bodies, just as he did 
before he became man, when as a spirit being he appeared 
to Abraham in human form but without being of human 
nature.— Gen. 18:1-8. 

But they tell us that their belief that Christ's coming 
will be in the flesh is based upon the facts recorded in Acts 1:9,1 1; 



especially the declaration, "This same Jesus, 

which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in 

like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." 

We inquire, Is there in this anything difficult? or that 
would demand that all of the foregoing Scripture teachings 
respecting our Lord as a spirit being should be cast aside, 
ignored? I think not. I suggest that this passage when 
rightly understood, is in full accord with the others. It is 
the manner of our Lord's coming again that is to resemble 
the manner of his going away. Was the manner of his going 
quiet, unaccompanied by outward display, unknown to the 
world, and known and recognized only by his chosen? Yes. 
Then surely in "like manner," and not in a different 
manner, should his chosen look for him to come again. 
Quietly, unknown to the world, known only to those who 
"watch," he will come again. 

A mistake of these friends has been to infer that 
"manner" means flesh, and they have failed to notice the 
real "manner" of his going— quietly, unobserved of the 
world. Our Lord had a body of flesh when the disciples 
beheld him taken up into heaven, but the flesh was no 
longer he, as before his resurrection, but merely a 
form, like his clothing, that represented (but veiled) his 
real, glorious, spiritual body, which St. Paul saw afterward, 
at the cost of his sight- 1 Cor. 15:5-8; 9:1; Acts 9:3-18. 

The fact that our Lord manifested himself in a body 
of flesh after his resurrection, before his ascension, by no 
means proves that he will similarly manifest himself in a 
fleshly form at his second advent; for "manner" and condition 
are wholly different things. I believe from other 
Scriptures that instead of his appearing in the flesh, his 
saints when "changed" to spirit beings will "see him as 
he is," as St. Paul saw him "before the time;" but with the 

R1874: page 228 

powers of their "changed" conditions they will not suffer 
from the sight of the Lord's glory, but will be with him 
and behold and share his glory. 

We would like, too, that these gentlemen, when they 
meet, should not fail to notice the peculiar Greek word 
parousia— rendered "coming" in connection with our 
Lord's second advent, the signification of which is presence. 
Notice that Matt. 24:37 contains the word, declaring: "As 
it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the presence of 
the son of man." In the time of the Lord's second presence 
the world will proceed as usual— eating, drinking, 
planting, building, etc., and know not of his presence and 
the approaching trouble, as in Noah's day they knew not 
of the coming flood. Compare also Luke 17:26. Our 
friends err also in their interpretation of Zech. 14:4, "His 
feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives." The 
passage does not refer to the literal feet of Christ at all, 
but symbolically to the feet of his father, Jehovah, as will 

R1874: page 229 



be clearly seen by reference to the preceding verse, if 
the English reader will remember wherever the word "Lord" 
occurs in the Old Testament in small capital letters, the 
original (Hebrew) is Jehovah— exclusively the Father's 
name. 

A very large proportion of Christian people are post-millennialists 
(believers that Christ will not come until the 
church shall have introduced and finished the Millennium). 
Nevertheless they see that eighteen centuries have done but 
little even in the most civilized parts, toward bringing 
about the condition in which God's will shall be done on 
earth as (perfectly as) it is done in heaven; and they see 
that even now the nominal conversions in heathen lands 
are not five per cent of the births, while in the most civilized 
lands the really sanctified are few. Many of these 
would be prepared to look for the Lord's coming and 
kingdom as the only tangible hope for the groaning creation: 
but they are repelled by such pre-millennialists, as 
propose this "Prophetic Conference," who claim that 
Christ will come again in the flesh marred and wounded, 
but shining, and that with his saints, also in the flesh, with 
their deformed features shining, he will set up a fleshly 
kingdom, an earthly court, after the order of kings, emperors 
and popes of the present time, but more magnificent and 
beneficent. 

If, therefore, the coming meeting could be a real conference, 
and if the conferees could come to see that Christ 
at his second advent, and his associated saints, will be no 
longer flesh and blood, but spirit beings, whose majesty 
will be completely hidden from mortal view, but whose 
power and authority will be everywhere in evidence (as 
Satan, "the prince of this world," a spirit being, is present, 
and invisible, but nevertheless powerful, working in 
and through, the "children of disobedience"), it 
would do much to convert thousands to pre-millennial 
views; for thousands are too consistent and too spiritually 
minded to suppose that God, having begun in the spirit, 
will perfect his plan on such a plane of the flesh. 

I would be glad to see these brethren make their proposed 
meeting a genuine prophetic conference; and, if 
they will confer thereupon, we will cheerfully and freely 
supply them the evidences, chapter and verse, that demonstrate 
that the Lord has come upon them "as a thief," 
and that, not watching aright, they "knew not" that the 
day of the Lord's spiritual presence (parousia) began in 
the autumn of A.D. 1874, as is abundantly attested by the 
prophets and corroborated by the "clouds" of trouble in 
which he first reveals himself to the world in judgments; 
to be followed by his revelation as the "Sun of Righteousness," 
to heal and bless all who will accept his grace. 

To me the Scriptures clearly demonstrate that the 
great antitypical Jubilee began with our Lord's presence in 
1874, and that the little period of forty years between then 
and 1915 is in Scripture called the "day of vengeance" in 
which God will overturn all present institutions, financial, 



social and religious (the smiting time of Daniel 2:44,45), 
preparatory to the inauguration of the Kingdom of Righteousness 
symbolised by the divided Mount of Olives (the two 
parts of God's kingdom), upon which symbolically Jehovah's 
feet shall rest, when he shall make the place of his 
feet (the earth, his footstool) glorious.— Isa. 60:13. 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1874 : page 229 

YOUR SAFETY IN THE COMING TROUBLE. 



"The sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the hypocrites. 

Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us 

shall dwell with everlasting burnings?" 

"He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth 

the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, 

that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his 

eyes from seeing evil: he shall dwell on high; his place of 

defence shall be the munitions of rocks; bread shall 

be given him, his waters shall be sure."— Isa. 33:14-16. 

THE fear here spoken of by the prophet is the fear 

that is now beginning to be experienced throughout 

the lengths and breadths of nominal Zion— Christendom 

(Christ's kingdom), so called. The Prophet, as he 

frequently did (e.g., Isa. 55:3-9), took the standpoint of 

the future,— of our day,— and thus speaks for the Lord of 

the work he is now about to do— "Now will I rise, saith 

the Lord: now will I be exalted; now will I lift up myself. 

[The appointed time to overthrow the present order 

of things and to establish the Kingdom of God having 

come.] Ye [the same class referred to above— the sinners in 

Zion. See also verse 1] shall conceive chaff; ye shall 

bring forth stubble [Such will be the result of the great efforts 

to draw numbers into the membership of nominal 

Zion— the efforts to stamp all the world who will submit to 

it with the name Christian, as manifested in the recent 

movements toward so-called Christian Union, which would 

not only baptize the ignorant infants and count them as 

born into the Church, and recognize all the adherents of 

Apostate Christianity, but seeks also to gain by compromises 

and by flattery the adherents of Judaism, who totally 

repudiate Christ, as well as the blinded millions of heathenism 

that bow to idols of wood and stone and know not 

God nor his dear Son, our Lord and Redeemer]— Ye shall 

conceive chaff: ye shall bring forth stubble: your breath 

[your false doctrines of belief and policy] as fire shall devour 

you [Your unprincipled policy which would thus sell 

the Lord and the truth for gain— in numbers and prestige 

and power before the world— shall lead to dire results— to 

fearful trouble and destruction]. And the people [there assembled 



and compacted in a false Christian, or as some 
suggest, religious union.— See also Isa. 8:9-13] shall be as 
the burnings of lime [self-consumed; the very nature of 
an organization of such heterogeneous elements must of 
necessity be self-destructive, the process also being a painful 
one]; as thorns [Yes, it will be a union of thorns; each will 
be a thorn in the flesh to the other] cut up [made ready] 
shall they be burned in the fire." 

Observe, it is "the sinners in Zion," not the humble 
sincere people of God, that are afraid; and fearfulness 
hath surprised the hypocrites. To the former class, as in 
the end of the Jewish age also, belong those wilfully blind 

R1874 : page 230 

leaders in Zion and all their wilfully blind followers, who 
refuse to see the truth when it is testified to them and who 
love and prefer the error and devote their energies to bolstering 
up and reinforcing the systems of error with which 
their temporal interests, social and financial, seem to be 
identified. And in doing this, ostensibly to promote the 
interests of the Redeemer's Kingdom, but really in opposition 
to its establishment, their course is surely hypocritical, 
as the Prophet declares. 

While the great theologians, whose leisure and learning 
have afforded them special facilities for coming to a 
knowledge of the truth, have wasted their talents in 
building up and supporting with their influence great 
systems of error, and while it has been and still is 
their great ambition to draw into these systems great numbers, 
according to the Prophet, they have been only preparing 
stubble for the fire of this evil day. And already, 
as the Prophet declares, "fearfulness hath surprised the 
hypocrites." Does it seem surprising to some that the 
Prophet should so irreverently handle some of the reverend 
gentlemen of to-day who so wisely (?) descant upon the 
credibility and authority of the sacred Scriptures, and 
who, while condemning them, with a great show of 
learning and eloquence, offer in their stead the miserable 
substitute of their own false reasonings utterly regardless 
of the divine revelation? For the beautiful record 
of man's creation in the image of his Maker they substitute 
the ape origin, or, going back of that, they find him in the 
protoplasm. For the account of his fall and redemption 
they substitute the theory of his evolution by what they 
call a natural process, from lower to higher conditions. 
And for the clearly defined destiny of man revealed in the 
Scriptures they substitute the vain and idle speculation of 
endless progression. 

R1875 : page 230 

While all of the leading or clerical class in nominal 
Zion have not yet fallen into this snare, the great ones 
have, and their ideas are fast taking possession of the theological 
seminaries, and their public teachings from the 



pulpit, the religious press and the professor's chair are fast 

moulding the thought of all "Christendom." And it is 

from this source, and as a result of the "fears" of this 

very class, whose learning and positions of influence enable 

them to see, as people in the humbler walks of life have 

been less able to see, the trend of events toward disaster 

and ruin— the great time of trouble foretold. And instead 

of using their powerful influence for truth and righteousness, 

which would of course necessitate the repudiation of 

their own past erroneous teachings, and humbly endeavoring 

to lead the people back to the old paths pointed out by 

the Lord and the apostles, in their pride of heart and consequent 

blindness they are leading them further into the 

labyrinths of error; and, according to the Word of the Lord 

(Luke 6:39), both leaders and people shall fall into the ditch. 

But while the most intelligent and influential, who are 
thus misusing their talents and betraying their trusts as 
stewards of the Lord's goods, as did their prototypes in 
the Jewish age (Matt. 15:7-9,14), are the greatest sinners 
in Zion, those also who blindly follow their leading become 
partakers of their sin (Rev. 18:4) and share the same penalty 
—both together "fall into the ditch" and, as "stubble," 
are prepared for the fire. 

While in their fear of the fiery trouble which they now 
see coming upon the earth, they anxiously soliloquize (for 
they hesitate to express their fears openly)— "Who among us 
shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall 
dwell with the everlasting burnings [the consuming burnings, 
the trouble threatening to last until the whole present 
order of things is consumed]?" 

If these inquiries were made of the Lord, and with a disposition 
of heart to obey his voice, the fearful calamities 
now, alas! soon to be experienced, would be averted; but 
such is not the case. These are mere soliloquies, the underbreath 
expressions of their fears, the only result of which 
is the leaning still more to their own understandings, the 
compromise of truth and righteousness and a determination 
to band together for mutual protection and the resistance 
of the righteous judgments of God. As to the results of 
such a union, see Isa. 8:9,10; 28:17,18. 

But hear the word of the Lord, ye who have no part 
nor lot with the workers of iniquity, and who would inquire 
of him upon what conditions any may stand in this evil 
day; for thus saith the Lord, "He that walketh righteously 
and speaketh uprightly, he that despiseth the gain of oppressions, 
that shaketh his hands from the holding of bribes, 
that stoppeth his ears from the hearing of blood, and shutteth 
his eyes from seeing evil: he shall dwell on high; his 
place of defence shall be the munitions of rocks; bread 
shall be given him, his waters shall be sure." And if ye 
know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. 

In these days when iniquity abounds and the love of 
the many who profess the name of Christ waxes cold, only 
those who have the stamina of character can fulfil these 
conditions. Those who reverence God more than men, 
however great may be their pretensions to wisdom, piety 



and learning; who rest their faith implicitly upon the inspired 

testimony of the Apostles and Prophets; and who 

exercise their own God-given right of private judgment 

and so prove all things by an appeal, not to human philosophies 

and idle speculations, but "to the law and the 

testimony" (Isa. 8:20), and hold fast to that which is 

good— those only can fulfil these conditions. 

To walk righteously means to walk contrary to the 
course of this present evil world. It means to take the 
unpopular side of the questions of the day in nearly every 
case, and thus to be misunderstood and misrepresented and 
have our names cast out as evil; in a word, it means to suffer 
for righteousness' sake. 

To speak uprightly is to go a step further than to walk 
righteously: it implies not only personal effort to withstand 
evil and error in their effects upon one's own character, but 

R1875 : page 231 

also the fortitude to withstand error with bold and fearless 
presentations of the truth, regardless of the cost of such 
faithfulness, which we are assured not only by the Word of 
God, but by observation and experience as well, will be 
persecution in some or possibly in many forms. Such a 
course of righteousness in "this present evil world," when 
the powers of darkness are in the ascendency, inevitably 
leads to social ostracism and hatred, in proportion to the 
zeal for God that is manifested, and persecution in some 
form is sure to follow. But those of the class here described 
cannot be bribed by any of these considerations. If one has 
been a clergyman and his eyes have been opened to the truth, 
he cannot be bribed by any considerations of salary or 
prestige or fame to stifle his convictions— "he shaketh his 
hands from the holding of bribes." 

If he be a merchant or mechanic, and the multitudes 
say, Come, join our fraternity and band together with us 
to conserve our interests or to fight for our rights, he replies, 
No, "They that are of a froward heart are abomination 
to the Lord, but such as are upright in their way are 
his delight. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall 
not be unpunished." (Prov. 11:20,21) Let the rich 
consider the interests of the poor and needy, lest they fall 
under the fearful condemnation of the oppressor (James 5:1-5); 
and let the poor commit their cause unto the 
Lord, who has pledged himself on behalf of all those that 
trust in him. 

To all thus minded, who unflinchingly stand for 
truth and righteousness in this evil day, is the blessed promise 
of God— "He shall dwell on high [above the fears, 
the unrest and the distress which will overwhelm the world]; 
his place of defence shall be the munitions of rocks [the 
Lord, the Rock of ages, the Most High shall be his hiding 
place]; bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure 
[he will be sustained with the bread of life and refreshed 
with the water of life both spiritually and physically]. 
Blessed are all they that put their trust in the Lord, for they 



shall never be confounded. 

R1875 : page 231 

THE TRIUMPH OF GIDEON. 

-OCT. 13.-JUDGES 7:13-23.- 

Golden Text— "Though a host should encamp 
against me, my heart shall not fear."— Psa. 27:3. 

THE selection of Gideon's army was an illustration 
of the Lord's method in the selection of a "peculiar 
people" who shall share with him the honors of victory in 
the conquest of sin and all its defiling host. 

R1876 : page 231 

At the sound of the trumpet thirty-two thousand were 
gathered together unto Gideon to fight against the hosts of 
Midian. (Verse 3.) But the Lord said to Gideon that there 
were too many, and that all were not of the kind desired. 
Then the Lord commanded Gideon to prove them. From 
the human standpoint the thirty-two thousand of Israel had 
no show of conquering the hundred and thirty-five thousand 
of their enemies (Judges 8:10); but from the standpoint 
of faith in God, who called them to this service, 
victory was certain, though none could foresee in what way 
it should be brought about. 

The Lord had in mind a glorious victory, but it was 
to be achieved by his might and power alone. The honor 
due to the human instruments who were privileged to share 
in it was not to be in their skill and strength in battle, 
but in their faith in God and their zeal in obeying his orders, 
as an evidence of the strength of their confidence in God. 

Accordingly, the first test of faith applied was permission 
for all the fearful to return home. This reduced the 
army to ten thousand. The next test was a test of zeal. 
When led down to the brook to drink, all but three hundred 
halted very leisurely and knelt down to drink, which 
required the loosening of their armor and unfastening of 
their swords. But three hundred did not stop to do this, 
but hastily scooped up a little water and lapped it from their 
hands. This zeal, inspired by a living faith in God, was 
just the element of character for which the Lord was looking; 
and these three hundred "peculiar people," full of 
faith and active zeal, were the only ones acceptable to God 
and privileged to share the honors of delivering Israel from 
a mighty host of oppressors. 

Just so the Lord Jehovah contemplates the conquest 
of the world for Christ (Zech. 14:3); and Christ, like 
Gideon, is called of God to lead a "little flock" of "called 
and faithful and chosen" ones (Rev. 17:14) forth to the 
conquest of the hosts of sin. 



All that have been called during the entire Gospel age 
have been but a few in comparison with the opposing forces 
of the world. The call was first to a justifying faith in 
Christ. Then the privilege was offered to these to present 
themselves as living sacrifices to God (Rom. 12:1), and 
thus to go forward to the battle. But that was more than 
the weak faith of the multitudes could endure; and thousands 
therefore returned, shunning the hardships of the 
way, and faithless as to the Lord's ability to grant them 
the victory. 

But still quite a multitude made the full consecration; 
and, buckling on the armor of God, they pressed forward. 
Of these the hardships of the way are continually 
thinning the ranks. Many grow weary in well-doing, and 
zeal abates, and love grows cold, and faith declines, and 
they fail to push on to the end. Beloved, let us not be of 
those who draw back, or of those who faint by the way; 
for glorious will be the victory of faith and zeal. Blessed 
is he that shall endure unto the end. Such shall indeed be 
"a peculiar people, zealous of good works." 



R1875 : page 231 

RUTH'S CHOICE. 

-OCT. 20. -RUTH 1:14-22.- 

Golden Text— "Thy people shall be my 
people, and thy God my God."— Ruth 1:16. 

MANIFESTLY the chief object in the brief narrative 
of Ruth and Naomi was to preserve an 
authentic record of a link in the chain of our Lord's 
human ancestry. Though a Gentile by birth, Ruth was a 
sincere Jewish proselyte, incorporated into the commonwealth 
of Israel, and as such she was recognized of God as 
one of his chosen people. And not only so, but she was 
also honored with a place in the line of our Lord's human 
ancestry, being the great-grandmother of David. The 
same was true of Rahab, also a Jewish proselyte, who became 
the mother of Boaz, the great-grandfather of David. 
The story of Ruth and Naomi is an interesting one 

R1875 : page 232 

as an item of Jewish history. It has its lights and also 
its shadows; for the characters were but samples of our 
fallen humanity coming gradually under the influence of 
divine grace. All that was noble in them therefore calls 
forth our admiration and esteem, while the blemishes are to 
be deplored. 

Naomi and her husband, Elimelech, pressed by hard 
times and a threatening famine, decided to leave the land 
of Israel and the people of God, and try their fortunes 



among the Gentiles in the land of Moab. In doing so they 
were leaving the special privileges of association with God's 
people, and failing also to contribute their part toward their 
comfort and encouragement and godly counsel in the time 
of general distress. They were also exposing themselves 
and their children to the unhallowed influences of an idolatrous 
people. This was the part they chose merely for 
temporal advantage, rather than to share the hardships at 
home and trust in the Lord to supply their needs. 

The result of this wrong course was only trouble. 
Elimelech died there, and Naomi was left alone with her 
two sons to raise. By and by the two sons married heathen 
wives who knew not the God of Israel. Then they also 
died; and Naomi, bereft of all but her two daughters-in-law, 
feeling that the hand of the Lord was against her in that 
she was thus sorely chastened, decided to retrace her steps 
to the land of her nativity, and again to cast in her lot 
with the Lord's people. 

When she had thus, by sad experience, learned the 
needed lesson and determined again to submit herself to 
the Lord's leading, the favor of God began to return 
to her. She found a great comfort and blessing in the 
manifested love and devotion of Ruth, her daughter-in-law, 
and in her conversion to the Jewish faith. "And Ruth 
said, 'Entreat me not to leave thee, or return from following 
after thee: for whither thou goest I will go; and where 
thou lodgest I will lodge; thy people shall be my people 
and thy God my God. Where thou diest I will die, and 
there will I be buried. The Lord do so to me, and more 
also, if aught but death part thee and me.'" 

That this was not a mere impulse on the part of Ruth 
is also manifest from her subsequent course of faithfulness 
to her mother-in-law; and Naomi's appreciation and devotion 
to her interests were just as manifest. Evidently 
though Naomi and her husband had erred in judgment and 
had been faint-hearted they were still loyal to God and let 
their light shine in the land of Moab, and both the 
daughters-in-law had been influenced by it, while Ruth was 
fully converted to God. 

Their kindly reception by the people of Bethlehem 
and the sympathy and kindness shown them were other 
great blessings. And finally the marriage of Ruth to Boaz, 
a man of character, wealth and influence, furnished a happy 
home to the desolate women and Ruth was honored of God 
in the line of our Lord's ancestry. 

The advice of Naomi to Ruth concerning Boaz was 
not, however, of unalloyed wisdom. Such a course today 
would brand any woman as a loose, if not a disreputable, 
character. And that Boaz feared such reproach is also 
clear from his request of Chap. 3:14. In advising such a 
course Naomi again betrayed the weakness of her trust in 
God. But God in kindness had mercy on her weakness; and, 
their hearts being free from evil, God overruled all for good. 



page 232 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER:-Enclosed you will find check to be 
placed to the credit of the Church of Boston. We are all 
out of "Do You Know" tracts. There is a great interest 
among the brethren here to spread the glad tidings, and we 
find use for lots of printed matter. We generally meet the 
people coming out of meetings. 

Enclosed find clipping. How true it is that these 
"powers" shall be rolled together as a scroll. (Isa. 34:4.) 
Our hearts should be continually at the throne of grace, 
knowing just where we stand; and God grant it may be 
our privilege to help with our dear Head to bring all things 
to a condition of peace. 

Yours in Christ, A. SIMPSON. 



R1875 : page 232 

MY DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Though 

never have we met (and perhaps never shall we) in this life, 
yet for the last eight or nine years my spirit has been oft 
refreshed from yours. At the first reading of The Plan of 
the Ages I was interested, impressed, converted. Before 
that my soul had been wandering and searching and longing 
for the pure waters, in a wilderness of theologies, 
theories, philosophies and fictions— groping after the "unknown 
God." 

You have known something of the development of 
my thought in the later years by kindly exchanging your 
publications for mine— The Grand Army Advocate; and 
though it is a secular paper, yet never has a number left me 
without bearing a word for the King. Meekly and humbly, 
I trust, have these gone forth from my hand, and the purpose 
has been to stir up thought and direct the seeing eye 
toward the "old paths;" how far successfully I do not 
know— God knoweth. 

And now I am full of thankfulness and praise to our 
Father for the new light which in these last times hath been 
shed abroad eminently through your ministry. The truth 
which makes and keeps you free has graciously gone forth 
in freedom to many a searching soul, and its work, mayhap, 
is only yet commencing. 

I have just read your last Old Theology Quarterly. 
Its compact scope and perfect impartiality are marvelous. 
I can wish that every thoughtful mind might read it. Of 
course, however, conviction of truth comes only through 
the ministration of the spirit of truth; and ears must be 
opened or they cannot hear. 

We have here, under the faithful teachings of Brother 
Page, a little band. The dear Lord is in our midst when 



only two or three meet together; but generally there are 
more, and I am sure that enlargement of thought and research 
in Scriptural matters are rapidly opening up the 
gates that the King of glory may come in. 

And now, dear Brother and Sister, that the cry goes 
loudly up to you, "Watchman, what of the night?" may 
the Lord God of Hosts sustain you and keep you faithful 
unto the end. 

Sincerely yours in Christ, J. F. BISHOP. 



page 233 
