Announcements
PREACHING FOR THE PURPOSE OF A WITNESS—Matt. 24:14, NW.
The work of God’s witnesses is not in vain. It reaches people throughout the world with the vital information that the old world is nearing its end and the kingdom of God is at hand. The message being accepted by some and rejected by other persons, the hearers are being marked as either “sheep” or “goats.” Those who hear with acceptance may, in turn, join in the preaching with Jehovah’s witnesses, who, during April, will continue going from house to house giving oral Bible sermons and offering a year’s subscription for The Watchtower for $1. Three booklets will be given free to each new subscriber. If you would like to join in this grand work, write the Society or get in touch with the nearest group of Jehovah’s witnesses.
CELEBRATION OF THE LORD’S EVENING MEAL
Again the time approaches when in a special way and with the keenest appreciation the supreme sacrifice of the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world, will be commemorated. The observance of the Lord’s evening meal by the anointed remnant this year will occur on April 7, after 6 p.m., Standard Time. Joining with them will be great numbers of “other sheep” who will be in attendance and hear explained the meaning of the occasion. A discourse will be given by a mature, capable, qualified minister to call to mind all that the celebration means, and then the emblems, unleavened bread and red wine, will be passed, after Jehovah’s blessing has been asked on each separately. The anointed present will partake of the emblems. In conclusion opportunities to have part in field service will be announced, after which the meeting will be closed with song and prayer.
NORTH AMERICAN ASSEMBLY ADDRESSES
Five outstanding North American assemblies of Jehovah’s witnesses will be held this summer. If you consider their value and the spiritual food that will be provided, there should be no question about going—the only question is, Which ones will you attend? Regular readers of The Watchtower probably have decided even that, so here are the addresses to which you may write for accommodations. Room requests may be sent in six to eight weeks prior to the assembly date. Address all mail to Watchtower Convention. Be sure to send it to the rooming address. Do not send any mail to convention halls.
Chicago, Ill., June 22-26, Comiskey Park, 35th and Shields Ave.
Rooming: 1618 W. Madison St., Chicago 12.
Vancouver, B.C., Can., June 29–July 3, Empire Stadium, Exhibition Park.
Rooming: 1696 W. 7th Ave., Vancouver 9.
Los Angeles, Calif., July 6-10, Wrigley Field, 435 E. 42d Pl.
Rooming: 5428 S. Broadway, Los Angeles 37.
Dallas, Tex., July 13-17, The Cotton Bowl, Fair Park.
Rooming: 4808 San Jacinto St., Dallas 4.
New York, N.Y., July 20-24, Yankee Stadium, 161st St. and River Ave.
Rooming: 557 W. 157th St., New York 32.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
May 1: Theocratic Conduct Within the Family Circle, ¶1-11. Page 208.
May 8: Theocratic Conduct Within the Family Circle, ¶12-25. Page 211.
May 15: Theocratic Tact in Divided Households. Page 217.

