Fulfilling Our Vow Day After Day
1 The psalmist David was moved to declare to Jehovah: “I will make melody to your name forever, that I may pay my vows day after day.” (Ps. 61:8) David knew that the making of a vow is a wholly voluntary matter. However, he also appreciated that if he made a vow, he was obligated to fulfill it. Even so, he praised Jehovah for the opportunity to fulfill his vows day after day.
2 When we made our dedication to Jehovah, we willingly vowed to do his will. We disowned ourselves and made serving Jehovah our primary pursuit in life. (Luke 9:23) Hence, we too must pay our vow day after day. (Eccl. 5:4-6) Our public declaration made at the time of water baptism must be reflected in our entire pattern of life, since we know that “with the mouth one makes public declaration for salvation.” (Rom. 10:10) This includes preaching the good news. (Heb. 13:15) Personal circumstances vary greatly, but day after day all of us can keep in focus the importance of sharing the good news with others.
3 Make Opportunities to Preach Daily: Sharing the good news with someone else is a joyful experience. In order to do this daily, we have to make opportunities to preach whenever our circumstances permit. Many happy experiences have been enjoyed by those who have taken the initiative to witness informally to individuals at work or in school and to neighbors or others they encounter each day. Even writing letters or using the telephone can be a means of witnessing to others. Taking advantage of all these means as well as setting aside time regularly for witnessing from door to door and making return visits can lead to the special joy that comes from conducting a home Bible study. Yes, each day we may be able to create opportunities to preach.
4 A sister began reading Examining the Scriptures Daily during her work break. She invited a workmate to read the day’s text with her, and that soon led to a Bible study with the woman. They studied for half an hour each day, five days a week. Another workmate observed their daily study. He eventually identified himself as an inactive brother. Moved by the sister’s zeal, he contacted an elder in order to become reactivated. This sister touched two other lives in a positive way because of following through in fulfilling her vow day after day.
5 When we are motivated by a heart brimming with appreciation for all the good things Jehovah has done for us, fulfilling our dedication vow as best we can each day will bring us joy and satisfaction. Like the psalmist, we can declare: “I laud you, O Jehovah my God, with all my heart, and I will glorify your name to time indefinite.”—Ps. 86:12.

