Have You Tried Evening Witnessing?
1 All of us find pleasure in being productive in our work. On the other hand, when we are unable to see positive results, work can become tedious and unfulfilling. Meaningful labor is personally rewarding, and it is a blessing. (Compare Ecclesiastes 3:10-13.) We can apply this principle to our preaching work. We know from experience that when we go from door to door and are able to converse with people about the Bible, we return home spiritually refreshed. We feel that we have really accomplished something.
2 In some areas it has become very difficult to find people at home during certain hours of the day. Reports indicate that in many places more than 50 percent of the people are not at home when we call early in the day. Many congregations have dealt with this problem by making arrangements for evening witnessing, and they have met with good success. Publishers report that when they call later in the day, more people are at home, and in general, people tend to be more relaxed and more inclined to listen to the Kingdom message. Have you tried evening witnessing in your territory?—Compare Mark 1:32-34.
3 Elders Organize Evening Witnessing: In some areas meetings for field service in the late afternoon or early evening have been well supported. Consideration can be given to young publishers who get out of school in the afternoon and to adults who have finished their secular work by later in the day. Some publishers who are not able to be out in field service on weekends find that evening witnessing during the week is a practical way for them to have a regular share in the preaching work.
4 There are various activities you can engage in during evening witnessing. You can witness from house to house with magazines or use the literature offer for the month. Evening is a fine time to call on people who were not at home when publishers called earlier in the day or on weekends. There might also be good territory for street witnessing, allowing you to contact people coming home from work. Many find that the evening is the best time to make return visits on those who have shown interest.
5 Be Cautious and Discreet: Going out at dusk or after dark could be hazardous in certain areas. It would be wise to travel in pairs or groups on well-lit streets and visit homes or apartment buildings only where there is some assurance that you will be safe. When you knock at the door, stand where you can be seen, and clearly identify yourself. Be discerning. When you observe that you have called at an inopportune time, as when the family is eating, offer to call at another time. Usually it is best to confine your witnessing to the early evening hours, rather than make late calls, when householders may be getting ready to retire for the night.
6 Long summer evenings are particularly appropriate for evening witnessing. As we render God “sacred service day and night,” Jehovah will certainly bless our efforts.—Rev. 7:15.

