The Future for God’s Loyal Ones
“JEHOVAH is righteous; he does love righteous acts. The upright are the ones that will behold his face.” Those words of King David are found at Psalm 11, verse 7. And today, what a glorious future lies ahead of those who perform righteous acts in God’s service! Revelation chapter 7 describes “a great crowd . . . out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues,” that survives the final war of Armageddon. Over them God spreads his “tent,” drawing these dedicated servants into a grand intimacy with him.​—Rev. 7:9-17.
Our loving God does not want us to be destroyed with the wicked in His day of vengeance. He wants us to find salvation. And to encourage us in this, he provides in the Bible a glorious forevision of “a new heaven and a new earth.” That new earth will be a stable human society, united by divine love under the “new heaven” composed of Christ Jesus and his 144,000 corulers. All these anointed ones will have shown themselves to be loyal to God here on earth, and will have been resurrected to rule with Christ in his heavenly kingdom. The billions of mankind will find it easy to place great confidence in those tried and proven governors.​—Rev. 14:1, 4, 5; 20:6; 21:1, 2.
Did we say billions of humans here on earth under Kingdom rule? Yes, billions! For that will be the grand time of the resurrection of the dead into the paradise earth. That is the paradise that Jesus spoke about to the evildoer who was with him at Calvary. (Luke 23:43) What rejoicing there will be among those resurrected ones over being released from the grip of death! Tears, mourning, outcry, pain​—even inherited death—​will be no more.​—Rev. 20:11-14; 21:3, 4.
In that new order, blind eyes will be opened to rejoice in beholding God’s beautiful creations. Deaf ears will be unstopped to listen to music more delightful than any yet composed by man. Song writers themselves will be perfect, and their melodies will exalt Jehovah and his grand accomplishments. The tongue of the dumb will be loosed, to share in delightful conversation and in praising Jehovah. Lame ones will run again, and radiant health will be the lot of all mankind. All these blessings, and many more, will flow to humanity.​—Compare Isaiah 35:1-6.
In God’s new order, there will be no corrupt politicians to oppress, no armies to kill and maim, no selfish profiteers to inflate oil and commodity prices. No longer will thousands of Babylonish religious sects confuse people, or shed innocent blood in religious warfare. Instead, all mankind will be united in the one true worship of our loving God, who declares from his heavenly throne: “Look! I am making all things new.”​—Rev. 21:5.
Let all who look forward to that grand provision of Jehovah now share in the fulfillment of his prophecy: “Your loyal ones will bless you. About the glory of your kingship they will talk.”​—Ps. 145:10, 11.

