From Our Readers
Overcoming Drug Abuse
Thank you for your article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Recover From Drug Abuse?” (July 8, 1986) It made me realize why I felt as I did when I stopped abusing drugs. I had used them for ten years or so, starting at 14. I am now 27 and have just got over my problem thanks very much to Jehovah. I had been through psychologists, counselors, drug programs, loss of friends, even nine years in prison because of them, and I still couldn’t stop. It was only when I replaced the evil with the good, when I started to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, that I was able to stop.
J. T., Jr., United States
The article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Recover From Drug Abuse?” shows that you understand drug-dependent persons and that you are interested in helping them. I, too, was dependent upon drugs and was under a doctor’s care. Wanting to live comes from learning how to live. And knowing how to live is taught by having a close relationship with Jehovah.
P. O., Federal Republic of Germany
Latchkey Children
I am writing concerning your article “Young People Ask . . . Why Isn’t Mom Here When I Get Home?” (June 22, 1986) Sadly, in our area some parents are leaving children eight years old and under alone while they work. But here in Indiana it’s illegal to leave a child under age ten alone for any period of time. Did you want readers to feel that being a latchkey child is ok at any age?
L. S., United States
The article did not recommend that young children be left home alone at all. It merely acknowledged that latchkey children are a fact of life and showed young people how to cope with the situation. All the examples we gave dealt with children of 12 years of age or older. We think that working parents should consider the individual need and ability of any child they will leave alone for a period of time, as well as the need to conform to any local legal age requirements.​—ED.
The Mystery Behind the Occult
I was interested in reading your article on the occult and notice that you give a lot of space to negative subjects. (August 22, 1986) I feel you could give more to the Risen Savior and the good news.
J. H., Australia
We also devote much space to telling our readers about the good news of God’s Kingdom under Christ and the positive benefits of following God’s laws in our lives. At the same time, we feel the need to take up serious problems facing people today and to show how these will be resolved. Further, there are many dangers in the world, such as occultism, and we believe that it is positive to warn our readers about these dangers and show how they can gain protection from them.​—ED.
I want to let you know how much I appreciate the article “The Demons Controlled Me.” (August 22, 1986) Before my baptism I was under the same influence. I just didn’t know what was taking control over me. Many people felt that it was a way God used to let me know the future. It wasn’t until I started to study with Jehovah’s Witnesses that I learned the truth on the matter. At times I still dream of events that are to happen, but I pray to Jehovah to help me not to pay any attention to the dreams. I just wish I had known what it was that I was getting into back then.
B. T., United States

