New Brochure to Be Offered!
 1. What will we offer during November, and what is the purpose of this publication?
1 At our “Keep on the Watch!” District Convention in 2009, a new brochure was released entitled The Bible—What Is Its Message? During November congregations around the world will offer it for the first time. How will this publication benefit people in our territory? Most people, especially those in non-Christian religions, know little about the Bible. Therefore, the brochure explains on page 3 that it is designed to provide “an overview of the Bible.”
 2. How might we offer the brochure?
2 How to Offer It: We could say something like this: “We would like to get your opinion on what this says. [Read 2 Timothy 3:16.] Many we talk to agree with these words; others feel that the Bible is nothing more than a good book. What do you think about the Bible? [Allow for response.] Whatever our religious beliefs may be, there are good reasons to examine the Bible for ourselves. [Read the introductory paragraph at the top of page 3.] As you read the fast-moving summary of the Bible found in this brochure, you will see something interesting: The Bible has one overall theme and message.”
 3. What is another presentation that we might use, especially in territory where many belong to a non-Christian religion?
3 Here is another option, especially when preaching where many people belong to a non-Christian religion: “We would like to get your opinion on what is stated here in the Scriptures (or in this holy book). [Read Psalm 37:11.] What do you think the earth will be like when this prophecy is fulfilled? [Allow for response.] This is an example of the hope and comfort that people of all cultures and faiths can receive from the Bible.” Read the paragraph at the top of page 3, and offer the brochure.
 4. How may we use the brochure to start a Bible study?
4 Start a Bible Study: When we return we could remind the householder of our previous conversation and consider a paragraph or two on the subject we discussed, using the questions at the end of the appropriate section. Or if we wish to introduce the Bible Teach book right away, we could read with him the back cover of the brochure, hand him the book, ask which of the chapter titles interests him, and consider a paragraph or two from that chapter together. May all of us have a full share in offering this brochure during November!

