“Do Not Be Afraid”
 1. What challenges similar to Jeremiah’s may we personally face?
1 Jeremiah, when commissioned as a prophet, had feelings of inadequacy. But Jehovah reassured him, “do not be afraid,” and kindly strengthened him to accomplish his assignment. (Jer. 1:6-10) In our day, shyness or lack of confidence may affect our participation in the ministry. Fear of how people may respond or view us could cause us to hold back at times. How can we overcome such fears, and what personal blessings will result?
 2. How will preparation help us to allay our fears regarding the ministry?
2 Prepare in Advance: Adequate preparation can do much to allay our fears. For instance, if we review in advance potential conversation stoppers, we will be prepared to answer common objections. (Prov. 15:28) Why not use practice sessions during Family Worship to prepare for various challenges at school and in the ministry?—1 Pet. 3:15.
 3. How does trust in Jehovah help us to overcome fear?
3 Trust in Jehovah: A sure antidote for fear is reliance on our God. Jehovah guaranteed that he will help us. (Isa. 41:10-13) What greater security could we have? In addition, Jesus assured us that even when unexpected situations arise, God’s holy spirit will enable us to bear witness in a fine way. (Mark 13:11) Therefore, petition Jehovah regularly for his holy spirit.—Luke 11:13.
 4. What blessings result from persevering in the ministry despite challenges?
4 Blessings: As we persevere in the ministry despite challenges, we are strengthened to face future trials successfully. We develop courage and boldness—characteristics of those filled with holy spirit. (Acts 4:31) Furthermore, as we overcome personal fears with Jehovah’s help, we fortify our faith and our trust in his saving arm. (Isa. 33:2) We also experience the joy and satisfaction that come from knowing that we are pleasing our heavenly Father. (1 Pet. 4:13, 14) Let us, then, not be afraid to declare the Kingdom message with boldness, always confident of Jehovah’s backing!

