Singapore Tramples on Freedom of Worship
ON THE evening of February 24, 1995, four homes in the city of Singapore were raided by police. A total of 69 people were arrested.a Among them were a 71-year-old woman and two 15-year-old girls. Why? Was it because of criminal or subversive activity? No. Not one of them was engaged in anything that could even in the remotest sense be considered dangerous, immoral, or antisocial. They posed no threat to the moral values, safety, and well-being of their fellow Singaporeans. Yet, after ransacking the four homes, the police took the 69 people, who had come together to study the Bible and enjoy a social gathering, to the police station. There they were held overnight, interrogated, fingerprinted, and photographed​—yes, treated like common criminals! During this time​—as long as 18 hours in substandard conditions—​they were denied access to legal counsel and were even forbidden to make a phone call to tell family members where they were. One can only imagine how such summary action affected these peaceable, law-abiding citizens!
The scenario is reminiscent of conditions during the dark days of Nazi Germany and the Communist era in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. It is not what a casual visitor to Singapore would expect to find in that pristine and affluent modern city-state. Singapore has built a reputation as a 20th-century wonder of economic and social advancement. It is a declared democracy that has a constitution guaranteeing its citizens basic human rights, including freedom of speech, religion, and assembly.
Yet, those arrested in February were targeted solely because they were Jehovah’s Witnesses meeting together to study the Bible and share Christian fellowship. The charge against them was “attending a meeting of an unlawful society.“
In fact, Jehovah’s Witnesses have been denied legal recognition in Singapore since 1972 when the Singapore Congregation was deregistered and the literature, including Bibles, published by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society was placed under ban. No opportunity was allowed to challenge the assumptions on which that action was taken. Recently, the legality of this official discrimination was challenged in Singapore’s courts in the case of four Witnesses who had been convicted in February 1994 of possession of prohibited Bible literature. The appeal against their convictions was heard in August 1994 and was summarily dismissed. Chief Justice Yong Pung How of the High Court released his opinion the following month. He held that there was no violation of religious freedom and that the convictions were justified on the basis that Jehovah’s Witnesses were a threat to national security because members would not participate in military service. On February 17, 1995, the four Witnesses sought leave to appeal this adverse decision to the Singapore Court of Appeal. The application was denied.
This last decision was given prominence in the government-controlled Singapore press. No doubt this court decision and the resulting publicity foreshadowed the events that followed. Within a week the arrest of the 69 Witnesses took place. The charges against four of these​—citizens of Britain, France, and Luxembourg—​were subsequently dismissed. Even for these, however, the experience was terrifying. One man had lived and worked in Singapore for years with his wife. They lost their jobs and their rented home and were forced to say good-bye to many close friends.
The 63 remaining adults were charged with belonging to a banned society, and some were also charged with possession of  prohibited literature. They face a maximum of three years in prison or a S$3,000 ($2,100, U.S.) fine or both. The two 15-year-old girls appeared separately in juvenile court.
No Threat to National Identity and Unity
Around the world, in the more than 200 lands where they reside, Jehovah’s Witnesses are known as decent, honest, law-abiding people. They are recognized for their staunch refusal to take part in any kind of subversive, antigovernment activity​—unchristian action that can result in their being disfellowshipped, or excommunicated. Truly, the Singapore government has nothing to fear from them. They are in no way a threat to Singapore’s national security or sense of national identity and unity. (Romans 13:1-7) This was plainly stated in a letter dated March 21, 1995, from Milton G. Henschel, president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, to Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong of Singapore. This letter is reproduced here for the benefit of our readers.
Liberty-loving people in business, government, and the private sector will be watching with interest to see how this situation in Singapore develops. Will the government of Singapore act in harmony with the basic human rights and freedoms espoused by its own constitution and the international community of nations? Certainly, Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world are deeply concerned about their fellow worshipers in Singapore. They remember them in their prayers and bear in mind the assurance found in the Bible: “Jehovah is a lover of justice, and he will not leave his loyal ones.“​—Psalm 37:28.
[Footnotes]
In the months since these 69 were arrested, another 11 Witnesses have been arrested and charged with possession of illegal literature.
[Box on page 30]
March 21, 1995
Goh Chok Tong
Prime Minister
Istana Annexe
Singapore 0923
Republic of Singapore
Lee Kuan Yew
Senior Minister
Prime Minister’s Office
460 Alexandra Road
37-00 PSA Bldg
Singapore 0511
Republic of Singapore
  Dear Sirs:
  A recent Reuters dispatch from Singapore dated February 25, 1995, was most disturbing. It reported that Bible study meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses had been broken up by police and 69 people were arrested. This report has focused world attention on the situation of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Singapore, where their activities and literature have been banned for over 20 years.
  It is difficult to understand why a religious organization which functions openly with full protection of the law in more than 200 countries should be banned in Singapore, a country which espouses the principles of democracy. It is all the more disturbing in view of Singapore’s constitutional guarantee of freedom of worship for its citizens.
  Jehovah’s Witnesses have never posed any threat to national security anywhere. Indeed, throughout the world they have the reputation of being peaceable, hardworking, morally upright, and law abiding​—qualities which I am sure you promote in your country.
  It is true that in their strict adherence to Bible standards for Christians, the position of Jehovah’s Witnesses has sometimes been misunderstood or misrepresented. But, was that not true of the founder of Christianity who also was misrepresented as being against “Caesar,” the government of his day? Jehovah’s Witnesses simply follow the example of Jesus and the early Christians. They respect the government where they live, pay their taxes, and promote good morals. They are conscientious and upright citizens. Never have Jehovah’s Witnesses taken part in any kind of subversive activity in any country and I can assure you that their presence in Singapore poses no threat to your country’s national interests.
  Due to recent media reports, the repressive measures taken against Jehovah’s Witnesses in Singapore by your government are now common knowledge. It is especially a matter of concern to their 12 million associates around the world. I ask you to use your good office to remedy the situation and afford Jehovah’s Witnesses in your country the freedom of worship and conscience guaranteed by the Constitution.
  I believe a frank discussion with representatives of Jehovah’s Witnesses would help dispel any misunderstandings about our organization and activity and would reassure you that the government of Singapore has nothing to fear from Jehovah’s Witnesses. I would be happy to arrange for such a meeting.
  I look forward to your reply.
Yours respectfully,
Milton G. Henschel
President
[Picture Credit Line on page 31]
Nik Wheeler/​H. Armstrong Roberts

