“Rejoicing in the Harvesttime” in the Philippines
SUN-KISSED beaches, warm tropical seas, jungle-clad mountains, fertile plains​—yes, this is the Philippines! Here is a country made up of thousands of islands, some stunningly beautiful, scattered in the seas off the coastlines of Southeast Asia. But the Philippines is not only scenery; it is also people​—47,000,000 of them.
The life-styles of these people vary greatly​—from the primitive but contented Tasaday tribe in the southern rain forests to the modern business tycoons in the cosmopolitan city of Manila. But, for the most part, Filipinos are an agricultural people. Many live in distinctive houses built on stilts and rely on the produce of the land for their livelihood. For such a people, the harvest is a busy, happy time. It is a delight to bring the fruitage of their hard work in from the fields. And in a fertile land like this, with proper irrigation, joyful harvesttime can come three times a year.​—Isa. 9:3.
In the past 50 years, however, another harvest has been reaped in the Philippines. This has been an abundant harvest, or ingathering, of people who have chosen to pursue the true worship of Jehovah God and who have put their trust in his kingdom.
PLANTING THE TRUTH
The first seeds of truth that produced this harvest drifted into the Philippines much like seeds being carried by the wind. Charles Taze Russell, the first president of the Watch Tower Society, started the preaching of true religion here when he visited the capital city of Manila in 1912. In the early 1920’s, a certain H. Tinney from Canada did missionary work here for a year. He left behind a functioning Bible study class. American servicemen or their wives spread more seeds of truth during succeeding years, and an American of Portuguese descent, Joseph Dos Santos, came to preach in Manila in the course of a round-the-world trip.
As a result of these different sproutings, in 1934 a branch office of the Watch Tower Society was established in Manila. The second world war severely disrupted the country, but it did not slow down the spiritual harvest work. Despite persecution from both the Japanese invaders and the local Filipino resistance fighters, the number of proclaimers of the “good news” grew from 373 in 1941 to over 2,000 in 1945. At present, there are more than 60,000 Kingdom proclaimers spreading the “good news” among the Filipinos.
TRIBESMEN EMBRACE THE TRUTH
This work has now reached the most remote parts of the islands. To reach the more isolated communities in those regions, Jehovah’s Witnesses often have to walk for days, constantly climbing up and down mountains. But their efforts have borne fruit, for members of even the more primitive tribes now are numbered among worshipers of Jehovah. In northern Luzon, it is the custom of certain tribes to tattoo a young woman when she reaches marriageable age. So in that area it is not unusual to meet women who now are Jehovah’s Witnesses but whose tattoo-covered arms show that they were brought up according to other views.
One young member of the Subanon tribe, from the fertile regions of southern Philippines, overcame a big obstacle when he embraced true Christianity. At the tender age of nine he had the sad experience of seeing his two sisters kidnapped by rebels and carried off to the mountains. He swore revenge and enlisted in the army as soon as he was old enough. His parents, who then were studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, tried to dissuade him, saying that only God’s kingdom would correct the injustices of this world. But his thirst for revenge was too strong and he would not abandon his plan. Soon he found himself in combat, facing a band of rebels just like the one that had kidnapped his sisters years earlier. At last, the chance for revenge! But, to his surprise, he could not shoot at the rebels. The things his parents had told him about pure Christianity were too strong in his heart, and he purposely fired his gun in the air. As soon as possible, he resigned as a military man and began sharing in the work of “publishing peace” to his neighbors.​—Isa. 52:7.
Another young man, the son of a datu, or tribal leader, also became a Witness. When he was nine years old, he had run away from a cruel stepfather (who had 10 wives) and was finally taken in by a major of the Philippine Constabulary. While at school, the youngster had the opportunity to study magic with someone who had learned the art in India. He became very adept at practicing magical arts. Later, he entered the army, all the while becoming more famous as a magician. After the second world war, he married a Catholic girl and became involved in that religion, while still carrying on his magic practices. Finally, he studied with Jehovah’s Witnesses. After reading God’s condemnation of all uncanny practices, he abandoned his magical arts to engage in the clean and undefiled worship of Jehovah.​—Deut. 18:10-12.
AMONG THE REBELS
In common with many lands today, the Philippines has its share of activist rebels. Also, in isolated regions bandits make life difficult for the people. For the most part, these activities are being kept under control by the government. Nevertheless, in jungles and remote areas where hiding places are plentiful, it is difficult to eliminate them entirely.
Some religions have made a bad name for themselves by actively supporting the rebel movements in the name of “social justice.” Jehovah’s Witnesses, however, have maintained a neutral stand and this has resulted in a fine witness. (John 15:19) Some rebels have even ceased fighting and have placed their trust in Jehovah’s kingdom, the only solution to mankind’s difficult social problems.
One young woman from Mindanao, the second-largest island in the Philippine archipelago, was raised a Catholic. She entered a seminary as an “aspirant” but soon experienced disillusionment and became a teacher. Eventually she went to Manila to study for a degree. After she heard a Jesuit chaplain incorrectly say that the apostles and early Christians were the first to practice communism, she became very involved in Communist organizations and joined student demonstrations, often marching side by side with nuns and priests.
Back home, she started teaching her pupils her new ideas. This led to conflict with her superiors and a short jail sentence. Upon release from prison, she was forced to resign from her teaching post. Hence, she went into the hills and lived with a group of rebels for seven months. Betrayed and captured, she was detained for 10 months, which time gave her the opportunity to examine the Roman Catholic Church more closely. Her conclusion: this is an apostate religion.
Finally, this young woman came into possession of the tract Has Religion Betrayed God and Man? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses. The message had a ring of truth, especially in the light of all her experiences. So she contacted the Witnesses, asked many questions, and was given satisfactory answers. Finally, in 1974 she abandoned her Communistic convictions and was immersed as a witness of Jehovah. Later, she had the opportunity to preach to some of her former “comrades”​—much to their astonishment.
In another case, a young man on Mindanao was raised in a Protestant family. Disillusioned with religion, he joined a group of guerrillas who claimed to be bullet-proof if they recited certain Latin prayers. In time, the government negotiated with their leader and they were used to fight certain rebels. Hence, the young man drifted away and joined a group of “regular” bandits. They had no political convictions, but made a living preying on innocent people. Their specialty was ambushing and robbing bus passengers.
On one occasion, this young man went home to his father with a large sum of money. But his father refused the money and started preaching to him. Yes, the father now was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He gave his son the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life, and the young man took it back to the gang’s hideout. Although the leader showed much interest, he was unable to give up the easy money that came from banditry. However, the young man realized that here, at last, was the truth. He quit hiding, received a government amnesty and was baptized in 1973. Soon thereafter he became a full-time preacher, or “pioneer.”
ESCAPING FROM DEMON CONTROL
The Philippines is quite well known as the home of so-called faith healers. These claim to perform surgical operations without anesthetics or instruments. The patient feels no pain as the “healer” supposedly reaches right into his body with his bare hands (without cutting the skin) and operates on internal organs. People come from Europe and America to be “operated on” in this way.
One young woman in northern Luzon had an aunt who claimed such powers and felt capable of making injections into the body merely by using her fingers. The young woman was impressed and greatly desired the same powers, feeling that this would make her like the early apostles. She prayed fervently, but did not receive any powers.
Feeling that perhaps faith was lacking, she sought help from one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The Witness gave her the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life. Unable to understand it, the young woman approached other Witnesses, who studied the Bible with her. She found that her Bible knowledge was increasing. Nevertheless, she so much wanted the gift of healing that she kept associating with her aunt. Also, she was praying to Jehovah to give her this gift.
One night, the whole matter became clear to her. While her aunt was holding a healing session, the young woman went outside to pray to Jehovah. Then from inside the house came a voice saying that there was a powerful force outside preventing their healings. The young woman realized that her aunt was merely calling on spirits to help her and that Jehovah was much stronger than they are. Hence, she completely severed her relations with the “faith healers” and began serving Jehovah, not with the gift of healing but by spreading knowledge about the far more valuable spiritual healing power of God’s word.​—Prov. 4:20-22.
Another woman on Mindanao was very much under the control of the demons. She thought that while asleep at night, she had the power to leave her body and fly through the air as a witch. In these “travels” she felt that she associated with other witches and even ate human flesh.
These dreams appalled her, but she could do nothing to prevent them. She even contemplated suicide. Once, an Adventist recommended that she read the Bible. However, since she did not understand what she read, even this did not help her. Finally, she spoke to one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The Witness explained that Jehovah is stronger than any demon. A free home Bible study was started and she was taught to pray to Jehovah for help. What wonderful relief! The demon attacks stopped.
One time, this woman thought that she would put Jehovah to the test. That night she neglected her customary Bible study and did not pray before going to sleep. Sure enough, the vivid, revolting dreams returned. She prayed to Jehovah for forgiveness for putting him to the wrong kind of test. Since then, she has had no doubt about the power of Jehovah God to deliver her from demon harassment.
THE HARVEST IS STILL GOING ON!
Yes, with Jehovah’s rich blessing, much spiritual harvest work has been done in this tropical republic during the past half century. In some locations, a large proportion of the population now are Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Jehovah’s people here are determined to use whatever time God will allow until the “great tribulation” to help others to enjoy the wonderful privilege of serving their Creator. Indeed, God’s servants continue to ‘rejoice in the harvesttime’ in the Philippines.​—Isa. 9:3; Matt. 24:21.

