VOL. XVI. MARCH 15, 1895. No. 6. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items— Extra Towers, Calendars, 

Wall Rolls, etc 66 

Views from the Tower— 67 

The Religious View 67 

The Jewish View 70 

Poem: Some Better Things 70 

The Memorial Supper 71 

"Come, My People." 72 

Bible Study: Love the Essence of Divine Law 74 

Bible Study: Review 75 

Encouraging Letters 75 

page 66 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 



MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



"CHRISTIAN COMMON SENSE" in our last issue seems to 
have met the wants of God's people as an answer to the Satanic doctrine 
that God is the instigator and author of "all the sin; wickedness and 
crime of the world." We have an extra supply of the last TOWER and 
will send extra copies free to such as will promise to give or loan them 
amongst Christian people afflicted with this revived theosophic delusion. 

CALENDARS. We have many inquiries for calendars for '95, 
such as we supplied at very low prices for '93 and '94. In reply: We 
failed to secure any for '95 at special prices and hence got none. Those 
who desire can procure them at the retail price through their nearest 
bookseller. 

WALL ROLLS. --We continue to supply the Wall Rolls,-60 
cents each, postage paid by us. Two kinds, "Strength and Sunshine 
for Every Day," and "Precept, Prayer, Promise and Praise." Each presents 
Scripture, etc., for each day— repeating monthly. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. -Do not forget these. They preach 
the glad tidings in few words wherever they go; to your correspondents, 
as well as to postmen, and others enroute. Price, post-paid, 25 for 10 
cents, 100 for 25 cents. 

TRACTS IN GOOD SUPPLY NOW. Order freely all you 
can and will use judiciously. 

BIBLES AND BIBLE STUDY HELPS at specially low 
prices. Send for catalogue. 



R1784:page67 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



DR. Horton, in the Methodist Times, says:— "On 

the church of England it is impossible to rely. 

She is permeated with the Roman virus. Her clergy denounce 

the Reformation. Whatever love they had for the 

gospel of Nazareth and the Son of Man is dying away. 

They are fascinated by the gospel of Rome and the Vicegerent 

of Christ. The apostasy is not yet complete, but 

its progress is amazing. I venture to say that but for the 

accessions to the church of England from the Nonconformist 

churches at this time Protestantism would be as good as 

dead within her borders. And those accessions cannot continue. 

Presently the Nonconformist churches will claim 

and use their own sons, and will not be able to spare them 

for a Romanised Establishment. The hope of England lies 



in the Free churches, in the homes of the Spirit of Christ 
which have been provided and kept by the Spirit of God 
against this time." 



On Feb. 25, Archbishop Ireland addressed the students 
of the University of Chicago in the chapel,— Subject, 
"Religion, Science and Good Citizenship." 

The Chicago University is under Baptist patronage. 
What Romanism does not know about true "Religion, Science 
and Good Citizenship" would fill many volumes; and, 
judging from the past, a Roman Catholic Arch-bishop should 
make a remarkable instructor upon these subjects!! 

According to an article which has been going the 
rounds of the Press over the signature A. Tyler, this same 
Bishop Ireland on the occasion of his last visit to Rome encouraged 
the Cardinals there in the following (patriotic?) 
words:— 

"We can have America in ten years, and I give three 
points for your consideration— the Indian, the negro, and 
the public schools. The importance of the possession of 
America cannot be overestimated. It is a providential nation. 
The movements of the modern world have their highest 
tension in the United States. The natural order is seen 
here in its best, and here displays its fullest strength. The 
church, unhampered by dictates of government or by despotic 
custom, can, with freedom, choose its arms, and, 
making straight for the opposing foe, bring the contest to a 
speedier close. I am aware there are those among us who 
do not partake of my hopefulness. What can be done, they 
say, in America? Catholics are a handful. What can be 
wanting? Why should we fear or hesitate? We number 
10,000,000— a powerful army, if the forces are well drilled, 
and their latent strength put in action. Catholics in America 
are loyal to the faith, brave in confessing it, self-sacrificing 
in its interests, devoted to their chieftains; when 
combined efforts are called for, ready, and at all times 
prompt to obey when orders are given." 



As a sign of the times we note that the Socialists of 
France are adopting a form of civil baptism for their children. 
In the town of St. Denis, where socialism has quite 
a hold, the Mayor, himself a socialist, recently baptised as 
many as nine children in one day— using a socialist formula, 
with the express statement that the parents desired to 
withdraw them from the guardianship of the church. The 
account says, "The god-parents took a pledge to bring up 
the children 'in the love of labor and liberty and the sentiment 
of fraternity necessary to make them good citizens 
and fervent republicans.'" 

Not only with these, but with many of the "leading 
lights" here, who follow more conservative lines, the idea 
is growing, that "the doctrines of Christ" and "faith 



in his blood" belong to a religion which has been outgrown; 

and that the true religion for the future, and the 

only one that will gain the attention of the masses, is the 

R1784:page68 

gospel of social revolution— humanitarianism and utilitarianism. 
All who see clearly the true gospel of redemption 
through the precious blood and as a result, by and by, the 
offer to all men of restitution (Acts 3:21), and these alone, are 
prepared to point out clearly to the deluded that they have 
mistaken the false, earthly systems of men for the Church 
of God whose names are written in heaven, and that the 
only hope of the groaning creation is described by St. 
James (Chap. 5:7,8) and St. Paul. -Rom. 8:22,21. 

THE HIGHER CRITICS IN BAD COMPANY. 



"It has just leaked out," says Truth, "that at a Baptist 
congress in Detroit lately the Higher Critics got a deserved 
set-back. This is the story. 

"President Harper [of Chicago University] and President 
Andrews, of Brown University, with others, had been 
advocating the methods of modern Higher Criticism, and 
saying that the last twenty-seven chapters of Isaiah were 
written by some other man, when Prof. Howard Osgood of 
Rochester arose in reply. He spoke briefly, completely 
answered the Higher Critics, and then said, I have here 
an article written almost exactly one hundred years ago. I 
will read it and tell you the author.' He read a criticism 
on the Bible, and especially on Isaiah, advocating a double 
authorship of the latter, in almost exactly the language of 
Harper and his friends. He made a few comments upon 
the clearness of the ideas of the author, and showed his 
teachings to be identical with modern Higher Criticism. 
He then exclaimed after a long pause, The author of this 
paper was Thomas Paine.' The effect was wonderful. 
There was a look of surprise on the faces of the critics, and 
then, as the applause rang out, they looked as though they 
would like to escape. ...It was carefully kept out 
of the papers for some reason." 



Prof. Drummond, in his "Natural Law in the Spiritual 
World," after cautiously advancing the doctrine of 
Evolution— so guardedly that many of his readers absorbed 
his suggestions without realizing what they implied of Scripture 
contradiction— has now thrown off the mask and declares 
his anti-Scriptural views in his new book, "The Ascent 
of Man." 

How could we expect this learned gentleman (See Isa. 29:14) 
to be interested in, or to appreciate, the Bible doctrines 
of redemption and restitution from the FALL? (See 



Acts 3:21.) Far easier for him would it be to forget all 
the greatness of the past— the statesmanship of Moses, the 
wisdom of Solomon and Confucius, the logic of Paul and 
Socrates and Plato; the poetry of the Psalmist, Job and 
Shakespeare; the "lost arts" of manufacture, elastic glass, 
tempered copper and Damascus steel; and the musicians 
and sculptors and painters of the past; and to think only 
of the greatness of the present so-called "brain-age." Far 
easier would it be for him to conclude that St. Peter and 
"all the holy prophets since the world began" were mistaken, 
deluded, and that he and all the "higher critics" 
are correct. Because, forsooth, the "times of restitution" 
which Peter and all the holy prophets and apostles hold 

R1785 : page 68 

forth as the hope of the world, would, according to these 
self-styled critics, be a return to ape-hood. Truly the words 
of the Lord are fulfilled— "The wisdom of their wise men 
shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men 
shall be hid." 

THE CATHOLIC CHURCH AND THE SOCIAL STRUGGLE. 



"In a recent number of the Forum, Prof. Goldwin 
Smith directed attention to the belief current throughout 
Europe that a wide-reaching and violent social upheaval is 
not distant. Whether the movement will result merely in 
temporary collision and disorder, or in complete revolution, 
depends of course upon the relative strength of the disruptive 
agencies and of the forces arrayed upon the side of the 
existing order. At first sight an immense preponderance 
of material power would be attributed to the upholders of 
the present social system, but the history of the French Revolution 
proves that such preponderance cannot be maintained 
unless there is a corresponding moral power behind 
it. That this moral support must come mainly from the 
Roman Catholic Church is the averment made in an interesting 
article contributed by Mr. Charles Robinson to the 
American Magazine of Civics. 

"It would be, indeed, a mistake to say that no European 
Catholics are infected with socialistic doctrines. A 
wing of the Centrist or Catholic party in Germany has 
evinced considerable sympathy with socialism, and the same 
thing may be said of a section of the Clerical party in Belgium. 
These sporadic phenomena are doubtless explicable 
by the fact that Catholics and Socialists encountered for 
many years in Belgium a common opponent in the liberalism 
of M. Frere-Orban, and in Germany a common oppressor 
in Prince Bismark. Such inclinations, however, to 
fellowship in feeling and action seem destined to be transient, 
for the reason that the causes which produced them 
have ceased to operate. Liberalism of the Frere-Orban 
type is now almost extinct in Belgium, and Bismark made 



the journey to Canossa before he retired from public life. 
Moreover, the head of the Church of Rome, whom every 
Catholic is bound to obey, has declared himself of late in 
the most distinct and authoritative terms on the side of the 
social system which has individualism for its basic principle. 
Catholicism, therefore, is already in theory, and will presently 
become in fact, a unit in resistance to the social solvents 
which range from the collectivism that professes to 
seek the fulfilment of its aims by constitutional means alone, 
to anarchy of the most irrational and malignant type. 

"On the other hand, no Protestant denomination has 
yet taken an unequivocal position with regard to the contest 
between socialism and individualism. Not even in Germany 
have the so-called Christian Socialists, among whom 
Chaplain Stacker has been so conspicuous, received any official 
rebuke from the Lutheran and Evangelical churches. 
Although, too, we might deem it probable that most of the 
Protestant sects will be eventually enlisted among the protective 
forces of society, yet, as Mr. Robinson points out, there 
can be nothing simultaneous, coherent, and effectual in their 
action, owing to their innumerable subdivisions and their 
traditional dissensions. The moral support, then, which is 
indispensable to the retention of material power by the defenders 
of the existing order, must come principally from 
the Church of Rome. In a word, it is not liberalism, as 
Gambetta thought, but socialism that may see in Catholicism 
its chief enemy. 

"Mr. Robinson does not fail to note the striking change 
in the attitude of European statesmen toward the Catholic 

R1785 : page 69 

Church, since they have begun to apprehend the approach 
of a revolutionary epoch. Crispi in Italy and Castelar in 
Spain have publicly acknowledged the necessity of securing 
the cooperation of Catholicism, if the politico-social fabric 
reared on parliamentary institutions and the individual right 
of property is to be upheld. The Opportunists, who formerly 
were the most implacable assailants of the Catholic 
Church in France, are now disposed to welcome the conciliatory 
overtures of Leo XIII. and to form a species of alliance 
with the so-called "rallied" Republicans. In the 
Reichstag only the other day a bill permitting the Jesuits to 
resume educational functions in Germany was passed for the 
second time; and, should it now be sanctioned by the Bundesrath, 
the last vestige of the Falk legislation, aimed against 
Catholics, will have disappeared. These incidents are indications 
of a general awakening to the magnitude of the 
service which the Catholic Church may render, should the 
existing social system be seriously threatened." 
—New York Sun. 



Protestants are rapidly preparing for federative union 
and to take a hand in protecting both the good and the 



bad of the present social structure. The world, especially 

the rich and aristocratic class, is turning to the great religious 

systems for help. And religious people generally are 

and will more and more be inclined to assist, because they 

clearly see that the wreck of society would be a general calamity 

to the poor as well as to the rich; and because they 

believe that it would greatly retard mission work for the 

conversion of the world— which they think to be their special 

commission; and all this because they do not recognize 

the times in which we are living. As with the Jews in the end 

of their age, they "know not the time of their visitation." 

They know not that the Lord's time has come for the 

transfer of the control of earth from the princes and kings 

of the earth (and especially from the great Prince of this 

world, who now worketh in the hearts of the children of 

disobedience— 1 Thes. 5:2-4; 2 Pet. 3:10) to the control 

of Christ, the King of kings and Lord of lords, "whose 

right it is." 

"But ye [faithful, watching], brethren, are not in darkness 
that that day should overtake you as a thief"— although 
it will come upon all others as a thief and a snare.— 
1 Thes. 5:1-5. 

Although you are powerless to rectify the evils of the 
present social order, while numbers and power and influence 
uphold it, you are waiting for God to do this according 
to his promise, and not in vain you pray continually, 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is 
[done] in heaven." You know, too, that the conversion of 
the world under present conditions is hopeless, and you are 
waiting for the King of glory to take full possession and to 
bless all the families of the earth with the knowledge of the 
Lord, which shall fill the whole earth as the waters cover 
the great deep. 

While your influence must always be for godliness, for 
contentment and for peace, yet you may sustain your hearts 
and the hearts of others with the Lord's promises of deliverance. 
And even though the trouble be severe, "such as 
was not since there was a nation," you need fear no evil; 
for the Lord is the refuge and habitation of his people, and 
for them all things shall work together for good. Your 
hearts are sustained by such promises and by the prospect 
of the glory and blessing of the Millennial age which will 
be thus introduced by— 

"The signs and groanings promised 
To precede a second birth." 

"Wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that 
I rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather 
[all] the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to 
pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger: 
for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my 
jealousy [justice, anger]. For then [following this great 
trouble, upon the ruins of present systems, I, the God of 
heaven, will set up my kingdom and] I will turn unto the 
people a pure language [the unadulterated truth], that they 
may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with 
one consent."— Zeph. 3:8,9. 



Evidently Protestants are feeling the jibes of the world, 
that their forces are too scattered to be of much avail in 
the coming "battle of the great day of God Almighty." 
In evidence note the following items. 

EX-PROTESTANTS WORKING FOR CHURCH UNITY. 



"The Rev. Dr. Lunn, editor of The Review of the 
Churches, London, England, and President of the Grindewald 
Conference, has returned to the Murray Hill Hotel, 
after conducting a most successful series of meetings in 
Boston, Toronto, Chicago, Washington, Baltimore and 
Philadelphia. 

"In several of these cities the recommendation of the 
Grindewald Conference, that Whit Sunday in each year 
should be observed as a day of special prayer for unity, and 
as the occasion for each preacher to give a sermon dealing 
with the good qualities of some denomination other than 
his own, has been enthusiastically adopted. 

"The ministers of Chicago, Washington and Baltimore 
all unanimously agreed to observe Whit Sunday in this 
manner, and in Washington an interdenominational association 
has been founded as the result of Dr. Lunn's visit. 

"Dr. Lunn will address a meeting of ministers, and laymen 
on English Movements Toward Christian Unity.'" 
--N. Y. Times. 



"The Ram's Horn, of Chicago, has offered a prize, 
$100 in gold, to anyone who presents the best plan and 
creed to unite the churches of Christendom. It is specified 
that the plan of organization or government or federation 
shall not exceed 500 words, and that the statement of creed 
(which may be in the language of Scripture) shall not exceed 

R1786 : page 69 

500 words. A preliminary examination will select the 
best twelve papers, which will be referred for final award 
to a committee composed of John Henry Barrows, D.D., 
LL.D., George Dana Boardman D.D., LL.D., Bishop 
Samuel Fallows, Bishop John H. Vincent and Joseph 
Cook." 

"Say ye not, a confederacy, to all them to whom this 
people shall say, a confederacy." 

R1786 : page 70 

THE JEWISH VIEW. 



The movement in New York City for the conversion 
of the Jews is at present principally represented in the 
mission work of the converted Jew, Hermann Warszawiak. 
Considerable progress has been made of late, and now it has 
been decided to erect a building specially suited to the 
needs of the work. It will be called, "The Christ's Synagogue," 
and will have a separate entrance to, and special 
apartments for, a Jewish Missionary Training School. A 
library, a gymnasium, etc., will add to its attractions for 
the younger Hebrews. 

We rejoice in every good work, including such efforts 
to turn away blindness from Israel. And this, as we have 
elsewhere shown, is due to come about when the Gospel 
Church has been completed. But we would rather see them 
remain "blind," than see them deluded into the no-ransom 
views of Antichrist. We know not what gospel Mr. Warszawiak 
is preaching, but we trust that it is the old theology, 
of which the cross of Christ is the center. With the Jewish 
mind in its present skeptical state, it would be no difficult 
thing to lead many of them to acknowledge pseudo-Christianity. 
Many will admit that the great Jew, Jesus, 
whose name is claimed and whose character and teachings 
are generally reverenced if not obeyed throughout Christendom, 
was a martyr to Jewish prejudices, etc., if only you 
do not make it a condition that he shall believe that this 
Jesus died for the sins of the Jews and the whole world. 
There "the offense of the cross," mentioned by the Apostle, 
comes in. Leave out the cross, the ransom, and many 
Jews are ready thus to join in what we may be excused for 
calling, "Christian Infidelity." 

But by and by, as soon as the Gospel Church, the 
Bride, has been selected, the true gospel will be preached 
with demonstration to the whole world, and again it will 
be "to the Jew first;" and then, through the Jews, to 
others of the world— the gospel that in Christ the sin-offering 
types of the Jewish law have their fulfilment, and 
that in Christ the promises to Abraham must all be fulfilled. 
(Gal. 3:16,29.) This is the gospel that must ultimately 
open the eyes of the "blind."— Rom. 11:25-31; Isa. 29:18; 
35:5; 42:7,16. 



Urging Jewish scholars to study the New Testament, 
the Jewish Messenger says:— 

"The subject should receive more attention than it 
does in our seminaries; the day is past to regard it as dangerous. 
We Jews have no right to be so self-satisfied as to 
refuse new light, if it be good and wholesome, from any 
source. Perhaps Judaism as it is in the lives of the great 
mass of us would have more depth, beauty, and spirituality 
if we did not shut ourselves in an intellectual ghetto and 
call that process loyalty to religion." 



Miss Barlee, who has been connected with the London 
Jews' Society in Jerusalem for about ten years, thus 
describes the changes which have taken place during her 
residence there:— 

"Innumerable houses have been built outside the city 
walls, and new colonies formed. Rows of new houses are 
to be seen in places where, when I first came, I used to pick 
wild flowers among the rocks and stones. Progress is written 
upon everything. The Jaffa Railway, now an established 
thing, ceases to be an object of wonder to the native population; 
new lines will soon be open in other parts of the 
country; a boat now crosses the Dead Sea, and lately I received 
a letter from Kerak in Moab, where postal communication 
with Jerusalem has been established. In Jerusalem 
itself, civilization has made rapid strides, carriages of every 
description are now flying to and fro in the different new 
roads. It would seem that the Lord's time to favor Zion 
is at hand." 



SOME BETTER THINGS. 



Though wintry wind the yellow leaf displaceth, 
For Spring's sweet harbingers it maketh room; 

Ere long the tender bud the forest graceth, 

New verdure waketh from old Nature's tomb. 

The snowy blossom from the orchard fadeth, 
'Tis then the earnest of fair fruit we find; 

Though morning mist the landscape overshadeth, 
The sunlit mountain-peaks are just behind. 

Lo, in the crimson West the glory dieth, 

And from his throne Day's monarch hath withdrawn! 
Herein the promise of the sunrise lieth— 

Already we are waiting for the dawn. 

O heart bereaved, some better thing remaineth, 

Though God should seem thy treasures to remove; 

Some better thing his gracious hand retaineth, 
He will not fail the children of his love. 

Some better thing! Thy life-joy all departed- 
Its glory trailing sadly in the dust; 

O cleave to Him,— the Savior tender-hearted; 

Thou canst not understand, but thou canst trust. 

Perchance he leads to depths of self-abasement, 
And storms awake, and billows round thee roll. 

Give thanks! Contrition is the open casement 

Through which the Dove of Peace shall reach thy soul. 



O patient heart, thy best, thy brightest bringing, 
With full consent upon His altar lay! 

Some fair new blessing even now is winging, 
All unobserved, its sure and noiseless way. 

Thy purpose crossed, each sunny prospect clouded, 
Still to His changeless promise learn to cling. 

Although His plan may be in darkness shrouded, 
Jehovah hath reserved some better thing ! 
—Lucy A. Bennett. 



R1786 : page 71 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



WITH Christians generally it is customary to celebrate 
Good Friday as a memorial of our Lord's 

death, and Easter Sunday as a remembrancer of his resurrection. 
But with the early Church every Sunday was a 
remembrancer of our Lord's resurrection, while his death, 
symbolized in the Last Supper eaten the evening before the 
crucifixion, but "in the same day," was celebrated annually, 
as the antitype of the killing of the Jewish Passover 
lamb,— on the fourteenth day of the first month, lunar 
time, as reckoned by the Hebrews. Desiring to return to 
the "old paths," many WATCH TOWER readers, in every 
quarter of the world, adopt and practice this custom of the 
Primitive Church. Its appropriateness is beyond question 
even by those who for one reason or another have seen fit 
to adopt more modern customs and to celebrate it quarterly 
or monthly or weekly or daily,— according to human 
judgment, caprice or theory. 

Only two of these theories claim Scriptural authority, 
and they alone, therefore, require answer. 

(1) Those who hold that the Lord's death should be 
commemorated daily have no other argument than that the 
Apostle declared, "As often as ye do this ye do show forth 
the Lord's death until he come." They forget that three 
or four times a day or even hourly would be more "often," 
and therefore more proper, according to their definition of 
this word "often." The fact is that the stress lay upon 
the words "do this," as our Lord said,— "This do ye, as 
oft as ye drink it [annually], in remembrance of me." 
(1 Cor. 11:25.) The Lord's disciples as Jews were accustomed 
to the killing and eating of the Paschal lamb, at 
a specified time annually, and our Lord wished that henceforth 
they should recognize him as the antitype of that 
lamb,— his death as the antitype of its death and the passing 
over, or justification from death to life, of the Church 
of the Firstborn (Heb. 12:23) as the antitype of the sparing 
of the firstborn of Egypt. 



To "do this,"— i.e., to celebrate the Passover,— was 
the command of the Law to the Jew; but our Lord in setting 
his followers free from the Law Covenant and accepting 
them under the New Covenant did not command them 
to "do this," nor to do anything but "love,"— which he 
declared to be the fulfilling of his law of the New Covenant. 
But he did say, "As oft as ye do this [yearly— never oftener, 

R1787 : page 71 

and never less often did the Jews celebrate their Passover], 
do it [henceforth, not in remembrance of the typical Passover 
and the typical lamb slain and eaten, but] in remembrance 
of me,"— "the Lamb of God which taketh away 
the sin of the world," by whose death and blood of sprinkling 
you are passed over, from death unto life, and by the 
eating of whose flesh (figuratively speaking) ye shall obtain 
strength for the journey out of the Kingdom of darkness, 
sin and oppression, the dominion of Satan (typified by 
Pharaoh) to the heavenly Canaan under the lead of the 
Lord's Anointed, whom Moses and Joshua typified. 

(2) Those who celebrate the Lord's death every Sunday 
well know that more appropriately that day commemorates 
the reverse idea,— the resurrection of our Lord from 
death; but they think that they find justification of their 
course in the "breaking of bread" every first day of the 
week, practiced by the early Church. But they hastily 
draw a wrong inference: those "breakings of bread" 
were only ordinary lunches or "love-feasts" eaten for a 
double purpose— to satisfy hunger, but apparently, specially, 
because they met on that day to celebrate the Lord's 
resurrection;— because it was in the "breaking of bread" 
that he had twice made himself known to them on that 
notable day when his communion and expounding of the 
Scriptures had driven away their fears and enkindled hope 
and caused their hearts to burn within them with the hope 
that maketh not ashamed. (Luke 24:32; Rom. 5:5.) It was 
in connection with the eating of natural food that twice 
again before his ascension, our Lord made himself known 
to the disciples and instructed and refreshed them, and 
probably both were on the first day of the week.— John 20:26; 
21:13. 

Is it any wonder, then, that the early Church formed 
the habit of gathering every first day of the week to commune 
with the Lord in spirit; and is it any wonder that 
they repeated the "breaking of bread" and any other 
features that would keep vividly before their minds the 
scenes and thoughts of their first experience and heart-burning? 
It is not surprising. But that had nothing whatever 
to do with the annual Passover, which to the early 
Christians took on a fresh importance, because "Christ our 
Passover" had been slain. (1 Cor. 5:7,8.) Christ our 
Passover represented his sacrifice by both bread and wine, 
as symbols of his flesh and his blood; but the accounts of 
the love-feast or "breaking of bread" make no mention of 
the wine,— and not the slightest hint that these were meant 



to commemorate the sufferings and death of our Lord, the 
Head, and the Church, which is his body. 

But we, as Christians, do not celebrate the Jewish Passover 
and its deliverance from Egypt, nor do we kill and 
eat the typical lamb. With the Jews the lamb, its selection 
on the 10th day of the month and its killing on the 14th 
day were separate from the Passover festival, which began 
on the 15th and lasted for a week. The Jews celebrate 
specially the festival: we memorialize the death of the great 
Lamb of God, and understand the Jewish seven days festival 
to be only typical of the complete and everlasting joy 
resulting from our present eating of our Lamb with the 
bitter herbs of persecution during this Gospel night, waiting 
for deliverance early in the Millennial morning. Surely 
when the blindness of fleshly Israel begins to turn away, 
nothing will appeal to them more forcibly than that Christ 
is the antitype of the Passover lamb, and that the blessings 
flowing from his death are the antitypes of the Passover 
blessings. 

R1787 : page 72 

We follow the Jewish method of reckoning the date— 
the same that our Lord and the Primitive Church followed 
—and it is very simple. The Jewish (ecclesiastical) year 
begins in the Spring,— with the first appearance of the new 
moon after the Spring equinox. There they begin to count 
their month. This year the new moon of Spring will appear 
on the 26th of March, and consequently the fourteenth 
day of the first month will be April 8th. But as in the 
Hebrew reckoning the day begins at six o'clock of the preceding 
day, it follows that the fourteenth of Nisan will 
begin at six P.M., Sunday, April 7th. About 8 o'clock 
on that evening, therefore, would be the anniversary of the 
Lord's Supper. 

At this hour, in accordance with our usual custom, the 
Church at Allegheny will celebrate the memorial of the 
greatest transaction upon the pages of history;— the transaction 
which means so much to all who trust in the ransom 
given once for all, but which has so little meaning to others. 
No arrangement is made for a convention or general gathering 
at the time; but friends passing through the city are 
always welcome. The same course is recommended to the 
scattered ones of like mind everywhere: that they meet with 
brethren residing near them, and celebrate with as nearly 
as possible the simplicity of the model given us by our Lord 
over eighteen centuries ago. 

Let us each call to mind that the bread and wine not 
only symbolize our Lord's sacrifice on our behalf, but also 
that as his Body or Church we are members of the one loaf 
now being broken for others;— that thus we are to share 
with our Lord in sacrifice, and by and by share also his 
glory— "If so be that we suffer with him, that we may also 
be glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 



R1787 : page 72 
"COME, MY PEOPLE. 



"Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut 
thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little 
moment, until the indignation be overpast."— Isa. 26:20. 

THERE is an affectionate tenderness about these words 
of our Heavenly Father which helps us to realize his 
great love for his people, and his special care over them. 
Through his prophet, taking the standpoint of the end of 
this age, he is forewarning us of a great time of trouble 
which is just imminent (verses 5,6,21)— "a time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation," when the whole 
present order of things, civil, social and religious, shall be 
swept with the besom of destruction. Yet in the midst of 
it all he would have his people in rest and peace in him, as 
saith the prophet, "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace 
whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusteth in thee. 
Trust ye in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord Jehovah is 
everlasting strength."— Verses 3,4. 

And again the Lord had another of his prophets put 
into our mouths those beautiful words of trust and confidence 
—"God is our refuge and strength, a very present 
help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though the 
earth [the present social order] be removed, and though 
the mountains [governments] be carried into the midst of 
the sea [overthrown by the turbulent sea of world-wide anarchy]; 
though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, 
though the mountains shake with the swellings thereof.... 
The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge." 
(Psa. 46.) Surely, "like as a father pitieth his children, 
so the Lord pitieth them that fear him."— Psa. 103:13. 

But while appreciating very gratefully this special love 
and care for us as his people, in the comfort, encouragement 
and protection afforded us by our Heavenly Father 
in the midst of the world's great tribulation, we would 
come far short of having his spirit if we should regard 
the matter with self-complacency, forgetful of his great 
love for the whole world also, which, vailed behind the 
clouds of his righteous indignation against their sins, in 
wisdom strikes the heavy blow which will shatter all their 
idols and humble their pride in the dust, that so the sore 
wounds of his wrath may prepare for their everlasting healing. 
If God so loved the world as to give his only begotten 
Son, "that whosoever believeth in him should not perish 
[eternally], but have everlasting life," he loves them still, 
and it is his love that wields the rod for their correction. 
So also would he have his people regard his judgments, and 
while rejoicing in the sunshine of his favor, because by 
faith and obedience they have come into an attitude which 
can receive it, he would have them share his spirit towards 



the world; and while the blows of his righteous indignation 
fall heavily upon them, he would have us point them 
to the cause of their calamities and to the only remedy— 
"In returning [to God] and rest [in him alone] shall ye be 
saved; in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength." 
"Be still," saith the Lord, "and know that I am God; I 
will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the 
earth."-Isa. 30:15; Psa. 46:10. 

But who are those whom the Lord is pleased to designate 
by the endearing name, "My people?" Does this 
class include every one upon whom his name is named? 
No, for that would include a great number of false professors. 
As the Psalmist expresses it, it includes all those who 
have made a covenant with God by sacrifice (Psa. 50:5)— 
all the consecrated and faithful children of God, however 
young or weak they may be, whose hearts are fixed firmly 
and resolutely to be true loyal and obedient children by his 
assisting grace. 

To be numbered among the people of God is a very 
great privilege; but it means much more than many seem 
to understand— much more both on their part, and on 

R1788 : page 72 

God's part. On their part, it signifies, not merely a name 
to live, in some great organization which bears the Christian 

R1788 : page 73 

name, but that they have become sons and heirs of God 
through Christ, that they have fully consecrated themselves 
to God to follow in the footsteps of his dear Son, that they 
have renounced the vain pomp and glory of the world and 
have solemnly covenanted to live apart from its spirit, ambitions, 
hopes and aims; and not only so, but that, in 
pursuance of that covenant, they are striving daily to be 
faithful, and meekly to take up their cross and follow their 
leader and head, Christ Jesus. 

On God's part it signifies the fulfilment of all his 
gracious promises to such through Christ, both for the life 
that now is, and for that which is to come. It signifies 
that in the present life we have his fatherly love, care, discipline, 
counsel, teaching, protection and encouragement 
to the end, and that afterwards we shall be received into 
his glorious presence and everlasting rest and joy and peace. 
Oh, how blessed to be the people of God! even in the 
present life the reward of his favor is beyond computation. 
Through all the age God has permitted his people to be 
scattered as sheep in the midst of wolves, and as wheat in 
the midst of tares; but now the harvest of the age is come, 
and their gathering together unto him is due. They have 
been growing in the midst of that great organization, the 
nominal Christian church, which God calls Babylon (confusion), 
but which men call Christendom (Christ's Kingdom). 
Upon this great system which has appropriated the 
name of Christ while misrepresenting his teaching and his 



spirit (although in possession of his Word of truth and of 

many advantages of precept and example from his saints 

so long permitted to dwell in her midst), God is about to 

pour his indignation, which will involve the whole 

world with it; but before doing so, he forewarns his people 

to come out of her (Babylon), that they be not partakers of 

her sins, and that they receive not of her plagues. (Rev. 18:4.) 

But while calling them thus to come out of Babylon, 

he calls them also to come into another place, or condition 

rather— "Enter thou into thy chambers and shut thy 

doors about thee: hide thy self... until the indignation 

be overpast." 

The place of hiding is the secret place of the Most 
High, under the shadow of the Almighty. (Psa. 91:1-9.) 
This secret place of the Most High, Beloved, is the place 
of intimate communion and fellowship with God, through 
the blessed privilege of prayer and through faith in his 
precious Word and his promised providential care. 
"When all around our souls give way, 
He then is all our hope and stay." 

Oh, how precious is this hiding place! What rest and 
refreshment we find in the midst of the commotion that is 
even now bestirring the whole world, but especially the nations 
of Christendom— rest from the pride and folly of man 
in their abortive efforts to readjust the present unsatisfactory 
social order; and rest from the strife of tongues in 
an equally vain attempt to evolve the clear principles of 
truth and righteousness from the present confusion of human 
traditions. (Psa. 31:20.) Here we find rest, peace, 
light and joy, which the world can neither give nor take 
away. 

Few indeed are those who can understand our motives 
in thus withdrawing from the world and from the various 
organizations of the nominal Christian church to walk alone 
with God; and many are the reproaches which such must 
endure for his name's sake. But fear not; "shut thy 
doors [of faith] about thee," and heed not the reproaches; 
turn a deaf ear to them, and "Sanctify the Lord of hosts 
himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your 
dread" (Isa. 8:13); and, "Above all, take [for the conflict 
before you] the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able 
to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked." 

It is well, especially in this time of greatest need, that 
the Lord's people should consider the value of this portion 
of the Christian's armor, and that the doors of their faith 
should thoroughly shut them in to the secret place of the 
Most High. When the reproaches fall thick and fast, when 
they are told that they have left the faith and gone after 
fables, that they have incurred the Lord's displeasure, and 
that their sufferings for Christ's sake are the penalties they 
deserve, when their names are cast out as evil and they are 
separated from the company of those whom they have long 
regarded as the Lord's people, because they bear his name, 
ah, then is the time for firmly grasping the shield of faith 
and for adopting the triumphant language of the Psalmist: 

"The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall 



I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall 
I be afraid?. ..Though an host should encamp against 
me, my heart shall not fear; though war should rise against 
me, in this will I be confident. ..In time of trouble he 
shall hide me in his pavilion: in the secret of his tabernacle 
shall he hide me: he shall set me upon a rock. ...When 
my father and my mother [my most trusted human friends] 
forsake me, then the Lord will take me up." "The Lord is 
my shepherd, I shall not want. Yea, though I walk through 
the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for 
thou art with me: thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me." 
-Psa. 27:1,3,5,10; 23:1,4; also 56:4. 

It is to inspire such a faith as this that the Lord has 
offered us, in addition to all his precious promises, so many 
encouragements to simple, childlike trust in him, and that 
he has bidden us turn a deaf ear to the reproaches of men, 
saying— "Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the 
people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach 
of men, neither be ye afraid of their reviling s.... I, 
even I, am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that 
thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the 
son of man that shall be made as grass, and forgettest the 
Lord, thy Maker, that has stretched forth the heavens and 
laid the foundations of the earth, and hast feared continually 
every day, because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he 
were ready to destroy?. ..I have put my words in thy 
mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, 
that I may plant the heavens [establish the new heavens], 
and lay the foundations of the earth [the new earth], and 

R1788 : page 74 

say unto Zion [the people tried and proved by these 
afflictions to be the worthy heirs of the new Kingdom— 
the new heavens and earth], Thou art my people."— 
Isa. 51:7,12,13,16. 

What condescension on the part of the Almighty to 
thus consider our weakness when the darts of the enemy 
wound our hearts, and to pour in the balm of his consolation. 
He would not have one of his children whom Christ 
has made free to come again under the bondage of "the 
fear of man which bringeth a snare." (Prov. 29:25.) He 
would have every man in Christ realize his liberty from sin 
and superstition and his solemn accountability to God for 
all his thoughts and words and doings.— "Sanctify the 
Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let 
him be your dread." 

Just here the words of the Apostle Paul (1 Thes. 5:21; 
Gal. 6:4) are worthy of special notice— "Prove all 
things; hold fast that which is good," and "Let every 
man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing 
in himself alone and not in another." Thus every individual 
in Christ is reminded of his own personal responsibility 
in matters of faith and conduct. Not until he has proved 
what is truth and righteousness, accepting the Word of 
God as the only standard of authority, is it proper to take 



a resolute stand; but, having proved "what is that good and 
acceptable and perfect will of God," nothing should be 
able to unsettle his faith or turn him from the line of duty, 
and no fear of man should bring him again into the snare 
of bondage to superstition or human traditions or opinions 
of others. If each individual prove his own work— his 
faith in the doctrines and his conduct in life— by the square 
and compass of God's Word, "then shall he have rejoicing 
in himself and not in another"— i.e., his faith, no matter 
through what privileged human agent or agency it may 
have been received, will be so established by the Word of 
the Lord that it will be his own, and in no sense dependent 
upon another. 

It was the neglect of this principle, of the right and 
duty of the individual judgment in proving all things by the 
inspired Word, that brought upon the Church the snare of 
the great apostacy, which set up infamous popes to dictate 
in matters of faith and conduct and subvert the consciences 
of men. Let us remember the command, "Sanctify the 
Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let 
him be your dread." Let us fear and dread to displease him; 
let us see to it that we know and love righteousness and 
that we have the law of God, not in our heads only, but 
also in our hearts, for so shall we ever find acceptance with 
him; and to such, who in faith continually rely upon the 
Lord, who go forth, strong in the strength which he supplies 
through faith, to do valiant service for truth and righteousness, 
comes also the blessed assurance, "Fear not, little 
flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the 
Kingdom." 

While the storm of trouble that is to engulf the whole 
world will affect all men, both individually and collectively, 
the Lord's people, who seek only to draw yet closer 
to him, entering more fully into the secret place of communion 
and fellowship and rest in him, and shutting the 
doors of faith about them, will there be safely hidden from 
the alarm and fear and trembling that will take hold upon 
all other classes; and while they patiently endure its effects 
upon their temporal interests, they will rejoice not only in the 
knowledge of God's overruling providence, in the whirlwind 
and in the storm as well as in the calms of life, but 
also in his blessed assurance that his wrath will be thus revealed 
only "for a little moment," and then will his righteous 
Kingdom be manifested in power and great glory, and they 
shall shine forth as the sun. 

"Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and 
shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a 
little moment, until the indignation be overpast." Oh 
blessed invitation! Lord, we will trust in the covert of thy 
wings. 



R1789 : page 74 

LOVE THE ESSENCE OF DIVINE LAW. 



-MARCH 24, ROM. 13:8-14.- 

Golden Text— "Abstain from all 
appearance of evil."— 1 Thes. 5:22. 

VERSES 8-10 need no comment. The truth of the 

statement, "Love worketh no ill to his neighbor: 

therefore love is the fulfilling of the law," is obvious to all. 

Love delights to bless, and against its pure and benevolent 

instincts there is no law. It recognizes the rights and 

liberties and proper relationship to God and fellow men of 

every individual, and in no sense interferes with those inalienable 

privileges of any of God's intelligent creatures; 

but rather delights in the largest development and most 

rapid progress of every individual. It is noble, generous, 

free, frank, unselfish, kind, tender-hearted, pitiful, helpful 

and true. 

This noble benevolence, Paul says, we owe to every 
man.— "Owe no man any thing but to love one another." 
This debt we owe, not only to our brethren in Christ, but 
also to our brethren of the human family. Originally God 
created man in his own image, and though that image has 
been sadly defaced in all, he has planned to restore it, 
and himself so loved the world, even while they were yet 
sinners, that he redeemed them at great cost. And if God 
so loved the world, then we also should love them with the 
same benevolence, kindness and tender compassion; and 
if we love God and have our hearts filled with his spirit we 
will delight to do so. 

Verses 11-13 remind us of the near approach of the 
day of Christ when virtue will meet its just reward, and when 
sin and selfishness will be exposed in all their horrid deformity. 
Therefore, the Apostle urges, we should put on the 
armor of light, that we may stand approved in that day. 

Verse 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ— put on 
his loving, generous, noble, pure spirit: study and copy his 
life, which was an illustration of the perfect law of God; 

R1789 : page 75 

and, while so doing, ignore so completely the desires of the 
old nature as to make no provision for fulfilling them, thus 
manifesting the singleness and fixedness of the purpose to 
follow him. 

The Golden Text is a plain and timely precept to all 
who would live godly— "Abstain from all appearance of 
evil." It would not be consistent with righteousness to do 
otherwise than abstain from the appearance of evil, as well 
as from the evil itself. If we love righteousness and hate 
iniquity we will hate the very appearance of evil ourselves, 
and will shun the appearance as we would shun the thing 
itself. We will shun it, not only because we desire to have 
others think well of us, but because we love purity and 
delight in moral excellence. 



R1789 : page 75 

REVIEW. 

-MARCH 31.- 

Golden Text— "Take my yoke upon you and learn of me."— 
Matt. 11:29. 

We trust that all our readers who have been studiously 
pursuing the lessons of this quarter have indeed taken upon 
them the yoke of Christ, and that they have been learning 
of him, not only in an intellectual way, but also through 
the medium of the heart. Not until we have taken the 
Lord into our daily life as our living, personal companion 
and confidential friend and counselor and comforter and 
guide, as well as our Redeemer and Lord, can we fully 
learn of him those precious lessons which give to his 
disciples a joy which the world can neither give nor 
take away. 

May this intimate communion and fellowship with 
Christ impart to us each more and more of his own spirit, 
so that the world may take knowledge of us, as they have 
of others (Acts 4:13), that we have been with Jesus; and 
let the prayer of each be, 

"Lord Jesus, make thyself to me 

A living, bright reality! 
More real to faith's vision keen, 
Than any earthly object seen; 
More dear, more intimately nigh, 
Than e'en the sweetest earthly tie." 



R1789 : page 75 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-We had for our lesson last 
Sunday, "On Trial for Life." Can it be possible that if I 
do not attain the high calling, I shall die the Second Death? 
I had always supposed that if I failed to attain the prize of 
the high calling I would get the spirit nature; that is, so 
long as I remained under the ransom. Is there not a second 
prize, or is there no other life for us? 

[In reply we refer the brother to the TOWER 
for July 1, '94, "The Prize set Before Us."— ED.] 

My life has not always been an overcoming one, in 
the warfare between the new and the old natures; and I 
have had no assurance that I would attain the reward of 
the high calling; but I did receive some comfort from the 
thought that I would be with the "great company;" and now 
you have taken that from me. But though I have not always 
walked as obeying the high calling, I do love the dear 



Lord with all my heart and love his truth and all his saints, 
and would give my life for any of them; yet for all that 
I have not assurance that the dear Lord would give it me, 
and it would be too bad, after serving the Lord for so many 
years, to be at last a castaway. The thought makes my heart 
fail within me, and I have again covenanted with the Lord 
that with his help I will be a better man, and I have resolved 
to live nearer the fountain of divine grace and to pray 
without ceasing. Pray for us here, as a church. We all 
feel a desire, as never before, for a more consecrated life 
and to walk in the spirit. We will all be more careful to 
walk in the narrow way. Your Brother, ADOLPH FOYEN. 

[REPLY.— You have correctly understood the article 
in question. The human nature once consecrated to the 
Lord a sacrifice— exchanged by his grace for the new nature, 
the spiritual,— is gone from our grasp entirely and forever. 
Whatever life we gain thereafter must be spiritual life or 
none. Hence the Lord and the apostles always present the 
matter as a race for life, and declare that the gospel is to 
us, either "a savor of life unto life, or of death unto 
death;" and speak of those who draw back, not as drawing 
back to an earthly hope of restitution, but as drawing back 
unto perdition— destruction. 

But our Heavenly Father's plan has so safeguarded us 
that none will be total failures here, except those who would 
also fail of life there,— in the Millennium. While the way 
to joint-heirship is very "narrow," as the prize to be gained 
is very valuable, yet the Lord's provision for the "great 
company" of the consecrated, who fail as "overcomers," 
his arrangement for their special scourging as sons and for 
bringing them through great tribulation for the "destruction 
of the flesh" which they did not overcome and "sacrifice" 
as they had covenanted to do, will be so complete that all 
who would be worthy of life at all will be purified and made 
white and tried, and be "saved so as by fire," though their 
works shall suffer loss— the loss of the great prize of joint-heirship 
with Christ. See the letters and answers in last 
issue. See also again the article to which you refer and 
one in our issue of Feb. 15th— "The King's Highway;" 
also, "The Scape Goat Class" in TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
OF BETTER SACRIFICES, pp. 59-63. 

These are good resolutions, dear Brethren: Any who 
run for anything less than the great prize of our high 
calling are making a great mistake. God's way is not 
only the best in the end, but the best all the way to 
the end. Those who, though loving the Lord and righteousness, 
cling to the desires of the world and the flesh, 
and endeavor to drag these along in the race, are never 
satisfactory to the Lord nor to themselves. And they find 
"the destruction of the flesh" a much more severe ordeal 
than its "sacrifice" would have been; for the Lord's 
smile is upon those who joyfully sacrifice what they can in 

R1790 : page 75 

his service. Go on, dear Brethren, the King is your 



Brother as well as your Lord, and his "grace is sufficient 
for you." He says, Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life. Faithfulness means to the extent 
of your ability: and none of us should expect to be owned 
at all of the Lord unless willing to do according to our 

R1790 : page 76 

ability in his service. The love of Christ constraineth us 
to do no less than this.] 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Your kind favor of the 14th 
ult. with letter of Bro. Green came duly and was read with 
much interest. 

Relative to meetings to be held at Carroll: It will 
give me pleasure to lead them whenever I can, and I have 
so informed Bro. Goodbury. Bro. Airport is also desirous 
that I should start a class at W . 

Enclosed please find check to cover our "Good Hopes," 
also twenty-five subscriptions to ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

During last year a considerable number of tracts (No. 
12) were distributed at church doors on Sunday mornings, 
and we have reason to believe that some good has been 
accomplished. As a consequence a number of DAWNS have 
already been sold. Our meetings have also been held 
regularly. The attendance has been good, sometimes as 
high as twenty. 

Wishing you a happy and prosperous year, I am your 
fellow-servant and brother in the truth, 
H. N. RAHN. 



page 76 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: We have had another splendid 
meeting to-day, although the number present, owing to 
bad weather, was not so large as usual. Yet all who did 
come seemed to feel the power and presence of the Lord, 
and held sweet communion with him and with one another. 
There is one brother, who is now a regular attendant, in 
whom I feel a great interest. He is sixty years old or 
more. Many years ago he read himself out of orthodoxy 
and withdrew from the Lutheran church, finally becoming 
an atheist, then a spiritualist of the most pronounced type, 
which belief he has held for a number of years. 

About a year since, I loaned him DAWN, but he did 
not get much interested until two months ago. He has 
now read all three volumes, the first volume three or four 
times, and says that after reading many systems of theology 
this comes the nearest "holding water" of any of them. 
He used to be a great Bible reader; but believing that the 
churches were the authorized exponents of Bible doctrine, 
and seeing their sham and hollowness, he turned his back 



on it all, despaired of ever getting any satisfaction out of it, 
and latterly seemed to take delight in fighting the Bible 
and was looked upon as a great blasphemer. 

Now that he sees the harmony of God's great plan, he 
says, "I thought I had been fighting the Bible all these years, 
but I see now, that I have been fighting the hypocrites and 
liars instead." How many honest skeptics are doing the 
same thing to-day. Our old brother has given up his spiritualism 
and is as teachable as a child. In this particular, 
at least, the truth has wrought a complete change in him. 
He wants the TOWER. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, C. A. OWEN. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL AND WIFE:-Your last communication 
to me was in answer to an inquiry as to whether 
a person who had read the DAWNS and accepted their teaching 
as the plan of God, but who because of his inevitable 
surroundings could not see his way clear to accept and run 
for the high calling, would have an opportunity for the 
earthly phase of the Kingdom. I need not restate your 
answer. You know what it would be. 

As you know I have been a reader of the TOWER since 
'92, and have never had a doubt as to the correctness 
of your interpretation of God's plan; but it pointed out 
the way so narrow and difficult, that I thought that with 
the responsibilities of a large family and some other difficulties, 
I could never attain the end. Hence I was really 
making no effort in that direction (a delusion of the enemy 
of all souls). Your answer to my inquiry, and the coming 
of Brother Bohnet about the same time, showed me that 
the very things I had supposed to be insurmountable obstacles 
were perhaps the very things I needed to fit me for the 
Kingdom honors. Hence I am determined to run for the 
prize, notwithstanding I know I still have much to overcome. 
But the Lord has promised to be with me in six 
troubles and will not leave nor forsake me in the seventh. 
Praise his dear name for ever! I am so glad, too, to accept 
him as my substitute; for it is only in and through his imputed 
righteousness that I can hope to stand. 

In conclusion will say, pray for our little number here, 
that the very God of peace may sanctify us wholly, and 
keep us against the evil day. May God bless you and 
spare you long to give meat in due season is my prayer. 
H. C. ROGERS. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I desire to congratulate you 
on the beautiful "new dress" of the WATCH TOWER: it is 
very striking. How firm a foundation the tower stands upon, 
while those waves and storms beat upon it. The entire 
design is excellent. 

Regarding contribution to the Tract Fund the coming 
year: if prospered, count on me for as much as heretofore 



-more if I can make it so. 

With love to yourself and Sister Russell,— in Christ, 
Your brother, J. H. BROWN. 



R1790 : page 76 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-In reading the article in TOWER 
for Feb. 1, on "Seeking Fellowship with Rome," I am reminded 
of an editorial in the N.Y. Evangelist, Jan. 31, 
which shows how the contagion is spreading amongst all 
the "daughters" who seem to be developing so much 
"love" for the old "mother." The editorial in question 
was upon the Pope's recent American Encyclical. Among 
other good words for the "old mother," the Editor says: 

"There is neither weakness nor corruption in St. Peter's 
chair to-day, and there is much of wisdom, much we may 
be glad to recognize without any disparagement to Protestant 
principles, which is worthy of respect. Why should we not 
rejoice if the prospect is that, by virtue of this necessity to 
accommodate itself to the American spirit and American 
institutions, such a change may be brought about in the 
ancient church as may be tantamount to an internal, if not 
an external reformation? The church of Rome, with all 
its faults and all its errors, is a part of Christ's Church. 
It has done a glorious work, in some periods of the world's 
history. We should not be Christians if we did not hope 
that it may yet have a glorious work to do." 

I have underscored some of the most notable words. 
How it must make the "faithful" smile to read these words 
of love— especially when they recall those "glorious periods" 
past,— the Inquisition, the Crusades, the Massacre 
of Bartholomew, the slaughter of the Hugenots and Waldenses, 
the fires of Smithfield, and all the other "glorious 
periods" when noble men and women were horribly tortured 
and put to death, simply because they loved God and 
his Word of truth! 

How clearly passing events in the "ecclesiastical heavens" 
go to show the truth of our view of God's plan,— 
that he has "spewed" the systems— Babylon— out of his 
mouth. Truly the "voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride 
is heard no more in her." They "know not the time of 
their visitation." 

With Christian love, yours, J. A. MITCHELL. 



page 77 
