From Our Readers
Unborn Children  The article “Learning Begins in the Womb” delighted me. (January 22, 1992) I am a medical doctor, and I recently met with a couple who asked for my advice about having an abortion. In giving my comments, I added the arguments made in your article. The couple decided they would have the baby. Thanks to you, a small infant will be able to live.
G. U., Ecuador
Motorcycles  I read your article “Motorcycles​—How Dangerous Are They?” with interest. (April 8, 1992) I am now entering my 55th year in the motorcycle business and am always interested in motorcycle safety. Often where a motorcycle and a car are involved in an accident, the car is at fault; many times drivers just do not see the motorcycle. Keep up the good work in bringing us such interesting subjects.
M. H., United States
I have ardently followed all the safety precautions you mention. But this did not compensate for the most dangerous threat to a cyclist’s safety: THE OTHER DRIVERS! I was almost run over a few years ago by someone who never even stopped. I fell off my bike and, despite protective gear, received serious injuries. As a husband and a father of two beautiful children, I decided it would be best for me to sell my bike.
J. B., United States
We tried to give a balanced picture of both the pleasures and the dangers of motorcycle riding. Readers were encouraged to “weigh these aspects of appeal and safety against each other” when they considered riding a motorcycle. It is not up to others to be judgmental when it comes to matters of personal decision.​—ED.
The Universe  I have just finished reading with my children the articles on “Unlocking the Secrets of the Universe.” (March 22, 1992) These articles showed how fascinating Jehovah’s immense creation really is. Thank you for the clear and simple way in which you explained the various kinds of heavenly bodies. Every subject you cover is handled with great clarity, depth, and competence.
N. B., Italy
I kept putting this issue of Awake! aside because it was not a subject I was interested in. Now I feel different. You have taken what was for me a very complicated subject and​—as you always do—​presented it in a manner others can understand. I didn’t want the article to end once I started reading it!
S. J., Canada
Nail Straightener  Being of poor health, I am unable to have a direct share in the construction project taking place at the Watch Tower Society’s branch facilities in Selters/​Taunus, Germany. But the article about elderly Adams Akuetteh, called “the nail straightener of the Ghana branch” (May 22, 1992), moved me to tears!
T. R., Germany

