Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 30
Song 142
10 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Remind publishers to obtain Creation books and other needed supplies for field service. Encourage support for house-to-house service first Sunday of month and on Monday, September 7, where this is a worldly holiday. Program that follows is designed to help us with offer of Creation book during September.
20 min: “Preach a Release to the Captives.” Audience discussion. Brother reads paragraphs. When considering paragraph 5, demonstrate briefly a school-age publisher (a) offering Creation book to a teacher and (b) offering it to a schoolmate. Highlight illustrations when making offer.
15 min: Congregation Book Study conductor meets with a family to help them prepare for Sunday field service. Some in family apprehensive about working with Creation book. Afraid questions they cannot answer will be raised. Conductor points out that it is not necessary to refute all aspects of the evolution theory. We can show householder why it is reasonable to believe in creation. Goes to page 84 of Reasoning book, selects points from first subheading under “Creation.” If question on length of creative days arises, can use reasoning on page 88. If sincere questions about evolution raised, can go to pages 121-9 and discuss specific points with householder. Do not needlessly “argue evolution” with those highly critical of Bible. Discusses Topic for Conversation and how to adapt to offer. Conclude with one in family giving the presentation to another as suggested in paragraph 5 of article “Preach a Release to the Captives.”
Song 79 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 6
Song 98
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Read and comment on article “New Building Takes Shape.” Relate information to Society’s letter of February 10, 1987, announcing acquisition of this building. Conclude with local experiences with Creation book offer. Encourage participation in magazine work this Saturday.
10 min: “The Spirit That Jehovah Blesses.” Talk based on August 1, 1987, Watchtower, pages 26-9. Include commendation for right spirit displayed in local congregation.
15 min: “Set Goals to Help Keep Your Faith Strong.” Question-and-answer discussion. Let young ones, parents, servants, or pioneers share thoughts with audience concerning personal goals they have set.
10 min: Question Box. Discussion by qualified overseer. Include consideration of cited references.
Song 144 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 13
Song 115
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Giving Attention to Older Ones in Our Midst.” Question-and-answer discussion.
15 min: “Too Old to Learn?​—‘Never!’” Talk based on August 1, 1982, Watchtower, pages 4-7.
10 min: Elder interviews some older ones in the congregation who are exemplary. How long have they served Jehovah? What has helped them to endure? What helps them maintain their joy despite problems common to those with advancing years? Have other servants of Jehovah been a source of help and encouragement to them? In what ways? What joys from their ministry can they highlight?
Song 116 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 20
Song 162
10 min: Local announcements. Consider briefly magazine articles that could be featured this week.
15 min: Placing Magazines. Talk based on March 1, 1987, Watchtower, pages 17-20. Highlight information in box on page 18. Include some experiences in article as time permits. Encourage support for magazine work on fourth Saturday.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Witnessing Informally.” Question-and-answer discussion. Ask, by show of hands, how many were first contacted with the truth by informal witnessing. Entertain an experience or two as time permits.
Song 192 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 27
Song 193
13 min: Local announcements. Encourage support for house-to-house witnessing on first Sunday of month. Obtain magazines for both Saturday magazine day and Sunday subscription offer. Display magazines to be used and share points from articles that would be appealing to householders in your territory. Have pioneer or skilled publisher demonstrate use of Topic for Conversation, adapting it to the subscription offer.
17 min: “Subscriptions​—‘Wisdom Calling Out’!” Talk based on insert of April 1983 Our Kingdom Ministry, paragraphs 6-22. Highlight particular points that will help publishers to be effective when offering subscriptions. Positive attitude toward subscription offer important.
15 min: Local needs or talk based on article “Building Faith to Move Mountains” in July 15, 1987, Watchtower, pages 4-7.
Song 181 and concluding prayer.

