Preach a Release to the Captives
1 One person with a science background who read Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? said: “I am stunned by the clarity and power of this new book. I think that it’s the finest science book I’ve ever read for building appreciation for life. It’s very sophisticated scientifically, yet on a level that anyone can appreciate.” Many must have had similar feelings, since it was necessary to print more than 12,600,000 copies during the first 20 months of publication! What was your reaction upon reading it?
2 Satan has used many schemes as well as “teachings of demons” to blind people’s minds. (1 Tim. 4:1; 2 Cor. 4:4) One such teaching is the doctrine of evolution, and the Creation book is just what is needed to help us “preach a release” to those who are held captive by this God-dishonoring theory. (Luke 4:18) During September we will offer the Creation book extensively in our ministry. Though its value is inestimable, we offer it for a contribution of only $2.50. A small-size edition is offered for $1.25.
OVERTURNING “STRONGLY ENTRENCHED THINGS”
3 The evolution theory is one of the “strongly entrenched things,” yes, a “lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God.” (2 Cor. 10:4, 5) But Jehovah knows exactly what we need in order to reach all sorts of people, and he has provided us with powerful spiritual weapons to overturn such reasonings. (1 Tim. 2:4) After reading the Creation book, a college professor who says he is an atheist had to admit: “I have never before seen such a well-presented argument for creation.” Some educators and college students have been willing to accept the Creation book although refusing our other publications. Why not make an effort to reach such people in your territory with this offer? Excellent results have been realized by those doing so.
REACHING ALL WITH CREATION BOOK
4 Have you school-age publishers offered the Creation book to your teachers and fellow students? Why not do so during September? Have you offered a copy of the Creation book to your Bible students? Even though they are studying another publication, the Creation book will help strengthen their faith.
5 The Creation book offer goes well with our Topic for Conversation “Why Study the Bible?” You might say something like this: “Many people are interested in knowing how man got here and where he is going. Do you think the Bible answers such questions? [Allow response.] We have found that it can do so because it is God’s inspired Word. Notice this point at 2 Timothy 3:16, 17. [Read.] The evolution theory offers no hope beyond this present life, whereas the Bible holds out the promise of everlasting life. You will find that promise at John 17:3. [Read.]” Then offer the book, pointing out that it will show how man got here and how he can live forever.
6 Jehovah has provided us with an instrument to help free those held captive to God-dishonoring theories and false doctrines. Let us make good use of the Creation book in our ministry during September.

