Presenting the Good News​—Witnessing Informally
1 While resting at Jacob’s well near Sychar, Jesus initiated a conversation with a Samaritan woman. (John 4:5-30) Though tired and thirsty from traveling, he gave a witness about the truth. It was an informal witness. Did it have good results? Most certainly! It led to many Samaritans’ putting faith in Jesus. (John 4:39-42) What a fine witness and what surprising results from that one informal conversation!
2 Many today find informal witnessing an excellent way to spread the good news, and as a result, they have enjoyed thrilling experiences. Informal witnessing can be very productive. But you may ask where and when one can witness informally. How can it be done?
WHERE AND WHEN
3 One can witness informally in almost any set of circumstances or at any location. The important thing is to look for opportunities while going about our daily routine. Many publishers witness informally when going to and from work on public transportation or when traveling on vacation. Some take advantage of lunch breaks. Others look for appropriate occasions while shopping. One couple witnessed to the butcher at a supermarket, and when he showed interest in the truth, they arranged to continue the discussion at his home that same evening.
4 Infirm or ill publishers have had good success witnessing to visitors, medical personnel, and hospital attendants. (See w79 10/15 pp. 24-6.) Some brothers speak to visitors who call at their home. Others have had fine results approaching people enjoying the warm weather in public areas. Museums, airline or bus terminals, and other public facilities have proved to be excellent places for informal witnessing.
HOW TO DO IT
5 One Gilead student, a little nervous about witnessing informally, said: “I have often found that prayer helps when it is difficult for me to talk to people.” So look for ways to speak to people, and ask Jehovah to open the way. Then let zeal for Jehovah and the truth motivate you. Be friendly and warm when you approach individuals. Try to establish eye contact, and start a conversation on something that may be of mutual interest. Be considerate and kind, even if the person is not interested.
6 Of course, if possible, we want to leave an interested person with something to read. This means we should plan ahead and have tracts, magazines, booklets, or brochures available. Our new smaller-size tracts should prove to be valuable aids in informal witnessing. Some publishers have had excellent success in starting conversations by leaving brochures or magazines on their desk at work or on a table in their home. Such may catch the eye of a workmate or visitor and lead to an interesting discussion and fruitful witness.
7 Look for ways to witness informally. Carry tracts or other literature with you, and ask Jehovah to help you. Arrange to follow up all interest. Be sure to report the time as field service. By putting forth the effort as Jesus and the apostles did, Jehovah will bless you too in spreading the good news through informal witnessing.

