Question Box
● Is it proper to circulate among the brothers private material on matters such as medical or counseling services?
With relation to Christian conduct, the apostle Paul wrote that the ‘congregation is a pillar and support of the truth.’ (1 Tim. 3:15) Thus, the congregation is not to be a channel for distribution of private material, whether through specially arranged meetings at the Kingdom Hall or elsewhere or in printed form or audio and video tapes.
The Watchtower and Awake! have offered fine information and advice on dealing with medical problems and on upholding God’s law about blood. They have also had Scripturally balanced articles on fears, depression, and other emotional problems. These articles have been provided to inform. But they do not endorse certain types of diagnosis, therapy, doctors, counselors, or treatment centers, as personal decisions must be made on such matters.​—See w82 6/15 pp. 22-9.
Since there are many of Jehovah’s Witnesses, some persons, including our brothers, have tried to promote their business and viewpoints by preparing articles, brochures, and tapes directed to those in the organization. These may be on topics of interest or concern, but why are they circulated? To develop clients, customers. Even if some are not distributed to gain business, they may well contain private views put in ‘theocratic language’ with Bible citations. Whether prepared by a Witness or not, the views may not be in line with the Bible and the Scriptural counsel given by elders but may be based on philosophy or the elementary things of the world.​—Col. 2:8; 1 Tim. 6:20.
Problems and confusion have resulted because brothers and sisters innocently passed on such privately prepared material. All of us, especially the elders, who work in harmony with “the faithful and discreet slave” and who are looked to for guidance, should want to avoid contributing to such difficulties. (Matt. 24:45) Nor should we promote someone’s business or ideas and philosophy by circulating such material among the brothers.​—See km 6/77 p. 4.

