Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Jehovah Is Stronger Than His Enemies
THE Devil and his demons have long tried to hinder the preaching of the good news by means of false religion and spiritism. The Bible speaks about Satan’s evil intent at 2 Corinthians 4:4 where it states that “the god of this system of things has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, that the illumination of the glorious good news about the Christ, who is the image of God, might not shine through.”
But Jehovah God is stronger than Satan. There is nothing that Jehovah’s enemies can do to stop the accomplishment of his divine will, which is that “all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Timothy 2:4) The following reports from Kingdom proclaimers in Australia highlight this.
□ After a 20-year break with religion, a woman began to read the Bible again. This renewed interest in the Bible caused her to have numerous questions, so she prayed to God for help to find the answers. She wanted to search for the truth, but she knew that going back to her old religion would not solve her problem. Instead, she started her search by visiting a used-book store and asking if they had any books on religion.
The storeowner remembered that she had a religious book, not in the store, but at home. The title of the book was You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses. The woman eagerly read the book and found the answers to many of her Bible questions. After searching for Jehovah’s Witnesses in the telephone book, she finally contacted them and began a regular study of the Bible.
□ A young woman hired the services of a local newspaper to advertise the sale of an amulet. The advertisement referred to it as a ‘medieval amulet that is very powerful.’ One of Jehovah’s Witnesses noticed the ad. She decided to call the telephone number given and talk to the woman about the source of the amulet’s alleged power. A discussion on the Bible’s view of demonic activity followed. The young woman with the amulet revealed that just one day earlier, she had prayed to God for help with her problems with demons. The Witness made arrangements for another discussion over the telephone.
When she called, the young woman was not at home. The mother answered the telephone and said: “I don’t know what you told my daughter, but what has happened is a miracle!” She related that after the initial call, her daughter threw away all her satanic pictures and books and started reading the Bible.
Soon after, arrangements were made for a personal visit to the young woman. She immediately accepted a regular study of the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. She also began associating with the Witnesses by attending their Christian meetings. Again, Jehovah defeated the demons by making the accurate knowledge of Bible truths shine forth.

