House to House Without Letup
1 In ancient Israel, sacrifices were offered daily. (Ex. 29:38-42) The fire of the altar was kept burning; the ascending smoke was “a restful odor” that pleased Jehovah. (Ex. 29:18) Today, we are urged to “offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of lips which make public declaration to his name.” (Heb. 13:15) Instead of using sacrifices prescribed by the Law, we worship Jehovah by recounting his praises without letup.​—Isa. 43:21; Acts 5:42.
2 Jesus Christ, the greatest Witness ever to walk this earth, taught us how we must carry on pure worship by offering sacrifices of praise. He taught his disciples that there was an urgency to the message they preached. He knew that the most effective way to reach people with the good news was to talk to them personally in their homes. (Matt. 10:7, 12) So we find that the apostles followed his divinely inspired direction to preach from house to house.​—Acts 20:20.
3 It is no different today. As Jesus’ disciples, true Christians follow his example by preaching the good news from house to house. Though we may be criticized and persecuted for that, millions have learned the truth and hundreds of thousands of new disciples are joining the ranks of the great crowd each year, giving evidence that this is Jehovah’s way of accomplishing his will. That is why we persevere in our ministry.
4 Benefits of Preaching From House to House: “God is not partial . . . The man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34, 35) Going directly to each house in our territory clearly demonstrates impartiality, giving everyone opportunity to hear the Kingdom message regularly. In turn receptive ones receive personalized assistance according to their individual needs.
5 Almost all publishers, including younger ones, the elderly, and even those who are new, can participate in the house-to-house work. In this way each one can make “public declaration for salvation.” (Rom. 10:10) Participation with others in the house-to-house ministry draws us together in the bonds of love and unity. At the same time, we are given an opportunity to display our endurance when we encounter indifference or opposition. This public display of faith makes us “a theatrical spectacle,” which helps sincere ones to realize that we have an organized arrangement for teaching the Bible and that they can benefit from it. (1 Cor. 4:9) Everything clearly shows that Jehovah is blessing the house-to-house work and using it to gather the great crowd to his “house” of pure worship.​—Isa. 2:2-4.
6 Now more than at any other time in history, people need to hear the Kingdom message. Let us keep on preaching from house to house without letup until Jehovah says it is enough. (Isa. 6:11) Doing so, we will be rewarded with the joy that comes from sharing in the important and beneficial house-to-house ministry in this time of the end.​—1 Cor. 15:58.

