Service Meetings for July
Week Starting July 4
Song 141
10 min: Local announcements and applicable Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Mention titles of booklets, if any, congregation has in stock; encourage publishers to get supply for use in service. If congregation has no booklets, suggest brochures that might be used.
17 min: “House to House Without Letup.” Questions and answers. Invite expressions of appreciation from some in audience who were first contacted through door-to-door work.
18 min: “Help Others Learn the Truth.” Discuss with audience. Arrange for capable publishers to demonstrate two or three suggested presentations. Stress benefits of brief, simple approach.
Song 120 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 11
Song 115
12 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report along with any Society donation acknowledgments. Give commendation for contributions. (Ex. 35:29) Encourage publishers to consider doing evening witnessing​—a fine time for door-to-door work or return visits.
15 min: Local needs. Or have experienced elder give a talk on article “Keep Your Distance When Danger Threatens,” in February 15, 1994, Watchtower, pages 22-5.
18 min: “How Will They Hear Unless We Return?” Discuss with audience. Demonstrate suggestions in paragraphs 3 and 4. Give additional comments showing why return visits should be made with goal of starting studies.
Song 123 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 18
Song 125
15 min: Local announcements. Review highlights of article “New Circuit Assembly Program.” Mention dates of next circuit assembly if available. Outline field service arrangements for weekend, and encourage participation in magazine distribution.
 8 min: Question Box. Question-and-answer discussion.
22 min: “Finding Interested Ones by Means of Effective Street Witnessing.” Service overseer or other capable elder who is effective in street witnessing discusses article with two or three publishers who also have experience in street witnessing. Discussion can include two or three brief experiences. Demonstrate approaches with current magazines.
Song 134 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 25
Song 140
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Demonstrate presentation of latest issues of magazines. Encourage all to participate in magazine distribution.
15 min: “Younger Ones Need a Good Example.” Questions and answers. Interview one or two young persons who are good examples. Have them explain what spiritual goals they have set for themselves and how their efforts have brought extra blessings.
20 min: Improving the Effectiveness of Our Presentations. Family group has practice session based on suggestions in School Guidebook, page 99, paragraph 9. One family member demonstrates presentation, others offer commendation and suggestions for improvement. Include a common objection met in your area, and discuss how to overcome it.
Song 187 and concluding prayer.

