A Bird of a Different Feather​—Hurricane Iwa
IWA (ēʹ va) is the Hawaiian name for the frigate bird, or man-of-war bird. Indeed, it was a bird of a different feather that struck the Hawaiian Islands on Tuesday, November 23, 1982. Iwa was the first hurricane to be given a Hawaiian name, and it gave the islands a rare display of nature’s force. The worst storm to hit the state since 1959, Iwa battered the islands of Niihau, Kauai and Oahu with winds up to 110 miles (177 km) an hour.
On Kauai, which took the brunt of the storm, one out of eight homes was either destroyed or made uninhabitable. Almost all other structures suffered minor to extensive damage. Trees, power lines and utility poles were down everywhere, making roads impassable. Many of the trees that were still standing were stripped of leaves and branches​—stark reminders of the storm’s strength. Waves 25 to 30 feet (8 to 9 m) added to the damage caused by high winds, destroying homes, condominiums and hotels in the coastal areas.
Overall damage was less extensive on Oahu, although the north and west shores were severely affected by winds and high surf. Power was lost for both islands during the storm, resulting in a total blackout. While electricity was restored to parts of Oahu late that night, authorities estimated that it would take at least a month to restore full service to both islands. Amazingly, there was only one storm-related death and relatively few injuries​—mostly of a minor nature.
Many of Jehovah’s Witnesses on both islands suffered material losses, but not one was injured. Christian elders quickly called or visited all in their congregations to ensure their safety and to care for any needs they might have. They not only were able to encourage those whom they visited but received many firsthand reports of the storm’s strength and destruction to add to their own personal experiences.
One Witness reported: “The whole house shuddered as if a giant hand were shaking it.” Thinking they might have to flee, he tried to open the kitchen door, but the force of the wind against it was so strong that he could not budge it. “Looking out the window, I saw the four-car garage and shed outside our home shudder like an airplane at the end of a runway,” he said. “Then it banked to the right and flew off into the sky, disappearing from sight.”
An elderly Japanese Witness, who watched her roof disappear in the storm as she sat protected in the corner of her living room, said she was too excited to be afraid. “But,” she added, “I wasn’t too excited to forget to pray.”
Some had to evacuate their shore-area homes. One Witness family returned to find that their home had been moved 40 feet (12 m) by the huge waves, but it was sitting, still intact, in its new location. On entering they found nothing in the home broken except one dinner plate.
A Witness whose husband owns a produce warehouse relates: “My husband’s warehouse was almost completely destroyed by the high winds. The only part still standing, almost unharmed, is the room that he lets us use for a Congregation Book Study. This prompted one of his employees to say, ‘You should have let them (Jehovah’s Witnesses) use the whole building and none of it would have blown away.’”
While some tried to use the storm and the confusion in its aftermath for looting and personal gain, a feeling of concern and care for others was generally shown by people in the community. For the most part there was a fine spirit of cooperation and community help throughout the islands. This was especially evident among Jehovah’s Witnesses, as noted by two traveling overseers who reported: “Everywhere we went we found the friends to be in good spirits. Elders were quick to check on all in their congregations and see that any needing housing or provisions were cared for. Others in the congregations lovingly responded by sharing what they had with any in need. It was heartwarming to see the love and concern showed by the Witnesses in caring for one another.”
Spiritual needs were not forgotten either as preparations were made by elders for congregational meetings, even in areas severely hit by the storm. The day after the hurricane, most congregations were able to have their meetings, even though electricity had not been restored in many of these areas.
Jehovah’s Witnesses also expressed concern for neighbors in their communities by sharing material provisions with them and by helping them in the repair work. Thursday, less than 48 hours after the storm, many of the Witnesses were calling on those with whom they study the Bible to see if any further physical aid or spiritual comfort could be rendered.
One Witness family had an added reason for joy. Besides the safety of all in their family, they were blessed with a new baby, born just as the hurricane was reaching the island. Mother and daughter are doing fine.
All of Jehovah’s Witnesses who were affected by the hurricane expressed thankfulness for their physical safety. They felt as did the apostle Paul after surviving much tribulation. At 2 Corinthians 1:11 he wrote: “You also can help along by your supplication for us, in order that thanks may be given by many in our behalf for what is kindly given to us due to many prayerful faces.”

