From Our Readers
When They Leave Home
Thank you so much for the fine articles on “Why It’s So Hard for Parents to ‘Let Go’” in the February 8, 1983, issue. So realistic. You knew my feelings and made me appreciate my present role, no longer a caretaker but now an adviser, yet always a parent of four.
M. M., New Jersey
Your articles on “When They Grow Up and Leave Home” have truly been a blessing to me. Our only child, a daughter, will be 19 years old in a few months. The thought of her leaving home hurts me deeply. With the help of these well-written articles I feel I can make the needed adjustments in my attitude and be better prepared for my child’s departure from home.
A. R., Oklahoma
My wife and I enjoyed very much your articles on children growing up and leaving home. The articles tell it like it is, and encourage all to train their children properly and prepare both parents and children for the time when the children leave home. I would like to comment on one point. Your article quotes “Bob” as saying of his boys who had paper routes: “I wouldn’t take them around in the car if the sky was falling!” This is not meant to be critical; the important thing is that all turned out well for the family. I had a similar situation but handled it differently, which also turned out well for all concerned. While very young both our boys started delivering papers, which they did for about 10 years until they were old enough to have other employment. When they discontinued the paper routes they had a combined total of 485 daily customers. Yes, I did help them during torrential rain, illness and early on Sunday mornings so that we could all be at congregation meetings on time. I received good compensation, their cooperation, their help in many ways and their willingness always to run errands.
G. K., West Virginia
We agree that there can be several different correct and successful ways of dealing with similar situations. Happy is the parent who discerns what is needed.​—ED.
Paramedics
Thank you very much for the article “A Paramedic Tells His Story.” (January 22, 1983) I was in a serious automobile accident in 1969 and this type of service was not available yet. Experiences such as these are very helpful in today’s activities. They serve as an encouragement for us.
D. W., South Carolina
You couldn’t have had better timing! The day my husband finished his paramedic training we received the magazine in the mail. We had to read it right away. Paramedics are involved in a lifesaving work physically, but there is a far more important work of saving spiritual lives.
W. P., Colorado
Your article “A Paramedic Tells His Story” was most absorbing. I found the person’s sincerity and dedication both to his position and to his convictions most moving, and it has given me fresh impetus to review my own convictions.
D. B., England

