Announcements
USE THE REMAINING TIME WISELY
Not forever will the Creator allow present distress and wickedness to continue on the earth. He has foreordained a definite time to bring the last vestiges of Satan’s world to a violent end; and the remaining time is very short. Don’t you desire to use that remaining time wisely? (Eph. 5:15, 16, RS) If so, we invite you to join with Jehovah’s witnesses in the activity they have arranged for November. During this month they will be offering the new book “This Means Everlasting Life”, on a contribution of 35c. Through its 320 pages this attractive and enlightening book alerts its readers to how everlasting life may be gained and the nearness of the time when it will be the cherished possession of righteous humankind. Life seekers need to quickly and intelligently seek God and his kingdom. Can you think of a wiser use of your time than to aid another to learn of the way to life? Jehovah’s witnesses in your community will be glad to assist you to share in this activity. Or, if you prefer, write to us and we will furnish you with helpful instructions and report forms.
NEW WORLD TRANSLATION OF THE CHRISTIAN GREEK SCRIPTURES
Outstanding among the Scripture translations issued in recent years is the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures, first released on Wednesday, August 2, 1950, at the Theocracy’s Increase Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Yankee Stadium, New York city. Its total initial distribution at this assembly was 85,850 copies. This translation, accomplished by the New World Bible Translation Committee, is highly accurate, taking into account the latest Bible research. Modern speech is used throughout, yet for the sake of accuracy it is as literal as modern English usage will permit. The Creator’s name, Jehovah, appears 237 times from Matthew to Revelation. Copious marginal references, chain references on important words and phrases, footnotes, a foreword and an appendix combine to make the New World Translation a remarkable contribution toward a better understanding of the Christian Greek Scriptures. Your copy will be sent to you, postpaid, for a contribution of $1.50.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 26: Riches of the Full Assurance of Our Understanding, ¶1-15; and Further Enrichment of Understanding, ¶1-4.
Week of December 3: Further Enrichment of Understanding, ¶5-25.

