Visiting Jehovah’s Witnesses in China
TRULY it has been said that China, which is about one-third larger than the United States, is actually a “sea”—yes, a sea of 463,500,000 people. And, like a sea, this mighty ocean of humanity has moved with the tides of time. China has enjoyed the welcomed calms of peace during its 4,200 years of existence, but at the same time it has had more than its share of lashing storms, having been tossed and torn and whipped about by famine and dreaded pestilence, political crises and bloody wars.
Millions of Chinese people face death by starvation during the coming year because of the deplorable conditions in this land. We view the gaunt frames of adults; we note tiny children suffering from malnutrition. We are told that conditions are so bad in some sectors that many have resorted to eating a clay pie mixed with weeds and grasses. This they call the “goddess of mercy”. Not only death through famine stalks China, but, as the world well knows, the tidal wave of godless communism has flooded the nation with bloody civil war and has routed the Nationalist government out of the land.
But, regardless of these frightful conditions, many of the Chinese people have a bright new hope for the future, for they are the happy recipients of the Kingdom message published by Jehovah’s witnesses in that land. Let’s stop off for a moment in Shanghai and meet the Watch Tower Society’s Branch servant, Stanley Jones, and obtain more information on the work of Jehovah’s witnesses in China.
Shanghai appears to be a disorganized mass of buildings on the banks of the Yangtze river. The harbor is choked with the famous Chinese junks and numerous other craft, all sizes and shapes. We see the “coolies” running about with their heavy loads balanced on the two ends of bamboo poles that rest on the laborers’ strong shoulders. Branch servant Jones and two other Gilead-trained missionaries stationed in Shanghai are anxious to tell about their increases in China, and we listen attentively.
The witnesses currently number about 300. The Shanghai company of Jehovah’s witnesses is continually growing. To illustrate this Stanley Jones relates the experience of a Chinese lady doctor who became interested in Jehovah’s witnesses following the visit of a publisher-minister. A Bible study was arranged; rapid progress was made. On learning the truth about the trinity, hell and the soul, she remarked: “I never could really believe these religious doctrines.” It was not long until she was engaging in the missionary work from house to house. Through the efforts of this new minister a Bible study was conducted with a group of nurses, and this study has already produced another new publisher.
But what goes on at our next stop, Hong Kong? Multitudes of people are on the move. Hundreds of men are running along the streets pulling their rickshas. The harbor is full of activity. Motor-powered boats and junks with their one huge sail plow through the waters; myriads of small craft and sampans powered by women with long oars weave about between the ferries, ocean liners and other vessels that have taken refuge here to escape any “incidents” with the Communist and Nationalist navies. Here too we see the traditional coolie men and women loading and unloading trucks, and carrying heavy bundles along the roadside. Roaring past them goes a modern motor transport. Here is the contrast of East and West.
Our four friends, missionaries all, are glad we are with them. Indeed their words of joy and appreciation brighten this dreary day as we make our way to the missionary home at 1 Bonham Road. The work in Hong Kong is progressing favorably, and the missionaries are kept very busy conducting dozens of home Bible studies with those interested in the truth, just like their fellow workers in Shanghai. The little group in Hong Kong is commencing to grow and we can look for good increase.
Two of the missionaries who meet us at the airport were until very recently serving on the island of Tai Wan, commonly called Formosa. You will recall that Formosa is the last stronghold of the Nationalist government and the place they plan to make their death stand against the Chinese communists. The two missionaries inform us that Jehovah’s witnesses on Formosa are undergoing persecution and hardships because of their ministry, but they are nonetheless pressing on. The witnesses on Tai Wan are to be found mostly among the Ami people, a very humble and meek class of persons who inhabit the mountainous regions of Formosa. We rejoice to learn that more than 200 Ami people have manifested genuine interest in the preaching activity.
China is getting a witness, but there is so much more to do!

