Clouds​—They Tell a Story
“I wandered lonely as a cloud  That floats on high o’er vales and hills.”​—William Wordsworth, 1804.
POETS, ancient and modern, have turned to the sky and the clouds for inspiration. Even city dwellers will look up to the sky to see what weather awaits them. The wise country person remembers the old saying, “Red sky at night is the shepherd’s delight, red sky in the morning is the shepherd’s warning.” Just a fable? No, it was based on the type of clouds that can augur good or bad weather in the reflection of the sun.
Clouds come in different shapes and designs. They all tell a story. There are the ones that seem to pile up higher and higher into the sky. Often they are what are called cumulus clouds, from the Latin word for “pile,” or “heap.” If they are rain-bearing cumulus clouds, they will likely be dark or gray and then they are called cumulonimbus, nimbo being the Latin term for “rain.”
What about those clouds high in the sky that look like curling, wispy feathers? Instead of being composed mainly of water droplets, as most clouds are, these, because of their altitude, are made of ice crystals and are called cirrus, from the Latin word for “curl.” The low-lying clouds that cover the whole sky and bring snow or rain are called stratus (layerlike) clouds because they hang like a blanket, or a layer, across the sky.
There are several variations on these basic types, but regardless of which clouds we see in our part of the world, how grateful we can be to have such variety in the sky. Just compare a good photo showing clouds in the sky with one that has none. Usually, you will soon see which picture has character.
But how are clouds formed? That is another subject for another occasion. However, the next time you look at clouds, recall the words of Elihu: “Look up to heaven and see, and behold the clouds, that they are indeed higher than you.” (Job 35:5) Then remember their Creator, Jehovah God.
[Pictures on page 17]
Right: Cirrus clouds
Below: Stratocumulus clouds in a sunrise
Above: Cumulus clouds
Left: Cumulonimbus forming a thunderhead

