Finding Spiritual Treasures in Guinea
FOR centuries, explorers risked life and limb looking for treasure and wealth. Intrepid ones who reached Guinea, in West Africa, found two very different kinds of riches​—material and spiritual. The land, rich in diamonds, gold, iron ore, and high-grade bauxite (from which aluminum is extracted), is home to more than nine million Guineans.
Though the religions of Christendom do not predominate in the country, worship is important, and many prize spiritual treasures. What exactly are these treasures? They are Jehovah’s faithful servants, described at Haggai 2:7 as “the desirable things of all the nations.”
Spiritual Treasures
Digging deep into the earth in search of hidden treasures requires substantial effort. Likewise, in the Christian ministry, earnest effort is necessary to find spiritual riches. In Guinea, the Kingdom-preaching work began in the heart of the country in the early 1950’s and did not reach the capital, Conakry, until the early 1960’s. There are now some 900 of Jehovah’s Witnesses in 21 congregations and groups nationwide.
Missionaries arrived in 1987 and worked along with the only congregation in Conakry. Now there are more than 20 missionaries in the capital and in the interior. They zealously build up the congregations and share with the local brothers in the ministry.
Luc, who lives in Conakry, experienced joy as he studied the Bible with Albert, a young doctor. Albert had searched for religious truth in various churches, and he was involved in spiritistic practices. He wore a ring that a spirit medium had given him with the guarantee that it would bring him good fortune. After much disappointment in his search for the true religion, Albert threw his ring away and prayed: “God, if you exist, make it possible for me to know you and serve you. Otherwise, I will just live my life according to my own desires.” Shortly thereafter, Albert was visiting his sister’s home and overheard one of Jehovah’s Witnesses who was conducting a Bible study with his niece. Soon arrangements were made for Luc to study the Bible with him.
Week after week, Luc joyfully walked more than three miles [5 km] each way to conduct the study. Though Luc had had little formal education, Albert, a university graduate, was deeply impressed by his strong faith in the Scriptures and his practical application of the material. How happy Albert was to discover that mankind’s suffering is not God’s fault but, rather, that Jehovah purposes to end all suffering and to make this earth into a paradise. (Psalm 37:9-11) Bible truths coupled with the fine conduct that he observed among members of the congregation touched Albert’s heart.
However, just as a raw diamond has to be painstakingly cut by a skilled craftsman in order to sparkle, so Albert needed to remove layers of worldliness in order to harmonize his life with God’s righteous standards. He stopped consulting spirit mediums, quit abusing alcohol, and gave up gambling. Albert found it much harder to quit smoking. When he finally prayed intensely to Jehovah for help, he succeeded. Six months later, he legalized his marriage. His wife began studying the Bible. Now both are baptized servants of Jehovah.
Martin is another spiritual diamond. He started studying the Bible in Guéckédou when he was 15 years old. His Catholic parents opposed his attending meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses. They destroyed Martin’s Bible literature, beat him, and chased him from the family home. Just as a diamond is formed when carbon is subjected to extreme pressure, so Martin grew firm in his love for Bible truth as a result of opposition. In time, his parents’ attitude softened, and he returned home. What accounted for his parents’ change of heart? They noticed a great difference between Martin’s conduct and that of his younger siblings, who had developed a rebellious spirit and had become involved in sexual immorality. Convinced that Martin’s new faith was good for him, his father welcomed congregation members into the home. Martin’s mother has thanked the brothers many times for all they have done to help her son. Baptized at 18 years of age, Martin later attended the Ministerial Training School and is now serving as a special pioneer minister.
Imported Spiritual Riches
While Guinea exports much of her natural resources, some of her spiritual riches have been “imported.” Many people have emigrated from other African nations, usually for economic reasons. Others have come to escape long and cruel wars.
Ernestine, from Cameroon, came to Guinea 12 years ago. She studied with Jehovah’s Witnesses and attended meetings year after year without getting baptized. In 2003, tears filled her eyes as she watched the baptism at a circuit assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Overcome with feelings of guilt, she prayed to Jehovah: “I am now 51 years old, and I have done nothing good for you. I want to serve you.” Afterward, Ernestine acted in harmony with her humble prayer. She explained to the man with whom she was living that they could stay together only if they got legally married. He agreed, and she later shed tears of joy at her own baptism in November 2004.
Since the early 1990’s, Guinea has welcomed thousands of refugees from Liberia and Sierra Leone, including hundreds of Jehovah’s servants. Soon after arriving in a refugee camp, the brothers arrange for regular meetings, organize the preaching work, and build a Kingdom Hall. Some people have become servants of Jehovah in refugee camps. Isaac is one of these. After his baptism, the possibility arose for Isaac to return to his former position at a large Liberian company. He chose instead to remain in the Lainé refugee camp as a regular pioneer. He explains: “Now I don’t have to ask permission from a boss to attend meetings or an assembly. I am free to serve Jehovah.” In December 2003, a district convention was held in this remote camp for the 150 Witnesses living among the 30,000 refugees. Happily, 591 attended, including 9 deaf persons who followed the program in sign language. Twelve were baptized. The brothers deeply appreciated the efforts made to provide a spiritual banquet for them.
“Desirable Things” Make Needed Changes
No obstacle seems to be too great for those seeking gold and diamonds. It is heartwarming, however, to see the efforts new ones make to overcome all obstacles in order to serve Jehovah. Consider Zainab’s case.
At the age of 13, Zainab was forced into child slavery. She was taken to Guinea from her home in another West African country. At the age of 20, she came across the message of the Bible. She was eager to apply what she was learning.
Attending Christian gatherings for worship was difficult for Zainab. But she deeply appreciated the meetings and was determined not to miss them. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) She would hide her books outside in order to retrieve them on the way to the meetings. On several occasions, she was brutally beaten by her “owners” for attending these spiritual gatherings.
Circumstances later changed, and Zainab was freed. She immediately began to attend all the meetings, which helped her to make rapid spiritual progress. She refused a high-paying job that would have prevented her from attending the meetings to receive Christian instruction. She enrolled in the Theocratic Ministry School, became an unbaptized Kingdom publisher, and later symbolized her dedication to Jehovah by water baptism. Right after that, she engaged in the auxiliary pioneer ministry. Six months later, she applied to serve as a regular pioneer minister.
After attending a few meetings, one interested person stated: “I don’t feel poor when I’m here.” While many people are interested only in Guinea’s material riches, those who love Jehovah are eagerly searching for spiritual riches. Yes, “the desirable things of all the nations” are turning to Jehovah’s pure worship today!
[Box on page 8]
GUINEA-2005
Peak number of Witnesses: 883
Bible studies: 1,710
Memorial attendance: 3,255
[Maps on page 8]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
GUINEA
  Conakry
SIERRA LEONE
LIBERIA
[Picture on page 9]
Albert and Luc
[Picture on page 9]
Kingdom Hall in Conakry
[Picture on page 10]
Ernestine
[Picture on page 10]
Martin
[Picture on page 10]
Zainab
[Picture Credit Line on page 8]
USAID

