Gaining Happiness Through Study of God’s Word
1 Wise King Solomon wrote: “Happy is the man that has found wisdom, and the man that gets discernment.” (Prov. 3:13) Have you gained this happiness that Solomon mentioned? The key is ‘finding wisdom and getting discernment.’
2 This takes effort and time. It involves study of Jehovah’s Word, the taking in of godly knowledge and application of such in our lives. (Prov. 2:2-4) Those who seek understanding and wisdom through regular study of God’s Word will agree that “those keeping fast hold of it are to be called happy.”—Prov. 3:18.
3 One definition of study is: “To fix the mind closely upon a subject.” Our knowing this helps us to understand why those who regularly study God’s Word are happy. They are ‘fixing their minds’ on God’s thoughts and his wonderful promises. Thus, they gain the highest education, a godly one. Feeding one’s mind on God’s truths is a most delightful experience, helping us to continue growing spiritually.—Heb. 5:13, 14.
HOW THE ORGANIZATION HELPS
4 Jehovah’s organization assists us in gaining the happiness we seek. In fact, a fine study program is laid out for us by the “faithful and discreet slave.” How? Well, we noted above that reading is an important part of study, and we have many good things to read, do we not? So it would be important to read the books and each issue of The Watchtower and Awake! as they come out. Certainly if we recommend that others read the publications, we should first do so ourselves. Truly we can gain happiness from reading such fine publications regularly.
5 Above all else, our reading must include God’s Word itself. How enjoyable it is to keep up with the weekly assignment of Bible reading for the Theocratic Ministry School program. Many schedule time to read other portions of God’s Word daily. Are you gaining happiness in this way?
6 Preparation for our meetings is another important part of our study program. You will find that you are better able to participate and will remember more of what is discussed. And how can we prepare? Some suggestions are: reading carefully the assigned material, underlining key words or phrases and looking up Scripture texts that are cited but not quoted. Some find it helpful to make notes of related points or scriptures in the margins. The more we can remember and apply, the happier we will be.—John 13:17.
7 What are other things we can include in our Christian study program? Reading and discussing the daily text should be a must in Christian homes. Advance preparation for return visits, Bible studies and talks would also be essential. (Prov. 15:28; 1 Pet. 3:15) Many do research in connection with their weekly Bible reading in order to understand the material better. What a blessing our regular schedule of study can be!
8 Through your study program do you find ‘delight in the law of Jehovah’? (Ps. 1:2) If so, you are truly blessed and know that getting wisdom from Jehovah “is better than having silver as gain.” (Prov. 3:14) But, if you are unable to keep up with all the reading and study you would like to do, do not get discouraged or give up. Could you, perhaps, adjust your activities so as to have more time to devote to reading and studying? As you do this, you will find that your joy increases as your knowledge of Jehovah grows. Then you will appreciate more fully that wisdom from Jehovah “is a tree of life to those taking hold of it, and those keeping fast hold of it are to be called happy.”—Prov. 3:18.

