Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 29
Song 2
10 min: Local announcements. Enthusiastically encourage all to share in field service with the new book “Let Your Kingdom Come” and the New World Translation on first Sunday of the month.
20 min: “Proclaim the Kingdom Hope to Others.” Questions and answers. On paragraph 4, ask audience how they would make the transition from the Topic for Conversation to opening chapter of “Kingdom Come” book. After discussing paragraphs 5 and 6, have brief demonstration on how to use the boxes on pages 11 and 25, or others.
15 min: Talk and discussion with audience on “Speaking in Tongues Today—From God?” in August 15, 1981, Watchtower. Relate material to local situations in territory and how we might cope with the belief of speaking in tongues today as taught by charismatics.
Song 80 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 6
Song 45
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News.
15 min: “Keep Building One Another Up.” Encouraging talk by elder based on 1 Thessalonians 5:11 emphasizing the need for strengthening one another’s faith, using the tongue for good. (Jas. 3:10, 11; Commentary on James, pages 117-119) Also mention can be made of importance of quickly settling differences with others, not harboring resentments but courageously going to one offending you in the spirit of Matthew 18:15, 16 and Matthew 5:23, 24 so as to be at peace with your brother.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—With the Bible.” Question-and-answer coverage with audience discussion on how offer can be presented in most appealing way to householders in local territory. Also have two short demonstrations featuring presentation of Bible and/or book.
Song 16 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 13
Song 17
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
10 min: Interview one or two publishers on how their gaining a knowledge of the truth has helped them to overcome problems in their life. Emphasize that it is not just the knowledge they have obtained but the application of Bible principles that has helped them to make necessary corrections.—John 13:17.
10 min: Local needs, or give a talk on the subject “Faith Healing—Not for Christians Today,” based on the article in the September 1, 1981, Watchtower.
15 min: Following Up and Developing Interest. Discussion with audience; also relate experiences on what can be done to develop the interest found after placing the new book “Let Your Kingdom Come.” Encourage prompt and thorough follow-up of interest so sheeplike ones will be helped.
Song 111 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 20
Song 110
10 min: Local announcements and discussion of the day’s text to be handled by family as if at breakfast. Encourage family discussion of daily text.
20 min: “Parents—Are Your Children Growing Spiritually?” Question-and-answer discussion but with encouragement for local experiences of what parents have done to help children to grow spiritually.
15 min: Understanding Your Children. Father and mother with children discuss some of their problems. One child finds it difficult going to school because of ridicule from fellow students. Child relates pressure he experiences from fellow students to join social clubs, become involved in school politics, and so forth. Parents tactfully and lovingly reason with youth on dangers involved and have child draw conclusion from own knowledge and appreciation of truth. Another child has trouble when issues arise in connection with holidays. Child explains he feels shy and reluctant to speak about beliefs when these situations arise. Parents empathetically acknowledge the difficulty of the situation and express their confidence in their child’s ability to handle these problems with Jehovah’s help. Share examples from Bible of how Jehovah assisted younger ones such as David and Josiah. Have child try to think of Bible examples, perhaps from My Book of Bible Stories.—See The Watchtower of June 15, 1964, pages 377-382 and September 1, 1964, pages 533-538.
Song 115 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 27
Song 52
10 min: Announcements and Question Box.
10 min: Talk by elder from November 15, 1981, Watchtower article, “Feed Regularly on Bible Truths!”
10 min: Scriptural talk covering local needs of congregation.
15 min: “Gaining Happiness Through Study of God’s Word.” Question-and-answer discussion with audience. Have some brothers mention how and when they arrange to do their personal study. Build up enthusiasm for public talks to be given from the new book.
Song 59 and prayer.

