Parents—Are Your Children Growing Spiritually?
1 What a blessing it is to have children who love to serve Jehovah! What joy it brings to the hearts of devoted parents. The apostle John reflected that feeling regarding his spiritual children when he wrote, “No greater cause for thankfulness do I have than these things, that I should be hearing that my children go on walking in the truth.”—3 John 4.
2 “But how do you get your children to be spiritual in their outlook?” many parents have asked. The question is understandable when you see the satanic pressures imposed on the young today. The answers from parents who have been successful are helpful. “The number one requirement is setting a good example in spirituality yourself,” said one father. This brother, a busy elder with a family of four children to look after, takes time to be with his children. Their life is centered around the Kingdom. They talk about spiritual things as a family. When they go on vacations, they go as a family and the father makes sure they attend the meetings at the local Kingdom Hall.
3 Another factor is making the field service an occasion of joy. One mother stated that she took the children along with her in the field service from the time they were infants. They have always enjoyed the service, not going simply because they had to.
COMMUNICATE FREELY
4 How would you know if your children were growing spiritually if you did not communicate freely with them? It would be difficult, to say the least. That is why so many successful parents find it wise to talk freely and openly with their children. They spend time together. Rather than socializing with other adults apart from the children, they have found it best to have the children with them. In this way no age barrier is created. Wise parents also take a keen interest in the children’s activity whether at school or otherwise. Such kindly interest in the children makes it easy for the children to approach their parents when problems arise, being confident that their parents will understand even if they have done something wrong.—Prov. 15:14.
5 Some parents have found it prudent to listen carefully to what their children are talking about. They find out what their children are learning inside and outside the home, and then take steps to correct any wrong thinking before it takes root in their children’s hearts and minds. Rather than belittle their expressions, wise parents endeavor to upbuild their children and encourage them to keep up the fight to remain spiritual in this materialistic world. (Eph. 6:10-13) Such loving concern draws parents and children together.—Prov. 24:5.
STUDYING GOD’S WORD TOGETHER
6 A regular family Bible study is another essential in developing spirituality. If children see that their parents are sufficiently interested in Biblical knowledge to set aside time for study each week, they will eventually be helped to do the same thing. In addition to time that is set aside for discussions of a given portion of a book or magazine each week, discerning parents will impart whatever instruction or encouragement their children may need at the moment. Happenings at school or in the neighborhood may reveal a need to consider appropriate material so as to deal with a current problem or face an issue. This is a part of growing up spiritually.
PROVIDING A SPIRITUAL TREASURE
7 Some parents have mistakenly thought the best thing they could do for their children would be to provide material advantages. Experience has shown that when the parents have given priority to the material things of life, it has all too often led to the parents’ becoming weak spiritually and neglecting their children’s spiritual interests. (Mark 8:36) While they may enjoy a higher standard of material living, could it be said that sacrificing one’s spirituality is worth it? Other families have chosen to reduce their standard of living so as not to lose sight of the real goal. (John 6:27) They have learned to be content with less materially, but have gained spiritually to the blessing of themselves and their children.
8 Do you have your family’s spiritual condition at heart? If so, why not work to store up a real spiritual treasure together? (Matt. 6:19-21) Help your children to grow spiritually and you, too, will be thankful that your “children go on walking in the truth.”

