Presenting the Good News—With the Bible
1 December and January are Bible campaign months. This offers excellent opportunities for encouraging our neighbors to obtain a copy of the New World Translation along with the new Bible study aid “Let Your Kingdom Come.”
2 Since most people may have a Bible, why encourage them to obtain the New World Translation? As you will recall at the district convention this past summer, four points were discussed to help us appreciate the value of the New World Translation. First, we learned that since older and more reliable Bible manuscripts are available now, a modern translation of these documents helps us to have a more correct understanding of the Bible. Secondly, the original Bible languages are now much better understood. Thus the increased knowledge of these languages makes for more understandable translations.
3 The third point mentioned at the convention is that the languages into which the Bible has been translated have undergone changes in the course of years. The English language has undergone a vast number of changes since the 17th century when the King James Version and Douay Version were produced. Finally, and most importantly, there is the matter of correct understanding of the Bible by the translators.
4 We cannot escape the fact that erroneous religious beliefs have influenced many Bible translators. One obvious example is where they have failed to stick loyally to God’s Word in the use of God’s distinctive name, Jehovah. Often it has been deliberately covered over. Thus people need a translation that accurately conveys the message found in the original languages.
5 How happy we should be to have a translation where no effort has been spared to ensure accuracy! We need to get the New World Translation into the hands of people. How could you present it at the doors? No doubt, there are several ways that have been effective in your territory. As a suggestion you might try the following, using the new Topic for Conversation:
6 “Good morning, my name is ——— and I am pleased to find you at home. My reason for calling is to share with you the Bible’s solution to mankind’s problems. As you probably have noted, our problems are on the increase despite sincere efforts to bring a change. [Give local examples.] Do you think there will ever be a solution? [Allow for a response.] Notice this encouraging comment in the Bible. [Read Revelation 11:17, 18.] Did you note the solution? God is going to bring to ruin those ruining the earth, thus cleansing it from crime, selfishness, pollution, hunger, wars, and so forth. How? By means of his kingdom. At Matthew 6:10, Jesus told his followers to pray, ‘Let your kingdom come.’ Would you like to know how this is going to come about? Since the answer is found in the Bible, I would like to leave with you a copy of a modern translation along with this book on the subject of the Kingdom for $3.75.”
7 In the event that you would like to feature the new book, you might say: “Good morning, I am pleased to find you at home as I have come to talk to you about God’s kingdom. Many have wondered why Jesus told his disciples to pray, ‘Thy kingdom come.’ Perhaps you have, too. [Allow for a response.] Would it not be interesting to know what the Kingdom will do for our earth? [Allow for comment.] Notice what this Bible study aid says on the subject here on page 21, paragraph 1. [Read paragraph.] I would like to leave this book with you along with a modern translation of the Bible for just $3.75.”
8 “Your word is a lamp to my foot, and a light to my roadway,” said the psalmist. (Ps. 119:105) People in the world need to understand God’s Word if they are to gain salvation. Jesus and the early Christians loyally advocated the Word of God. Let us do the same this month by offering the New World Translation and the book “Let Your Kingdom Come.”

