Proclaim the Kingdom Hope to Others
1 What hope should Christians proclaim? Certainly not some man-made political hope! History shows that all such hopes are futile. Truly, human schemes are unable to provide for mankind’s lasting needs and salvation. (Ps. 146:3) The only real hope is the Kingdom for which Jesus taught his disciples to pray.—Matt. 6:10.
2 Yes, we have good reason to proclaim the Kingdom hope to people in our territory. Jehovah’s people know the Kingdom is God’s instrument to rid the universe of Satan and all who support his rule. The Kingdom will clear Jehovah’s name of all the reproach that has been heaped upon it for nearly 6,000 years. And, happily, the Kingdom will administer to mankind the ransoming power of Jesus’ sacrifice, relieving all suffering and pain. Under its millennial rule, billions now sleeping in death will be resurrected.
MAKE USE OF “LET YOUR KINGDOM COME”
3 Jesus foretold that in the time of the end his disciples would be preaching the “good news of the kingdom.” (Matt. 24:14) We are truly happy to have a share in proclaiming to others what mankind’s real hope is—God’s kingdom. At our “Kingdom Loyalty” District Conventions we were thrilled to receive a new instrument to assist us in this God-given work—the book “Let Your Kingdom Come.” During December, we have our first opportunity to use it from door to door as we offer it along with the New World Translation.
4 Have you thought of how you might proclaim the Kingdom hope with this new book? The opening words of chapter 1 on pages 5 and 6, along with the beautiful picture depicting an earthly paradise, would make a very fitting presentation. Why not review this first paragraph and select points you would like to use that relate to the prayer “Thy kingdom come.”
5 What practical use can be made of the boxes containing pointed information about the Kingdom? The one on page 11 is entitled “The Reality of God’s Kingdom.” It gives facts about the King, the Heavenly Corulers, its Realm, the Loyal Subjects, the Laws and the Educational Program. Notice, too, the box entitled “What God’s Kingdom Will Do” on page 25. You might ask the householder a question, such as “Do you recall some of the things the Bible says the Kingdom will do for mankind?” Then call attention to the answer on page 25.
6 Pictures are always eye-catching, especially to young persons. In addition to the beautiful paradise scene on pages 4 and 5, there are excellent pictures on pages 52 and 53, 77, 148 and 149, 180 and 181. You will find the pictures on pages 148 and 149 very useful for a discussion on either the initial call or a return visit, for they outline the Kingdom theme of the Bible along with appropriate illustrations.
7 These are a few of the excellent features to be found in the new book “Let Your Kingdom Come.” It is written in a concise, direct and yet appealing style. The pointed questions for discussion along with Scriptural references will help you to reason with householders on the subject of God’s kingdom. So, let us all be enthusiastic about offering this new publication.
8 Another fine aid in making the Bible and book presentation is the Bible Topics for Discussion in the back of the new Bible. You can suggest to householders that these groupings of scriptures will help them to get insight into the subject under discussion.
THOROUGH PREPARATION
9 To make best use of the book it is essential to read it through carefully. Many have done this by now and so are familiar with its contents. The more you know about the Kingdom hope the better you will be able to proclaim it to others. If your heart is warmed by the marvelous Kingdom hope and you have full confidence in its realization, then you cannot help but proclaim it to others with enthusiasm.

