VOL. XXXII MARCH 1 No. 5 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 67 

Money to Be Dictator 67 

Pope Pius X. Congratulated 68 



Federation in Fact 68 

The Immortality of the Soul 69 

Mr. Edison and the Bible 70 

Cardinal Gibbons' Words Agree to This 71 

The Kingdom of God in Sad Condition 72 

All a Great Mistake 73 

Murders Her Grandchildren 73 

1911 --Memorial Supper- 19 11 74 

Too Much Money 75 

Priests Poor Business Men 75 

The Duty of the Hour 76 

Some Calculations on the Jubilee Cycles 76 

The Wise Choice 78 

One Sacrifice Sufficient 78 

Interesting Questions 79 

Berean Questions in "Scripture Studies" 79 

page 66 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



1911-GENERAL CONVENTION-- 19 11 

The interests of the Far West this year will be served by 
the Convention trip already announced in these columns. 
Particulars of this will be repeated before the time. It is not 
possible to add any other points to the itinerary. 

Favorable dates for three-day Conventions will probably 
be fixed for Toronto, Canada, and some point in Nova Scotia 
—announcements later. 

Mountain Lake Park, Md., has been selected as the place 
for the principal Convention for the year. Its location in the 
top of the mountains is splendid. The dates there will be 
September 1 to 1 1— not the best, but the best that we can 
secure, as the association holding the Park property keeps the 
months of July and August for its own use. 

At this season we will not expect as large an attendance as 
we had last year at Celoron-Chautauqua at the height of the 
season. Additionally the widely scattered tour and the 
Toronto point will reduce the attendance. We hope later to 
announce very desirable excursion rates with full particulars. 
We announce the date thus early for the convenience of the 
friends who must arrange for leave of absence to attend. 

IMMERSION SERVICE IN BROOKLYN. 

Sunday afternoon, April 9th, opportunity will be given those 
desiring to symbolize their Baptism into Christ's Death by 
water immersion. Robes, etc., will be provided. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR APRIL 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for April follow: (1) 60; (2) 
155; (3) 67; (4) 105; (5) 6; (6) 160; (7) 170; (8) 
110; (9) 41; (10) 281; (11) 325; (12) 112; (13) 25; 
(14) 176; (15) 130; (16) 145; (17) 293; (18) 113; 
(19) 115; (20) Vow; (21) 46; (22) 4; (23) 259; (24) 
145; (25) 264; (26) 88; (27) 233; (28) 47; (29) 179; 
(30) 230. 



R4771 : page 67 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

MONEY TO BE DICTATOR 

THE trust system seems to be laying hold of 

everything— railroads, steamships, steel 

production, smelting, bridge works, oil refining 

and selling, meat, produce, groceries. 

Above all it has made a money combination 

or banking system, the most gigantic 

the world has ever known. Billions of dollars 

of the people are in the banks, and the 

banks are controlled by wealthy syndicates. 

This money trust has a power of control 

which is marvelous. As in Great Britain the titled aristocracy 

hold the land and collect immense revenues and 

bring great pressure to bear socially and financially, so 

now it is in this country, with evidently more to follow. 

AN ILLUSTRATION OF THIS POWER 

As an illustration of this power we note the facts recently 
set forth in the New York Press respecting the 
Magazine Trust. This Trust has recently bought up 
several magazines and put them under one management. 
And directly and indirectly it is able to dictate the policies 
of nearly all the others. The Editor of Hampton's 
Magazine sets forth that, having refused to enter the 

R4772 : page 67 

combine, his magazine is suffering boycott. Thus the 
capitalist syndicate, which is said to be headed by J. P. 
Morgan, the banker and trustifier, says: "Hampton's 
Magazine is warned to cease 'muck-raking,' to cease attacks 
upon Wall Street methods, to cease attacks upon 
the trusts in general." Mr. Hampton says:— 

"Constantly increasing pressure has been brought to 
bear on us to change our policy since Wall Street started 
its attempt to corner the magazine market and organize 
the biggest of all trusts. First this took the form of 
withdrawal of advertising. That failing to be effective 
we have been threatened in various ways. A few months 
ago we were notified that if we printed an article relative 
to a certain great corporation, the president of that 
corporation would make trouble for us with our stockholders. 
We printed the article. Within a month various 
magazines and newspapers and 'news bureaus' began 
to attack the stock of Hampton's Magazine. 

MONEY WIELDS CLUB 

"About this time we were advised that 'no bank with 
Wall Street connections' would have anything to do with 



this corporation as long as it remained under its present 
management. Also stockholders advised us that they 
had been approached, apparently by agents ofWall Street 
brokerage houses, who endeavored to secure their proxies 
to vote at the meeting. 

"The American people are in the grasp of the 'money 
trust' In the past the banker's only question has been 
the character of the business man, his experience and 
skill, the nature of his business, its conditions and the 
probable chances of success. Conditions have changed. 
'Thou shalt not run counter to Wall Street' is not the 
eleventh commandment— it is the first in the American 
business world. The money of the United States is 
cornered in Wall Street, just as wheat is cornered by a 
small group of men. No banking institution of whatever 
size dares to hazard a conflict with this influence. 

"As an illustration of what can be done, the current 
issue of Hampton's Magazine is being held up on the 
news stands. The Union News Company, because the 
magazine contains an article that offended Standard Oil, 
has ordered its agents not to sell it. The magazine lies 
on the stands, but the agents have their orders not to dispose 
of it, and when February 20 comes the copies will 
be returned unsold." 

This matter of coercion along financial lines is one 
of the most powerful methods of warfare ever known. 
Yet it keeps within the law. The effect will be to keep 
the surface of things quite smooth, whatever may be the 
turbulence beneath. The cry of "Peace, peace," where 
there is much discontent, will apparently be borne out by 
the facts, so far as the great newspapers and magazines 
represent them. The excuse will be that the public will 
get as much information as is good for them. What will 
happen to personal liberty under such conditions no one 
can foretell. God's people are to be peacemakers, to 
"seek peace and pursue it." Nevertheless the Scriptures 
forewarn us that all of these attempts to control the pressure 
and growing discontent of our time will prove unavailing, 
so, ultimately, there will be a great explosion, 
which will reach to the uttermost corner of the earth— 
the time when newspapers and banks, politicians and 
everybody will be lost, and when every man's hand will 
be against his neighbor. We see it coming. 

While we see the storm coming, let us remember the 
words of the Prophet, "We will not fear though the earth 
(society) be removed, and though the mountains (kingdoms) 
be carried into the midst of the sea (anarchy)." 
-Psa. 46:2. 

"BE AT PEACE AMONGST YOURSELVES" 
[1THESS. 5:13.] 

Because general discontent prevails in this our day, 
and because God's children, although not of the world, 
are in it, are influenced by it, therefore it becomes daily 
more necessary that each child of God shall be on the 



R4772 : page 68 

alert to keep his body under, to keep his tongue from 
murmuring, to keep his heart from discontent, to be filled 
with thankfulness and gratitude to God in appreciation 
of all his benefits towards us. 

Additionally the characters being called and drawn of 
the Lord during this Gospel Age must all be firm of texture 
—strong characters. God seeketh such to be of his 
Son's Bride and joint-heirs. Their firmness, positiveness, 
is in contrast with the supineness and indifference 
of others. Their weaknesses through heredity are as 
great as those of others. Hence when a number of these 
are brought together, as in a class for Bible study, there 
is a great need of patient forbearance one with the other. 
If differences and clashes come, the damage one to another 
is sure to be greater than with people of less character, 
of less positive convictions, of less determination. 
Consequently these find the Apostle's words true, "Ye 
have need of patience." 

With the Truth, therefore, to this class God proposes 
there shall also go the spirit of the Truth, the spirit of 
holiness, meekness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, 
love; otherwise serious friction and damage 
would result. 

If in any class of Bible Students, STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES be neglected, weakness, worldliness, love of 
pleasures, lack of zeal in the Lord's service, etc., are sure 
to manifest themselves. And if STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
are prosecuted but not applied to the heart and life 
the fruits of the Spirit will be deficient— meekness, gentleness, 
etc. Every item of knowledge should be used as 
the foundation for soil in which further graces of the 
Spirit will be developed for the enrichment of the character 
of the New Creature. 

We have had occasion at times to call the attention 
of the classes to the fact that those chosen to be their 
servants, ministers, elders, are not to be recognized 
as their "lords," and are not to be upheld in any attempts 
to "lord it over God's heritage." (1 Pet. 5:3.) Now, 
on the other hand, we wish to call special attention to 
the fact that a hypercritical spirit might be engendered 
by the class, which might lead some of the members to 
take a wrong attitude. It would evidently be just as contrary 
to the Lord's Spirit if the class were to "lord" it 
over the elders. They are to be loved, to be upheld, to 
be appreciated; and if they have some imperfections, like 
other men, they are no less worthy of sympathy and forgiveness 
and exoneration. 

In proportion as the Elders or ministers are faithful, 
humble, diligent, in the service of the flock, they should 
have the hearty co-operation of every member of the 
class. "Honor to whom honor is due; praise to whom 
praise is due." 

Some of God's people, like some of the people of the 



world, take a hypercritical view of some trifling things, 
such, for instance, as parliamentary usages in connection 
with meetings. We are to remember that the Bible lays 
down no particular parliamentary usages, but gives to 
God's people the one broad, general law to govern each 
one of them in all the affairs of the Church. This Law 
the Master mentioned in few words, saying, "A New 
Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, 
as I have loved you."— John 13:34. 

Let this law of love measure all of our relationships 
as God's people; whether we be of those chosen to be 
Elders or not chosen, the law of love should be used to 
measure our every act, our every word— yea, our very 
thoughts. If we can all, dear brethren, have this rule 
continually in mind, it will save a great deal of friction, 
heart-burnings and heart-achings. It will make us more 
like our blessed Master, better representatives of him 
before each other and before the world. It will incline 
us to be as methodical and careful as possible ourselves 
in all that we do and then lovingly not to expect quite 
as much of others until after they shall have learned the 
beauty of the right way by observing our course. Let us 
be content whatever the method adopted by the majority, 
if it expresses the will of the majority, however the 
conclusion may be reached. If we think the majority less 
wise than we, let us learn patience and wait, as the Lord 
does, until they learn the error of their course and amend 
it. In a word, let us each more and more seek to be 
peacemakers: "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they 
shall be called the children of God."-Matt. 5:9. 



POPE PIUS X. CONGRATULATED 

The present Pope is taking steps for the elimination 
of all Higher Critics and other unbelievers in the Bible 
from the Catholic priesthood. All the clergy and all the 
clerical students are required to swear their allegiance to 
the sacred traditions and to oppose what is styled "modernism," 
higher critical infidelity. The oath includes not 
merely the teachings of the Bible, but also the teachings 
of the Church. 

If loyalty to the Bible alone had been enjoined we 
could have wished that all the different Protestant denominations 
might have followed suit. That would have 
meant the cutting off of more than half of the ministers, 
trustees, etc., who freely confess that they have lost all 
faith in the Bible and are Bible teachers in name only- 
Bible opposers, in fact. 



FEDERATION IN FACT 
"Few people realize that most of the important Protestant 



denominations in America are united in a federation 
that is as real as the federation of States. Even the 
members of those denominations themselves who are 

R4773 : page 68 

aware of that fact are, for the most part, probably unaware 
of its significance. Nothing has so seriously hampered 
the Church as a moral force, as its sectarian divisions. 
If the Protestant branch of the Church is undertaking 
to remove from the field of moral power the hurtful 
influence of these sectarian differences, its power in 
shaping the lives of men will be incredibly enhanced. 
That is just what the Protestant churches of America 
are doing. 

"As our readers know, there assembled in Philadelphia 
two years ago last December, for the first time, the 
Federal Council of the Churches of Christ in America. 
These churches found their common interest, not in a 
creed— though they agreed in the assertion of their attitude 
toward Christ— nor in a common ritual or form of 
government, but in a common work. On the 24th and 
25th of last month, in the city of Washington, the Executive 
Committee of that Council held their second annual 
meeting. It is noteworthy that all their discussions 
pertained to common activities of service. Whatever discussion 
there was concerning beliefs was the by-product 
of the consideration of a practical measure, and it was 
of no effect upon the final action. In all such organizations 
the crucial question is the financial one. People are 
ready to gather together for talk; but when they make 
appropriations, one may be sure that they are to be reckoned 
with. The denominations constituting the Federal 
Council are assessed, and most of them have paid their 
assessments already. Moreover, out of these assessments 
the Executive Committee have appropriated funds for defraying 
the cost of the common work. 

R4773 : page 69 

"Under authority of this Executive Committee there 
has been a careful investigation conducted in co-operation 
with the chief Home Missionary Societies; and the 
resulting recommendations have been adopted by nearly 
five-sixths of the home missionaries west of the Mississippi 
river. Under the authority of the Committee a branch 
of the Council, the Commission on the Church and Social 
Service, has made an important report on the relation 
of the Church to industrial conditions in a center of steel 
manufacture. The Executive Committee of the Council 
at its meeting appropriated $5,000 for the use of the Commission 
on the Church and Social Service. 

"Compared with the great mass of people composing 
the constituency of this Council— about fifteen millions— 
the sum appropriated seems minute. But the size of the 
sum is of much less significance than the fact that thirty 



denominations, including virtually all the larger ones, 

have formed a Federation that is exercising the power 

of the purse. By disregarding differences in creed, polity, 

and traditions, and by federating with the object of 

engaging in a common work that costs, these thirty denominations 

have, we believe, followed the course that 

will lead to real Church Union."— The Outlook. 



OPPOSITION TO JEWS IN TURKEY 

Turkey has long had the honor of being one of the 
few countries in which Jews enjoyed all the rights and 
privileges of preferred citizens. The Turkish Revolution 
was supposed to mark an era of special favor to the 
Jews residing in Turkey. It now seems that this is 
not the case. We quote from the Hebrew Standard:— 

"Dr. Israel Auerbach states that the era of good feeling 
produced by the successful outcome of the revolutionary 
movement among the young Turks has vanished. 
Turkish officials were disposed to exhibit an 
anti-Semitic tendency toward the Jews in the last year. 
In place of efforts to make the Jews of Turkey an important 
element of the body politic, an attempt to repress 
them is noticeable. Unlimited immigration of Jews into 
the Ottoman empire is likely to prove a chimera; an immigration 
statute, providing for restrictions more or less 
severe, is in process of enactment." 



R4773 : page 69 

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

MR. EDISON has taken time from his scientific 

investigations, which have centered 

chiefly in electricity, to take a look into 

things metaphysical and spiritual. In a 

magazine article recently he discussed the 

immortality of the soul. He brought to his 

subject the reasoning and philosophical 

powers of a gifted brain accustomed to look 

more carefully than usual at the relationship 

and bearing of one principle upon another, 

one theory upon another, one fact upon another. 

Mr. Edison denies the immortality of the soul; he declares 

that he can see no facts in nature leading to any 

such conclusion. As a sample of his close reasoning on 

the subject we quote one of his statements, which he considers 

too self-evident to need proof. Indeed we doubt 

not that Mr. Edison's position would be that human immortality 

is not to be assumed, in view of the fact that we 

are a dying race. We presume that his position is that 

the proofs must be sought in the opposite quarter— that 



man must be assumed to be mortal and that any disputing 
this position must give the proofs of his immortality. We 
quote Mr. Edison:— 

"A man's intelligence is the aggregate intelligence of 
the innumerable cells which form him— just as the intelligence 
of a community is the aggregate intelligence of 
the men and women who inhabit it. If you cut your hand, 
it bleeds. Then you lose cells, and that is quite as if a 
city lost inhabitants through some tremendous accident." 

PHILOSOPHERS OF THE PAST HANDICAPPED BY DREAD 
OF THUMB-SCREWS, ETC. 

It will not do for us to claim that Mr. Edison is not 
a philosopher because he disagrees with philosophers of 
the past. We must admit that his attainments in science 
have all been results of the exercise of a naturally philosophical 
mind, which now for years has been trained in 
philosophical study, and that for this reason he has his 
splendid rank as a scientific man. On the contrary, we 
must admit that many of the philosophers of the past 
in their reasoning on theological questions were handicapped 
by dread of thumb-screws, racks and other tortures 
of the "Dark Ages," as well as by certain ignorance 
and superstitions, which, thank God, are gradually passing 
from the minds of all intelligent people. Indeed, we must 
remember that nearly all the philosophies as respects 
cosmogony and chemistry have proven themselves fallacious, 
and the latest researches of science astound us 
by threatening a revolution of the philosophies respecting 
astronomy. Perhaps philosophy has made progress in 
every other direction than along religious lines. And 
in this particular we note that the great majority of the 
learned have entirely abandoned the philosophies of their 
fathers and are known as "Higher Critics," "Evolutionists," 
etc. Only in the Catholic Church are the theological 
philosophies of a century ago given the slightest weight 
amongst the learned, although these theories, embodied 
in Protestant creeds, still hold a powerful sway in the 
minds of many Protestants who still like to think that what 
their fathers believed was infallible on every subject. 

Meeting Mr. Edison's statement, above quoted, with 
such candor as the gentleman's intellectual prowess seems 
to justify, we must admit that there is a great deal of 
force and logic in his deduction. Mr. Edison has Apostolic 
authority for considering man as made up of various 
members, each intimately related to the welfare and intelligence 
of the whole. St. Paul uses this argument in 
illustrating the true Church, "the Body of Christ." He 
likens one member to the hand; another to the foot; another 
to the eye, etc., and declares that each is necessary 
to the completeness and harmony of the whole and adds, 
So, also, is the Church. 

We will not here follow the Apostle's argument to the 
Church to note particularly how Jesus is the Head of the 
Church, how every member is united to each other member 



and interested in each other member. We will take 
the same example of the human figure. It seems to justify 
the statement that a man's intelligence is represented in 
the intelligence of all his members. Human skill is related 
to human intelligence. Consequently the man who 
has lost his hands has less intelligence, less opportunity 
and less skill than previously. If he lose also his feet, his 
intelligence decreases proportionately. If he lose his sight, 
his hearing and his sense of smell, each loss diminishes 
his intelligence. A whole village of people devoid of sight, 
hearing, taste, the sense of smell and of touch, would be 
a very unintelligent community. This we understand to 
be Mr. Edison's argument, expressed in different terms. 
Mr. Edison's terms seem appropriate if we take a sufficiently 
broad view of his language. To illustrate: If one 

R4774 : page 70 

lose a few drops of blood, the loss may make no perceptible 

impression upon his intelligence. But if he lose a 

quart of blood, his intelligence will be considerably diminished; 

faintness, stupor, may be expected. This 

would seem to prove Mr. Edison's statement correct, and 

that the loss of a few drops of blood is really a loss, to 

some extent, of vital power, and hence a loss of intelligence, 

but in so small a degree as not to be appreciable 

to one in health. 

PUZZLED OVER BELIEF THAT BLOW THAT WOULD KILL 
WOULD ENABLE MAN TO KNOW EVERYTHING 

In olden times we were told, and tried to believe it, 
that a dead man knew more than a living one. We were 
puzzled by the fact that a blow on the head might stun 
one to insensibility, in view of the fact that we were told 
that a heavier blow, that would kill the man, would enable 
him to know everything in an instant. The philosophy 
(?) of this was handed to us thus: The soul is the intelligent 
being, of which nobody knows very much. It is 
imprisoned in our mortal bodies and can operate in them 
only unsatisfactorily. The moment of death is the moment 
of release to the soul, which then can think and reason 
more soundly than when obliged to use the brain. 

Many of us tried in childhood years to believe such 
unphilosophical philosophy. We asked for proofs and 
were told that it was the voice of the Church's philosophers, 
and if we would doubt it we would be damned to 
eternal misery. Believing this, and not willing to be 
doomed to eternal misery, many of us restrained ourselves 
and that portion of our brain became well-nigh 
atrophied. 

Even the religious found it difficult to believe in so immaterial 
a soul and inquired, Why, then, a resurrection 
of the dead? Will the resurrection signify another real 
imprisonment of the soul and a decrease of intelligence, 
as this philosophy (?) would seem to imply? Some gave 



up the quest for knowledge in despair and sought for 
something more intelligent outside of all the creeds and 
philosophies of "science falsely so-called." Others of us 
have held to the Word of God and sought to see its 
philosophy, its teachings, and to harmonize them. 

We are glad to belong to this growing class of Bible 
students who declare, Let God and his Word be true, 
though it disprove many of the theories we once believed 
and almost worshipped. (Rom. 3:4.) We want the 
Truth! 

MR. EDISON AND THE BIBLE 

We are not personally acquainted with Mr. Edison, 
nor with his religious views, but we believe that his 
philosophical mind is turning quite into line with the 
teachings of the Bible respecting man and his future. We 
do not say that he has attained the Bible viewpoint, but 
merely that he has taken a good step in that direction. 
Without discounting good features contained in our own 
creeds, we must admit that many of them are thoroughly 
illogical and unscriptural. For instance, the theory that 
a human soul is an invisible entity specially created by 
God and full of Divine intelligence and that this intelligent 
soul is introduced into the new-born child and is the 
real child— this is no longer reasonable nor logical to us. 

We wonder that our forefathers of the darker period, 
in their wonderful philosophies, did not see the absurdity 
of such a position. If it were true, would it not make the 
Almighty Creator a co-laborer with fornicators and adulterers 
in the bringing into the world of illegitimate children? 
Still worse, does not this theory charge to the 
Almighty God of Wisdom, Justice, Love and Power the 
creation of idiots and mental imbeciles and moral degenerates? 
If the human parents merely bring human 
bodies into existence as receptacles for souls which God 
individually and specifically creates in each instance, then 
not the parents, but the Almighty is responsible for all 
the degeneracy we see in the world, for it is the soul that 
is responsible, as all must admit. 

THE FIRST MAN, OF THE EARTH 

The center of the mistake on this subject, handed to 
us from the philosophers of the "Dark Ages," is the assumption 
that the real man is the spirit being, the soul. 
St. Paul assures us to the contrary of this, saying, "The 
first man was of the earth, earthy." The Lord through 
the Prophet David declares the same truth, saying, "What 
is man that thou art mindful of him?. ..Thou hast 
made him a little lower than the angels." (Psa. 8:4,5.) 
The angels are the lowest in rank on the spirit plane, and 
man, although in God's image when perfect, was still 
lower than the angels, in that he was not a spirit being, 
but a human, an earthly being— "of the earth, earthy." 

The Scriptural proposition is not that God made a body 



for man out of the dust of the earth and put a spirit man 
into that body, but that God made man of the dust of the 
earth, breathed into his nostrils the breath of life (an 
animal life) and "man became a living soul"— an animal 
or earthly soul. In other words, the entire Adam became 
a living soul— a living being. That one man was subsequently 
made twain for the very purpose of propagating 
living souls in his own likeness. And thus for six thousand 
years the Divine command has been in process of 
fulfillment— "Multiply and fill the earth." God created 
but the one soul originally, divided it, and then, by 
natural processes, generation after generation of human 
souls have been born. Man is an earthly soul or earthly 
animal, as are all the earthly creatures, only that his is a 
higher nature— an earthly image of his Creator, who is a 
Spirit Being. 

From this standpoint how clearly we can discern the 
mistakes of the philosophies of the past and the true 
philosophy revealed to us only in the Bible, although discerning 
penetrating, philosophical minds like that of Mr. 
Edison may reach the same truth from the study of the 
great Book of Nature. 

From this standpoint we see that the entire man is a 
living soul— that is to say, a sentient being. The formation 
of Adam was very important, just as today, under 
the same Divine regulations, the shape of the brain has 
to do with the character of the man— gentle or vicious, 
criminal or conscientious, benevolent or stingy, reverential 
or otherwise. As the Bible declares: "As a man 
thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Prov. 23:7.) And a 
man's thoughts shape themselves according to the structure 
of his brain. Thus phrenology is a widely-recognized 
science. Not only so, but physiology tells us that 
the various portions of the human body are so intimately 
related to the brain that the quality of the mind can be 
discerned in the general features, not only in the shape 
of the nose, the curl of the lip, the glance of the eye, but 
also in the grasp of the hand and its general shape, even 
to the particularity of a finger print. 

All these outward signs indicate the character of the 
soul, being— all are identified with it. In a word, a soul 
is a person. The various districts of the brain representing 
the various sentiments and passions of the individual, 
are like so many members, each having its own personality. 
Amongst these various members of the human 
mind some are stronger, some weaker, and the stronger 
ones dominate. There are exceptions, of course, to this 
rule in what we sometimes term conversion. Conversion 

R4774 : page 71 

means the establishing of a new rule or order in the individual 
life. Note the method of its accomplishment:— 

(1) Certain matters are brought to the attention of 
the person or soul which seem to indicate a wiser course 
than the one pursued in the past. The various districts 



of the brain, like so many members of a council, consider 
the proposition, weigh its pros and cons, advantages and 
disadvantages, and then reach a decision. That decision 
we call will. Sometimes there is desperate struggle in the 
brain, the various members of the council of thought 
battling and struggling against each other. The will may 
be strong or may be weak, just as a party in Congress 
may be strong or weak while in power. But the will rules 
with more or less vacillation or strength, according to the 
number and power of the members supporting it. 
Thus we have found some possessed of strong characters; 
others who are weak, vacillating— "double-minded." 

THE WILL REPRESENTS THE SOUL, THE PERSON, 
THE EGO 

Some of the qualities of the mind may be styled the 
"flesh"— this term represents the lower and more animal 
qualities of the person, the soul. To the contrary of these 
are the higher organs of the mind— reverence, spirituality, 
conscientiousness, sublimity, ideality, etc., and these are 
called the heart, because they include the affections and 
qualities of the mind to which God appeals, saying, "My 
son, give me thine heart." 

Thus seen, we are daily making soul-character, influenced 
by our environment and the lessons and experiences 
which come to us through our senses. The character develops 
either upward or downward— toward God or toward 
sin. But there is no such thing as total depravity, 
except in idiocy, for, by Divine providence, some features 
of the original Divine likeness in which father Adam was 
created still persist in all of his children who have reason. 
The effort of all reformers is to appeal to the mind, 
either through fear or love or selfishness, to effect an organization 
of the mental qualities favoring the things of 
righteousness and opposed to sin. The permanent conversion 
which produces the saintly character is the appeal 
of love— "The love of Christ constraineth us." The love 
of the Father is potent in the hearts of all who receive 
it. It can effect changes in conduct, in language and in 
thought, which can be accomplished by nothing else. 

A METHODIST BISHOP'S DEFINITION OF SOUL 

A Methodist Bishop is credited with the following 
definition of a soul: "It is without interior or exterior, 
without body, shape or parts, and you could put a million 
of them into a nut-shell." Mr. Edison does not believe 
in such a soul. In repudiating such a view he places 

R4775 : page 71 

himself in accord with the Divine teachings. 

The word immortality is rarely used in its strict, academic 
sense, as signifying deathlessness or that which is 
proof against death— inherency of life, requiring no sustenance. 



Immortality in this sense of the word is, of 
course, a quality which belongs to God alone. As the 
Scriptures declare of him, "He alone hath immortality, 
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto, 
whom no man hath seen nor can see." Immortality in 
this sense of the word, possessed by the Heavenly Father 
and his only begotten Son, the world's Redeemer, is 
promised as a special reward (not possessed by angels or 
any other creature) to the elect, saintly few, called, chosen 
and faithful during this Gospel Age. These are styled 
the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, and the promise to them is 
that they shall receive this great reward of glory, honor 
and immortality when the Redeemer shall appear in his 
glory in the end of this Age to grant to them a share in 
the First or Chief Resurrection from the dead. With 
this attainment of immortality they are promised also new 
bodies, no longer flesh, but spirit, no longer in the likeness 
of the first man— "As they bore the image of the 
earthly, they shall also bear the image of the heavenly." 
-I Cor. 15:49. 

ARE ALL MEN IMMORTAL? 

Mr. Edison is in full agreement with the Bible in his 
conclusion that human soul or personality is always 
identified with an organism or body. We must also agree 
with the Bible and with Mr. Edison that all souls die. 
The Bible declares, "The wages of sin is death," and 
again, "The soul that sinneth, it shall die." The Bible 
explains that Adam, as a living soul, might have continued 
his existence perpetually had he not transgressed 
the Divine Law and that the transgression brought to him 
the penalty of death. Mr. Edison agrees with this conclusion 
without, perhaps, admitting original sin or anything 
else connected with the Scriptures. 

Where, then, is human immortality? We answer 
that there is no human immortality, in the same sense 
that there is a Divine immortality— in the sense that God 
is death-proof. He alone has immortality in that sense. 
When we speak of immortality in respect to mankind, 
we use the word, not in an academic sense, but in a relative 
way. We mean that death does not end all for 
Adam and his children— that a future life is arranged for 
them in Divine providence— when, where and how the 
Bible clearly tells. 

We wish that Mr. Edison and many thinkers who 
have no confidence in the Bible might see the beauties 
and harmonies of its presentations. The Bible declares 
that the eternal life lost by father Adam has been redeemed 
for him by the death of Jesus Christ, "the Just for 
the unjust." It tells us further that as all of Adam's race 
share by heredity in his death penalty, so they all shall 
be permitted to share in his recovery from the power 
of the tomb, from sin and death. Thus the Scriptures declare, 
As by a man comes death, by a man also comes 
the resurrection of the dead; for as all in Adam die, even 



so shall all in Christ be made alive, every man in his own 
order or company.— I Cor. 15:21-23. 

The great Apostle Paul declares that there shall be a 
"resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust." 
The Hebrew Prophet declares, "Many that sleep 
in the dust of the earth shall awake." The awakening 
time will be the morning, as the present is the night-time 
of sin and darkness. The glorious morning nears, as the 
night of sorrow and tears passes. There will be a glorious 
dawn to that great day of a thousand years, whose light 
is already fore-gleamed in the wonderful inventions of 
our time, in which Mr. Edison has been used of the Almighty 
to assist. Shortly the Sun of Righteousness shall 
shine forth, scattering the darkness, ignorance, superstition, 
sin, death. Shortly the reign of the Divine righteousness 
and love, co-ordinated, will bring blessings to our 
race, now resting under the sentence or curse of death. 
Shortly all will have the opportunity of recovery from 
the fallen condition of weakness and degradation, being 
uplifted or resurrected gradually to the full perfection of 
human nature, earthly nature, in the image and likeness 
of the Creator, in the midst of a world-wide Paradise. 

CARDINAL GIBBONS' WORDS AGREE TO THIS 

Cardinal Gibbons gave an interview to a reporter of 
the Columbian Magazine in answer to Philosopher Edison. 
Noting with interest the Cardinal's defense of the 

R4775 : page 72 

doctrine of immortality, we have clipped and below produce 
the essence, the kernel, of his argument on the subject 
as based upon the Scriptures. We are pleased to 
see that, like ourself, the Cardinal finds the Scriptural 
proof of a future life, not in the philosophies of a darker 
past, but in the resurrection promise of the holy Scriptures, 
as follows:— 

"Christ brings to humanity the certainty of eternal 
life. He proved it by his own resurrection; and if anyone 
thinks the evidence for Christ's resurrection is weak, 
I ask him to study and think deeply over the 

fifteenth chapter of First Corinthians. No sane scholar, remember, 
denies that we have the testimony of St. Paul himself; 
nor that St. Paul is honestly setting down the testimony 
of those who claim to have seen our Lord after death. If 
so many sane men, Apostles and disciples of Christ, are 
mistaken, if they cannot believe the testimony of their 
own eyes, if such a delusion can keep so firm a hold on 
so many different characters for so many years and become 
the basis of all their beliefs and the transforming 
power of their lives, then no human testimony is of any 
value; then let us close our courts of justice, for no case is 
proven by so many trustworthy witnesses. No!" the Cardinal 
said, in the tone of deepest conviction, "Christ is 
risen; and his resurrection is the plainest evidence of 



man's immortality." 



R4775 : page 72 

THE KINGDOM OF GOD IN SAD CONDITION 

BISHOP HUGHES (Methodist), of California, 

recently spoke in Boston. He complimented 

the Catholic Church and berated 

his own denomination and, incidentally, 

called attention to the sad state of God's 

Kingdom. In its report of the address 

the Boston Transcript says: "Praise for the 

Roman Catholic Church and what it does 

for its children, was given by Bishop Edwin 

H. Hughes, of California, before a 

large congregation at the Bromfield Street Methodist 

Church last evening at the final session of the Sunday 

School Institute. Bishop Hughes said:— 

'"You talk about the wonderful hold the Roman Catholic 
Church has upon its people. You ask, how does it 
do it? I will tell you how it does it. They instruct their 
children. It is borne in upon the consciousness of every 
child in every good Roman Catholic home, as soon as it 
comes to any sort of understanding, that the Church is 
the instrument of his salvation, and he is held right to 
that idea. They establish their catechetical classes, they 
run their parochial schools with a religious purpose, and 
they lay an enormous emphasis upon taking care of their 
children. 

'"I say to you, if the Roman Catholic Church is willing 
to pay that price for holding its own, and the Methodist 
Episcopal Church is not willing to pay that price 
for holding its own— then I say the Roman Catholic 
Church deserves to be the coming Church. 

"The Protestant Church that does not see that its 
future is inevitably bound up with the religious instruction 
is just as certainly doomed to failure as I am standing 
here tonight. If the members of the Roman Catholic 
Church are more willing, under the instructions of their 
priests, to obey the laws of God with reference to the 
children of the Church than our people are, under our instruction, 
then I say that the Roman Catholic Church is 
entitled to the credit of the whole business. 
'"When God Almighty puts into the arms of any 
earthly parents a new life, then I say that God Almighty 
pays those parents the biggest compliment that he can 
possibly pay. That child is God's child ere he is our child, 
and he is to be held as a member of the Kingdom of God. 
We of the Methodist Church hold that all children, by 
virtue of the unconditional benefits of the atonement, are 
members of the Kingdom of God. If this is so, then the 
biggest task we have is to keep them members of that 
Kingdom. I believe the greatest church on earth is the 



Christian home; the finest sanctuary to be found anywhere 
is the Christian home.'" 

THE SUNDAY SCHOOL EFFECT 

The Bishop used the above words in connection with 
an address on Sunday School Work. His words endorse 
our presentations of the subject. In STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Vol. VI., we call attention to the fact that 
Sunday Schools are an innovation little more than one 
century old. We point out that they are the expression 
of human wisdom merely— that neither to the Jews nor 
to Christians did God give directions respecting Sunday 
School organizations. The Divine arrangement is that 
each family should complete a unit and that the parents 
should be the instructors of the children in religious 
things. In disregarding this Divine arrangement two 
evils have ensued:— 

(1) The parents have felt relieved of the responsibility 
of teaching their children and thus have lost a 

great blessing and source of personal instruction. 

R4776 : page 72 

(2) The children have been taught to look elsewhere 
for the highest information, and correspondingly 

to disrespect their parents as unqualified to be their instructors. 
As a result, disrespect and disobedience to 
parents have increased and parental interest in and control 
over their children have diminished. 

We urge upon all parents everywhere within the range 
of our influence to weigh the responsibility resting upon 
them in respect to their children. Whoever brings into 
the world a child, should feel the responsibility toward 
it for food and raiment and reasonable comfort, and particularly 
for moral and religious instruction. Regardless 
of what others do or do not, all of the Lord's consecrated 
people should be faithful to this great trust. No service 
to the Lord could possibly be acceptable as a sacrifice if it 
meant the neglect of duty to one's children. 

ATONEMENT AND THE KINGDOM 

We are glad to note that Bishop Hughes recognizes 
the unconditional benefits of the Atonement in respect to 
all children. His reference to the Kingdom of God, however, 
clearly shows that his understanding respecting it 
is quite vague. There are at this moment at least eight 
hundred millions of children under ten years of age. If 
these all be members of the Kingdom of God, our Savior 
was quite in error when he declared: "Fear not, little 
flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the 
Kingdom." Eight hundred millions could hardly be called 
a little flock. And besides, Jesus said the Kingdom had 
not yet been given. On the contrary, did he not teach us 
to pray, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth 



as it is done in Heaven"? 

We ask the Bishop, and as many as this article shall 
reach, to consider the improbability of the Bishop's view 
of matters being true— the incorrectness of the Methodist 
view. If earthly parents have a responsibility for 
their children, how about the heavenly Creator or Parent, 
"In whom all live and move and have their being?" 
Has God no responsibility for all the children born into 
the world? Would he neglect his duty, if earthly parents 

R4776 : page 73 

did neglect theirs? Are the thousands of millions of 
heathendom and Christendom going to a burning hell because 
of neglect of their education by the great Life-Giver 
or Father? 

Let us reason a little on the Bishop's statement of 
Methodist views. If Christ made an atonement for the 
sins of all mankind, of what purpose or value has it been 
as yet to any but the handful, the "little flock," whom our 
Lord declares will receive the Kingdom of God by and 
by— the Kingdom prayed for? 

We look all about us for God's Kingdom quite in vain. 
The heathen three-fourths of humanity are surely not 
God's Kingdom, nor any credit to any Kingdom or government. 
The one-fourth of humanity known as Christendom 
(Christ's Kingdom) does not appear to be the 
genuine article. It is full of jarring creeds, selfish antagonisms, 
bitterness, envy, hatred, strife, "works of the 
flesh and of the Devil." Its most civilized nations are 
spending thousands of millions of dollars on war preparations 
—and this after more than eighteen hundred 
years of the reign of Messiah, as Bishop Hughes and the 
Methodist friends think. 

ALL A GREAT MISTAKE 

Our Methodist friends and many others have, according 
to the Bible, made a great mistake in their theology 
on this point. God's Kingdom is not here. It has not 
yet come. We are still, in the language of the Apostle, 
"waiting for the Kingdom of God's dear Son." The 
promise is still more sure that the faithful, saintly overcomers 
of this Gospel Age will sit with Messiah in his 
Throne of spirit control during his Messianic Kingdom. 
We are still waiting for it. Neither the heathen children 
nor the heathen parents, nor the Christian children, nor 
the Christian parents are yet in the Kingdom which has 
not yet come. 

We are glad that the Bishop sees that the Atonement 
of Christ is universal— for all mankind. We ask him to 
look again at the subject and to note that in the present 
Age, during the past eighteen centuries, God has been 
merely selecting the saintly followers of Jesus to constitute 
with him the Kingdom or ruling class. These are 
the little children, or humble children of God. "Beloved, 



now are we the sons (children) of God, and it doth not 
yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he 
appears we shall be like him, for we shall see him as 
he is." 

God has not only arranged that the Atonement work 
of the Savior shall be for the sins of the whole world, but 
he has also provided that there shall be a time and an 
opportunity in which the Redeemer will make his atonement 
work available to all mankind— heathen and Christian, 
old and young. To them he will give the opportunity 
of Restitution to all that was lost in Adam and 
provided for at Calvary. This will be at the Second 
Coming of Christ, as St. Peter explains in Acts 3:19-23. 

Then Messiah will set up, establish, his Kingdom— a 
thousand years' reign of righteousness. Satan will then 
be bound and the darkness which belongs to his reign of 
sin and death will give place to the glorious light of the 
knowledge of God. Under those favorable conditions humanity 
will not have an opportunity of becoming kings 
and priests unto God, members of the "little flock"; but 
they will all have the opportunity of becoming identified 
with the Kingdom, not as kings, but as subjects. They 
will all have the opportunity of attaining everlasting life 
as human beings in this world, which will then gradually 
be transformed— Paradise regained. Meantime the unwilling, 
rebellious, disobedient, as St. Peter says, will be 
"destroyed from amongst the people"— Second Death. 

RESPONSIBILITY OF CHRISTIAN PARENTS 

The fact that God has not neglected his responsibilities, 
but is working out his glorious purposes to fulfil 
them, must not make Christian parents negligent. On 
the contrary, the example should make them all the 
more careful by showing them a parent's obligations. 
Some of the children may so respond as to become eligible 
to a share in the Kingdom proper, as members of 
the Royal Priesthood, who shall sit upon the Throne; but 
to the others, parents also have a duty. Such should be 
taught, not that all transgressions will be punished alike, 
in eternal torment, but that every transgression, great 
and small, will receive eventually a just recompense of 
reward. They should be taught that whatsoever 
is sown will be reaped, and that advancements under the 
blessings of the Kingdom may be promoted or retarded 
by their present conduct, by obedience or disobedience 
to the Divine law. Such rational teaching will appeal 
much more quickly to the children than will any amount 
of falsification and misrepresentation concerning eternal 
torment, fire, etc., in which no reasonable person longer 
believes, and which came not from the Bible, but from 
the "Dark Ages." 



R4776 : page 73 



MURDERS HER GRANDCHILDREN 

EASTER SUNDAY'S LESSON 

--APRIL 16.-2 KINGS 11:1-20.— 

"Blessed are they that keep his testimony, and 
that seek him with the whole heart."— Psalm 119:2. 

JEZEBEL'S daughter, Athaliah, on the death 

of her husband, became Queen Dowager of 

the Kingdom of Judah, her son Ahaziah 

becoming King. In Oriental lands the 

King's mother is still the highest authority 

in the Kingdom, as, for instance, in China. 

This was the custom with the Jews. As 

Queen Dowager Athaliah had exercised a 

powerful and baneful influence against the 

true God and his worship and in favor of 

Baal worship. Here is not the only instance in which 

the intermarriage of the kings of Israel with the daughters 

of foreign kingdoms brought great injury. Her 

mother Jezebel was another notable illustration. And we 

remember that it was Solomon's foreign wives who ensnared 

him. 

In line with all this we remember that the Divine 
command to all Jews was that they should not intermarry 
with other nationalities. Every deviation from the Divine 
Law seems to have brought with it serious penalties. 
This is strictly in harmony with God's arrangement with 
that one nation alone, that they should be his people in 
a peculiar sense, that other nations were not his people 
and that obedience to his laws would bring them blessings 
and disobedience bring them adversities. That Law 
is still upon the Jews, but it is not upon others. 

A proper recognition of the antitype, or spiritual significance 
of that item of Jewish Law, should be observed 
by all; it is applicable to Christians, who constitute, from 
the Divine standpoint, "a holy nation, a peculiar people." 
Christians are not to be unequally yoked with unbelievers. 
Christians are to come out from the world and be 

R4777 : page 74 

separate. This, however, does not apply to nominal 
Christians, but only to the spirit-begotten class, who have 
made a full consecration of themselves to the Lord. 
These are counselled to marry "only in the Lord"— only 
the consecrated. Those who disregard this Divine injunction 
endanger their own spiritual development, as 
well as their own happiness and the happiness of the 
worldly person with whom they become yoked. 

MURDERING FOR POWER 



When King Ahaziah was slain by Jehu, his mother, 
the Queen Dowager, realized instantly that this meant 
her loss of rank and power— the power and honor and 
riches which her selfish, proud heart so loved. She realized 
that the moment her grandson ascended the throne 
she must vacate her position in favor of her daughter-in-law. 
Her selfish, proud heart resolved that on no 
account should this be. Rather, she would be a murderess. 
Forthwith she caused her grandchildren to be 
slain, except one, an infant, who was hidden by his aunt 
in a room used for the storage of sleeping mats, and, in 
our lesson, styled a bed-chamber. Subsequently, he was 
nursed until his seventh year, in one of the rooms connected 
with the old temple, which was in disuse during 
Queen Athaliah's reign, as she favored and upheld the 
worship of Baal. 

One lesson for us here is the power of pride. We 
may well hope that many could not be influenced to become 
murderers, even with such inducements. But not 
many of us will ever have such a temptation either to 
grasp a throne or to retain hold on one already possessed. 
Other illustrations of the power of pride leading to 
murder, in the interest of a throne, are mentioned in 
history. For instance, King Herod's murder of all the 
infants of Bethlehem of two years and under was to 
preserve to himself and his heirs the throne of Israel. 
History tells us of how Laodice poisoned her six sons, 
one by one, that she might be Empress of Constantinople. 
Another mother named Irene, which name signifies peace, 
gouged out the eyes of her own son that he might be 
incapable of ruling the Empire over which she sought to 
reign alone. 

No wonder the Bible declares that the heart of man 
in his fallen condition is deceitful above all things and 
desperately wicked! No wonder the Bible tells us that 
the blessing of the New Covenant which God will establish 
with the world through Israel, during Messiah's 
reign, will operate to the taking away of the stoniness of 
the heart and to the return to mankind of a heart of flesh 
—a proper human sympathy such as the perfect man had 
when he was created in the image and likeness of God! 
How glad we are that Messiah's Kingdom will not merely 
restrain sin and sinners, but, by restitution processes, 
take away the stoniness of heart and bring as many as 
are willing of mankind back to tender-heartedness and 
into harmony with the Divine Law of Love for God and 
for the neighbor! 

Since we are not kings and queens and have not their 
temptations, let us note that the same principle of hard-heartedness 
operates in the business world, in the social 
world and in the family. In the business world, it 
operates to the destruction of a rival concern. In the 
social world, it cuts rivals, prompts to misrepresentation, 
slander, etc. In the home, as between parents and children, 
brothers and sisters, it frequently means injustice. 
The correction for all this is a love of righteousness 



which will lead each to love and to obey the Golden 
Rule and, as nearly as possible, to comply with the Divine 
will, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart and all thy mind and all thy being and all thy 
strength, and thy neighbor as thyself." 

CROWNING THE BOY KING 

The young King was named Joash. He was kept in 
hiding six years and, in his seventh year, was crowned. 
Jehoiada, the High Priest, whose daughter had rescued 
Joash, superintended the inauguration ceremonies. With 
great wisdom he called together the chiefs of the nation 
at a festival time, when their coming would not be 
thought strange. Likewise the guards were so disposed 
as to give every protection to the young King and leave 
the palace without protection. The ceremony passed off 
successfully. The Queen Dowager, hearing the shouts, 
"Long live the King!" came forth from the palace to the 
temple to investigate and, realizing the situation, cried, 
"Treason, treason!" 

So it is that injustice sometimes becomes intrenched 
and fortified in human minds so that an attempt to establish 
righteousness is considered treason, rebellion, outrage. 
The lesson to all the Lord's consecrated children 
is, "Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the 
issues of life."— Pro v. 4:23. 

When the crown was put upon the young King's head, 
on top of it was laid the Testimony, the parchment scroll 
of the ten commandments. Thus was indicated that the 
Divine Law was superior to the crown. Such should be 
the estimation of the matter in every well-balanced mind. 
Divine Law comes first; human laws second. And human 
laws are usually up to as high standards as the people 
who make them are worthy. 

Judah must have been considerably sunken in the 
qualities of patriotism and manhood to allow the Dowager 
Queen to usurp the throne by murder for six years. 
Similarly states and cities, permitting and recognizing the 
domination of frauds and combines against the public interests, 
are usually getting as good treatment as they deserve. 
It is the heart, the intellect, the mind that is 
to be educated up to the higher standards— then those 
high standards will be attained by the body politic. 



R4778 : page 74 

1911 -MEMORIAL SUPPER- 1911 

THE JEWISH PASSOVER, which lasts for 
a week, begins this year on Thursday, 
April 13, which, in Jewish reckoning, is 
the 15th of the first month. In Jewish 
reckoning a day begins to count in the 



evening at 6 o'clock, consequently the 15th 

begins Wednesday night at 6 o'clock. 

Wednesday, April 12, would be the 14th 

day of the first month, and it, in turn, begins 

at 6 p.m. Tuesday, April 11, which is 

thus the anniversary of the first celebration of the Lord's 

Supper. 

It is the custom of WATCH TOWER readers all over the 
world to celebrate our Redeemer's death on its anniversary. 
We trust that the celebration this year will be 
a very general one. The significance of the Memorial is 
described in our issue of February 1 and also in SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, Series VI. 

On the evening of April 1 1 at 7:30 the New York 
City Church will assemble in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 
17 Hicks street, for the celebration of the Memorial. All 
Christians in fellowship of heart with the Lord are cordially 
invited to be present. We do not, however, specially 
invite or urge brethren from other congregations meeting 

R4778 : page 75 

similarly for this celebration on the same evening. We 
believe the instructions of the Lord's Word on the subject 
imply that each congregation or family of the 
Lord's children should meet together for this celebration. 

There will be a baptism service on the Sunday preceding 
the Memorial— April 9— in the Brooklyn Tabernacle 
at 3 p.m. The subject of baptism is also discussed in 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Volume VI. All thinking of participation 
in this symbol are requested to make a very 
thorough study of the subject, that they may act with 
proper intelligence. 

We recommend that all gatherings of Bible students, 
if possible, provide an opportunity for immersion preceding 
the Memorial. The Memorial celebration should be 
esteemed a great privilege. If any one is out of heart 
fellowship with the Lord, his first work should be to get 
right with him. And the Lord directs that any coming 
to his altar, should, as far as possible, before coming, get 
into heart harmony with all of the "household of faith." 
This should, therefore, be a time of heart searching and 
purifying. This, in the Jewish Passover type, was prefigured 
by the search made for leaven of every description 
—leaven being a symbol of corruption, sin, contrariness 
to purity, righteousness and love. 

Whoever finds himself out of harmony with the Lord 
at this season and avails himself of the privileges above 
suggested and seeks a return to Divine favor will surely 
experience a great blessing. And whoever passes by the 
opportunity will lose a blessing which none can afford 
to lose. A realization of our own imperfections at such 
time must not discourage us or make us faint. Rather we 
should remember God's provision for our reconciliation 
through our great Advocate, whose death the Memorial 
celebrates. Let us also remember our Covenant of sacrifice, 



by which we become members of the Body of Christ. 
It may not be amiss that we remind our readers that 
for some reason which we cannot explain it has for years 
appeared to us that Satan is granted special power to 
tempt the Lord's consecrated people at this Passover 
season, as he had special power at this season when our 
Lord was crucified. Then Judas entirely succumbed. St. 
Peter stumbled badly, and all of the Apostles temporarily 
forsook the Master and fled and were in deep perplexity 
until Pentecost. The Master's advice then is good still, 
"Watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation." 



R4777 : page 75 

TOO MUCH MONEY-FURTHER OFFERINGS REFUSED 

FREE-WILL OFFERINGS ONLY 

A LESSON FROM THE FAR PAST ON GIVING FOR RELIGIOUS 
PURPOSES -TREASURERS WITHOUT BONDSMEN 

-APRIL 23.-2 KINGS 12:1-16.- 

"Then the people rejoiced for they 
offered willingly."— 1 Chron. 29:9. 

SIXTEEN years passed after the incidents of 

our previous study and found King Joash 

in his twenty-third year. Already he had 

made suggestions to the priests respecting 

the repairs of the temple, which was considerably 

dilapidated, because the people 

were still half-hearted in the worship of 

Jehovah. The influence of the idolatry of 

surrounding nations was still upon them. 

Some of them still burned incense upon the 

altars of Baal. 

PRIESTS POOR BUSINESS MEN 

King Joash found that allowing the priests to collect 
the money wherewith to repair the temple showed no 
results. Not every good-hearted man has executive ability. 
The record does not tell that the priests were dishonest 
in the use of the money collected for their affairs. 
Nor does it say that they spent the money unwisely. 
Possibly the people did not have confidence in the priests 
and did not give so freely on that account. However, the 
King noted the fact that the temple continued to be 
dilapidated and called for the priests and said to them, 
Why repair ye not the breaches of the temple? The 
answer of the priests is not given, but the King's mandate 
was, "Now, therefore, take no more money from your 
acquaintances." The King passed over the matter as 



lightly and courteously as possible, without charging the 
priests with embezzlement or neglect. 

A new procedure was to have a specially prepared 
money-chest inside the temple court, convenient to the 
worshipers who passed in and out, and under the care 
of the priest, who served as doorkeeper. This method 
proved successful. The money speedily accumulated. 
Ere long there was a sufficiency to make the repairs and 
more. Further donations for this purpose were refused. 
The temple was put into good order and a general blessing 
followed the experience. 

There is a lesson in this matter for us. The people 
like to see results. (1) They want to know that monies 
that are donated for benevolent purposes are not all absorbed 
for office expenses. (2) Voluntary offerings have 
the approval of both God and men, rather than offerings 
that are importuned, coaxed, begged, wheedled from 
saints and sinners. Everybody who gives to the Lord's 
cause is advantaged thereby; he not only forwards a 
benevolent cause, but cultivates generosity in his own 
heart. Our Lord said, "It is more blessed to give than to 
receive"— where the giving is willing and voluntary. 

Church begging is undoubtedly doing great harm. 
The remark has been made that the chief item of religion 
in some churches is begging for money— private solicitation, 
and also public solicitation, by the passing around of 
the collection box. Church fairs, church suppers, grab-bags, 
etc., are still more reprehensible than the collection 
box and private solicitation. Some one has called such 
efforts the "milking of the goats." The Lord's people 
are supposed to be sheep; the world's people, goats. 

The proper thought seems to be what the Scriptures 
inculcate, namely, that each Christian should give according 
to his ability and interest in the work and that non-worshipers 
should not be expected to give nor requested 
so to do. But who does not know that a large proportion 
of the money collected for church purposes is unwillingly 
given by people who not only are not directly interested 

R4778 : page 75 

in the projects, but sometimes even opposed thereto! 
Thus Protestant business men often give to Catholic 
charities, rather than offend good customers. Likewise 
Catholic business men donate to Protestant enterprises 
with which they have no sympathy. 

It is a good time to return to the Gospel admonition, 
Let each one of you lay by in reserve on the first day 
of the week according as God has prospered you— for 
religious and charitable objects. Only such voluntary 
giving has any merit whatever in the sight of God or in 
the sight of good men. Only such will receive the Divine 
blessing upon it, whether it be the widow's mite or the 
rich man's munificence. 

R4778 : page 76 



BREAKS IN THE TEMPLE WALL 

Viewing the spiritual temple we perceive that, outwardly, 
as represented by the magnificent churches of 
metropolitan cities, nothing more could be desired than 
what is now enjoyed. Describing the church conditions 
of our day, the Scriptures portray our condition under 
the figure of the Laodicean Church, thus: "I know thy 
works, that thou art neither cold nor hot; I would thou 
wert hot or cold. So, then, because thou art lukewarm, 
and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my 
mouth. Because thou sayest, I am rich and increased 
with goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not 
that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and 
blind, and naked, I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried 
in the fire, that thou mayest be rich, and white raiment, 
that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy 
nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with 
eyesalve, that thou mayest see."— Rev. 3:15-18. 

It is from the spiritual standpoint, therefore, that the 
temple of today needs to have repairs. Outwardly, the 
church is rich; spiritually, she is poor. The majority of 
her educated, including ministers, have abandoned all 
faith in the Bible as the Word of God. Yet they are not 
known as infidels, but by the less harsh term, "Higher 
Critics," "Evolutionists." With many the faith in a personal 
God even, is shaking and they incline to wonder if, 
somehow or other, we have not an unintelligent God- 
nature— and mankind and all other intelligencies merely 
evolutionary products. The cause and foundation of this 
disastrous condition is not far off. 

The absurdities of the creeds formulated during the 
"Dark Ages" are so great that intelligent people can no 
longer accept them. We have made the mistake of supposing 
that these absurdities are based upon the Scriptures 
and well supported thereby. The Truth is that our 
creeds of the past not only contradict each other, but also 
contradict the Bible. To learn this, to believe it, signifies 
a return to Bible study with the colored spectacles 
of our fathers removed and with our hearts uplifted to 
God that he may give us the light promised to his faithful 
people in the end of this Age, of which we read that 
we should "give heed to the sure word of prophecy as 
to a light shining in a dark place until the day dawn and 
the day star arise."— 2 Pet. 1:19. 

THE DUTY OF THE HOUR 

Noting the spiritual impairment of the House of God, 
the Church, all who love the Lord and who worship him 
should do their part, make their contribution, toward the 
improvement of these spiritual conditions. It is not to be 
left wholly in the hands of the clerical or priestly class. 
The people in general are to appreciate the situation and 
each delight to do his part in the rebuilding of the 



spiritual walls of Zion. Those spiritual walls consist of 
"the faith once delivered to the saints." 

Each Christian should ask himself, What am I doing 
toward these repairs? How am I manifesting to the Lord 
my zeal for Truth and righteousness and my hatred of sin 
and untruth? And as an answer to this question each 
should redouble his efforts to understand the Truth and 
to help others to an understanding of it, whatever may 
be the cost to the creeds and systems of the "Dark Ages." 



R4778 : page 76 
SOME CALCULATIONS ON THE JUBILEE CYCLES 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Your calculation of the Jubilee Cycles (as published 
in September issue of Overland Monthly, 1910) beginning 
the count from the time Israel entered the land of 
Canaan, is so remarkably simple that I am surprised it 
did not come to my attention sooner; as it is with this 
added new viewpoint that certain questions which have 
somewhat puzzled me before have now been thoroughly 
cleared up in my mind, I am noting them for your consideration. 
They are as follows: 

1 . Why did not Israel celebrate 20 instead of only 
19 Jubilees in the land before the great Cycle of 50 
Jubilees began their count, so that the entire 70 Jubilees 
would be complete? 

2. Why did the Jews remain in their land 19 years 
after the celebration of their last typical Jubilee? Why 
did they not immediately go into captivity? 

3. Did the 70 years of desolation typify anything? 
If so, what? 

As a result of your article in the Overland Monthly 
I have been helped to a solving of these questions, and I 
am sending you herewith my calculations and conclusions 
for any comments or added thoughts you may have or 
can suggest. 

FIRST CALCULATION 

This is my understanding of your reckoning as presented 
in Overland Monthly: 

"To fulfil the word of the Lord by the mouth of 
Jeremiah until the land had enjoyed her Sabbaths: for 

R4779 : page 76 

as long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfill 
three score and ten years."— 2 Chron. 36:17-21. 

In the above quotation we find the entire number of 
Jubilee years the Lord purposed for Israel to be 70, 
which mark 70 cycles or periods of time. Each cycle was 
49 years and its Jubilee the 50th year. 



70 times this number (50 years) would be 3,500 yrs. 

And this period, measured from the time Israel 

entered Canaan, which occurred before the date 

known as A.D. 1 1,575 " 

Hence the years since A.D. 1, to complete above 
period of 3,500 years, are 1,925 " 

Or 1925 A.D. marks the date when the full number 
of Israel's Jubilees would have been accomplished as indicated 
by the Lord through Jeremiah the prophet. 

THE SECOND CALCULATION 

This calculation is based on the Jubilees from the 
standpoint of the Law which was given to Israel as a 
nation and to which they bound themselves, and which 
has been and is now being fulfilled with regard to the 
Jews.— Lev. 26. 

This calculation in no way antagonizes the view as 
expressed in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. 2, chapter 6, paragraph 
2, page 180; also page 181; but is considering it 
only with regard to the Jewish nation and their land and 
not with regard to the restitution or antitypical Jubilee 
as set forth in S.S., Vol. 2. 

The multiplying of the Sabbath or 7th day by 
7 (7 x 7 = 49) pointed out Pentecost, the 50th day, or Jubilee 
day, which followed. 

The multiplying of the Sabbath or 7th year by 7 
(7x7 = 49) made the cycle which pointed out and led to 
the 50th year or Jubilee year. 

The multiplying of the Sabbath or 50th year by 50 
(50 x 50 = 2,500) made the cycle which pointed out and 
led to the 51st cycle or Jubilee cycle. 

As the Jubilee day was not celebrated on the last or 49th 
day, but on the following or 50th day, and the Jubilee year 
was not celebrated on the last or 49th year, but on the following 
or 50th year, so the Jubilee cycle (of 50 years) was not 
celebrated on the last or 50th cycle, but on the following or 
51st cycle. 

The Law required that where the typical system 
ended, the antitypical counting should begin. 

R4779 : page 77 

Total number of years in Great Cycle 2,500 yrs. 

From the celebration of the last Jubilee by Israel to 
the year A.D. 1 625 " 

The number of years since A.D. 1 necessary to 
complete the cycle of 2,500 years 1,875 " 

If the year 1875 A.D. marks the end of the Great 
Cycle of 50 x 50 years, then the following 50 years, or 
from 1875 A.D. to 1925 A.D., will be the Jubilee Cycle 



or period of time during which the Jews will be returned 
to their possessions. (This date, 1925 A.D., as we have 
seen, is the date originally intended by Jehovah as marking 
Israel's full number of Jubilees.) And how harmoniously 
does this agree with the ending of the Times of 
the Gentiles, which terminate during this Jubilee period; 
their lease of power departing from them allows the Law 
to be fulfilled toward the Jew, who can now come into 
his possessions. 

Here we get the key to the matter regarding the 
celebration of only 19 and not 20 cycles before the Great 
Cycle (of 50 x 50 years = 2,500 years) began to count. 
The last or 20th Cycle of 50 years was reserved for the 
Jubilee Cycle to follow the Great Cycle. 

Jubilees celebrated in the land by Jews 19 

Jubilees represented in Great Cycle 50 

Jubilee period representing the time in which the Jew, 
according to Jubilee celebration, should return to his 
possessions 1 

70 

THIRD CALCULATION 

"And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim 
liberty throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants 
thereof; it shall be a Jubilee unto you; and ye shall 
return every man unto his possession, and ye shall return 
every man unto his family. 

"A Jubilee shall that fiftieth year be unto you: ye shall 
not sow, neither reap that which groweth of itself in it, 
nor gather the grapes in it of thy vine undressed."— 
Lev. 25:10,11. 

Here we have two statements made respecting the 
Jubilee year: 

1. The RETURN of every person to his possession; and 

2. The REST of the land. 

"Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it 
lieth desolate, and ye be in your enemies' land; even 
then shall the land REST and enjoy her sabbaths. As long 
as it lieth desolate it shall REST; because it did not REST 
in your sabbaths when ye dwelt upon it."— Lev. 26:34,35. 

Here again we find that while Israel celebrated the 
Jubilee when they dwelt in the land, and each man may 
have returned to his possession and family at the Jubilee 
period, nevertheless the Lord declares that the land "did 
not REST" in its Sabbaths when they dwelt upon it. 

So the Lord provided the REST feature of the Jubilee 
for the land when Israel went into captivity for 70 years, 
and here the 70 Jubilees of REST were accomplished for the 
land, but during that time the other feature of the 
Jubilee was neglected (the RETURN of each man to his 
possession and family), for we find the very reverse of 
this condition to be true. The Jews, instead of returning 
to their possessions during that time, were in captivity 



to and serving the King of Babylon. 

How, then, and when will this returning feature of 
the Jubilees be accomplished? 

As shown in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. II., chap. 6, Israel 
celebrated 19 Jubilees before going into captivity, and 
we have no reason to doubt that at each of these celebrations 
the RETURNING of the people to their possessions 
was accomplished to the best of their ability. 

Now, as 70 was the number of Jubilee Sabbaths or 
years of REST celebrated for the land (during the captivity), 
but only 19 Jubilees or years with the RETURNING 
feature were celebrated, when will the other 5 1 Jubilees 
or years with the RETURNING feature be fulfilled? We 
answer:— 

70— Full number of Jubilee Cycles ordained of God. 
19— Cycles (with Jubilees) celebrated (50 years 
each) 950 yrs. 

51— Cycles remaining (without Jubilees) celebrated 
(49 years each) 2,499 " 

Total years 3,449 

Number of years Israel entered Canaan before the 
date known as A. D. 1 1,575 " 

Total number of years since date known as A.D. 1 
to complete above period of 3,449 1,874 " 

Or the year 1874 A.D. completes the above period 
as was actually fulfilled. This date, 1874, is just 5 1 
years prior to the year 1925 A.D., which, in the first 
calculation, was found to be the date originally intended 
by Jehovah as completing the Jubilees for Israel. 

Here we have the 5 1 Jubilees or years to be celebrated 
all at one time and not individually as were the first 19. 
What wisdom on the part of our Heavenly Father! The 
land has already enjoyed the REST feature of the Jubilees 
(while the Jews were serving in captivity to Babylon) 
and now Israel, being deprived of the privileges of the 
RETURNING feature of the Jubilees for 51 Cycles (of 49 
years each), can celebrate the 51 Jubilees with RETURNING 
feature from 1874 A.D. to 1925 A.D. And this 
we find fully corroborated, for in 1874 the first Jewish 
colony was founded in Palestine. (Overland Monthly, 
September, 1910, page 324, 7th line from top of page.) 
And we see every year the increase of Jews RETURNING 
to their land and fulfilling the purpose of these 5 1 
Jubilees. 

The further question as to why Israel remained in 
the land 19 years after the celebration of the last Jubilee, 
is answered, to my mind, as follows:— 

IS THIS TOO FAR-FETCHED? 

If a day symbolically represents a year in Scripture, 



and 7 days mark to Israel the Sabbath which was carried 
out in the larger or 7-year system, would not the year 
symbolically represent the next greater time measure, or 
the Cycle period? If so, then, after the typical feature 
had ceased and the Great Antitypical Cycle began to 
count, Israel's 19 years in the land and 70 years captivity 
would fitly represent, or typify, the 19 Jubilee Cycles 
which Israel celebrated in their promised land, and 70 
Cycles or (70 x 50 years = 3,500 years) 3,500 years of 
captivity before they would be permitted to FULLY 
POSSESS again their land. 

R4780 : page 77 

Number of years in 70 cycles 3,500 yrs. 

Number of years Israel celebrated their last Jubilee 
before the date known as A. D. 1 625 " 

Number of years after date known as A.D. 1. when 
the 70 cycles end 2,875 " 

The year 2,875 A.D. is just 1,000 years from 1875, the 
time the Jews began to return to their possessions. At 
that time, we trust, according to the sure promises of the 
Lord, the Jews, as well as all mankind, will not only be 
established in their land but be capable of POSSESSING it 
and WILL POSSESS it; and it shall be for Abraham and his 
seed for an everlasting POSSESSION. 

Your Brother, sincerely for truth, in love, 
HAL KAUP. 



R4780 : page 78 

THE WISE CHOICE 

"Choose ye this day whom ye will serve; as for me and 
my house, we will serve the Lord."— Joshua 24:15. 

THE Children of Israel had crossed Jordan. 

Moses was dead and Joshua was their 

Leader. They were having no difficulty at 

that time; but Joshua thought that it was 

proper just then for them to make their 

decision— proper for them to decide whether 

or not they would be faithful to the Lord, 

or would allow themselves to be led away 

by the idolatry of the people who lived in 

Canaan. Joshua had called them together 

and had recounted to them the Lord's blessings and favor 

which they had thus far enjoyed, and then expressed himself 

in the grand and noble sentiments of our text. 

So, dear friends, we who realize that the Lord has 
been blessing, guiding and sustaining us in the past, 
should come to a full, positive decision as respects our 



course of life. The very fact of coming to a positive 
decision is a great blessing and a great help in the formation 
of character. Every time we come to a wise decision 
on any question, it strengthens mind and character, 
and makes us much more ready for another test— along 
some other line, perhaps. 

We well recognize the fact that the entire consecration 
which the Christian makes, leaves nothing out; but 
we need to have some touchstone, something which will 
enable the mind to reach a decision quickly, and this 
touchstone should be God's will, so that to perceive the 
Lord's will on any subject would be to settle it without 
any temporizing. Again, it is highly proper that we 
should reiterate our consecration, and thus make it 
prominent before others. 

For instance, if this were New Year's Day, and we 
were at a testimony meeting, there would be nothing 
wrong in saying, "Whatever any one else may do, I 
acknowledge God and will serve him!"— not as a new 
vow, but as a fresh acknowledgment of the consecration 
Vow we have already taken. 

We are to recognize the difference between making a 
new covenant every day, and the daily renewing of our 
covenant; the one would be an impropriety; the other 
would be proper. If we have made a binding covenant 
for life, we should no more think of breaking it than 
would a man who had leased a house or sold it. 

Every day we should renew our covenant with the 
Lord— renew it and make it fresh in our minds, thus 
showing that there has been no change on our part; that 
we are still in the same attitude. This is the same 
thought as was in the making of our consecration; we 
are dead with Christ— "Ye are not your own, ye are 
bought with a price." We are exhorted to make this 
review of our lives and renewal of our consecration 
daily; to continue to keep this before our minds and 
hearts; to render our sacrifice to the Lord. Thus we are 
baptized by baptism into his death; and this baptism continues 
just as it was with our Lord. He had made his 
consecration and so it had to be completed; so it is with 
us; our vow, our covenant is unto death. 

If the Lord's consecrated people could be brought to 
the point where the chief aim in life, the burden of all 
their prayers, would be that they might have a larger 
measure of the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of holiness, 
the spirit of the Truth, the spirit of Christ, the spirit of 
a sound mind, what a blessing it would mean! If then 
they should wrestle with him until the breaking of day, 
their hold upon him would be sure to bring the desired 
blessing. The Lord reveals himself for the purpose of 
giving this blessing; but he withholds it until we learn to 
appreciate and desire it. 



R4780 : page 78 



ONE SACRIFICE SUFFICIENT 

"Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, 
first for his own sins and then for the people's; for this 
he did once, when he offered up himself."— Heb. 7:27. 

IT HAS been asked how the Church could in 
any way be identified with the offering of 
this sacrifice. 

To get the Apostle's thought we are 
compelled to take one of two views; either 
that the High Priest in this case meant our 
Lord Jesus alone, separate and distinct 
from his Body, or else that it did not mean 
our Lord Jesus alone, separate and apart 
from his Body. 

In another place the Apostle tells us that God foreknew 
the Church; therefore, in the Divine Plan it was 
a foreknowledge that there would be a Church selected 
from among sinners, even as it was predestinated of 
Jesus himself that he should be the Head: "He [the 
Father] hath chosen us in him [Christ] before the 
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and 
without blame before him in love; having predestinated 
us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto 
himself." (Eph. 1:4,5.) Consequently, to take any 
other view would indicate blindness respecting the Scriptures. 
For this reason, we think that Paul referred, in 
the text under discussion, to the High Priest as a whole 
—Head and Body. 

Although this feature of the Plan was not revealed 
until the end of the Gospel Age, we see, nevertheless, 
that the Apostle was discussing the change of dispensation, 
and that everything pertaining to the Tabernacle 
and the "Most Holy" passed away to give place to the 
"better sacrifices" of the Gospel Age— all these things 
coming in instead of those things. And this is what the 
Apostle is reasoning out. When, therefore, he speaks of 
the High Priest, saying, "And this he did once," he is 
referring to the one sacrifice of two parts. He does not 
mean to say that the Priest offered merely one sacrifice 
of one part, but that the Priest made first the offering 
of the antitypical bullock, and afterwards the offering of 
the antitypical goat. 

In the type these things were done year by year; but 
in the antitype, which must be greater than the type, and 
which must really put away sin— "this he did once." 
Instead of doing this year after year, as represented in 
the typical atonement day sacrifices, the Great High 
Priest first offered the sacrifice of the antitypical bullock 
on behalf of those who are accepted as members of his 
Body, and afterwards the sacrifice of the antitypical goat 
on behalf of all the world of mankind. 

We also see that this second part has not yet been 
accomplished; after it shall have been finished, then will 



begin to follow the long-promised glory— "The sufferings 
of Christ and the glory that shall follow." (I Pet. 1:11.) 
And again, "the sufferings of this present time are not 
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed 
in us."— Rom. 8:18. 



R4780 : page 79 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

Question.— Kindly explain the following text, especially 
the forepart of it: "The Man Christ Jesus, who gave 
himself a ransom for all."— I Tim. 2:5,6. 

Answer.— Our Lord gave himself a corresponding 
price for all— a ransom. The application of this price 
will be made in due time. It has been, at the present 
time, appropriated to the Church, imputatively, on account 
of their turning from sin and walking in the footsteps 
of Jesus. The next step in its application will be, not 
the imputation, but the actual giving of this to the world, 
bringing them up out of their imperfection, during the 
thousand years of the Mediatorial reign; bringing them 
back into that condition in which they shall be in harmony 
with God, even as Adam was in harmony with him 
before the fall. 

Regarding the expression, "The Man Christ Jesus," 
we would say that the Man who gave himself seems to 
be the particular point. That Man who gave himself, 
the anointed Jesus, who finished the giving of himself at 
Calvary, is the "Mediator between God and men," between 

R4781 : page 79 

God and the world of mankind. In harmony with 
the Divine Plan, during this Age, before his work of 
uplifting mankind is due to begin, he is doing another 
work that the Father has ordained; namely, the selection 
of brethren over whom he is placed as the "Captain of 
their salvation." These are counted in as members of 
the Body of the Messiah, he being Head over them— 
"the Church which is his Body." 

So, then, the Man Christ Jesus is the Redeemer of 
the world. But in the interim— as noted above— before 
the application of his merit shall be made for the world, 
the testimony is given to a few— as many as have ears 
to hear and are join t-sacrificers with him. These will 
be associated with him as Prophet, Priest, Mediator, King 
and Judge between God and men during the Millennial 
Kingdom. 



Question.— After Adam sinned, could God have made 
with him such a Law Covenant as he made with the Jews 



—a Covenant offering him life upon condition of fulfilment 
of the Law? 

Answer.— We think it would not be reasonable to 
suppose that it would be consistent with the Divine 
principles, after Adam had had a full and complete trial, 
and after he had failed in that trial, and after he had 
been sentenced to death, that God should belittle his 
Government and his decision by making another proposition 
to him, after he had gotten into a more or less fallen 
condition. It would seem that even the suggestion of a 
trial would have been inconsistent with Divine principles, 
unless full satisfaction had first been made for the transgression 
already committed. We see quite a difference 
between Adam and the children of Adam, who were born 
in imperfection and who have never willingly and wilfully 
and intelligently sinned against God and who have 
never been given an offer or opportunity to see whether 
they would be able to keep that Divine Law. 

God gave Israel certain surroundings of typical justification 
and typical sanctification, etc., for the purpose of 
imparting general instruction foreshadowing the great 
blessing which he ultimately will bestow upon all mankind 
—giving them the opportunity of coming back into 
Divine favor and eternal life. 



page 79 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study V.— The Organization of the New Creation. 
APRIL 2 

THE ORGANIZATION OF THE NEW CREATION 

(1) When will the organization of the New Creation be 
complete, and how is it illustrated in the Scriptures? P. 195. 

(2) In view of the foregoing, what shall we say about a 
temporary organization of the New Creation? P. 196, par. 1, 
first part. 

(3) What is the character of the Divine arrangement with 
respect to this preparatory work, and why is the granting of 
liberty the best plan? P. 196, par. 1, last part, and par. 2, first part. 

(4) Why has the simplicity of the organization of the 
Church by the Lord and the Apostles been regarded by many 
good persons as unsatisfactory and inadequate? P. 197, top. 

(5) Taking Natural Israel as a type, should we expect to 
find a nominal as well as a real New Creation? P. 197, par. 1, 
first sentence. 

APRIL 9 

(6) What judgment is permitted the New Creation as 

to the "wheat" and "tares," and has any "branch" in "the True 



Vine" the right to criticise, rebuke or otherwise prune any 
other "branch"? P. 197, par. 1; P. 198. 

(7) How differently are such matters dealt with in 
human organizations? P. 198, par. 1. 

(8) Explain what is signified by the "Mystery of God." 
P. 199, par. 1, first part. 

(9) Describe its counterfeit, the "Mystery of Iniquity." 
P. 199, par. 1, last part; P. 200, par. 1. 

(10) What course toward these "tares," or imitation 
New Creatures, has the Lord pursued and instructed his 
people to follow? P. 200, par. 2. 

APRIL 16 

(11) When did the Mystery of Iniquity begin to work, 

and why did it not make much headway in the Early Church? 
P. 201, par. 1. 

(12) What spirit led gradually to the organization of 
the great Anti-Christ? P. 201, par. 2. 

(13) How has our great Adversary thwarted every fresh 
effort to reach the Truth since the Reformation period? 
P. 202, par. 1. 

(14) Cite certain facts which prove conclusively that the 
Scriptures have been preserved in comparative purity, and 
that the systems claiming to have been organized by the 
Lord and his Apostles are totally different from the Church 
which they did organize. P. 202, par. 2, to P. 204, par. 2. 

(15) Why has God permitted the world of mankind in 
general to exercise their mental and moral qualities according 
to their own inclinations? P. 204, par. 3. 

(16) How has the Lord been dealing with "Christendom?" 
and how and when will he bring order out of confusion? 

P. 205, par. 1. 

APRIL 23 

(17) What special feature of the Divine Plan characterizes 
"the ends of the Ages?" (1 Cor. 10:11.) P. 205, par. 2. 

(18) As originally instituted, who was the Head of the 
true Church? P. 206, par. 1, first part. 

(19) What is meant by the "True Vine" and the "Vine 
of the Earth," and what are their respective fruits? P. 207, 
top. 

(20) Did the Lord and the Apostles recognize any division 
in the Church, or were the various names applied to the 
Church as a whole, and even the smallest gatherings, intended 
as proper names? P. 207, par. 1. 

(21) What spirit led to the use of various unscriptural 
names during the Dark Ages? P. 207, par. 2. 

APRIL 30 

(22) How many Apostles were chosen, and what were 
their names? P. 208, par. 1. 

(23) Who was chosen by the Lord to succeed Judas, 
and what are the Scriptural proofs? P. 208, par. 2. 



(24) What Scriptural evidence have we against "Apostolic 
Succession?" P. 209, par. 1. 

(25) Why has the Church no reasonable need for more 
Apostles? P. 209, par. 2. 

(26) How were the twelve Apostles selected by our 
Lord? P. 210, par. 1. 

(27) What were doubtless some characteristics of the 
Apostles, and why were they chosen so early in our Lord's 
ministry? P. 210, par. 2. 



page 82 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 81 



SEMI-MONTHLY 