Persecution in a Peaceful Land
FOR OVER 60 years the land had been peaceful, with a friendly people ruled by a kindly king. Then the king died. Almost overnight the peaceful country became the scene of suffering inflicted on a minority group known worldwide for their love of neighbor and respect for authority. Why were they persecuted? Because of their desire to live by Bible principles. Where did this happen? In Swaziland.
Swaziland is a pleasant little country of some 6,700 square milesa situated between South Africa and Mozambique. Green and mountainous in the west, low-lying and drier in the east, it has just over half a million inhabitants. The Swazi nation occupied the territory in the early 18th century. In 1903 it came under British rule but was established as an independent kingdom in 1968, ruled by King Sobhuza II.
This remarkable man achieved the distinction of being, in his day, the oldest and longest reigning monarch on earth, ruling from 1921 until his death on August 21, 1982. He was noted for his wisdom and discretion. With his country sandwiched between South Africa and Mozambique and their widely differing policies, he followed a neutral course. As a result, Swaziland remained a land of peace and growing prosperity.
The Religious Background
Like most African peoples, the Swazi have for centuries practiced ancestor worship. In recent times many missions and churches have freely operated in Swaziland, but traditional customs and ritual still play a big part in the lives of the majority. In the early 1930’s Jehovah’s Witnesses sent missionaries there to spread the good news of God’s Kingdom. Frequently these missionaries visited King Sobhuza, who invariably gave them a royal welcome.
In time, a number of Swazi people responded to the message preached by Jehovah’s Witnesses. Because they now obeyed God’s law as set out in the Bible, these ones could no longer follow certain non-Christian religious customs. This brought opposition from some chiefs, but the King would not allow Jehovah’s Witnesses to be persecuted. Therefore the Witnesses have good reason to be grateful to him and sincerely mourn his death. But does this mean that they should share in traditional religious mourning customs, such as shaving the head?
Mourning Ceremonies
Such ceremonies are very important to their practicers. An expert on African customs, Dr. I. Schapera, wrote: “The worship of ancestors is based upon the belief that when a man dies he continues to influence the lives of his relatives remaining on earth.” Concerning these dead ones, he explains: “If offended by any breach of custom, they can also send drought, cattle plague, tribal or personal disaster, sickness or death.” If a chief is involved, this “applies even more forcibly.” Hence, failure to perform mourning rites for a king would be unthinkable to believers in these traditional customs.
However, Christians have to take into account how Jehovah God views such practices. Thousands of years ago God said to his chosen people: “You must not make cuttings upon yourselves or impose baldness on your foreheads for a dead person. For you are a holy people to Jehovah your God.”​—Deuteronomy 14:1, 2.
This is logical because nothing we do can please or displease someone who has died. “The dead . . . are conscious of nothing at all.” (Ecclesiastes 9:5) Even a ruler at death “goes back to his ground; in that day his thoughts do perish.” (Psalm 146:3, 4) At that point he is asleep, unconscious. His only hope lies in a future resurrection by God. He can neither help nor harm his former subjects.
To shave one’s head for a dead person would give the impression that one believed his soul still lived. Such an act would be hypocritical for one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Ezekiel 18:4) He would be “carrying on a lie” and displeasing God. (Revelation 22:15) Besides, true Christians are strictly warned not to mix non-Christian practices in with their worship. (2 Corinthians 6:14) They cannot conscientiously observe mourning rites that conflict with the Bible, however much grief they may feel when a friend dies.
Officials React
On September 13, 1982, The Times of Swaziland carried this report: “The Governor of Lobamba Royal Residence has announced directives to be followed by the Swazi nation during the mourning period of the late King Sobhuza II. Councillor Vusumuzi Bhembe has announced in a nationwide radio broadcast that as a sign of mourning, all Swazi males must have their hair cut [head shaved bald]. . . . Married women will have their hair trimmed right round the head above the ears.” Pressure was soon brought to bear on those whose conscience would not allow them to comply with this decree.
On Thursday, September 23, 1982, Andreas Xaba, a veterinarian officer working for the Swaziland Government, was asked by his superior, Mr. Mavimbela, why he had not shaved his head. When Andreas tried to explain, Mr. Mavimbela refused to listen and fetched three soldiers from a military camp nearby. The soldiers, however, decided that the police should handle the matter.
While waiting for the police, Mr. Mavimbela asked one of the soldiers to fetch Andreas’ wife from her home because she, too, had not cut her hair. The police arrived, but the senior officer said that they were to leave Mr. and Mrs. Xaba alone as there was no directive from the government to arrest those who had not cut their hair.
Nevertheless, that evening seven soldiers came to the Xabas’ home accompanied by Mr. Mavimbela and took them to the military camp. There all the soldiers gathered together and, after questioning them, repeatedly beat Andreas and his wife. Then they were put in detention and forced to lie on their backs while soldiers hit them on their feet. Finally their heads were forcibly shaved and they were allowed to go.
On October 11, 1982, four of Jehovah’s Witnesses were made to stand trial in the national court of Manzini. Before passing sentence, the Court President, Mabhula Shongwe, ordered the police to shave their heads. This was carried out brutally. Eyewitnesses report that blood flowed from head wounds. Sentences were then passed: one year’s imprisonment or R100 fine.
Two days later 11 Witnesses, 10 men and a woman, were arrested at their place of employment, the Mhlume Company. The next day security guards from this firm went to the homes of these men, rounded up their wives and children and placed these, too, in custody. On October 20 all were given an opportunity to explain in court why they would not shave their heads. In a respectful way they explained the matter, using Bible passages such as Deuteronomy 14:1 and Matthew 6:17, 18. Nevertheless, they were given a sentence of one year’s imprisonment or R100 fine. In addition their heads and those of their wives and children were all forcibly shaved. Later they were dismissed from the Mhlume Company.
On September 28, 1982, 13 Witnesses employed at the Usuthu Pulp Company were sentenced by Prince Logiyela Dlamini in the National Court at Bhunya to pay a fine of R60. Later they were prevented from entering their place of employment. They asked to see the management but instead were forced to appear before the supreme Privy Council at Lobamba on October 7.
The chairman of this council, Mr. Lusendvo Fakudze, allowed the Witnesses to explain their stand. During the discussion one of the chiefs threatened: “In 1975 we wanted to do away with you, but you were shielded by the late King. Who is going to protect you now?” Finally the Witnesses were told that the matter would be referred to the body of princes and then to the Queen Mother at Lobamba. Meanwhile their employers were advised not to accept them unless they would shave their heads.
The following week these Witnesses were arrested again. Six of them were due to stand trial on October 19, in the same National Court of Bunya. When the day arrived, the president of the court did not appear. It became necessary to postpone the case until the following day and appoint a new president, Mr. Magomba Dlamini. He ordered that the Witnesses be forcibly shaved and sentenced them to three months in prison or a fine of R30.
Among those convicted were Aaron Phakathi, Leonard Mabuza, Bartholomew Mbuli, Stephen Mngomezulu, John Shabangu and Lina Mbuli. These had now been sentenced a second time for the same offense. They were all fired by the Usuthu Pulp Company.
At the time of writing, at least 90 Witnesses have been arrested and sentenced, according to reports received. Some have been arrested more than once.
Some Good Results
In spite of the hardships some encouraging experiences have resulted from this unexpected persecution. Consider the following report by the Witnesses held in Manzini prison:
“When we arrived at this place, the prison warder was very much against us, saying that we were fighting against the government. He stopped our brothers from coming to see us and sent them back with all the food they had brought us. But we kept showing deep respect to him and gave our answers politely. When he saw this, his attitude changed. He gave us his Bible and asked us to preach to all the prisoners. Eventually, everybody there knew that we were in jail for the sake of righteousness and both the prisoners and the police were encouraging us to stand firm.”
God or Caesar?
Jehovah’s Witnesses are mindful of the apostle Paul’s words: “Let every soul be in subjection to the superior authorities.” (Romans 13:1) They remember, too, that Jesus taught: “Pay back, therefore, Caesar’s things to Caesar.” However, Jesus added: “. . . but God’s things to God.” (Matthew 22:19-21) When the apostles of Jesus were ordered to cease doing something that God had commanded them to do, they responded: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.” (Acts 5:29) They did not want to disobey their human rulers. But when those rulers forced them to choose between obedience to God and obedience to men, they had to obey God first.
Jehovah’s Witnesses follow this Christian example. At the same time they pray that the authorities will come to understand their viewpoint. The apostle Paul wrote: “I therefore exhort, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, offerings of thanks, be made . . . concerning kings and all those who are in high station; in order that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life.”​—1 Timothy 2:1, 2.
The Swazi authorities are doubtless aware that Jehovah’s Witnesses try to lead “a calm and quiet life.” As a group, they pay their taxes and live clean, honest lives. However, since King Sobhuza’s death, a dangerous precedent of religious persecution is being established. Also, many Witness men and women now have no means of making a living, having been fired from their jobs.
What Do You Think?
Does it surprise you that in this modern age a whole nation is forced to practice rites to appease the dead? Do you believe that people should be able to worship God according to their conscience? Do you feel compassion for those who suffer because of being denied this? If so, you may wish to send a telegram or a letter​—in a spirit of respect and kindness—​to one or more of the officials of the Swazi Government. In the accompanying box are the names of some high officials to whom you may wish to write.
[Footnotes]
One square mile = 2.59 square kilometers.
[Box on page 30]
Her Majesty the Queen Regent  Ndlovukazi Dzeliwe  Lobamba Royal Residence  P. O. Box 1  LOBAMBA  Swaziland
Chairman of the Supreme Council  Prince Sozisa  Lobamba Royal Residence  P. O. Box 1  LOBAMBA  Swaziland
Minister of Home Affairs  Prince Gabheni  P. O. Box 432  MBABANE  Swaziland
The Prime Minister  Prince Mabandla  P. O. Box 395  MBABANE  Swaziland
Minister of Justice  Mr. Polycarp KaLazarus Dlamini  P. O. Box 924  MBABANE  Swaziland
Commissioner of Police  Mr. Titus Msibi  P. O. Box 49  MBABANE  Swaziland
Federation of Swaziland Employers  P. O. Box 386  MBABANE  Swaziland
Councillor Vusumuzi Bhembe  Lobamba Royal Residence  P. O. Box 1  LOBAMBA  Swaziland
Councillor Lusendvo Fakudze  Lobamba Royal Residence  P. O. Box 1  LOBAMBA  Swaziland
Chief Justice  Mr. C. J. Nathan  P. O. Box 924  MBABANE  Swaziland
King’s Liaison Officer for Religion  Mr. A. K. Hlophe  P. O. Box 162  MBABANE  Swaziland

