Announcements
SERVING WITH JEHOVAH’S CHANNEL OF COMMUNICATION—Eph. 3:10, NW.
What channel does Jehovah use? Obviously the one that does his work, that of proclaiming the kingdom of God, which work was begun in these last days. While this organization has suffered much persecution it has continued to make known widely the truth of God’s kingdom. What a privilege to be serving with Jehovah’s channel of communication and to have the joy and pleasure of inviting others to receive the water of life! During this month a special offer of the Watchtower magazine is being made, giving all who long for the truth about the purposes of God an opportunity to receive regularly this most valuable magazine and learn much during the year. All of Jehovah’s faithful slaves will want to have part in offering a year’s subscription for The Watchtower at only $1. New subscribers will be given three booklets on Bible subjects of particular significance.
TRAIN FOR THE MINISTRY
We live in a world of specialization. Yet ministers of Jehovah have always been specialists in their chosen profession. Already adequately qualified for the ministry, they never slack their training, but continue to progress with the latest teaching program arranged by Jehovah through his organization. The new book Qualified to Be Ministers provides such advanced instruction. It fills the need of everyone, those who are contemplating the ministry and those who may have had years of service in this most blessed of professions. It is currently being studied in every congregation of Jehovah’s witnesses. Can you afford to be without your copy? Send only 50c today.
ARE YOU LOOKING AHEAD?
Jehovah’s witnesses keep looking ahead and at the same time they diligently study the record of faithful servants in Bible times. Why? Because on entering each new year of service opportunities they are encouraged by reviewing Bible writings and also edified by their own stimulating report of last year’s faithful and zealous preaching activity contained in the 1956 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses. And as they consider each month’s Scriptural theme identified on the new 1956 calendar they are urged to duplicate and exceed past efforts. Do you have these two latest instruments to encourage forward-looking preaching activity? Write today. The Yearbook is only 50c; the calendar is 25c, or five for $1 to one address.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
February 5: Exclusive Devotion, ¶1-18. Page 8.
February 12: Exclusive Devotion, ¶19-21, and ‘Choose Whom You Will Serve,’ ¶1-16. Page 13.
February 19: ‘Choose Whom You Will Serve,’ ¶17-21, and “My Load Is Light.” Page 19.

