Serving with Jehovah’s Channel of Communication
JEHOVAH has a channel of communication on earth? Yes, even as earthly governments have channels of communication for their subjects, so the great Ruler of the universe, Jehovah God, ever since he placed intelligent creatures upon this earth, has had channels of communication, but always only one at a time, to make known to men his will and purposes regarding them. Thus Adam, in that he was used to inform Eve of God’s law, served as a line of communication.a
Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and especially Moses, likewise served as Jehovah’s channels of communication in their day. After Moses certain judges and then a long line of prophets did likewise serve until John the Baptist. Then men were favored with the most direct line possible, Jesus Christ. He who had from of old personally heard Jehovah’s words at his mouth and who had served as a channel of communication to angels and to men, both directly and indirectly, now was serving as Jehovah’s direct channel of communication to men.
While serving thus he also trained others, around whom a continuous channel of communication could be established so that there would be no interruption upon his returning to heaven. Ever since the pouring out of the holy spirit at Pentecost the anointed followers of Christ have thus served as a channel of communication, making known Jehovah’s purposes as these became progressively clearer. This has resulted in bringing startling information even to angels: “This was to the end that now to the governments and the authorities in the heavenly places there might be made known through the congregation the greatly diversified wisdom of God.”—Eph. 3:10, NW.
Today Jehovah has again a channel of communication in the earth, through which he is causing Proverbs 4:18 (AS) to be fulfilled: “The path of the righteous is as the dawning light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.” Among the evidences pointing to the anointed Christian witnesses of Jehovah as a group being that channel are these: their witnessing to Jehovah’s name and established kingdom; their accepting the entire Word of God; their keeping separate from the world, and their being persecuted by all nations.
Those who appreciate the foregoing facts will gladly serve with Jehovah’s channel of communication in this day by making public declaration in the Christian congregation, by witnessing to the truth at every opportunity and by so arranging their affairs that they can have the greatest possible share in preaching the good news of the Kingdom. Are you a dedicated Christian witness? If so, are you making the most of your opportunities of serving with Jehovah’s channel of communication?
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, May 15, 1955.

