A Peaceful New World—Will It Come?
When you look at the scene on this tract, what feelings do you have? Does not your heart yearn for the peace, happiness, and prosperity seen there? Surely it does. But is it just a dream, or fantasy, to believe that these conditions will ever exist on earth?
Most people probably think so. Today’s realities are war, crime, hunger, sickness, aging—to mention just a few. Yet there is reason for hope. The Hebrew Scriptures foretell that God will create a “new heavens and a new earth” and that “the former things will not be called to mind, neither will they come up into the heart.”—Isaiah 65:17.
These “new heavens” and “new earth,” according to the Scriptures, are not a new material heavens or new literal earth. The physical earth and heavens were made perfect, and the Scriptures show they will remain forever. (Psalm 89:36, 37; 104:5) The “new earth” will be a righteous society of people living on earth, and the “new heavens” will be a perfect heavenly kingdom, or government, that will rule over this earthly society of people. But is it realistic to believe that “a new earth,” or glorious new world, is possible?
Well, consider the fact that such ideal conditions were part of God’s original purpose for this earth. He placed the first human couple in the earthly Paradise of Eden and gave them a marvelous assignment: “Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth and subdue it.” (Genesis 1:28) Yes, God’s purpose was for them to have children and eventually to spread their Paradise over all the earth. Although they later chose to disobey God, thus proving to be unfit to live forever, God’s original purpose did not change. And it must be fulfilled in a new world!—Isaiah 55:11.
In fact, it is the Messiah, promised in the Hebrew Scriptures, who will serve as a divinely appointed king and rule over this new world. (Psalm 2:2, 6-9; Daniel 7:13, 14) The Messiah will rid the earth of all wickedness, and then the psalm will be fulfilled: “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”—Psalm 37:29.
Life in God’s New World
The Messiah’s rule will bring earthly benefits beyond compare, accomplishing everything good that God originally purposed for his people to enjoy on earth. Hatreds and prejudices will cease to exist, and eventually everyone on earth will be a true friend of everyone else. In the Scriptures, God promises that he will ‘make wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.’ “Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.”—Psalm 46:9; Isaiah 2:4.
The whole earth will eventually be brought to a gardenlike paradise state. The Scriptures say: “The wilderness and the waterless region will exult, and the desert plain will be joyful and blossom as the saffron. . . . For in the wilderness waters will have burst out, and torrents in the desert plain. And the heat-parched ground will have become as a reedy pool, and the thirsty ground as springs of water.”—Isaiah 35:1, 6, 7.
There will be every reason to be happy in the Paradise earth. Never again will people feel hunger because of lack of food. “The earth itself will certainly give its produce,” the Scriptures say. (Psalm 67:6; 72:16) All will enjoy the fruits of their own labor, as our Creator promises: “They will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. . . . They will not plant and someone else do the eating.”—Isaiah 65:21, 22.
In God’s new world, no longer will people be crammed into huge apartment buildings or run-down slums, for God has purposed: “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy . . . They will not build and someone else have occupancy.” The Scriptures also promise: “They will not toil for nothing.”—Isaiah 65:21-23.
In time, God’s Kingdom will even restore the peaceful relations that existed in the garden of Eden between animals, and between animals and humans. The Scriptures say: “The wolf will actually reside for a while with the male lamb, and with the kid the leopard itself will lie down, and the calf and the maned young lion and the well-fed animal all together; and a mere little boy will be leader over them.”—Isaiah 11:6-9; Hosea 2:18.
Just imagine, in the Paradise earth, all sicknesses and physical infirmities will also be healed! God’s Word assures us: “No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’” (Isaiah 33:24) God’s Word also promises: “He [God] will actually swallow up death forever.”—Isaiah 25:8.
How It Is Possible for You
This is certainly a wonderful hope, and it is not too good to be true because God always fulfills his promises. (Isaiah 46:9, 10) Of course, there are requirements to be met if we are to live forever in this coming Paradise on earth. What are they?
These requirements can be found, in part, in the Tanakh and are emphasized in the Christian Greek Scriptures, which give specific details about the Messiah. These later writings, known to most people as the “New Testament,” were written under the same inspiration as was the Tanakh. The two writings together form the Holy Scriptures, or the Bible. They contain the wonderful promise that God “will wipe out every tear from [people’s] eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”—Revelation 21:4; see also Hosea 13:14.
Jehovah’s Witnesses, the authors of this tract, are no part of Christendom or Jewry. Rather, they accept these Holy Scriptures as the only basis for accurate knowledge of God’s will. Jehovah’s Witnesses are diligently working in all parts of the earth to help people learn about Jehovah, the true God, so that they can live forever in peace in his new world.—Micah 4:1-4.
Unless otherwise indicated, all Bible quotations are from the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.

