From Our Readers
Listening  The article “Are You an Empathetic Listener?” (December 8, 1994) was just what I needed. A friend told me several times that he doesn’t like it when I say that his problems really aren’t that bad and then proceed to give him unrequested advice. To be honest with you, I thought he had the wrong attitude. Now I see that I was wrong!
S. H., United States
I had been waiting for an article like this one, but it surpassed all my expectations. All too often, we underestimate the importance of knowing how to listen. Yet, most of us have dreamed of receiving such attention ourselves.
S. D., Italy
I am 18 years old, and I often find myself not knowing what to say in certain situations. But after reading that lovely article, I feel that I can be an empathetic listener.
J. M., Australia
It’s good to know that we don’t have to solve each problem we hear but that often listening is enough. Especially may those of us from dysfunctional families need to learn basic communication skills. Thank you for continuing to use the Bible to teach us how to live.
J. D., United States
Improved Artwork  I majored in visual design in school. At the same time, I was studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. But when I would take Awake! to school, my fellow students used to complain about its design​—that the ‘color sense’ was bad and so forth. In recent months, however, the designs have been truly outstanding. I really feel proud of the magazines!
N. I., Japan
Damaged Atmosphere  I just finished reading the article “When Our Atmosphere Is Damaged” and enjoyed it very much. (December 22, 1994) You certainly have a knack for selecting meaningful subjects to write about. Several times, though, you mentioned global warming but gave no proof. Careful! If the opposite should one day prove true, there would be a journalistic penalty to pay.
M. L., United States
We did not endorse the theory of global warming but merely reported the fact that a number of reputable scientists believe it is taking place. Whether the controversial theory will be verified or disproved by further research remains to be seen.​—ED.
Class Trips  I was pleased to read your article “Young People Ask . . . What About Class Trips?” (October 22, 1994) Years ago my class planned a one-​week trip. After considering the matter in prayer, I decided not to go. When the class came home, I learned that several of my classmates had engaged in sexual immorality. Indeed, such trips could be a very hard test for a Christian youth.
J. S., Norway
The article really helped me because I have gone on a number of field trips. The questions you presented enable a youth to analyze the situation. Thank you for helping me put class trips into perspective.
M. R., United States
Recently I was invited to take part in a class trip to a place I’ve always wanted to see. I decided to forgo the trip, although I had already bought the ticket. Later I began to think about what I had missed. But your article arrived at the right time. After reading it, I was sure I had made the right decision.
L. S. B., Brazil

