
STUDY 53
Audience Encouraged and Strengthened

What do you need to do?
Impart hope or courage to your audience. Invigorate and strengthen them.


Why is it important?
People are under great pressure from the world. Many get discouraged. What a speaker says and how he says it can deeply affect his audience.





REGARDLESS of the problems they face, servants of God should be able to find encouragement in the Christian congregation. To that end, elders especially must ensure that their talks and counsel are encouraging. The elders should prove to be “like a hiding place from the wind and a place of concealment from the rainstorm, like streams of water in a waterless country, like the shadow of a heavy crag in an exhausted land.”—Isa. 32:2.
If you are an elder, do your talks provide refreshment and comfort? Do they invigorate those who are endeavoring to serve Jehovah faithfully? Do they impart strength to persevere in doing God’s will in spite of public apathy or opposition? What if some in your audience are depressed, suffering under the weight of severe economic pressures, or battling a serious illness for which there is no known cure? You can ‘strengthen your brothers with the words of your mouth.’—Job 16:5.
Use the opportunity that you have as a speaker to help your brothers draw hope and strength from Jehovah and the provisions that he has made.—Rom. 15:13; Eph. 6:10.
Call to Mind What Jehovah Has Done. An important way to inspire courage is by showing how Jehovah helped his people through difficulties in the past.—Rom. 15:4.
Jehovah told Moses to “encourage” and “strengthen” Joshua before Israel entered the Promised Land, which at the time was occupied by enemy nations. How did Moses do that? In Joshua’s presence, Moses reminded the entire nation of the things Jehovah had done for them as they left Egypt. (Deut. 3:28; 7:18) Moses also recounted victories that Jehovah had given them over the Amorites. Then Moses urged Joshua: “Be courageous and strong.” (Deut. 31:1-8) When seeking to encourage your brothers, do you help them to draw strength by remembering what Jehovah has already done for them?
Sometimes individuals are so overwhelmed by their problems that they wonder whether they will ever experience the blessings of the Kingdom. Remind them of the dependability of Jehovah’s promises.—Josh. 23:14.
In some lands our brothers are faced with government decrees forbidding the preaching of the good news. In such cases, loving elders can help fellow believers to draw strength from the experiences of the apostles of Jesus Christ. (Acts 4:1–5:42) And highlighting the way God maneuvered events as recorded in the book of Esther will most certainly inspire the brothers to have courage.
At times individuals attend congregation meetings but do not progress any further. They may feel that God could never forgive them because their former way of life was so bad. Perhaps you could relate how Jehovah dealt with King Manasseh. (2 Chron. 33:1-16) Or you might tell about people in ancient Corinth who changed their way of life, became Christians, and were declared righteous by God.—1 Cor. 6:9-11.
Do certain ones feel that the problems they are experiencing indicate that they have lost God’s favor? You might remind them of what Job experienced and how he was richly blessed because he held fast his integrity to Jehovah. (Job 1:1-22; 10:1; 42:12, 13; Ps. 34:19) Job’s false comforters had wrongly contended that Job must have committed some sin. (Job 4:7, 8; 8:5, 6) In contrast, when strengthening the disciples and “encouraging them to remain in the faith,” Paul and Barnabas said: “We must enter into the kingdom of God through many tribulations.” (Acts 14:21, 22) Likewise today, you can strengthen those undergoing trials by pointing out that endurance under tribulation is required of all Christians and is of great value in the eyes of God.—Prov. 27:11; Matt. 24:13; Rom. 5:3, 4; 2 Tim. 3:12.
Encourage your listeners to think about ways in which Jehovah has fulfilled his promises in their own lives. With a little prompting, they may see how Jehovah has already acted toward them personally, just as he promised. At Psalm 32:8, we read: “I shall make you have insight and instruct you in the way you should go. I will give advice with my eye upon you.” By helping your listeners recall how Jehovah has guided or strengthened them, you will enable them to see in a deeply personal way that Jehovah cares for them and that he will really help them through whatever trials they face at present.—Isa. 41:10, 13; 1 Pet. 5:7.
Show Delight in What God Is Doing Now. When seeking to encourage your brothers, draw attention to what Jehovah is doing right now. Speaking about these things in a way that shows that they delight you will stir up similar feelings in the hearts of your listeners.
Consider how Jehovah helps us to cope with the pressures of life. He shows us the best way to live. (Isa. 30:21) He explains the reasons for crime, injustice, poverty, sickness, and death and tells us how he will put an end to all of these. He surrounds us with a loving brotherhood. He grants us the precious privilege of prayer. He entrusts us with the privilege of being his Witnesses. He opens our eyes to see that Christ has already been enthroned in the heavens and that the last days of the old system are rapidly coming to an end.—Rev. 12:1-12.
Add to those blessings our congregation meetings, assemblies, and conventions. When you speak of these provisions in a way that shows genuine appreciation for them, you will strengthen the determination of others not to neglect assembling with their brothers.—Heb. 10:23-25.
Reports that give evidence of Jehovah’s blessing on our efforts in the field ministry are likewise a source of strength. In the first century when Paul and Barnabas were en route to Jerusalem, they caused “great joy to all the brothers” by relating in detail the conversion of people of the nations. (Acts 15:3) You too can bring joy to the brothers by sharing upbuilding experiences with them.
Added encouragement will result when individuals are helped to see the value of what they are doing. Commend them for the share they are having in the Christian ministry. Commend those whose activity is severely limited by old age and illness but who are showing faithful endurance. Remind them that Jehovah does not forget the love they have shown for his name. (Heb. 6:10) Faith proved under test is a priceless possession. (1 Pet. 1:6, 7) Our brothers need to be reminded of this.
Speak With Feeling About the Hope Ahead. The inspired promises of things to come are a major source of encouragement to all who love God. Perhaps most in your audience have often heard these expressions. But by the appreciation you show when you speak about these promises, you can bring them to life, instill confidence in their fulfillment, and cause hearts to overflow with gratitude. Applying what you have learned in the Theocratic Ministry School can help you to do that.
Jehovah himself is the Great Encourager and Giver of strength to his people. Yet, you can cooperate with him in conveying such blessings. When you speak to the congregation, make good use of the opportunity to do that.



HOW TO DO IT
When preparing a talk, remind yourself of the problems faced by those in your audience. Consider carefully how to encourage and strengthen them.

Make good use of God’s Word. Show how what it says relates to situations we face.

Speak with sincere feeling.




EXERCISE: When doing your Bible reading or your personal study this week, select a portion that you feel you can use to encourage others. Share it with someone in the congregation.



