
Program for Developing Ability as a Speaker and a Teacher




WHETHER you are young or advanced in age, male or female, this course can aid you in expressing yourself more effectively and in becoming better qualified as a teacher of God’s Word.
Assignments for those enrolled in the Theocratic Ministry School will be made by the school overseer. On the next three pages, you will find your personal counsel form. The numbers preceding the various points correspond to the studies on the pages that follow. In those studies you will find an explanation of what is involved in mastering these aspects of speaking and teaching and why each one is important. You will also find helpful direction on how to accomplish what is being recommended.
The color coding on the counsel form indicates which points apply to assignments that involve (1) reading to an audience, (2) a demonstration with two or more people, or (3) a discourse to the congregation. The school overseer will assign the point on which you are to work. It is preferable to work on just one point at a time. You will benefit by doing the exercises recommended at the end of the assigned study. If you give evidence that you have successfully applied the counsel in the designated study, your counselor will assign you another point.
If your assignment is to be handled as a demonstration, you will need a setting. A list of settings appears on page 82, but you are not limited to this list. Your counselor may recommend that you try a certain setting in order to gain experience, or he may leave it up to you to make the selection.
Reading this book and doing the exercises even when you are not preparing school assignments can contribute greatly to your progress. Perhaps you can cover a different study each week or so.
Regardless of how long you have been sharing in the school or participating in the field ministry, there is room for improvement. May you benefit fully from the education provided through the Theocratic Ministry School.




