
STUDY 21
Scriptures Read With Proper Emphasis

What do you need to do?
Emphasize words and expressions that highlight your line of reasoning. Read with appropriate feeling.


Why is it important?
The full force of scriptures that are read is made to stand out with proper emphasis.





WHEN you speak to others about God’s purposes, whether privately or from the platform, your discussion should center on what is in God’s Word. This usually involves reading scriptures from the Bible, which ought to be done well.
Proper Emphasis Involves Feeling. Scriptures should be read with feeling. Consider some examples. When you read Psalm 37:11 aloud, your voice should convey happy anticipation of the peace that is promised there. When you read Revelation 21:4 regarding the end of suffering and death, your voice should reflect warm appreciation for the marvelous relief that is being foretold. Revelation 18:2, 4, 5, with its appeal to get out of sin-laden “Babylon the Great,” ought to be read with a tone of urgency. Of course, the feeling expressed should be heartfelt but not overdone. The proper amount of emotion is determined by the text itself and by the way it is being used.
Emphasize the Right Words. If your comments on a certain verse are built around just a portion of it, you should highlight that portion when reading the text. For example, when reading Matthew 6:33, you would not give primary stress to “his righteousness” or to “all these other things” if you intend to analyze what is meant by “seeking first the kingdom.”
In a talk on the Service Meeting, you may plan to read Matthew 28:19. What words should you emphasize? If you want to encourage diligence in starting home Bible studies, stress “make disciples.” On the other hand, if you plan to discuss the Christian’s responsibility to share Bible truth with an immigrant population or you want to encourage certain publishers to serve where the need is greater, you might stress “people of all the nations.”
Frequently, a scripture is presented in answer to a question or in support of an argument that others view as controversial. If every thought expressed in the text is emphasized equally, your audience may fail to see the connection. The point may be obvious to you but not to them.
For example, when reading Psalm 83:18 from a Bible that contains the divine name, if you put all the emphasis on the expression “the Most High,” a householder may fail to grasp the seemingly obvious fact that God has a personal name. You should stress the name “Jehovah.” However, when you are using that same scripture in a discussion of Jehovah’s sovereignty, you should give primary emphasis to the expression “the Most High.” Likewise, when using James 2:24 to show the importance of coupling faith with action, giving primary emphasis to “declared righteous” instead of to “works” might cause some who hear you to miss the point.
Another helpful example can be found at Romans 15:7-13. This is part of a letter written by the apostle Paul to a congregation made up of both Gentiles and natural Jews. Here the apostle argues that the ministry of Christ benefits not only circumcised Jews but also people of the nations so that “the nations might glorify God for his mercy.” Then Paul quotes four scriptures, drawing attention to that opportunity for the nations. How should you read those quotations in order to emphasize the point that Paul had in mind? If you are marking expressions to stress, you might highlight “the nations” in verse 9, “you nations” in verse 10, “all you nations” and “all the peoples” in verse 11, and “nations” in verse 12. Try reading Romans 15:7-13 with that emphasis. As you do so, Paul’s entire line of argument will become clearer and easier to grasp.
Methods of Emphasis. The thought-carrying words that you want to stand out may be stressed in a number of ways. The means that you use should be in keeping with the scripture and the setting of the talk. A few suggestions are offered here.
Voice stress. This involves any change in voice that makes the thought-carrying words stand out from the rest of the sentence. The emphasis may be achieved by a change in volume—either by increasing it or by decreasing it. In many languages, a change in pitch adds emphasis. In some languages, however, that may change the meaning altogether. When a slower pace is used for key expressions, this adds weight to them. In languages that do not permit voice stress as a means of emphasizing certain words, it will be necessary to do whatever is customary in that language in order to obtain the desired results.
Pausing. This may be done before or after reading the key portion of a scripture—or both. Pausing immediately before you read a main thought creates anticipation; pausing afterward deepens the impression made. However, if there are too many pauses, nothing will stand out.
Repetition. You can place emphasis on a particular point by interrupting yourself and rereading the word or phrase. A method that is often preferable is to complete the text and then repeat the key expression.
Gestures. Body movement as well as facial expression can often add emotion to a word or a phrase.
Tone of voice. In some languages, words may at times be read in a tone that influences their meaning and sets them apart. Here, too, discretion should be exercised, especially in using sarcasm.
When Others Read Texts. When a householder reads a scripture, he may stress the wrong words or none at all. What can you do then? Generally it is best to make the meaning clear by your application of the texts. After making the application, you might focus special attention directly on the thought-carrying words in the Bible.



HOW TO CULTIVATE THE USE OF EMPHASIS
Regarding any scripture that you plan to read, ask yourself: ‘What feeling or emotion do these words express? How should I convey it?’

Analyze texts that you plan to use. Regarding each one, ask yourself: ‘What purpose will this text serve? Which words need to be emphasized in order to achieve that purpose?’




EXERCISES: (1) Analyze a scripture that you plan to use in the field service. Practice reading it with appropriate feeling. Having in mind the way that you plan to use the text, read it aloud with emphasis on the correct word(s). (2) In a current study publication, select one paragraph that contains quoted scriptures. Analyze how the scriptures are being used. Mark the thought-conveying words. Read the entire paragraph aloud in a manner that gives proper emphasis to the scriptures.



