
STUDY 18
Use of Bible in Replying

What do you need to do?
Make good use of the Bible itself when answering questions.


Why is it important?
Our commission is to “preach the word.” Jesus set the example, saying: “I do not speak of my own originality.”—2 Tim. 4:2; John 14:10.





WHEN asked about our beliefs, our way of life, our viewpoint regarding current events, our hope for the future, we endeavor to use the Bible in replying. Why? Because it is the Word of God. It is from the Bible that we draw our beliefs. We base our way of life on the Bible. It shapes our view of world events. Our hope for the future is firmly rooted in the Bible’s inspired promises.—2 Tim. 3:16, 17.
We are keenly aware of the responsibility that goes with our name. We are Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Isa. 43:12) So we answer questions, not on the basis of human philosophy, but on the basis of what Jehovah says in his inspired Word. True, as individuals we have opinions on matters, but we allow God’s Word to shape our views because we are firmly convinced that it is the truth. Of course, the Bible gives us latitude for personal preference in many matters. Rather than imposing our preferences on others, we desire to teach the principles set out in the Scriptures, thus allowing our listeners to exercise the same freedom of choice that we enjoy. Like the apostle Paul, we seek “to promote obedience by faith.”—Rom. 16:26.
Jesus Christ is described at Revelation 3:14 as “the faithful and true witness.” How did he answer questions and deal with situations that were thrust upon him? Sometimes by using illustrations that would make people think. At other times by asking the inquirer about his own understanding of a scripture. Frequently by quoting scriptures, paraphrasing them, or alluding to them. (Matt. 4:3-10; 12:1-8; Luke 10:25-28; 17:32) In the first century, Scripture scrolls were usually kept in the synagogues. There is no evidence that Jesus had a personal collection of those scrolls, but he knew the Scriptures well and referred to them liberally when teaching others. (Luke 24:27, 44-47) He could truthfully say that what he taught was not of his own originality. He spoke what he had heard from his Father.—John 8:26.
Our desire is to follow Jesus’ example. We have not personally heard God speak, as Jesus did. But the Bible is God’s Word. When we use it as the basis for our answers, we avoid drawing attention to ourselves. We show that instead of voicing the opinion of an imperfect human, we are firmly determined to let God have the say as to what is truth.—John 7:18; Rom. 3:4.
Of course, our desire is not merely to use the Bible but to do so in a way that will be most beneficial to our hearer. We want him to listen with an open mind. Depending on the attitude of the person, you could introduce Biblical thoughts by saying: “Don’t you agree that what really counts is what God says?” Or you could say: “Did you know that the Bible discusses that very question?” If you are speaking to someone who does not have respect for the Bible, you may need to use a somewhat different introduction. You could say: “Let me share this ancient prophecy with you.” Or you might say: “The book that is the most widely distributed in human history says this . . . ”
In some instances, you may choose simply to paraphrase a text. Where possible, however, it is best to open the Bible itself and read what it says. Show the scripture to the person in his own copy of the Bible whenever this is practical. This direct use of the Bible often has a powerful effect on people.—Heb. 4:12.
Christian elders have a special responsibility to use the Bible when answering questions. One of the qualifications for serving as an elder is that the brother is “holding firmly to the faithful word as respects his art of teaching.” (Titus 1:9) A member of the congregation may make a serious decision in life after an elder has given him counsel. How important that this counsel be firmly based on the Scriptures! An elder’s example in doing this can influence many others in their manner of teaching.



HOW TO BECOME MORE PROFICIENT
Read the Bible daily. Have a good program of personal study.

Make it a practice to include scriptures in your comments at congregation meetings.

When faced with questions or situations, before replying or making a decision, always ask yourself, ‘What does the Bible say?’

When you do not know what the Bible says on a matter, do not guess or give a private opinion. Offer to do research.




EXERCISE: List one or two questions that you have been asked (1) in the field service, (2) about some matter recently reported in the news, and (3) about engaging in a certain popular activity. For each, select at least one scripture that would be appropriate to use in replying.



