
STUDY 19
Use of Bible Encouraged

What do you need to do?
Encourage your audience to follow along in the Bible as texts are read.


Why is it important?
What a person sees with his own eyes, especially in his own Bible, makes a deeper impression.





OUR desire is to direct the attention of everyone to God’s Word, the Bible. That sacred book is the basis for the message that we preach, and we want people to realize that what we say is, not of our own originality, but from God. People need to develop confidence in the Bible.
In the Field Ministry. When preparing for the field ministry, always select one or more scriptures to share with people who are willing to listen. Even if you are planning to make a relatively brief presentation of Bible literature, it is often beneficial to read an appropriate Bible text. The Bible has greater power to direct sheeplike people than anything that we might personally say. Where it is not possible actually to read from the Bible, you may choose to quote from it. In the first century, copies of Scripture scrolls were not widely available. Yet, Jesus and his apostles quoted extensively from the Scriptures. We too should make an effort to memorize scriptures and use these appropriately in our ministry, sometimes just quoting them.
When you are able to read from the Bible, hold it so that the householder can follow along as you read. If the householder follows along in his own copy of the Bible, his response to what he reads may be even more favorable.
You must realize, however, that some Bible translators have taken liberties with God’s Word. Their renderings may not conform in all respects to what was in the original Bible languages. A number of modern translations have eliminated God’s personal name, obscured what the original-language text says regarding the condition of the dead, and concealed what the Bible says about God’s purpose for the earth. In order to show a person what has been done, you may need to compare key texts from a variety of Bibles or from earlier translations in the same language. On a number of subjects, Reasoning From the Scriptures provides a comparison of the ways that various translations render key expressions in verses that are often used. Anyone who loves truth will be grateful for knowledge of the facts.
At Congregation Meetings. All should be encouraged to use their Bibles at congregation meetings. This accomplishes good in a number of ways. It helps to keep the attention of the audience on what is being discussed. It adds visual impact to the oral instruction given by the speaker. And it impresses on the minds of newly interested ones that the Bible is, indeed, the source of our beliefs.
Whether those in your audience actually follow your reading of Scripture texts in their own Bibles will depend to a great extent on the encouragement that you give. Direct invitation is one of the best methods.
It is up to you, the speaker, to decide which texts you want to emphasize by having the audience look them up. It is best to read scriptures that will help you develop your main points. Then, as time permits, add a few others that support your argument.
Of course, merely citing the text or inviting the audience to look up a scripture is not usually sufficient. If you read one text and then go on to another before your audience has even had time to find the first one, they will soon become discouraged and will stop trying to follow along in the Bible. Be observant. When the majority have located the text, read it.
Think ahead. Cite your scripture sufficiently in advance of reading it. This will minimize the loss of time that results from waiting for the audience to find the text. While less material will be covered if you allow time for the audience to look up scriptures, the benefits will make it worthwhile.



HOW TO DO IT
Show the householder the text as you read it from the Bible, or invite him to follow along in his own Bible.

When speaking in the congregation, directly invite the audience to look up key scriptures, and then allow them enough time to do this.




EXERCISES: On return visits, try the following: (1) Hand your Bible to the householder, and ask him if he would like to read a certain verse that you have already located. (2) Ask the householder if he would like to get his own Bible and read a key scripture.



