Jehovah’s Witnesses​—True Evangelizers
1 Jesus Christ put the responsibility to evangelize on all his disciples, specifically directing them to preach the good news of the Kingdom. (Matt. 24:14; Acts 10:42) His early disciples set the pattern in this as they spoke about the Kingdom without letup​—not only at places of worship but wherever they met people in public and in going from house to house. (Acts 5:42; 20:20) As Jehovah’s Witnesses today, we have proved ourselves to be true Christian evangelizers, preaching the Kingdom message in 232 lands and baptizing over one million new disciples in just the last three years! Why has our evangelizing work been so successful?
2 Good News Excites Us: Evangelizers are preachers, or messengers, of good news. As such, we have the exciting privilege of announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom​—the only real good news that can be offered to distressed humanity. We are enthusiastic about the advance knowledge we have gained of a new heavens that will righteously rule a new earth made up of faithful mankind in the coming Paradise. (2 Pet. 3:13, 17) We are the only ones who have embraced this hope, and we are eager to share it with others.
3 True Love Motivates Us: Evangelizing is a lifesaving work. (Rom. 1:16) That is why we experience great joy in spreading the Kingdom message. As true evangelizers, we love people, and that moves us to share the good news with them​—our families, neighbors, acquaintances, and as many others as possible. Doing this work whole-souled is one of the finest expressions we can make of our true love for others.​—1 Thess. 2:8.
4 God’s Spirit Backs Us: God’s Word assures us that when we do our work of planting and watering Kingdom seed, it is Jehovah who “makes it grow.” That is exactly what we see happening in our organization today. (1 Cor. 3:5-7) It is God’s spirit that backs us in our evangelizing activity and gives us great success.​—Joel 2:28, 29.
5 In view of the encouragement at 2 Timothy 4:5 to “do the work of an evangelizer” and because of our love for all people, may we be motivated to share the exciting Kingdom good news at every opportunity, confident that Jehovah will continue to bless our work.

