Service Meetings for February
Week Starting February 2
Song 166
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Theocratic News.
15 min: “Jehovah’s Witnesses​—True Evangelizers.” Questions and answers. Review box on page 19 in September 1, 1992, Watchtower.
20 min: “Extend an Invitation to Everyone Thirsting.” Review article, pointing out how the suggested presentations are designed to stimulate interest and motivate listeners. Have an adult demonstrate paragraphs 2-3 or 4-5 and a youth demonstrate paragraph 6. Each publisher should mention the donation arrangement.
Song 208 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 9
Song 96
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Witnessing to People of All Languages and Religions.” (Paragraphs 1-10) Questions and answers. List what languages are spoken by many in your territory, and show what literature the congregation has in stock for those languages. As described in paragraph 10, have demonstrated the use of the booklet Good News for All Nations.
Song 220 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 16
Song 75
 5 min: Local announcements.
12 min: Why You Need to Attend Congregation Meetings. Elder discusses main points in August 15, 1993, Watchtower, pages 8-11, stressing importance of regular attendance at all meetings.
18 min: “Witnessing to People of All Languages and Religions.” (Paragraphs 11-28) Questions and answers. List which non-Christian religions are present in your territory. Have an experienced publisher demonstrate how to give an initial witness to someone who is Buddhist, Hindu, Jewish, or Muslim​—whichever one is most prevalent locally.
10 min: “Jehovah Is My Helper.” Warm, encouraging talk by elder.
Song 15 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 23
Song 4
10 min: Local announcements. Review literature offer for March. Mention one or two ideas for presenting the Knowledge book, using points from the December 1995 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8. Emphasize the goal of starting home Bible studies.
15 min: “If It Gets Results, Use It!” Questions and answers. Have one or two experienced publishers from the audience briefly comment on presentations they have continued to use because of the simplicity of the presentations and the results produced. Then have some share recently suggested approaches that were in Our Kingdom Ministry and that have proved to be effective.
20 min: Practice Your Presentations. Short talk based on School Guidebook, pages 98-9, paragraphs 8-9. Stress need to analyze our presentations and to look for ways to become more effective. Have two sisters demonstrate how they analyze what they did at a door, discussing how they can improve. They also have a brief practice session to try out a presentation they plan to use next time, giving each other helpful suggestions. Chairman concludes by encouraging all to analyze and practice their presentations.
Song 103 and concluding prayer.

