“Jehovah Is My Helper”
1 When Jesus commissioned his first disciples, he told them: “Look! I am sending you forth as sheep amidst wolves.” (Matt. 10:16) Did that cause them to become apprehensive and hold back? No. They adopted the attitude later expressed by the apostle Paul when he told fellow Christians: “Be of good courage and say: ‘Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?’” (Heb. 13:6) They rejoiced to be counted worthy to be dishonored in behalf of Jesus’ name, and they continued without letup teaching and declaring the good news.​—Acts 5:41, 42.
2 Today the worldwide preaching work is in its final stages. Just as Jesus predicted, we have become objects of hatred by all the nations. (Matt. 24:9) Our preaching work has been opposed and ridiculed, and in some parts of the earth, it has even been banned. If we were lacking in faith, we could feel intimidated. However, knowing that Jehovah is our Helper refreshes us and strengthens us to persevere.
3 Courage is the quality of being strong, bold, valiant. It is the opposite of fear, timidity, cowardice. Jesus’ disciples have always needed courage to endure. It is essential if we are to avoid being disheartened by the attitudes and actions of a world at enmity with God. How encouraging it is for us to think of the sterling example of Jesus, a world conquerer! (John 16:33) Remember, too, the apostles who in the face of severe trials boldly declared: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.”​—Acts 5:29.
4 We Are Not the Sort That Shrink Back: We should strive to maintain a positive attitude toward our work. (Heb. 10:39) Always keep in mind that we are being sent out by Jehovah as an expression of his love and mercy toward all mankind. He never asks his servants to do anything that does not serve a useful purpose. Everything we are assigned to do will ultimately be for the good of those who love God.​—Rom. 8:28.
5 An optimistic outlook will help us to keep seeking the sheeplike ones in our territory. We might view the apathy that people display as an expression of their frustration and hopelessness. Let our love move us to be sympathetic and patient. Every time we place literature or otherwise detect a spark of interest, our goal should be to make a return visit promptly and stimulate further interest. We need never doubt our ability to start a Bible study or to be effective in conducting it. Instead, we should constantly and prayerfully seek Jehovah’s assistance and direction, confident that he will help us.
6 We firmly believe that Jehovah will see the work through to its completion. (Compare Philippians 1:6.) Our implicit trust in him as our Helper strengthens us, so that we do “not give up in doing what is fine.”​—Gal. 6:9.

