Serving Jehovah on His Holy Mountain
As told by Fred Germann
IN SOME parts of the world people superstitiously venerate mountains. For my part, being Swiss-born, I have always been irresistibly drawn to the mountains, and particularly the Alps. Ever since my childhood I have admired their overwhelming splendor, considering such majesty to be a silent testimony to God’s glory. Even now, at age 86, the sight of such towering summits reminds me of the prophecy of Micah 4:1, 2, which foretells the gathering of determined men and women upon “the mountain of the house of Jehovah,” the place of his pure worship, elevated above all false religions. What a privilege it has been for me to witness the fulfillment of this prophecy! But even as it takes determination and effort to climb a mountain in the Alps, so I have had to overcome many mountainous obstacles in pursuing pure worship. (Matt. 17:20) May I share a few memories with you?
FIRST GLIMPSES OF THE “MOUNTAIN”
In 1903, while living in the Swiss Bernese Oberland, my mother got her first glimpse of the “mountain” of true worship. She read a Bible tract announcing an incoming millennium under Christ that was to replace the present unrighteous system. She was so enthused by this message that she just could not help sharing it with her neighbors. One evening she had a visit from an irate pastor. But, Bible in hand, she was ready with the answers. At that time I was eight years old.
Mother soon symbolized her dedication to God by water baptism. In our region of Switzerland there was just one small group of Christians with “faith so as to transplant mountains.” (1 Cor. 13:2) It was in the little town of Thun, where, over 60 years later, the Watch Tower Society’s Swiss branch was to be located. Though it was distant from our home, mother would attend the meetings as often as possible. Away back there, the Thun Congregation was mainly under the oversight of two fleshly brothers, both very gifted at teaching. One of them had been to the “Bible House” in Allegheny (later part of Pittsburgh), Pennsylvania, U.S.A., and had shared in the work of translating the fifth volume of Studies in the Scriptures into German.
Unfortunately, both these brothers stopped following the great Guide, Jesus Christ, and started ‘leaning upon their own understanding.’ (Prov. 3:5) They gradually developed a critical spirit. Not knowing where else to go, my mother continued for a time associating with this group, but she soon began to lose her fervor in God’s service and eventually stopped going to the meetings. However, she continued talking to me about the truth and, when World War I broke out, I began to show real interest.
In 1915 Christian meetings were started in our little town of Frutigen. A local person made his house available for showing Pastor Russell’s Photo-Drama of Creation. This eight-hour, four-part projection of slides and motion pictures, with sound and color, related God’s purpose from the time of creation right down through human history to the climactic fulfillment of that divine purpose for the earth and mankind at the end of the millennium. My mother and I were both impressed by this remarkable presentation. We thus reestablished contact with the Bible Students, known today as Jehovah’s Witnesses. How happy we were! Our feet were at the foot of the “mountain of the house of Jehovah.”
THE ALPS OR JEHOVAH’S MOUNTAIN?
At that time I was a fervent mountaineer, even to the point of risking my life. But I would occasionally ask myself: ‘What is the true purpose of life, and why does the Source of all this beautiful creation not put a stop to injustice and suffering?’ Through meeting attendance and the study of the Watch Tower publications, I came to understand and appreciate the Bible and its Author, Jehovah God. So, in the fall of 1915, I decided that my love for the Swiss mountains must take second place to my love for the “mountain” of true worship. I dedicated my life to Jehovah and was baptized by Brother Emile Lanz in his apartment in Bern. At that time Dr. Lanz was in charge of the work in Switzerland and France.
I was then 20 years old and had looked forward to a promising future working for the Swiss post office. But henceforth I chose Jesus as my Guide and I wanted to “follow his steps closely.” (1 Pet. 2:21) So I wrote to the Bible Students requesting a supply of Bible literature for use in the evangelizing work. I was sent a huge parcel of tracts to distribute. Just then my professional activities took me to the little town of Huttwil. ‘Now,’ I said to myself, ‘get going!’ It was uphill work, and I was all alone, but I drew the necessary strength to accomplish it from a daily study of God’s Word and the Society’s publications. Also, Hebrews 13:11-15 provided me with the determination I needed. Once I had finished preaching in this little town, I went on to the neighboring villages, calling back when I found interested persons. Nor did I forget my workmates. I asked one of them whether he would care to study the Bible, and he accepted my offer. His wife and neighbor also sat in on our Bible discussions.
In the course of these discussions, my colleague’s wife and the neighbor asked if I would talk with the Protestant preacher, and I did so. This man still held fast to the hellfire doctrine. I explained how inconceivable this was, because the fleshly body would be quickly consumed in the flames. He retorted: “That’s no problem. God probably provides asbestos bodies.” When I opened my Bible to Ezekiel 18:4 (which says, ‘the soul that is sinning will die’), he interrupted, saying: “We just have to believe that the soul is immortal.” He refused to consider any scriptures on the subject.
About that same time, I met a schoolteacher who also believed in hellfire. I asked if she thought it possible for a person to be happy up in heaven, where she hoped to go, while thinking of the billions of sinners below in hell in eternal agony. She came out with this totally unexpected reply: “God will see to it that we won’t even think about them.” Such fallacious thinking convinced me of the need to help those who ‘worship what they do not know.’​—John 4:22.
A few months later I was transferred to Wangen-sur-Aar, where I had the joy of associating with the Biel Congregation. It was there that I made my decision to enter full-time service, and I wrote a letter of resignation to the Swiss postal authorities. As soon as all my affairs were in order I went to Zurich, where the Bible Students had their literature depot. Thus, in May 1916, I became a colporteur (pioneer). Instead of finding my joy in climbing mountains, I was now able to devote all my time to the work of inviting people to “come, . . . let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah.”​—Mic. 4:2.
DARK CLOUDS ON THE HORIZON
Anyone who has done any mountain climbing knows that one must be equipped for sudden changes in weather. Well, during those World War I years, dark clouds were looming up on the peaceful horizon of our preaching work in Switzerland. Brother Lanz, who had baptized me in 1915, began to manifest a rebellious spirit toward the Watch Tower Society’s president, Charles T. Russell. Puffed up with pride at being “Doctor” Lanz and convinced that his methods were the best, he allowed an embittered heart to develop within him.
One Sunday, when I was visiting the Frutigen Congregation, Lanz came out in open opposition. During his talk he said that the Society was in the wrong, and he proposed “another sort of good news.” (Gal. 1:6) Hitherto he had always presented Brother Russell as an exemplary Christian, but now he severely criticized him. Mother, angered at what she heard, said to me: “We must stay firm. It was here that we found the truth, and this is God’s work!” Her loyal attachment to Jehovah and his worship on his holy mountain had become unshakable. But her physical health worsened. So, in May 1917, due to family responsibilities, I had to give up full-time colporteuring and return home, where I resumed my former secular work. My mother finished her earthly course in 1918, faithful down to the end.
After such trials it seemed that our congregation in Frutigen had been ‘sifted as wheat,’ for only four of us were left to continue inviting people to worship Jehovah on his holy mountain. (Luke 22:31) Among these was Sister Emmy Schneider, who later took up the full-time preaching work and who is still faithful in Jehovah’s service. Brother Russell sent Conrad Binkele from Brooklyn to handle the dramatic situation brought about by Lanz and to strengthen the brothers. Many left Jehovah’s mountain of light at that time and soon found themselves in “the darkness outside.”​—Matt. 25:30.
In 1919 the way opened for me to get back into the full-time service. So I resigned once more from my work with the post office. I was able to go and help the Bern Congregation. At that time Alexandre Freytag, the Society’s representative at the French office in Geneva, became an apostate and soon he was sending out emissaries to win over to his ideas Christians in and around Bern. By personal visits, several of us were able to help the brothers to keep on walking firmly on the “mountain” of Jehovah’s pure worship.​—Rom. 16:17, 18, 25-27.
NEW EQUIPMENT
The first world war had considerably upset international communications. So we were no longer receiving Bible literature from Brooklyn. In order to help people to find Jehovah’s “mountain,” we had necessary Bible aids printed by a local firm. But this proved to be too expensive. We therefore considered the possibility of doing the printing ourselves.
A few members of the Bern Congregation had had some experience in printing. So, having ‘calculated the expense,’ and with the agreement of the Society’s new president, Brother J. F. Rutherford, a cooperative society called “The Watch Tower Printery” was set up. (Luke 14:28) One-hundred-franc debentures, reimbursable at will and without interest, were issued to raise the necessary funds, and a spacious house was purchased in Bern, at 36 Allmendstrasse.
A capable brother had the responsibility of buying the equipment. Knowing what our financial possibilities were, he went to Germany to buy good secondhand presses and one new rotary press. Unfortunately, all these machines were loaded onto a railway freight car with a leaky roof. This was just after the war, and conditions were still hard in Europe. What a disappointment when all this equipment arrived! The rain had got in and it was all rusty!
It was of no use sitting down and crying. Members of the Bern Congregation, including sisters, set to work with kerosene and emery cloth. After weeks of hard work, no trace of rust remained and, with the help of a specialized fitter, the brothers set up the presses and soon got them running smoothly. This printery building later served as the branch office and factory for Switzerland and the French-speaking countries for many years. Eventually, the Swiss Bethel was transferred to a much larger building constructed just across the street, at 39 Allmendstrasse. Later still, it was moved to Thun.
FEARLESS ON JEHOVAH’S “MOUNTAIN”
The eight-day convention held at Cedar Point, Ohio, from September 1 to 8, 1919, emphasizing the theme “Blessed Are the Fearless,” was a great source of encouragement for us Bible Students. We in Europe were also greatly helped when Brother Rutherford visited us in the fall of 1920. His example and words of encouragement made us determined to give of our very best in Kingdom service.
In addition to the Photo-Drama, the talk on the subject “Millions Now Living Will Never Die” was a magnificent witness. There were great audiences, and the book with the same title went “like hotcakes.” Sometimes literature servants would order these books by telegrams worded: “Send two hundred Million,” or, “Urgent. 150 Million,” much to the surprise of the telegraphists!
I was privileged to serve in the Bern Bethel right from the start, in October 1920, and still have wonderful memories of the warm brotherly love that reigned in the family. One morning, in July 1921, the branch overseer informed me that I had been appointed to supervise the work in Alsace-Lorraine and the Saar. Although much work had already been done in these parts, the existing congregations needed strengthening and new congregations needed to be organized. Here also “the mountain of the house of Jehovah” had to be “lifted up above the hills,” so that “peoples” in Lorraine, Alsace and the Saar might “stream” to it and worship Jehovah.​—Mic. 4:1.
As a pilgrim, and with the help of the local elders, I was able to organize public lecture campaigns. Since the Catholic Church was particularly powerful in those areas at that time, this activity took courage, and many times the Cedar Point theme “Blessed Are the Fearless” came to our minds.
HELPING THE “SHEEP”
Through his prophet Ezekiel, Jehovah stated: “I will search for my sheep and care for them. And I will bring them out from the peoples . . . In a good pasturage I shall feed them, and on Israel’s high mountains their abiding place will come to be.” (Ezek. 34:11, 13, 14) Back there in that early postwar period, zealous Christians sought out the “sheep” in every nook and cranny, and led them to Jehovah’s “mountain” of true worship where they found nourishing spiritual food.​—See Matthew 25:31-46.
With the publishing of the magazine The Golden Age (now Awake!), young Christians in Strasbourg and Saarbrücken plucked up their courage. They presented the magazine in the many restaurants and brasseries, giving a very good witness.
In 1922 and 1923 the Photo-Drama was shown again in Alsace, first by Brother Charles Eicher and later by myself, when Brother Eicher was called to serve at Brooklyn Bethel. There were no public-address systems back then. So it was a good thing that the Palais des Fêtes in Strasbourg had perfect acoustics, for there was an audience of about 1,800 every night. Our violinist, Charles Rohner, contributed greatly to the success of these presentations. He also was called to Brooklyn Bethel, where his musical talents were put to good use enhancing broadcasts over Watch Tower radio station WBBR.
The inhabitants of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg also needed to be invited to worship Jehovah on his holy “mountain.” I managed to show the Photo-Drama in the towns of Luxembourg, Esch and Differdange, and to give talks in five other locations. But Luxembourg was too far from Strasbourg for me to go there on a regular basis. Eventually, arrangements were made for German-speaking brothers from nearby Trier, Germany, to care for the work there.
In August 1925, and again in the spring of 1926, I was assigned as a pilgrim to visit the congregations in eastern Switzerland. It was about that time that I met my wife-to-be, Antoinette. But I did not want my marriage to interfere with my full-time service. A solution came along just at the right time. In May 1926 someone was needed to take care of the office and literature depot the Society had set up in Lens, northern France. I was sent there, first alone, and then, in 1927, I married Antoinette. She joined me in Lens and did the housekeeping and cooking, as well as some office work, along with Brother François Jankowski, who took care of the correspondence with the Polish brothers in the north of France.
“SAFE ON THE MOUNTAINS” OF JEHOVAH’S WORSHIP
In 1928 our first baby, Daniel, came along, and one year later Frédy was born. So I had to reorganize my life. I had to look for secular work to provide for my family. (1 Tim. 5:8) The big question was “where?” Should we return home to Switzerland and to the Alps that I loved so much, or stay in France, where the need seemed to be greater?
We finally decided to set up home in the Paris area, where, at the time, there was only a handful of Kingdom publishers. And here we are still, over 50 years later. Although slowed down somewhat by our age, both Antoinette (Mimi) and I are still striving to serve Jehovah faithfully on his holy “mountain,” and we rejoice to see some of our children and grandchildren doing likewise.
What a climb from 1915 to 1981! But I have been helped all the way by Jehovah and his organization, under his Son, Christ Jesus. As I draw near the end of my earthly course, I should like to express my deep appreciation to the “faithful and discreet slave” for the wonderful spiritual provisions made to help me and all my fellow Christians throughout the world to have the spiritual strength needed for the uphill work and the obstacles to be overcome. (Matt. 24:45-47) Like Habakkuk of old, I can say: “The Sovereign LORD [JEHOVAH] gives me strength. He makes me sure-footed as a deer and keeps me safe on the mountains.”​—Hab. 3:19, Today’s English Version.

