Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points. Check yourself.
● Why did Jesus Christ customarily go to the synagogue?
To hear the reading and discussing of the Hebrew Scriptures and to preach and teach.—P. 10.a
● On what qualities, primarily, is Christian courage based?
It is based on faith in Jehovah God and loyalty to right principles.—P. 36.
● What is “the sign of the Son of man”?
It is the act of God’s Son, Jesus Christ, in receiving authority from his Father to rule in an everlasting kingdom.—P. 38.
● How can a Christian tell if his associates are of the right kind?
He will know he has chosen proper associates if he feels spiritually upbuilt, strengthened, encouraged to greater zeal and faithfulness and is more appreciative of Jehovah’s goodness and loving-kindness as a result of associating with them.—P. 48.
● In what sense does Christ return to the earth?
By directing his attention to it and taking action regarding it.—P. 70.
● In contrast with Christendom’s clergy in general, how did the apostle Paul support himself while preaching?
By making tents, so that he would not become an expensive burden on the congregation. (2 Thess. 3:8-10)—P. 83.
● What city is Christianity’s center?
Heavenly Zion or heavenly Jerusalem.—Pp. 88, 89.
● Is it proper for a Christian to accept government provisions of welfare or relief supplies sent to disaster areas?
Yes, though he should do so only honestly and legally or when actually in need.—Pp. 95, 96.
● How many persons benefit directly and how many indirectly from the new covenant?
Directly, 144,000 benefit; indirectly, all mankind living and dead stand to benefit.—Pp. 111, 122, 123.
● Does God’s oath concerning a royal priesthood like that of Melchizedek apply to the 144,000 anointed followers of Christ?
No; that is a personal covenant made by God with Jesus Christ alone.—P. 114.
● Does the apostle Peter now use the keys of the Kingdom?
No. He used them to open the door of Kingdom opportunity to the Jews at Pentecost and to the Gentiles when preaching to Cornelius. There is no further need for him to use these keys.—Pp. 124-126.
● Is it proper to expose falsehood and corruption?
Yes. Jesus Christ did this and was thus performing a loving service. People needed the truth because false teachings and practices were leading persons to destruction.—Pp. 131, 132.
● What were the ‘willing’ performance and the “reward” the apostle Paul mentioned at 1 Corinthians 9:17?
The ‘willing’ performance was doing his preaching work at his own expense. The “reward” was, not eternal life, but his right to boast of something he did without obligation.—Pp. 138, 139.
● Why are the sixty-six books of the Bible referred to as a “canon”?
Because they constitute a measuring rule for determining right faith, doctrine and conduct.—P. 171.
● What are some factors to bear in mind if one would gain an accurate understanding of what he reads in the Bible?
The relationship of one Bible doctrine to others, the context of a passage, the circumstances under which the original writings were penned, the time of a certain event, and how the material fits into the larger picture of God’s purpose.—P. 176.
● How did Christendom’s observance of Easter and Lent originate?
They both had a pagan origin; they are not observed because of any command of Christ or the apostles.—Pp. 188, 189.
● What did Christ illustrate in the parable of the wheat and the weeds?
That there would be a corrupting of Christianity as to organization and doctrine. Satan would sow “weeds” or imitation Christians among the “wheat” or true Christians. They would grow together until the “harvest” time, when the “weeds” would be separated from the “wheat.”—P. 204.
● According to the Scriptures, is Satan merely the “principle of evil”?
No. He is a real live person in the invisible spirit realm, not merely the “principle of evil.”—Pp. 232-234.
● What is the “wild beast” of Revelation 13:1?
The world’s political system under Satan’s control.—P. 241.
● What will the binding of Satan mean to mankind?
It will give men the opportunity for endless life in happiness in a paradise earth under a perfectly godly government.—P. 242.
● What quality of Gideon especially endears him to us?
His modesty.—P. 249.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1966.

