Patience Produces Results
THERE are times in the lives of Jehovah’s witnesses when they need to exercise much patience in order to convince others of their sincerity in wanting to help them, but the rewards make it worth it. Here is an experience of one of Jehovah’s witnesses that proves the inestimable value of patience:
“In 1961 we were baptized as Jehovah’s witnesses. Our next-door neighbor who opposed the Witnesses was furious at us for taking this step. She told us that, though we were good neighbors, she wanted no part of our religion. Our attempts to get her to change her mind proved to be in vain. So we decided to pursue the course suggested by the Watch Tower Society. We would just offer her magazines that contained articles that we thought she would enjoy reading.
“This worked fine, for she accepted them and read the articles we suggested. This continued for about a year, and then she began to let her six-year-old daughter visit us.
“To entertain the tot, we would use the book From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained and explain the illustrations therein. Naturally, when she went home she told her mother what she was learning about Jehovah God, the paradise in Eden, Adam and Eve, and so forth. About two weeks later her mother telephoned me.
“She asked me if I was conducting a Bible study with her daughter, Jo Ann. I replied, No, but that I was merely explaining the meaning of the pictures in one of our books. I got the Paradise book and demonstrated what I was doing. She then said, ‘Jo Ann is enjoying this so much that I was wondering if you could find time to study the Bible with her.’
“A study was started with both of her children. Shortly, my neighbor called me again and said: ‘I really appreciate what you are doing for our children. They are learning so much from the Bible.’ She continued: ‘You know, I have been trying to make up my mind for months now to ask you to study with me too, but I just did not have the courage. I have been watching you all these past six years and how faithful you have been for so long. I figured that there must be something to it. Do you think you could find time to study with me too?’ Overjoyed, I answered that I would be glad to do so.”

