Jesus Christ—Who Is He?
“EVEN many people who are not Christians believe that He was a great and wise teacher. He was certainly one of the most influential people who ever lived.” (The World Book Encyclopedia) Who is “He”? Jesus Christ, the founder of Christianity. Do you know who he is? Does he in any way affect your life?
The events of Jesus’ ministry are recorded in the Bible in four historical works called the Gospels. How genuine are these accounts? After analyzing them, the well-known historian Will Durant wrote: “That a few simple men should in one generation have invented so powerful and appealing a personality, so lofty an ethic and so inspiring a vision of human brotherhood, would be a miracle far more incredible than any recorded in the Gospels.”
To millions of people in the Orient and elsewhere, though, Jesus Christ is a stranger. They may believe that he existed, but they do not think that he has any bearing on their lives. Others dismiss Jesus as unworthy of attention because of what professed followers of his have done. ‘They dropped an atom bomb on Nagasaki,’ some in Japan would say, ‘a city with more Christians than most cities in Japan.’
Yet, would you blame a physician for a patient’s illness if the patient failed to stick to the doctor’s prescription? Obviously not. People of Christendom have long ignored Jesus’ prescription for overcoming their day-to-day problems. So rather than reject Jesus because of so-called Christians, who do not follow his instructions, why not learn something about him for yourself? Look into the Bible, and see who Jesus really is and how he can even change your life.
Love—His Prescription
Jesus Christ was a great teacher who lived in Palestine almost 2,000 years ago. Very little is known about his childhood. (Matthew, chapters 1 and 2; Luke, chapters 1 and 2) When he became 30 years of age, Jesus started his ministry to “bear witness to the truth.” (John 18:37; Luke 3:21-23) The four historical reporters of Jesus’ life focused on his public ministry, the last three and a half years of his earthly sojourn.
During his ministry, Jesus gave his disciples the key to dealing with various problems in their lives. What was that key? It was love. In one of the best-known sermons in history, called the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus taught his disciples how to show love for fellow humans. He said: “All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you also must likewise do to them.” (Matthew 7:12) This principle is called the Golden Rule. The “men” that Jesus referred to here include even one’s enemies. In the same sermon, he said: “Continue to love your enemies and to pray for those persecuting you.” (Matthew 5:44) Would not such love solve many of the problems that we face today? Hindu leader Mohandas Gandhi thought so. He is quoted as saying: “When [we] shall get together on the teachings laid down by Christ in this Sermon on the Mount, we shall have solved the problems . . . of the whole world.” Jesus’ teachings on love, if applied, can cure mankind’s ills.
His Love in Action
Jesus practiced what he taught. He put the interests of others ahead of his own and demonstrated love in action. One day, Jesus and his disciples were ministering to many people, without taking time to eat a meal. Jesus saw the need for his disciples to “rest up a bit,” so they headed to a lonely place. But a crowd got ahead of them and were waiting for their arrival. How would you have responded if you had been in Jesus’ position? Well, Jesus “was moved with pity for them” and “started to teach them many things.” (Mark 6:30-34) This strong feeling of pity moved him to offer assistance to others.
What Jesus did for the benefit of others was not limited to spiritual teaching. He also extended practical help. For example, he fed 5,000 men (in addition to women and children) who had been listening to him until late one day. He fed another 4,000 in a later instance. On the earlier occasion, he used five loaves of bread and two fish and, on the latter, seven loaves and a few little fish. (Matthew 14:14-21; 15:32-38; Mark 6:35-44; 8:1-9) Miracles? Yes, he was a miracle worker.
Jesus also healed many ailing ones. He cured the blind, the lame, the lepers, and the deaf. Why, he even raised the dead! (Luke 7:22; John 11:30-45) Once, a leper entreated him: “If you just want to, you can make me clean.” How did Jesus respond? “He stretched out his hand and touched him, and said to him: ‘I want to. Be made clean.’” (Mark 1:40, 41) Jesus was moved by a strong desire to help them. Through such miracles, he demonstrated his love for the afflicted.
Hard to believe? But Jesus performed most of his miracles in public. Even his opposers, who tried to find fault with him on every occasion, could not deny the fact that he performed miracles. (John 9:1-34) Besides, his miracles had a purpose. They helped people to identify Jesus as the one sent by God.—John 6:14.
Just briefly considering Jesus’ teachings and his life endears him to us and moves us to want to imitate his love. Yet, that is not the only way Jesus can affect your life. He was not just a great teacher who taught love. He indicated that he had a prehuman existence as the only-begotten Son of God. (John 1:14; 3:16; 8:58; 17:5; 1 John 4:9) He also has a posthuman existence, which makes him even more significant to you. The Bible indicates that Jesus was raised up and is now enthroned as King of God’s Kingdom. (Revelation 11:15) Jesus said: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3; 20:31) Indeed, taking in knowledge of Jesus Christ can mean endless life in Paradise! How can that be? Why not learn more about Jesus and see how “the love the Christ has compels us” to imitate him? (2 Corinthians 5:14) Jehovah’s Witnesses will be happy to help you.—John 13:34, 35.
Unless otherwise indicated, all Bible quotations are from the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.

