Announcements
● Literature offer for December: New World Translation and any 192-page book for contribution of $3.75. If 192-page books are not available, offer the New World Translation and the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! for contribution of $3.25. January and February: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, for contribution of $2.50. March: Any two of the following books for a contribution of $1.00: Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” Evolution, Holy Spirit, This Life and World Government. These publications, with the exception of the “Eternal Purpose” and Evolution books, may be ordered from the Society if none are in stock locally. These books used in the March offer may be obtained by congregation publishers for 50c each and at the regular rate by pioneers. Congregations may request 25c credit for each of those books. On the Remittance and Credit Request form, a line under “Other Items” can show the total number of such books placed for use in the March special offer and for which credit is requested.
● Presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit congregation’s accounts on December 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● Publishers and pioneers, please order your 1983 bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! through your congregation. Congregations should begin collecting requests for these volumes now. Then, on January 1, 1984, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society, using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). Order only the number of volumes for which you have requests. In addition to English, the volumes will be available in Dutch, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese and Spanish at $4.00 each. There is no pioneer rate. Payment should not accompany the congregation order sent to the Society. (See 1983 Cost List, paragraph 23.) Volumes will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices until they are available.
● It is suggested that all congregations display the new yeartext by January 1, 1984.
● New Publications Available:
Choosing the Best Way of Life—Yoruba
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth—Efik, Tagalog
● The following publications are available in grade-two English Braille. They may be obtained on loan, or they may be purchased.
School and Jehovah’s Witnesses (1 volume) $1.00 to purchase
United in Worship of the Only True God (4 volumes) $5.00 to purchase
If purchased, a remittance should accompany all orders. Orders for Braille items should be sent to the Society’s BRAILLE DESK and should not be included on regular congregation literature orders.

