God’s Word Exerts Power
1 Why has the Bible exercised such a powerful influence on the lives of millions of people for centuries? One reason is that it contains direction from man’s Creator. (Ps. 19:7-11; 119:105) Bible writers themselves testify that the Scriptures did not come by their own efforts but by inspiration from God. (2 Sam. 23:2) They wrote as they were directed by holy spirit.—2 Pet. 1:20, 21.
2 When we study and apply the words written under the direction of holy spirit, we find they exert power in our lives. This can be seen by the way many persons have been moved to make great changes in their lives so that they come into harmony with God’s Word. Thousands have been influenced by God’s Word to dedicate their lives to Jehovah and do his will.
POWER IN OUR LIVES
3 Does the Word of God exert power in your life? We should be “intensely occupied with the word” and anxious to help others learn more about it. (Acts 18:5) Paul wrote: “When you received God’s word, . . . you accepted it, not as the word of men, but, just as it truthfully is, as the word of God, which is also at work in you believers.” (1 Thess. 2:13) It takes a careful study of God’s Word to gain this conviction. God’s Word certainly was at work in Paul’s life, as it motivated him to undertake his strenuous missionary tours, preaching the good news about the Christ.—Rom. 15:19.
4 For God’s Word to exert power in our life we have to know what it teaches and apply it. (Heb. 4:12) Some choose to ignore the direction it gives. (Eph. 4:25-32) But those who follow the direction of the Scriptures enjoy a fine relationship with their Creator.
HELPING OTHERS
5 Have you met people who question whether the Bible really is God’s Word? Some say it may be “inspired” in the sense of being from the pen of gifted writers, but they doubt that it is actually from God. Such persons, as well as others, owe it to themselves to examine the Bible, put it to the test and see that it actually is the truth. (John 17:17) For this reason our offer of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures along with any one of the older 192-page books will provide them with what they need to make this examination. The contribution of $3.75 is nominal.
6 It is not just the placement of literature that is important. The question is, Can more persons be helped so that God’s Word will exert beneficial power and influence in their lives and on their families as it has for us? Our Topic for Conversation, “What Hope for a Happy Future?” is appropriate, as the Bible is the only book that gives a sure hope and accurately foretells the future. John 17:3 shows that our hope includes everlasting life, and at John 17:17 Jesus testifies that God’s Word is truth.
7 Use questions to involve the householder and help him see that a happy future is possible. For example, you could ask, “Did you know that at John 17:3 Jesus talks about living forever?” Or in commenting on John 17:17, we might say: “Did you know that the person who taught and influenced more people than any other man who ever lived pointed to God’s Word as the source of truth? That Teacher was Jesus, and he said: [Read.].”
8 During the month of December we will also have opportunity to offer the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! for a contribution of 25c. This will be of special interest to persons who may have reading difficulties. Also, many families will enjoy having this brochure to discuss with their children. It can help them learn more about the Kingdom and how Jehovah will carry out his will to make the earth a Paradise.
9 Interested persons need to study the Bible and become convinced that it is really the Word of God. Keeping that in mind, we should try to start Bible discussions. If the person is not convinced that the Bible is inspired, you could talk about this when you make a return visit.—See Watch Tower Publications Index under “Bible, inspiration.”
10 Only by learning the truth and being convinced that the Bible is inspired of God will sincere persons be motivated to follow its direction, which leads to everlasting life. (Prov. 2:1, 20, 21) If we do our part, we will see the influence of the Word of God grow in our territory as new ones become obedient to the faith.—Acts 6:7.

