Improving Our Teaching Ability—By the Use of Questions
1 “When he saw the crowds he went up into the mountain; and after he sat down his disciples came to him; and he opened his mouth and began teaching them.” (Matt. 5:1, 2) Jesus, as the Master Teacher, instructed with skill. Through his effective use of questions, he stimulated the thinking ability of his listeners. He sounded down the truth into their minds and hearts. As Jesus’ disciples, we want to copy his methods in our teaching activity.—Matt. 17:5-7, 24-26; 18:12; Mark 11:29, 30.
THE VALUE OF QUESTIONS
2 Much of our success in helping the student depends on the effective use of questions. When used properly, they become outstanding tools for teaching. They can guide the student’s mind from one point to another in an orderly way, so that he reaches proper conclusions. Questions help in at least three basic ways.
3 First, they help the student express thoughts in his own words. In that way the teacher can ascertain if the student really understands the points being made. Note that in the United in Worship book not only are questions found at the bottom of the page and within many paragraphs, but additionally there are questions in a “Review Discussion” box at the end of each chapter, drawing together the overall main points. These questions test the understanding of the student and help him to see how he can make practical application of the information he is learning. Also, questions and suggestions combined with an illustration are used throughout the book as teaching vehicles. Examples of these are found on pages 27, 34 and 101.
4 Second, questions can help the student to see the reasons for points made. They help him develop reasoning ability. He learns to put things in proper perspective, comparing his former beliefs with the truths he is now learning from God’s Word. See questions on paragraphs 13-19 on pages 61-63 and paragraphs 13-17 on pages 95 and 96 of the Live Forever book.
5 Third, you can use viewpoint questions to determine how the student feels personally about a point of truth. For example, during the Bible study you may have occasion to ask one or more of the following questions: Does this sound reasonable? How do you personally feel about what you are learning? Do you think it is important to apply these things in your life? By carefully listening to his answers, you can determine the best way to assist him to love Jehovah with his “whole heart.”—Matt. 22:37.
KINDS OF QUESTIONS
6 Questions basically ask for facts—Who? What? When? Where? Or, they may ask for conclusions or opinions—How? Why? Viewpoint questions are illustrated in the preceding paragraph. There are also multiple-choice, true-or-false, review and leading questions, to name a few others. Short, concise questions usually are the most effective because they involve only one main idea.
7 Our objective in asking questions is to help the student gain knowledge and grow in understanding. His answers help us evaluate his progress and heart attitude. (Eph. 3:17-19) Also, well-worded questions can help lead the student’s mind to Bible answers that will educate his conscience. (Compare Paul’s method at Galatians 3:1-6, also his 17 questions in 1 Corinthians 9:1-14.) Questions skillfully used in teaching will move the student to put to work in his life the truths he is learning.—Isa. 25:9.
8 Rewards for being a good teacher are great. When we teach we share something valuable with another person. We give of ourselves to help someone else. Will you make the effort it takes to be a good teacher? Teaching others is an enriching experience that can add joy to life and bring a sense of wholesome accomplishment.

