Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 4
Song 20
 5 min: Local announcements. Brief review of text for the day. Encourage participation in magazine work on Saturday. Bring Our Ministry book next week.
15 min: “God’s Word Exerts Power.” Question-and-answer discussion. Highlight how God’s Word helps us and how we can use it to help others. Demonstrate presentation of offer illustrating use of questions in discussion. Arrange for return visit to discuss how we can be sure the Bible is inspired of God.
25 min: What Is School Like Today? Coverage of pages 8-11 of School brochure on “The Moral Principles We Follow.” In introduction comment on moral attitudes of the day and consequences to teenagers. Invite panel of young publishers to platform and discuss need to uphold Bible principles in view of attitude of worldly students on morals. Then discuss with panel and audience the sound moral principles covering six problem areas, starting with “Premarital Sex.” In conclusion emphasize “Value of Bible Principles” to congregation, showing the fine benefits that come from following Bible principles.
Song 100 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 11
Song 70
 5 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Remind all to bring Live Forever and United in Worship books next week.
12 min: “Presenting the Good News—To Relatives.” Discuss main points with audience. Include upbuilding experiences as time permits.
14 min: Coping With Holidays and Celebrations. Question-and-answer coverage of material on “Birthdays” and “Christmas” on pages 17-19 of School brochure. Use introductory material under “Holidays and Celebrations” on page 17. Also include information on “New Year’s Day” on page 20. Emphasize that we are not against gift giving or showing honor to one another. Show pagan background of these holidays and celebrations and why Christians rightly avoid involvement.
14 min: Question-and-answer discussion of Our Ministry book, page 65, paragraph 3 through page 72, paragraph 2.
Song 87 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 18
Song 79
 5 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
10 min: “Punctuality—A Mark of Thoughtfulness.” Question-and-answer coverage by elder. Kindly reason with publishers on why they should make genuine effort to be on time for meetings in congregation, for circuit assemblies and district conventions, and for field service.
20 min: Elder to handle article on “Improving Our Teaching Ability—By the Use of Questions.” Discussion of material and demonstration. Have brief demonstration on material in paragraph 2. (Publisher studying with student in Live Forever book, page 226, paragraphs 4 and 5. Direct student to illustration on page 227, asking question next to picture.) Elder: On paragraph 3 discuss the value of “Review Discussion” box in United in Worship book.
10 min: Talk on recent Watchtower article. Use December 15, 1983, Watchtower article “Do You Fear What Others Think?” or October 15, 1983, Watchtower article “Reject Worldly Desires!” Encourage all to share in magazine activity on Saturday.
Song 52 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 25
Song 33
10 min: Local announcements. Relate brief experiences enjoyed by witnessing during the holidays or through informal contacts with relatives. Review service arrangements, encouraging all to share on the first Sunday, January 1.
10 min: Review highlights of 1984 Yearbook. Discuss benefits of daily consideration of text individually and as a family. Invite one or two family heads to explain how they arrange for the text discussion with their families. (If Yearbook is not available, use time for local needs.)
15 min: “Theocratic Ministry School Refinements.” School overseer gives talk based on article along with appropriate information from Our Ministry book, pages 72-74 and the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1984. Highlight benefits to be derived by all, whether newly enrolled or those in the school for many years. Call special attention to information under “Counsel and Remarks” in school Instructions.
10 min: “Brochure to Be Featured in Congregation Book Study.” Talk by elder. Encourage all to obtain a copy if they need it and be sure to attend when this is studied.
Song 91 and concluding prayer.

