Presenting the Good News—To Relatives
1 The Kingdom message is refreshing good news to our ears, but others, whose hearts are not inclined toward Jehovah, are not moved by it. (Matt. 13:15) When approached with the good news, they show little interest. Most of us have unbelieving relatives like this. Yet our family relationship may offer an opportunity to witness that may not be available otherwise. (Compare John 1:40, 41.) Many now in the truth got started through help from a relative. Have you tried to take advantage of this unique opportunity to witness? You may be the only one who can get your relatives to listen.
OPPORTUNITIES TO WITNESS
2 Relatives not in the truth may come for a brief visit or to stay for a few days during vacation time. This may provide opportunities to give a tactful witness. Appropriate items of literature might be left in convenient places in your home. The prayers you offer at mealtimes may give you a chance to talk about your relationship with Jehovah. Invite your relatives to the meetings. Your faithfulness in attending meetings during this time may give you an opportunity to tell what goes on and why you feel it is important for you to attend. Their sitting in and listening during your family study could result in a real blessing to them. If you should be visiting in their home, you may find other ways to give an effective witness.
3 Children are often the center of attention when families get together. Having that in mind, parents might review some basic aspects of the Kingdom message with the children beforehand. Some casual statement or incident might prompt the children to speak up in an appealing way that touches the heart of other family members. At times such expressions have a more telling effect than much witnessing by older ones.
4 Occasionally relatives are brought together under sad circumstances, such as when someone is seriously ill or there has been a death in the family. Comforting thoughts based on God’s Word may give cause for hope and touch a heart that has been unresponsive in the past.
5 Opportunities may present themselves under other unfavorable circumstances. The relatives may insist on an explanation because you decline to participate with the family in observing some holiday or family custom. Let them know in a tactful manner what you believe and why. (1 Pet. 3:15) Your sincere response without criticizing their beliefs could make a lasting impression.—Prov. 25:11.
WITNESSING BY YOUR CONDUCT
6 Even if your relatives are strongly opposed, you are still able to give a witness by your conduct. (1 Pet. 2:12) Always conducting yourself in a thoughtful, respectful manner may favorably impress others. This is especially important when they say things to provoke you or test your determination to be guided by Bible principles.—1 Cor. 10:31-33; 2 Cor. 6:3, 4.
7 There is cause for special joy when a family member accepts the truth. Perhaps nothing could bring us more satisfaction than to see a loved one find the way to life. That prospect should be enough to motivate us to seek opportunities to witness to our relatives.

