A Joyous Dedication in Tahiti
FOR Jehovah’s Witnesses in Tahiti, Friday, April 15, 1983, promised to be an exciting day. Scheduled for that date was the dedication of their new branch building, which would be used in the furthering of the Kingdom-preaching work in the islands of French Polynesia.
As the day approached, preparations were well under way. All concerned were waiting with joyful anticipation for the arrival of guests from Fiji and New Zealand, as well as a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Lloyd Barry, and his wife, Melba, who were also due to be present. However, in the back of everyone’s mind was the nagging question, What will the weather be like?
Hurricane Season!
Usually, the weather is not a problem in Tahiti. Sunshine, refreshing trade winds and tropical depressions during the rainy season make up the usual weather pattern. However, this year had been different. For the first time since 1906, Tahiti had been affected by a series of destructive hurricanes. Already in December 1982, hurricane Lisa had torn off roofs and uprooted trees in the Society Islands, of which Tahiti is the largest. Things had barely been restored to order when, in late January 1983, hurricane Nano, with center winds reaching 130 kilometers (81 mi) per hour, caused further damage.
In late February a shocking third hurricane, named Orama, with a huge eye more than 70 kilometers (43 mi) across, and winds reaching 150 kilometers (93 mi) an hour, ripped through the area and destroyed much of what Nano had spared. Calm seemed to have returned when, on March 8, the inhabitants heard that a new hurricane, named Reva, was on its way, with winds gusting up to 180 kilometers (112 mi) per hour. On March 12 the center of hurricane Reva passed within 140 kilometers (87 mi) of Tahiti, blowing down trees and electric poles in Papeete, the island’s main town.
Hence, there was concern about the weather. Had Tahiti seen the last of the hurricanes? Would the weather prevent the arrival of the guests and delay the dedication of the new branch office? The answer to both questions proved to be No!
The Guests Arrive
Tahiti had not seen the last of the hurricanes. On Monday evening, April 11, it was announced that a tropical depression named Veena had now become a hurricane in the neighboring Tuamotu archipelago and would probably head for Tahiti. Sure enough, the eye of the hurricane, around which raged winds of up to 200 kilometers (124 mi) per hour, passed within 40 kilometers (25 mi) of Tahiti’s southeast coast. Starting early Tuesday morning, the island was battered by its high-velocity winds.
After it had gone, the tropical-paradise image of Tahiti was rather tarnished. It is estimated that 3,043 houses were destroyed and 3,199 damaged; 26 boats were stranded and 39 sunk, and 25,000 people were left homeless. On April 13, Tahiti awoke to an unusual concert of hammers echoing on wood and sheet iron. The islanders were rebuilding. But what about the dedication of the new branch building? And what about the guests? Would they be able to get into Tahiti? Already, an airplane coming from Fiji had been forced to turn back. At last, however, several hours late, the plane carrying the guests arrived safely.
Thursday, April 14, was a full day. Many were repairing their damaged homes, and at the new branch building​—which, happily, was undamaged—​last-minute preparations were under way. The visitors had opportunity to see the new Tahitian branch structure, about 25 kilometers (16 mi) from Papeete. They found it to be a strong, two-story building, able to house up to eight people. On the ground floor are various offices, storerooms and a library, while the second floor has a kitchen, dining room, living room, laundry and four bedrooms.
The Dedication Program
Finally, Friday, April the 15th arrived. At five o’clock in the evening, Francis Sicari, a member of the Tahiti Branch Committee and chairman of the proceedings, opened with words of welcome. Then, Alain Jamet, the coordinator of the Branch Committee, presented a program of slides reviewing the construction of the branch office building.
After that interesting feature, Francis Sicari returned to the platform and reviewed the development of the preaching work in French Polynesia. He reminded the 702 in attendance that a few seeds began to sprout in the islands early in the 1950’s. In 1957, at a convention in Los Angeles, U.S.A., the president of the Watchtower Society, Nathan H. Knorr, appealed for volunteers to serve where the need was greater in Tahiti. Some responded and the growth was speeded up.
In order to help organize congregations, the Society then arranged for a number of full-time servants to visit Tahiti from time to time. Among these were John and Helene Hubler, who had opened the work in New Caledonia back in 1954 and are now in district work in New Zealand. The Hublers were among the guests at the dedication program and were invited to relate some of their experiences. Helene movingly described the first Memorial celebration she attended in Tahiti. It was held outdoors under a clear sky, lit by a full moon shining through the coconut palms, while the air was filled with the perfume of flowers blown by a gentle trade wind. This scene had been indelibly fixed in her memory ever since.
Donald Clare, the Branch Committee coordinator for Fiji, was also present. He had helped to oversee the work in Polynesia for several years before Tahiti became a separate branch, and he related some experiences he had had during his various journeys to Tahiti. He said that the simplicity and warmth of the early full-time preachers in Tahiti were among his dearest memories.
The main talk was given by Lloyd Barry. He greatly encouraged the local Witnesses who had been affected by the recent hurricanes. He reminded them that disasters are characteristic of the last days of this system of things, but Jehovah, if he desires, can save his people. The important thing is to accomplish what Jehovah had commissioned us to do, whatever the circumstances. (Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20) Many comforting experiences coming from all over the world show us how well this commission is being fulfilled and how fully Jesus Christ and the angels are supporting it.
Why, though, does the Society construct new buildings when the world is in such an uncertain state? Brother Barry explained that Jehovah’s organization expects to survive these troubled times. God’s people are getting equipped and organized to give the greatest witness possible in these final years before Armageddon brings an end to this system of things. And they hope that many of their new facilities will be used in the great post-Armageddon reorganization work.
The speaker compared the dedication program to the ancient Jewish Festival of Booths. For God’s ancient servants, that festival was an occasion of great joy. (Deuteronomy 16:13-15) Similarly, for those assembled the dedication of the new facilities in Tahiti to the exclusive service of Jehovah God was an occasion for great rejoicing. Finally, all present resolved to keep strong their confidence in Jehovah’s promises.
Another Hurricane
Everyone was greatly strengthened and encouraged by the dedication program. The guests left almost hidden by the numerous leis that their Tahitian friends loaded on them. Then, on Monday, April 18, hurricane William passed by, venting its worst fury on the East Tuamotu Islands. Enormous waves submerged the atolls, and violent winds wiped out villages and coconut-tree plantations. Before it was finished, hurricane William, too, had caused great damage.
Nevertheless, the 496 witnesses of Jehovah under the Tahiti branch were happy that the storms had paused long enough to allow the dedication of their new branch to take place on schedule. They were prepared to be more zealous in telling their neighbors the good news of the Kingdom. And they were particularly happy to be able to point out that, despite natural disasters, “in the fear of Jehovah there is strong confidence, and for his sons there will come to be a refuge.”​—Proverbs 14:26.

