Increased Activity at United States Bethel
Increased theocratic activity brings greater joy. So there is great rejoicing as the United States branch prepares to move its printing, binding, and shipping operations from Brooklyn to Wallkill, New York. The existing printery at Wallkill is being renovated, a large addition is under construction, and new equipment has been purchased and will soon be installed.
Since 1927, the printery in Brooklyn has produced over one billion books. There is, however, a need to update our older printing and binding equipment, some of which is 44 years old. This older equipment requires more maintenance and manpower to operate. The existing facilities in Brooklyn cannot accommodate the larger, more productive equipment that we need. Therefore, it was determined that the printery operations should be moved to Wallkill where efficient printing, binding, and shipping equipment could be installed.
The consolidation of the U.S. printery operations at Wallkill would not be possible without the recent reorganization of our worldwide production of books. Prior to this reorganization, the United States branch produced almost 50 percent of the books used in our work worldwide. Some book production has been shifted to other branches, making better use of their facilities and leaving the United States with a reduced workload. It will also be necessary to provide six branches, including the United States, with a total of seven new printing presses. The use of new, more efficient equipment will make it possible to increase production worldwide with reduced personnel.
New Equipment for Wallkill Printery: It was with great excitement that the Bethel family received the news that the Governing Body approved the purchase of two new high-speed MAN Lithoman rotary web offset presses for Wallkill. These new high-speed presses are capable of producing magazines and book signatures (individual printed sections of a book) at a rate of 90,000 per hour. This means that an average congregation order of 350 magazines can be produced in just 14 seconds. The two new presses, along with the three existing MAN Lithoman presses at Wallkill, will be able to supply the needs of the United States field.
As mentioned in the branch letter on the first page of this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, new bindery equipment will also be installed at Wallkill. The new equipment is capable of producing hardcover books and deluxe Bibles at a rate of 120 a minute. The bindery will be set up with much of the equipment linked together by conveyors, allowing for efficient use of space and personnel.
The Shipping Department is also being designed for greater accuracy and efficiency by making better use of computer tools. A new high-rise storage system will allow literature to be stored in less than half the floor space currently used in Brooklyn. These improvements will contribute to a streamlined flow of literature to the over 12,000 congregations and groups in the United States and other areas we serve.
Construction Update: The progress on the printery addition at Wallkill has been excellent, with significant milestones reached successfully! The shell of the building, from foundation to roof, will be completed next month. Landscaping is nearly complete, and a massive mechanical system is being installed. Efforts to complete the interior, along with exterior finish work, have commenced in earnest. Work is also under way to renovate the existing printery building to accommodate new equipment.
The printery addition is scheduled to be substantially completed by February 2004 so that presses can be installed. There will be a total of 590,000 square feet, or 13 acres, of space ready for use. This includes a new 140,000-square-foot building and the renovation of the existing 450,000-square-foot printery building. To put this in perspective, it is the equivalent of 8 Assembly Halls or 125 Kingdom Halls.
Your Help Is Appreciated! Doubtless, it is the desire of each one of us to support this advancement of Kingdom interests fully. The number volunteering to assist with the construction work will likely exceed 1,000, and their assistance is greatly appreciated. Circumstances may not permit most of us to assist with the actual work, yet we are eager to provide support. How can we do so?
The total cost for the printery addition at Wallkill, including two of the seven new presses and other new production equipment, will likely be $50 million. Where does the money come from to pay for all of it? From voluntary contributions placed in the box marked “Contributions for the Worldwide Work​—Matthew 24:14” in every Kingdom Hall, together with donations sent to the branch office by Christians who wish to see the will of God accomplished. Where there has been a need, Jehovah’s loyal servants have always responded generously. For example, in Moses’ day, material things were needed to construct the tabernacle with all its glorious attachments and utensils. The privilege of sharing in building the tabernacle went out to all of God’s servants, and they gave according to their ability.​—Ex. 35:4-24.
As this tremendous project nears completion (likely in early 2005), we will inform the congregations so that individuals and families can arrange to visit the new facilities. In the meantime, may we take this opportunity to thank you for making possible the greatly increased theocratic activity at the United States branch. May Jehovah continue to bless all of us spiritually as a result.
[Box/Pictures on page 3]
Branches Receiving New Presses and Delivery Dates
Britain:       August 2003
Brazil:        November 2003
Japan:         January 2004
Mexico:        February 2004
South Africa:  April 2004
United States: April and May 2004
[Diagram on page 4, 5]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Press compared to a city bus
Length: 133 feet
Height: 18 feet
Weight: 201 tons
[Picture on page 3]
117 Adams Street building in 1927
[Pictures on page 4, 5]
Progression of work
January 2003
April 2003
July 2003
July 2003 view
[Pictures on page 6]
“ . . . the people continued to have a heart for working.”​—Neh. 4:6.
[Picture Credit Line on page 3]
Copyright by MAN Roland Druckmaschinen AG

