Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting September 8
Song 10
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage all to review their notes from the circuit assembly program for the past service year in preparation for next week’s Service Meeting. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate realistic demonstrations of how to present the September 15 Watchtower and the September 22 Awake! In one presentation, show a student or a parent witnessing to a schoolteacher.
10 min: Branch Letter. A discussion between a longtime publisher, preferably an elder, and a younger publisher. The younger publisher asks if the experienced publisher has seen the letter from the branch office in Our Kingdom Ministry. The experienced publisher explains that the branch letter was a feature of Our Kingdom Ministry during the 1960’s and 1970’s. They then discuss the letter on the front page, highlighting the main points.
25 min: “Youths​—Build a Fine Foundation for the Future.”a To be handled by an elder, using the questions that are provided. When discussing paragraph 5, highlight the joys and blessings of full-time service.
Song 170 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 15
Song 199
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
10 min: “Studying the Worship God Book.” Talk by a book study overseer. Draw attention to the study schedule. When discussing the fourth paragraph, include comments on the Ministry School book, page 28, paragraph 1, and page 70.
25 min: “Trust in Jehovah and Do Good.” (Ps. 37:3) Audience discussion based on the following questions, which highlight key points of the circuit assembly program for the past service year. Invite audience to include comments on how they were able to apply key points personally or as family groups. Feature these program parts: (1) “Manifesting Trust in Jehovah.” Why is it vital to display trust in Jehovah in all aspects of life? (it-2 p. 521) How can the Watch Tower Publications Index help us? (2) “Guard Against the Vanities of Life.” (Eccl. 2:4-8, 11) What vain works must we guard against, and how can we do so? (3) “Shun the Bad​—Be Doers of Good.” Why is it vital to adhere to Jehovah’s standards? (Isa. 5:20) With what good works should we be busy? (4) “Maintaining Our Confidence in Jehovah.” What will help us to stand firm in the face of trials and temptations? Why may we need to leave some things in Jehovah’s hands? (5) “Will You Be Counted Worthy of the Kingdom of God?” (Col. 1:10) What Bible examples stimulate us to continue walking worthily of Jehovah? (6) “Trust in Jehovah’s Promises.” How will doing this affect our lives?
Song 58 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 22
Song 7
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate demonstrations of how to present the October 1 Watchtower and the October 8 Awake! Show an elder and an infirm publisher doing telephone witnessing.
15 min: How Did We Do Last Year? The service overseer reviews highlights from the congregation report for the 2003 service year. Commend the congregation for the good things accomplished. Include appropriate points from the last report by the circuit overseer. Mention one or two reachable goals for the coming year.
20 min: “Increased Activity at United States Bethel.” Talk and audience discussion.
Song 39 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 29
Song 194
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for September. Mention the literature offer for October. Have a brief demonstration of how to start a Bible study in the Require brochure.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Clothe Yourselves With Humility.”b Draw comments from the audience on how the scriptures apply.
Song 224 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 6
Song 170
10 min: Local announcements. This month we are making a special effort to start Bible studies. Briefly review the May 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 1, paragraph 1.
15 min: “Be Sure to Put First Things First!” Talk and audience discussion based on the article in the September 1, 1998, Watchtower, pages 19-21. Mention the dates of the theocratic events scheduled for the next several months, and encourage all to mark these dates on their calendar. Invite audience to comment on what they do to avoid missing out on spiritual provisions.
20 min: Standing Up to Peer Pressure. Interview an elder or a ministerial servant who was raised in a Christian household. Refer to selected points from the February 15, 2003, Watchtower. What pressure did the brother face at school? (p. 24 par. 3; p. 25 pars. 4-5) Did he face any negative influence from others? (p. 26 pars. 4-6) Does he still face peer pressure as an adult? What has helped him to resist the pressure to conform? In brief concluding talk based on the August 1, 1999, Watchtower, pages 24-5, highlight the benefits of cultivating wholesome association.
Song 26 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

