Youths​—Build a Fine Foundation for the Future
 1. Why do Christian youths need to develop strong faith?
1 What is foremost in your mind? What do you think about? Are your primary concerns centered on things present, or do they reach into the future and focus on what God has promised? (Matt. 6:24, 31-33; Luke 8:14) Strong faith is needed to act on God’s promises, as can be seen from the examples of Abraham and Moses. (Heb. 11:8-10, 24-26) How can you develop such faith and build “a fine foundation for the future”?​—1 Tim. 6:19.
 2. What do we learn from King Josiah’s example?
2 Search for Jehovah: If you have a routine of spiritual activity with your family, that is commendable. But do not assume that such a routine will automatically produce strong faith. To find “the very knowledge of God,” you must personally search for Jehovah. (Prov. 2:3-5; 1 Chron. 28:9) Young King Josiah did that. Despite growing up in a less-than-ideal spiritual environment, “he started to search for the God of David his forefather” when he was 15 years old.​—2 Chron. 34:3.
 3. How can young Christians today search for Jehovah?
3 How can you search for Jehovah? By carefully examining what you believe and ‘proving to yourself’ that it really is the truth. (Rom. 12:2) For example, can you explain what the Bible says about blood or prove that God’s Kingdom began ruling in the heavens in 1914? Acquiring “an accurate knowledge of truth” is an important part of building a fine foundation for the future.​—1 Tim. 2:3, 4.
 4. How can unbaptized publishers make their advancement manifest?
4 Josiah’s search for God yielded good results. Before he reached the age of 20, he acted courageously to rid the land of false worship. (2 Chron. 34:3-7) Likewise, your spiritual progress will become manifest by your actions. (1 Tim. 4:15) If you are an unbaptized publisher, strive to improve the quality of your ministry. Do not be content simply to offer literature. Make it your aim to use the Bible, to reason with people, and to cultivate the interest that you find. (Rom. 12:7) This will help you to grow spiritually.
 5. What opportunities to expand their ministry are available to baptized Christians?
5 Give Jehovah Your Best: When you symbolize your dedication to Jehovah by getting baptized, you become an ordained minister of God. (2 Cor. 3:5, 6) This opens up opportunities for you to serve Jehovah full-time. These include pioneering as well as Bethel, missionary, and international service. Still other ways to expand your ministry are by learning another language or by moving to serve where the need is greater.
 6. How can all of us build a fine foundation for the future?
6 Of course, not all can make themselves available for these privileges of service, but each of us can give Jehovah his best. (Matt. 22:37) Whatever your circumstances, make serving Jehovah the focus of your life. (Ps. 16:5) By so doing, you will be building a fine foundation for the future.

