From Our Readers
Faithful Youths  I was touched by the series “Youths Who Put God First.” (May 22, 1994) When I was a teenager, I had a brain tumor. As one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I told the doctors: “I don’t want to take a blood transfusion.” Although a court order was obtained to force blood on me, the surgery went well without it. As I read about these faithful young servants of God, I had tears in my eyes. They had been through the same experience as I! Their stories have touched my heart and strengthened my love for God.
M. P., United States
I am 17 years old and have been afraid of finding myself in such a situation one day. Dying doesn’t scare me, but the thought of disregarding Jehovah’s laws does. It would be awful to give in under pressure. The article gave me much strength.
C. K., Germany
When I read the articles, I could not hold back the tears. Afterward, I read very carefully the booklet How Can Blood Save Your Life? (published by the Watchtower Society). I now know how to behave should I ever be in a similar situation.
Y. G., Germany
Since I suffer from an incurable form of leukemia, the experiences of young ones who have proved their devotion to Jehovah were quite encouraging to me as an adult. Many thanks.
H. K., Austria
I am 18 years old. I was thrilled and shaken when I read the articles yesterday. I could not stop crying when I came to see that these faithful children died. Their faith has made me ask myself whether I could, under such conditions, keep my integrity.
E. A. O., Nigeria
I was really struck by the indomitable firmness of all the youths mentioned. After reading the articles, I cried a lot and thanked Jehovah that he gave them the strength to face such difficulties down to their death. I can sincerely say that my teenage problems are really nothing in comparison.
R. C., Italy
There is no question that these deeply moving articles will encourage all young people who read them. These young ones were all firm in their refusal of blood; at the same time, they could think for themselves and explain themselves clearly. I was encouraged to learn that whatever pressures and tests there are, Jehovah will not fail to give us strength and needed help.
R. T., Japan
Illiteracy  I appreciated the series “Breaking the Chains of Illiteracy.” (February 22, 1994) When I fled from China to South Africa in the 1950’s, I was unable to speak any of the languages spoken here. However, Jehovah’s Witnesses patiently helped me to understand the Bible in English. I also attended their meetings, including the Theocratic Ministry School. My English gradually improved, and now I am confident in the door-​to-​door ministry.
W. W., South Africa
Reincarnation  Although I am Muslim, I am a regular reader of Awake! I wish to express my sincere thanks for your recent series “Have You Lived Before? Will You Live Again?” (June 8, 1994) I found it very informative. I have for a long time been searching for information that could be used to correct some of my friends who insist upon the existence of reincarnation. With the information given, I believe they will surely agree that since there is a resurrection, there cannot be reincarnation.
K. S., Nigeria

