Happiness​—Guaranteed!
“HAPPY are those conscious of their spiritual need,” said Jesus Christ. (Matthew 5:3) Contrary to conventional wisdom, Jesus pointed to the fulfilling of one’s spiritual need rather than the satisfying of material desires as the one essential ingredient for success in the pursuit of happiness. Those words of Jesus, if followed, amount to a guarantee of happiness.
Being conscious of one’s spiritual need, however, means more than simply being aware that such exists. More often than not, a need unfulfilled is a source of anxiety and resentment rather than of happiness. The Bible proverb puts it this way: “Expectation postponed is making the heart sick.” (Proverbs 13:12) Thus, happiness blossoms as one takes steps to identify and then to satisfy one’s spiritual need. How can this be done?
This is where the Bible comes in. Why? Because it alone can provide answers to questions that many have long contemplated without finding satisfying answers. For example, have you ever wondered, ‘What is the purpose of life? Why is man on the earth? What does the future hold?’ Besides providing satisfying answers to these and many other questions, the Bible also supplies guidance for living that has helped millions to cope with the complex problems that confront all of us today and that often impede our search for happiness. “[God’s] word is a lamp to my foot, and a light to my roadway,” says the psalmist. (Psalm 119:105) Yes, the Bible is a sure guide that can help you succeed in the pursuit of happiness. Consider these two real-​life examples.
From Resentment to Marital Happiness
Marriage can be a source of happiness or of misery. Sadly, for many it is the latter. However, the Bible’s counsel, when applied, has helped many to find happiness in a once unhappy marriage.
Yungk’un and Meihsiu had such an experience. “The first seven years of our marriage were not happy ones,” confides Yungk’un. “I spent very little time with my wife and two daughters. In fact, I often slept at my place of work.” Although having all they needed materially, they were not happy. His wife adds: “Aside from providing for us materially, my husband left all family matters in my care. I really resented it.” They even thought of separating.
Yungk’un had other family problems as well. Because of previous family difficulties, he had not spoken to his sister for seven years. This in spite of the fact that they lived less than a hundred yards from each other. Now, however, he enjoys a happy marriage and a fine relationship with his sister. Why the big change?
“My wife and I began studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses and attending their weekly Bible meetings,” explains Yungk’un. His sister did the same. They began to apply the things they were learning and were amazed at the results. Yungk’un obtained employment that allowed him to care for not only the material needs of his family but also their spiritual and emotional needs. They now enjoy a happy, united family life.
She Found a Purpose in Life
Those who study human nature have said that to be happy we need a reason for living, a purpose in life. A life centered on the selfish pursuit of material things does not satisfy this need. Twenty-​six-​year-​old Lini found this to be true.
“I used to work 12 hours a day, seven days a week,” she says. “My goal was to open a large beauty salon.” Even though she was close to realizing her dream, she felt something was missing in her life. “I used to wonder about the purpose of life. Was it just to work and make money?”
Then one day someone came into her shop and asked her the very question she had wondered about. She was told that the Bible could answer that question. Although she had never read the Bible before, she agreed to set aside one hour each week to examine it.
From her weekly study, Lini learned that the Bible had foretold many of the things she was witnessing every day. She was amazed at how accurately the Bible had described ahead of time the attitudes that existed all around her, foretelling that men would be “lovers of themselves, lovers of money, self-​assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal, having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-​control, fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God.” She studied other prophecies that point to the unprecedented suffering caused by wars, famines, and natural disasters that are seen around the world.​—2 Timothy 3:1-5; Matthew 24:7, 12.
Lini then learned something that made her very happy​—these world conditions that often rob people of happiness are an indication that a new era in human history is near. (Matthew 24:3-14) She also read in the Bible that the Creator of mankind purposes to establish a new world here on earth, where material prosperity such as imperfect man has never known will prevail worldwide. (Psalm 72:16; Isaiah 65:17, 18, 21, 22) This future prosperous society will not be marred by the existence of greed, selfishness, and materialism, with all their evil consequences. (Psalm 37:9-11, 29; 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10) She was thrilled when she read these words in the Bible: “There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.”​—2 Peter 3:13.
Happiness Awaits You
Rather than spending all her time in the pursuit of material goals, Lini now spends much of her time telling others about the things she has learned. Would you like to know more about these wonderful promises? Would you like to discover how the Bible can help you to find the happiness that Lini, Yungk’un, Meihsiu, and millions of others have found? Jehovah’s Witnesses would be most willing to assist you.
[Picture on page 8, 9]
Our Creator purposes to establish an earthly paradise

