“Why I Don’t Celebrate Christmas”
SOME say that children of Jehovah’s Witnesses are deprived because they don’t celebrate Christmas. But consider the essay “Why I Don’t Celebrate Christmas” that an 11-​year-​old Witness in California, U.S.A., wrote as a class assignment:
“To many people, Christmas means a lot of things​—presents, family, presents, food, presents, sharing, presents, love, presents, Santa Claus, presents, etc. Yet people nowadays rarely ever think about what Christmas means or why they celebrate it. If they do, they usually think of Christmas as Jesus Christ’s birthday, a time for family and, of course, lots of presents. Most people pity Jehovah’s Witnesses because they think their children are deprived. But are we really missing out on something? Let’s consider why Jehovah’s Witnesses don’t celebrate this holiday.
“As one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I don’t celebrate Christmas for many reasons. For one thing, it isn’t Jesus’ birthday. The Bible says there were shepherds out in the fields with their sheep. In Jerusalem it is very cold in the winter and often snows. It is very unlikely that the shepherds would live outside during these months. . . . There is more to it, though.
“Not only was Christmas not Jesus’ birthday but it was never observed by first century Christians. Its origins lie in the ancient Roman festival Saturnalia, beginning Dec. 17 and ending Dec. 25, the ‘birthday of the unconquered sun.’ In the fourth century, some Roman official decided to celebrate Jesus’ birthday Dec. 25, perhaps to sanctify their pagan holiday.
“It is no wonder that Christmas was banned from many different countries. Today some people (like Jehovah’s Witnesses) have followed their example. . . .
“I used to celebrate Christmas​—until I was four years old. . . . As to being deprived, Jehovah’s Witnesses most certainly are not. We get presents all year long. The only things we’re missing are these pagan holidays and their equally pagan celebrations.”
Although the teacher noted on the paper, “Not all people wish for presents,” she also wrote, “Very well done,” and gave the student an “A.”

