VOL. XIV. JANUARY 15, 1893. NO. 2. 

A WORD TO METHODISTS. 

FROM BISHOP FOSTER. 



The following earnest and solemn words 
from Bishop Foster have appeared in various 
Methodist Journals, and in tract form. He certainly 
gives his trumpet no uncertain sound. 

"The Church of God is to-day courting the 
world. Its members are trying to bring it down 
to the level of the ungodly. The ball, the 
theatre, nude and lewd art, social luxuries with 
all their loose moralities, are making inroads 
into the sacred inclosure of the Church; and 
as a satisfaction for all this worldliness, Christians 
are making a great deal of Lent and 
Easter and Good Friday and Church ornamentations. 
It is the old trick of Satan. The 
Jewish Church struck on that rock, the Romish 
Church was wrecked on it, and the Protestant 
Church is fast reaching the same doom. 

"Our great dangers, as we see them, are assimilation 
to the world, neglect of the poor, 
substitution of the form for the fact of godliness, 
abandonment of discipline, a hireling 
ministry, an impure gospel, which, summed 
up, is a fashionable church. That Methodists 
should be liable to such an outcome, and that 
there should be signs of it in a hundred years 
from the "sail loft," seems almost a miracle 
of history; but who that looks about him today 
can fail to see the fact? 

"Do not Methodists, in violation of God's 
Word and their own Discipline, dress as extravagantly 
and as fashionably as any other class? 
Do not ladies, and often the wives and daughters 
of the ministry, put on "gold and pearls 
and costly array?" Would not the plain dress 
insisted upon by John Wesley, Bishop Asbury, 



and worn by Hester Ann Rogers, Lady Huntington, 

and many others equally distinguished, 

be now regarded in Methodist circles as fanaticism? 

Can any one going into the Methodist 

Church in any of our chief cities distinguish 

the attire of the communicants from that of the 

theatre and ball goers? Is not worldliness 

seen in the music? Elaborately dressed and 

ornamented choirs, who in many cases make 

no profession of religion, and are often sneering 

skeptics, go through a cold, artistic or operatic 

performance which is as much in harmony 

with spiritual worship as an opera or a theatre. 

Under such worldly performance spirituality is 

frozen to death. 

"Formerly every Methodist attended class-meeting 
and gave a testimony of experimental 
religion; now the class-meeting is attended by 
very few, and in many churches it is abandoned. 
Seldom do even the stewards, trustees and 
leaders of the church attend class-meeting. 
Formerly nearly every Methodist prayed, testified 
or exhorted in prayer meeting; now but 
very few are heard. Formerly shouts and 
praises were heard; now such demonstrations 
of holy enthusiasm and joy are regarded as 
fanaticism. 

"Worldly socials, fairs, festivals, concerts, and 
such like, have taken the place of the religious 
gatherings, revival meetings, class and prayer-meetings 
of earlier days. 

"How true that the Methodist Discipline is 
a dead letter. Its rules forbid the wearing of 
gold, or pearls, or costly array; yet no one 
ever thinks of disciplining any of its members 
for violating them. They forbid the reading 
of such books and the taking of such diversions 

R1492 : page 19 

as do not minister to godliness; yet the 

church itself goes to shows and frolics and festivals 

and fairs which destroy the spiritual life of 

the young as well as the old. The extent to 

which this is now carried on is appalling. 

"The early Methodist ministers went forth 
to sacrifice and suffer for Christ. They sought, 

R1492 : page 20 

not places of ease and affluence, but of privation 

and suffering. They gloried, not in their 

big salaries, fine parsonages and refined congregations, 

but in the souls that had been won 

for Jesus. Oh, how changed! A hireling 

ministry will be a feeble, timid, truckling, time-serving 



ministry without faith, endurance and 
holy power. Methodism formerly dealt in the 
great central truth. Now the pulpits deal 
largely in generalities, and in popular lectures. 
The glorious doctrine of Entire Sanctification 
is rarely heard and seldom witnessed to in the 
pulpits." Methodist Exchange. 



That the good Bishop is not unduly alarmed 
about the actual state of Methodism is manifest 
to every observer who is not stone blind. 
Here are two items out of many that might be 
culled from both the religious and secular press 
substantiating the Bishop's charge. They read 
as follows:— 

"CHURCH BOWLING ALLEYS AND BILLIARD 
PARLORS. 



"The Christian Nation is our authority for 
the statement that 'Mr. H. W. Knight, before 
a recent gathering of Methodists at the Bible 
House in this city (New York), said that, as an 
adjunct to the churches, buildings should be 
constructed with bowling alleys and billiard 
parlors and the like to counteract the influence 
of the rum shops.' 

"A great many questionable things are done 
in many of the churches, ostensibly in the name 
of religion, but we were hardly prepared to get 
the announcement that things had come to 
such a pass that the Methodist Church would 
even consider such a proposition. A point 
made very prominent in the founding of that 
church was the idea of plainness and an entire 
separation from all worldly folly, but, having 
grown to be a large body and consequently 
popular, it is ready to entertain the proposition 
of having a gambling annex attached to its 
churches. 

"Several instances are on record where young 
men have gained their first lessons in gambling 
at church socials and festivals. If they have 
thus learned these lessons at occasional gatherings 
of the church for festivity and silly games, 
how will it be when a permanent establishment 
that can be visited at any time is erected in 
connection with the churches? We have 
searched in vain for the divine commission, 
Go ye into all the world, and, for those who will 
not hear the gospel, erect bowling alleys and 
billiard parlors in connection with the churches, 



in order that they may be entertained. 

"We know that this move will not meet the 
approval of the large majority of the members 
of the Methodist Church, but we are sorry to 
see that such is the tendency in the minds of 
many in the various churches at the present 
time; and while this is going on, should there 
not be a people who are seeking their power, 
not from some questionable means of worldly 
policy, but from the great source of all power, 
the world's Redeemer?"— Elder A. O. Tait. 

"The Voice," of New York, has also the 
following: ~ 

THE REV. DR. F. A. LLACY GIVES ADVICE. 



"The pastor of a Methodist Episcopal church 
in a city noted for its beer-brewing interests 
has been so greatly stirred by The Voice's 
Church and Saloon editorials that he was constrained 
to seek counsel of a brother minister 
of his acquaintance, asking advice as follows:— 

'"Dear Brother: My soul is stirred within 
me as I see this city wholly given up to the 
brewing interests. It would really seem that 
our churches are bowing to the liquor oligarchy. 
What are we to do— stay in the pulpit 
and keep silence, or preach Prohibition and 
take the consequences— abuse, non-support and 
persecution?'" 

The response to this we give below: 

'"My Dear Young Friend: Your difficulty 
is one quite common to comparatively inexperienced 
ministers. I can fully sympathize 
with you in feeling as though you would like 
to fire broadsides of Gospel truth into the sin 
and iniquity that besiege the world on every 
hand. I used to feel that way myself in my 
early ministry, when I had occasional fits of 
'enlargement of the conscience,' as I call it. 
It will require great care properly to suppress 
such impulses, and to keep the reins well in 
hand, so that you can manage the often none 
too pious men on whom you have to depend 
to supply the money for carrying on the Lord's 
work on an adequate scale. 

'"The preaching of the Gospel in a way not 
to offend has become a science, which it behooves 
a young minister to study well. It has 
taken centuries to evolve this science in its 
present perfection. We are wiser than the 
early Christians and those of the Middle Ages, 
who injudiciously butted their heads against 
the brass walls of prejudice. They preached 



against particular sins, and incurred unnecessary 
displeasure, when they might have preached 
the Gospel as the never-failing remedy for all 

R1492:page21 

sin, without specifying, and thus have secured 
the respectful attention and endorsement even 
of the most hardened sinners. 

'"It requires great wisdom and discretion 
to preach the Gospel in the present day in the 
way that most of the influential churches want 
it preached. The day of fishermen preachers 
is past. The young man who would serve a 
wealthy pulpit acceptably to-day must bring 
into it education, culture and refinement, and 
must show great deference to the opinions of 
the men who are looked up to, and who have 
influence in the church and in the 
neighborhood. 

'"Regarding the particular question about 
which you inquire, you should be careful to 
make a broad discrimination between, for instance, 
a wealthy brewer and a wicked dive-keeper, 
who may, in the natural course of 
business, handle the former's wares and be under 
business obligations to him. Your congregation 
will probably stand by you in anything 
you may say about saloon-keepers, especially 
about those who conduct disorderly and disreputable 
resorts, but it would not do to imperil 
influence for good by attacking a respectable 
wholesale dealer, or classing him in the same 
category with common saloon-keepers. 

'"Then, as to Prohibition, you know that 
question has so many bearings, especially in its 
political aspects, that it is well to feel your way 
very carefully before committing yourself to it 
unqualifiedly. You can safely say that you 
sympathize with the objects had in view by those 
earnest and excellent people who have become 
so discouraged in their attempts to keep the 
business within respectable limits that they even 
propose to do away with it entirely. I said 
that myself recently and it was heartily endorsed 
by a wealthy wholesale dealer, whose wife is a 
member of my church, and who is himself one 
of the best paying members of my congregation. 
Moreover, several Prohibitionists thanked 
me for my courageous stand against the liquor 
power. 

'"Now, my dear brother, I have great hopes 
for you. I know of no young man in the denomination 
who stands a better chance for ecclesiastical 
preferment than yourself, if you will 
but follow the dictates of your own sober judgment 



guided by a few such considerations as I 
have mentioned. Whenever I can help you in 
any way, command me, and believe me, 
Ever sincerely your brother in Christ, 
F. A. Llacy.'" 



But Methodists are not alone in these matters. 
Here is another item of similar import:— 

CHURCHES AND SALOONS. 



"There is considerable discussion in Pittsburg 
religious circles over the sermon last 
Sunday of the Rev. W. S. Rainsford, D.D., 
pastor of St. George's Episcopal Church, New 
York, in which he advanced some very radical 
views as regards the regulation of saloons. 
Dr. Rainsford, in substance, said that he had 
given the saloon question a great deal of study 
and that he had come to the conclusion that 
it is impossible to suppress saloons, at least in 
large cities, and the best thing the church can 
do is to make a compromise and countenance 
the establishment of places by Christian men, 
where beer, light wines and coffee can be sold. 
He also favored the opening of the places on 
Sunday during certain hours, and thinks the 
attachment of reading rooms would make them 
attractive. Dr. Rainsford thought that these 
places properly conducted would in a great 
measure aid the cause of temperance and lessen 
the consumption of spirituous liquors." 



The foregoing arraignments by Bishop Foster, 
not only Methodists, but Presbyterians, 
Baptists, Episcopalians and members of all denominations 
may well ponder, for they apply to 
all alike. They come from one of the oldest 
bishops in the Methodist denomination. Had 
they come from one outside of Methodism they 
might be regarded as malicious reproach, but 
coming as they do from one high in official 
capacity within the denomination, they must 
be regarded as his honest convictions in view 
of the broad observation of Methodism as a 
whole which his position as bishop furnishes. 

Its confessions ought indeed to be startling 
to every Methodist particularly, and to others 
in so far as they realize the same conditions. 
The Bishop accuses the membership of the 



R1493 : page 21 

Methodist church (1) of trying to bring the 
church down to the level of the ungodly by 
encouraging "the ball, the theatre, nude and 
lewd art, and social luxuries with all their loose 
moralities." What a charge! what a confession! 
Can the spirit of Christ, the love of the 
truth, or the joys of hope and of communion 
with God dwell in hearts that are so led of the 
spirit of the world? But does the Bishop 
mean that only a few such have crept into the 
Methodist church, while the great majority are 

R1493 : page 22 

otherwise minded? Evidently not, for he speaks 

of the membership of the Methodist church as 

a whole. He seems to see plainly that the 

whole Methodist field is overrun with tares, and 

that the true wheat— the saints who are actuated 

by the spirit of Christ— are numerically so insignificant 

as to be unworthy of mention. 

(2) He accuses them of trying to make satisfaction 
for this worldliness by giving more attention 

to the outward forms of godliness— the 
keeping of Lent and Easter and Good Friday, 
and attending to church-decorations, etc.— in 
other words of having "a form of godliness 
without the power." 

(3) He shows how the early zeal, enthusiasm, 
sobriety, consistency and devotion of Methodism 
have given place to pleasure-seeking with 

the world— how they are now "lovers of pleasure 
more than of God." 

But what word of commendation has he for a 
faithful ministry that bravely endeavors to stem 
this fearful tide of worldliness in the ranks of 
Methodism? None whatever. On the other hand, 
his testimony agrees with that of the Prophet 
Isaiah (28:7. See also S.S. Lesson on Isa. 28:1-13, 
in TOWER of Jan. 15, 1892), that the ministry 
as well as the membership have become 
intoxicated with the spirit of the world, and are, 
therefore, as far out of the way as the people. 
He speaks of them as "a hireling ministry- 
timid, truckling, time-serving, without faith, 
endurance and holy power;" says they have 
forsaken the great central truth of Christianity 
and deal in generalities and popular lectures. 

What an arraignment of Methodism. Doubtless 
the good Bishop would make some honorable 
exceptions among the ministry, as well as 
among the membership of Methodism, were he 
not speaking here of his outlook over Methodism 



as a whole. This can only be understood 

as his general view of the rank and file both of 

the ministry and membership of the great 

Methodist organization. In his estimation and 

from his specially favorable standpoint of observation, 

having a full acquaintance with the 

workings of the whole system and necessarily 

a large personal acquaintance with both the ministry 

and the membership, he plainly describes 

the rank and file of both as "tares"— mere 

imitation Christians, Christians in outward appearance, 

but not at heart. And, pointing to 

the fact that the society is only a little over a 

hundred years old, he declares that such a fall 

from the original devotion and zeal of Methodists 

for God "seems almost a miracle of history," 

and adds, "But who that looks about him 

to-day can fail to see the fact?" 

It is high time, in view of these things, that 
any of the Lord's true people who still abide 
in the midst of Methodism and who support it 
with their influence, their presence and their 
means, should awake and consider what the 
Lord would have them do. We are now living 
in "the harvest" or "end" of the Gospel 
age, when the wheat and the tares which the 
Lord allowed to grow together all through the 
age must be separated. (Matt. 13:30.) The 
great mass of tares is to be bound yet more 
tightly than ever in bundles preparatory to the 
burning (symbolic) in the great time of trouble 
predicted by the Lord and the prophets and 
the apostles to occur within this harvest period, 
and which therefore can be only a very few 
years in the distance. 

The sickle which the Lord is making use of 
to accomplish the separation is the truth due 
in this harvest period— the truth concerning 
the divine plan of the ages, showing both 
scripturally and philosophically the glorious 
outcome of the work of redemption in the grand 
"restitution of all things, spoken by the mouth 
of all the holy prophets since the world began" 
(Acts 3:19-21); and showing also the "high 
calling" of the Gospel Church— not the mixed 
company of wheat and tares which constitute 
the nominal gospel church, but the true and 
faithful saints," whose names were "written in 
heaven," and which have never been "blotted 
out" because of unfaithfulness: "The Lord 
knoweth them that are his." The divine plan 
of the ages shows how those called, chosen and 
faithful" ones (Rev. 17:14) are to be joint-heirs 
with Christ, how they are to reign with 
him over the earth for a thousand years, and 
how they with him constitute the promised 



"Seed of Abraham" which is to bless all the 
families of the earth.— Rom. 8:17; Rev. 5:10; 
20:6; Gal. 3:16,29; Gen. 28:14. 

R1497 : page 23 

THE TRUE CHURCH. 



One Sabbath morn I roamed astray, 
And asked a pilgrim for the way: 

"O, tell me, whither shall I search, 
That I may find the one true Church?" 

He answered, "Search the world around; 
The one true Church is never found. 

"Yon ivy on the abbey wall 

Makes fair the falsest church of all." 

But fearing he had told me wrong, 
I cried, "Behold the entering throng!" 

He answered, "If a Church be true, 
It hath not many, but a few!" 

Around a font the people pressed, 

And crossed themselves on brow and breast. 

"A cross so light to bear," he cried, 
"Is not of Christ the Crucified! 

"Each forehead, frowning, sheds it off: 
Christ's cross abides through scowl and scoff!' 

We entered at the open door, 

And saw men kneeling on the floor; 

Faint candle, by the daylight dimmed, 
As if by foolish virgins trimmed; 

Fair statues of the saints, as white 
As now their robes are, in God's sight; 

Stained windows, casting down a beam, 
Like Jacob's ladder in the dream. 

The Pilgrim gazed from nave to roof, 
And, frowning, uttered this reproof: 

"Alas! who is it understands 

God's temple is not made with hands?" 



II. 



We walked in ferns so wet with dew 

They plashed our garments trailing through, 

And came upon a church whose dome 
Upheld a cross, but not for Rome. 

We brushed a cobweb from a pane 
And watched the service in the fane. 

"Do prayers," he asked, "the more avail, 
If offered at an altar rail? 

"Does water sprinkled from a bowl, 
Wash any sin from any soul? 

"Do tongues that taste the bread and wine 
Speak truer after such a sign?" 

Just then, upon a maple spray, 

Two orioles perched, and piped a lay, 

Until the gold beneath their throats 
Shook molten in their mellow notes. 

Resounding from the church, a psalm 
Rolled, quivering, through the outer calm. 

"Both choirs," said I, "are in accord, 
For both give praises to the Lord." 

"The birds," he answered, "chant a song 
Without a note of sin or wrong: 

"The church's anthem is a strain 
Of human guilt and mortal pain." 

The orioles and the organ ceased, 
And in the pulpit rose the priest. 

The Pilgrim whispered in my ear, 
"It profits not to tarry here." 

"He speaks no error," answered I; 
"He teaches that the living die; 

"The dead arise; and both are true; 
Both wholesome doctrines; neither new." 

The Pilgrim said, "He strikes a blow 
At wrongs that perished long ago; 

"But covers with a shielding phrase 
The living sins of present days." 



We turned away among the tombs— 
A tangled place of briers and blooms. 

I spelled the legends on the stones: 
Beneath reposed the martyrs' bones, 

The bodies which the rack once brake 
In witness for the dear Lord's sake, 

The ashes gathered from the pyres 

Of saints whose zeal our souls inspires. 

The Pilgrim murmured as we passed, 
"So gained they all the crown at last. 

"Men lose it now through looking back 
To find it at the stake and rack. 

"The rack and stake are old with grime; 
God's touchstone is the living time." 



III. 



We passed where poplars, gaunt and tall, 
Let twice their length of shadow fall. 

Then rose a meeting-house in view, 
Of bleached and weather-beaten hue. 

Men plain of garb and pure of heart 
Divided church and world apart. 

Nor did they vex the silent air 
With any sound of hymn or prayer. 

God's finger to their lips they pressed, 
Till each man kissed it, and was blessed. 

I asked, "Is this the true Church, then? 
He answered, "Nay, a sect of men: 

"And sects, that lock their doors in pride 
Shut God and half his saints outside. 

"The gates of heaven, the Scriptures say 

R1497 : page 24 

Stand open wide by night and day. 

"So, then, to enter, is there need 
To carry key of church or creed?" 



IV. 



Still following where the highway led, 
Till elms made arches overhead, 

We saw a spire, and weathercock, 
And snow-white church upon a rock— 

A rock, where centuries before, 
Came sea-tossed pilgrims to the shore. 

My sandals straightway I unbound, 
Because the place was holy ground. 

I cried, "One church at last I find, 
That fetters not the human mind." 

"This church," said he, "is like the rest; 
For all are good, but none are best." 



V. 



Then far from every church we strayed— 
Save Nature's pillared aisles of shade. 

The squirrels ran to see us pass, 

And God's sweet breath was on the grass. 

I challenged all the creeds, and sought 
What truth, or lie, or both, they taught. 

I asked, "Had Augustine a fault?" 

The Pilgrim gazed at Heaven's high vault, 

And answered, "Can a mortal eye 
Contain the sphere of all the sky?" 

I said, "The circle is too wide." 
"God's truth is wider!" he replied. 

"Though Augustine was on his knee, 
He saw how little he could see; 

"Though Luther sought with burning heart, 
He caught the glory but in part; 

"Though Calvin opened wide his soul, 
He comprehended not the whole. 

"Not Luther, Calvin, Augustine 
Saw visions such as I have seen." 

While yet he spake, a rapture stole 
Through all my still inquiring soul. 

I looked upon his holy brow, 
Entreating, "Tell me, who art THOU?" 



But such a splendor filled the place, 
I knew it was the Lord's own face! 

I was a sinner, and afraid! 

I knelt in dust, and thus I prayed: 

"O Christ the Lord! end thou my search, 
And lead me to the one true Church." 

He spake as never man may speak— 
"The one true Church thou shalt not seek. 

"Seek thou, forevermore, instead, 
To find the one true Christ, its Head!" 

The Lord then vanished from my sight, 
And left me standing in the light. — Sel. 



R1495 : page 24 

SOME CONGREGATIONALISTS WAKING UP. 



An evidence of growth of public opinion on 
the subject of eternal torment was recently afforded 
in the Plymouth Church, Brooklyn, of 
which Henry Ward Beecher was formerly pastor. 
The Church takes up special collections 
for Missions, and it was decided recently that 
for the year 1893 no moneys should go into 
their usual Missionary channel, the "American 
Board of Foreign Missions," unless at the specific 
request of contributors; but that instead 
all should go to a missionary in Japan known 
to hold views in opposition to eternal torment. 
This motion was made by the present pastor, 
and only one person voted against it— a Mr. 
Bliss, whose name suggests his composure and 
joy even though all others of the race were in 
torment. 

One gentleman present, Dr. Raymond, speaking 
on the subject at that meeting, expressed 
his convictions very earnestly. As reported 
in the New York Tribune, he said: 

"I am sick and tired of going to the American 
Board in sufferance to aid in supporting 
missionaries who believe out and out in the 
damnation of all the heathen, and that damnable 
heresy that God doesn't love the heathen. 
I am tired of the whole miserable humbug, and 
I won't give a cent to spread the news of damnation. 
I won't let the damnable doctrine be 
disseminated by my money. That God is love 



is good news, but it is made stale old stuff by 
these men who drag a Juggernaut car over the 
heathen and want us to feed the beasts that 
haul it. It is my Christian duty not to give to 
any concern that will teach the heathen that 
their fathers went to hell." 



R1493 : page 25 

OUR LORD'S SERMON ON THE MOUNT. 

NO. I. MATT. 5, 6, 7. 



This sermon of our Lord is characteristic of 
the great Teacher who spake as never man 
spake. It is wonderful alike for its simplicity, 
its clearness, its depth and its comprehensiveness. 
It is entirely devoid of anything like oratory; 
for evidently its object was to instruct, 
rather than to play upon the emotions of his 
hearers. Indeed, it is specially noticeable in all 
our Lord's public ministry that his methods of 
teaching were calculated to keep reason on the 
throne, and not to permit it to be overpowered 
by an unduly wrought emotional nature. In 
this his methods are in marked contrast with 
many of those in vogue to-day. We note also 
that his words were simple and easy to be understood, 
and that they appealed strongly both 
to the judgment and to the heart. 

The sermon was addressed, not to a promiscuous 
congregation of saints and sinners, but 
to his earnest and faithful disciples who had 
left all to follow him— who had forsaken business 
and business prospects and home and 
friends and reputation, and who, in lieu thereof, 
had cheerfully accepted the reproaches that 
fell upon the Master, as well as the necessary 
toils and privations incident to such a life. 
Consequently its teachings apply, not to the 
world, nor to mere professors of Christianity, 
but only to those consecrated souls who have 
likewise left all to follow the Master whithersoever 
he goeth. The occasion was one of those 
seasons when, wearied with exhaustive labor, 
he withdrew from the multitudes who sought 
his healing touch and anxiously listened for the 
wonderful words that proceeded out of his 
mouth— "And seeing the multitudes [and being 
too weary to minister to them] he went up 
into a mountain, and having sat down, his disciples 
came up" (verse 1), and he opened his 



mouth and taught them. 
THE BEATITUDES. 



A comparison of verse 3 with Luke 6:20 seems 
to indicate that the parenthetic phrase, "in spirit," 
was Matthew's comment, and not our Lord's 
exact words, which, according to Luke, were 
"Blessed are ye poor; for yours is the kingdom 
of heaven." The reference we therefore 
regard as applying to those who follow their 
Lord, who, though he was rich, for our sakes 
became poor, that we through his poverty might 
be made rich. Blessed are such poor ones— 
those who become poor in any sense of the 
word, whether financially or socially or otherwise, 
by sacrificing themselves for the blessing 
of others. True, we may have very little to 
sacrifice, but nevertheless, blessed are all the 
sacrificers. 

The comforting words of verse 4 remind us 
of a similar expression of our Lord— John 16:20 
—"Verily, verily, I say unto you that ye 
shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice; 
and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow 
shall be turned into joy." (See also 2 Cor. 1:7; 
Isa. 61:2,3.) It is those in Zion who 
mourn over and lament the mighty power of 
evil in the high places both of church and of 
state, and who, setting themselves in opposition 
to it, incur the reproaches both of the 
world and of lukewarm, nominal Christians. 
Blessed are all who so mourn; for in due time 
they shall be comforted in receiving the reward 
of the righteous and in beholding the final 
triumph of righteousness and truth. 

Verses 5,10,11. The blessed meek ones of 
verse 5, who shall inherit the earth, are the 
same class who, according to verses 10,11, are 
bold and courageous enough to withstand evil 
and error and to champion righteousness and 
truth: they are meek in the true sense in submitting 
themselves fully to the Lord, and bold 
in defence of his truth and his way, even the 
endurance of persecution for righteousness' sake. 
Blessed are all such meek, persecuted and falsely 
accused ones; for they shall inherit the 
earth: theirs is the kingdom of heaven. By and 
by they shall reign with Christ in his throne. 
Rejoice, all ye, and be exceeding glad, for great 
is your reward in heaven. 

Verse 6 promises the satisfying portion of 
truth and righteousness in due time to all that 
hunger and thirst after righteousness. Verse 7 



R1493 : page 26 

promises a merciful judgment to all those who 
exercise the same, and is thus the strongest incentive 
toward as lenient judgment of our fellow-men 
as circumstances will permit. 

Verse 8. "Blessed are the pure in heart; 
for they shall see [Greek, horao, discern] God." 

R1494 : page 26 

To be pure in heart is to have pure, sincere 
motives and desires. Those so disposed come 
to the divine revelation with reverence and 
meekness; and such, and such only, are prepared 
to see the breadth and scope of the 
wonderful plan of God, and how far it transcends 
the narrowness of human theological 
creeds and philosophies. Having no films of 
prejudice or vain philosophy before their eyes, 
and no clouds between themselves and God, 
with delight they discover in his wondrous 
plan of the ages the worthy lines of his truly 
glorious character— his wisdom, justice, love 
and power. 

Verse 9. God is pleased to own the peacemakers 
as his children. These are they who 
have first themselves found peace with God 
through faith in the precious blood of Christ, 
and who thereafter devote their energies toward 
bringing others into this blessed rest of 
faith and peace with God, and who further 
seek to show by word and example how a heart 
at peace with God always seeks peace with fellow-men 
under all circumstances where the 
sacrifice of the principles of righteousness are 
not involved. All such peace-makers are the 
blessed sons and heirs of God. 

Thus, first of all, the great Teacher bids us 
rejoice in counting over our blessings, showing 
us that even here in this wilderness state our 
table is indeed bountifully spread and our cup 
runneth over with blessings. 

THE CHURCH, THE SALT OF THE EARTH AND 
THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD. 



Verse 13. "Ye are the salt of the earth," 
etc. The virtue of salt is its power to season 
and to preserve from decay and putrefaction, 
which power the true disciples of the Lord are 
here said to exercise over the masses of mankind 
in general. This, however, is not because 



we have this power in and of ourselves: 
it is the spirit of the truth, the spirit of Christ 
in us through the knowledge of the truth and 
obedience to it, transforming the old creature 
into the new creature in Christ. 

According to these words of our Lord, it is 
by the influence of such persons, directly and 
indirectly, that the world has been kept from 
sinking to greater depths of ignorance and sin. 
When the spiritual life of the Church has ebbed 
low, the world has always suffered in consequence. 
For example, remember the dark ages 
and then the opposite effect of what is known as 
the Great Reformation. When spirituality revived 
in the hearts of God's people, the whole 
world began to wake up, and to receive some 
droppings of the shower of blessing. In the 
lives of God's people men see the moral distance 
between virtue and vice, and reason of a 
coming judgment when each will receive the 
reward that is meet, and they are thereby either 
shamed or persuaded to better and nobler 
lives. 

But the possibility of losing this savor of 
truth and righteousness is also intimated: that 
is, we may retain the outward forms of godliness 
and lose its real power, its spirit or disposition, 
and thus become false representatives 
of the truth— hypocrites. And in such a case 
the question is an apt and suggestive one: "If 
the salt have lost its savor wherewith shall it 
be salted?" Or in other words, If the truth 
have lost its power over us, to what other power 
shall we look for the savor of the spirit of 
truth? "Sanctify them through thy truth," 
was the Lord's prayer, and if the truth ceases 
to avail for our sanctification and we turn from 
it, the implication is that nothing else will do 
it. And those who utterly repudiate its power 
are thenceforth "good for nothing," and their 
end is destruction. See also Heb. 6:4-8; 
10:26,27. 

Verse 14. "Ye are the light of the world," 
etc. The whole world walks in the valley of 
the shadow of death, and the Lord's disciples 
alone have the light of life, the blessed truth 
of redemption and full restitution— the good 
tidings of great joy for all people. "Let your 
light shine," says the Master. Let it dispel 
the nightmare which haunts so many minds— 
of a fiendish and all-powerful God whose purpose 

R1494 : page 27 

is to torment eternally nearly all of his intelligent 
creation. Let the light chase this and 



every other superstition back to the dark source 
whence it came. Do not hide your light, but set 
it forth prominently and keep it trimmed and 
burning, that its gracious beams may reach as far 
as possible through the gloom of ignorance and 
superstition. And, thank God, the time is coming, 
and is now not far distant, when all the light-bearers 
shall be exalted to power and great 
glory; for it is written, "Then shall the righteous 
shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of 
their Father." And when this heavenly city, 
the New Jerusalem, is thus set upon a hill [in 
the kingdom] it cannot longer be hidden; but 
its glory shall lighten the whole world. Praise 
the Lord for his mercy and grace! 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1494 : page 27 
FULNESS OF JOY. 



"These things write we unto you that your joy may be 
full."-l John 1:4. 

Joy may be regarded as the effervescence or 
overflow of true and genuine happiness; and 
it is our Heavenly Father's good pleasure that 
his children should be so full of happiness as 
to bubble over all the time. To this end he 
has prepared a table before them, even in the 
presence of their enemies, and filled their cup 
of happiness full, even to running over. (Psa. 23:5.) 
This table of good things is his precious 
truth, to which we, who were poor condemned 
creatures under sentence of death, but 
sincerely penitent and desiring to return to 
God, have been graciously invited. 

There, most prominently spread out before 
me, lies a most precious document: it is my 
pardon, sealed with the precious blood of Christ 
and signed by the great Sovereign of the Universe. 
It reads, "For God so loved the world 
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in him might not perish, but 
have everlasting life." And thereto is appended 
this emphatic assertion, challenging 
contradiction— "It is God that justifieth: who 
is he that condemneth?" (John 3:16; Rom. 8:33,34.) 
"What?" I exclaim, "Does that 
mean me?" Yes, says the document, if you 
are one of the world— one of the condemned 
posterity of Adam— and willing to accept this 



free gift of God through Jesus Christ his Son, 
then this pardon is yours. And you need no 
one else to tell you so. Do you not hear? 
"It is God that justifieth. Who is he that 
condemneth?" 

With tears of gratitude I gladly accept the 
favor; and, truly, if there were nothing more 
on the table we might well say, Our cup is full. 
But no: there is more, much more; and, drying 
my tears, I see that side by side with this 
blessed document lies another which guarantees 
full restoration, to all the willing and obedient, 
of all the rights, privileges and blessings originally 
granted to our father Adam, but which he 
long ago forfeited, not only for himself, but 
for all his posterity. It reads, "Times of Refreshing 
[or renewing] shall come from the 
presence of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus 
Christ,. ..whom the heavens must retain till 
the Times of Restitution of all things, which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy 
prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) 
Praise the Lord! I exclaim; that fixes 
a definite time when the blessings of liberty 
from sin and death shall begin to be actually 
realized. 

O! how we rejoice; and even though we still 
wear the prison uniform of a diseased and dying 
body, and still abide within the prison wall 
of this present dying condition, we rejoice in 
hope of the glorious day of release. 

But while clasping and holding and rejoicing 
in this precious hope, realizing that I am 
now recognized as a child of God and that in 
due time I shall be attired and blessed accordingly, 
my eye catches sight of a beautiful card. 
With trembling hand and a vague suspicion that 
this may be still another message of divine love, 
I lift it and read, "Hearken, O daughter, and 
consider and incline thine ear; forget also 
thine own people and thy father's house: so 
shall the King greatly desire thy beauty; for 
he is thy Lord, and worship thou him."— 
Psa. 45:10,11. 

R1494 : page 28 

Was ever a proposal of marriage couched in 
more delicate and beautiful phrase? With 
astonishment I read it again and again. Surely 
it can mean nothing less than this: I am 
invited by the King of kings to become the 
bride of his royal Son— his only begotten Son 
and heir of all things. And since clothed with 
the imputed robe of his righteousness, which 
hides all the unrighteousness of my own robes, 



I am really considered beautiful in the eyes of 
the King, I am told, so that he desires to make 
me his bride— if I am willing for his dear sake 
to forget my own people and my father's 
[Adam's] house— the world in general, with all 
its hopes, aims and ambitions. 

And while I gladly accept the offer and hasten 
to make ready for the glorious consummation, 
I find on this same bounteous table explicit directions 
as to how I may fit myself to behold 
the King in his beauty— of how I must appear 
in this precious robe of his righteousness which 
now makes me beautiful in his eyes, and that I 
may work out upon it the "fine needle work" 
(pains-taking embroidery) of an actual righteousness. 
Then, too, there are encouragements 
to perseverance in overcoming the world, to 
faithfulness in making ready for his appearing 

R1495 : page 28 

and to watchfulness against any snares by the 
way. Then there are warnings of the dangers 
and hardships of the pathway which are permitted 
to prove my love and loyalty by my faithful 
endurance. And there are copious promises 
of grace sufficient for every time of need. 
And there is line upon line to assure and reassure 
my faith of my Heavenly Father's good 
pleasure to thus exalt me to joint-heirship with 
his Son and to make me meet for such exaltation 
by making me also a partaker with him of 
the divine nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) Then there 
are precious secrets for those thus elected of 
God— with reference to the time and manner 
and circumstances, etc., of the Lord's appearing 
and to the glory and honor and blessing 
of the coming inheritance and the blessed 
mission of the coming kingdom. Ah! surely, 
Lord, "thou hast prepared a table before me in 
the presence of mine enemies: my cup runneth 
over," and I rejoice with joy unspeakable and 
full of glory. 

Ah, says the inspired Apostle who wrote 
some of these things, and who saw the Lord and 
heard his teachings when he was here in the 
flesh— "These things write we unto you that 
your joy may be full. That which we have seen 
and heard declare we unto you, that ye also 
may have fellowship with us (fellow-heirs of the 
same promises); and truly our fellowship is 
with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ." 
(1 John 1:4,3.) O what condescension on 
the part of the divine Father and Son and what 
favor toward us! We all are one— one family 
—the divine royal family whence universal 



blessing shall shortly flow to all creatures in 
heaven and in earth. 

But hold: there may be some who unworthily 
claim this honor while really they have no part 
nor lot in the matter. The only conditions 
upon which we can claim these precious promises 
are those of faith and obedience. And if 
we are still trusting in the finished redemptive 
work of Christ, and obedient to the heavenly 
calling, we are walking in the light of God's 
promises and instruction. And since in God 
is no darkness at all, and he has promised to 
guide us continually by his spirit through his 
Word, we cannot walk in darkness while we 
follow his leading. And in thus following 
where he leads and hearkening to his voice, and 
in making known our wants and our gratitude 
and love in prayer, which he has promised always 
to hear and heed, we have sweet fellowship 
with him and with his dear Son, our Lord 
Jesus. And not only so, but we have sweet 
fellowship also with all saints who are faithfully 
traveling in the same way. 

"This, then," says the Apostle, "is the message 
which we have heard of him and declare 
unto you, that God is light, and in him is no 
darkness at all." If we have fellowship with 
him we are walking (progressing) in the light 
—in the light which divine truth sheds about 
us and in the light of his approving 
countenance. 

"If we say that we have fellowship with 
him, and walk in darkness [walk contrary to 
his truth] we lie [for God does not lead his 
children that way], and do not the truth." 
Ah, there is the trouble. If any walk in darkness 
[away from the truth and toward error] it 
is not God's fault, but their own, in not obeying 
the truth. Dearly beloved, let us walk in 
the light. 



page 29 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1495 : page 29 
DEDICATING THE TEMPLE. 



I. QUAR., LESSON VI., FEB. 5th, EZRA 6:14-22. 

Golden Text— "I was glad when they said unto me, 
Let us go into the house of the Lord."— Psa. 122:1. 

The time of this lesson is about five years 
after that of the last two lessons. The Temple 
had been finished, although the wall of 
the city of Jerusalem was yet far from completed, 
and had been for a time abandoned. 

VERSE 14 evidently refers, not only to the 
rebuilding of the Temple, but also to the 
city wall; because it mentions the commandment 
of Artaxerxes as well as those of Cyrus 
and Darius. King Artaxerxes' command 
went forth long after the Temple was finished, 
and had reference merely to the city 
wall, completed over fifty years after the 
completion of the Temple. 

VERSES 15,16 draw special attention to 
"the house" of God, the Temple. This structure 
was undoubtedly built according to the 
specifications of King Cyrus, and if so was 
sixty cubits high and sixty cubits long (Ezra 6:3): 
it was therefore of larger dimensions 
than that of Solomon, although greatly inferior 
to it in ornamentation. Its dedication 
was, therefore, a very notable event with 
the people returned from Babylon, not one of 
whom, probably, had seen Solomon's Temple, 
which was destroyed about ninety years 
previous. 

VERSES 17-22 describe the elaborate ceremony 
with which the Temple was dedicated, 
although it was all as nothing compared 
with the dedication of Solomon's Temple; 
however, the people now were poor in comparison, 
and certainly did nobly and generously, 
their circumstances considered. This 
suggests to our minds the consecration of the 
living Temple, and how the offering of themselves 
to the Lord, on the part of the "living 
stones," is pleasing and acceptable to 
God through Christ, none the less on the 
part of those who have few talents than of 
those who have many. 

One point of this lesson specially worthy 
of note, by those who have fallen into the 
error of supposing that Israel and Judah 



were never re-united after their separation 

in the days of Rehoboam, and who claim 

that the ten tribes, styled "Israel," were all 

lost and that only the two tribes, Judah and 

Benjamin, styled "Judah," returned to Palestine 

after the Babylonian captivity, is that 

the people of Judah and Benjamin are not 

mentioned in this narrative, while the Levites 

are mentioned and the people as a whole 

are referred to as "children of Israel;" and 

it is specially stated (verse 17) that the sin-offering 

was of "twelve he-goats according 

to the number of the tribes of Israel." 

What better evidence could we have that 

all the twelve tribes were represented among 

these returned captives than this fact that 

the sin-offering was for all the tribes? 

None; except that our Lord and the Apostles 

in their day repeatedly addressed the 

descendants of those people as "Israel" and 

"Israelites." 

The Golden Text is frequently misapplied 
by Christian people to some earthly structure 
of wood or brick or stone. Let us see 
in it the real house of God— the Church of 
living stones, being fitted and prepared for 
the indwelling of God by his spirit. Let us 
rejoice to enter into this, the antitypical 
house of God, soon to be glorified. Let us 
rejoice to have our names written among 
its members— "written in heaven."— 
Luke 10:20. 

The time chosen for the dedication was 
the beginning of the Jewish year; hence in 
connection was the celebration of the Passover 
feast. 

R1495 : page 29 

NEHEMIAH'S PRAYER. 



I. QUAR., LESSON VII., FEB. 12, NEH. 1:1-11. 

Golden Text— "Lord, be thou my helper."— Psa. 30:10. 

VERSES 1-3. Nehemiah was an Israelite 
of the tribe of Judah. He was of one of those 
families which had not returned to Palestine 
under Cyrus' decree of about ninety years 
previous. He was an influential man, a 
Counselor to King Artaxerxes; for such is 
the significance of the title, "Cup-bearer" 
(verse 11). His attention was called to the 
pitiable condition of the returned Jews by 



R1496 : page 29 

his brother and certain others of his tribe 

R1496 : page 30 

who had returned to Babylon. The seventy 
years intervening between this lesson and 
the last had not been years of prosperity, 
but of adversity, to the Israelites, both in 
Jerusalem and in Babylon. Their enemies, 
taking advantage of the weaknesses of Ahasuerus, 
who reigned during the interim, had 
attacked the partially rebuilt walls and gates 
of the city of Jerusalem and had wrecked 
the former and burned the latter, which were 
of wood: and at Babylon, as we learn from 
the Book of Esther, a plot for the complete 
extermination of the Israelites had almost 
succeeded under the guidance of their enemies 
led by Haman— but had been prevented 
by divine interposition. 

VERSES 4-11. Nehemiah's subsequent 
history proves him to have been a great man 
—a man of wisdom and of executive ability 
—and his conduct as here related testifies 
to the same; for he at once sought the Lord, 
desiring of him wisdom and grace that he 
might act aright— that he might perform 
what he felt to be his duty toward his people 
—"Israel." 

In this we have a lesson which every real 
Christian's experience corroborates. Let 
nothing be done through strife or vain-glory 
(i.e., for self-glorification or honor), but let 
all things be done for the Lord's glory. 
And whoever is seeking service from such 
a motive will surely seek the divine wisdom 
to guide into the divine will and work. 

Prayer is not to be entered into with a 
view to changing the divine will and getting 
it to conform to our imperfect ideas, 
but rather to bring our hearts and minds and 
conduct into conformity to the divine will, 
assured that therein is our greatest and truest 
happiness. Nehemiah's prayer was of 
this proper sort. He confesses the justice 
of the Lord's chastisement of Israel for their 
sins. He properly includes himself with 
the others of his nation. He recalls the fact 
that God's dealings were just— in exact fulfilment 
of the covenant made with that 
nation. (Lev. 26:33, etc.; Deut. 4:25, etc.; 
28:64.) Then he refers to the Lord's promises 
in the same connection, That if Israel 



would repent he would return his favor to 
them.-Deut. 30:4; 9:29; Isa. 11:12. 

Nehemiah was so deeply in earnest that 
he continued his prayers and supplication 
after this manner for several days; not that 
the Lord needed urging on the subject, but 
that the subject was growing upon Nehemiah's 
mind and heart. Gradually he was 
made earnest and strong enough to take an 
important part in the answering of his own 
prayer, as is shown by verse 1 1 . His petitions 
closed, not with a boastful feeling that 
he had thought out a plan for Israel which 
would bless them and cover himself with 
honor, but with a plan which he believed 
to be of God, and upon which he desired 
God's blessing. He was about to bring the 
matter which was so close to his heart to 
the attention of the King Artaxerxes, and 
he prayed, "Prosper, I pray thee, thy servant 
this day, and grant him mercy [favor] in 
the sight of this man"— the king. 

Let us each follow this same course. "In 
all thy ways acknowledge him [God], and 
he shall direct thy paths."— Pro. 3:6. 



R1496 : page 30 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



page 30 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I did not sign the 
free will offering or "Good Hopes" sent me 
last year because I could not promise as much 
as I would like for the cause; but as I have put 
aside a little each week, I send it to you to day, 
and will continue the same plan for next year, 
only hoping to do better. 

When I read in the TOWER of the Brother 
who was wandering, I tell you, my dear Brother, 
it struck me hard. I love the dear Savior, 
but I often feel cold and distant, that I am cast 
off. When I go to prayer my mind wanders, 
and my heart becomes full of evil thoughts. 
I do not want to have such feelings, but it seems 
I cannot rid myself of them. I know I have a 
strong self-will which I try to overcome, but it 
seems I cannot. I feel all the while that something 
is saying to me "You need a change of 
heart;" and yet the more I try to do and be 



good, the more evil is present with me. Oh, 
how I would love to feel free and be rid of this 
feeling that troubles me so ! I would love to 
come out boldly and work for the Master. Oh, 
I hope I may yet be able to overcome, and that 
my soul may yet enter fully into his rest. 
Yours in Christian love, M. B . 



R1496 : page 30 

New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-As you know, 
I am engaged during week days in examining 
titles to real estate, and from this I 

R1496 : page 31 

derive my only income. I have for a long 

time desired to enter the ranks of the colporteurs, 

but circumstances have prevented 

me, and I have been obliged to await the 

Lord's due time. The door of opportunity 

for greater service seems to have opened 

now, for I have been enabled to effect an arrangement 

whereby I can use three days 

each week in spreading the truth, and devote 

the other three days to business. This 

will involve a considerable reduction of my 

income from the latter source, but I have 

no doubt that the Lord will provide sufficient 

for my expenses. Pray that I may be 

used always by him according to his will. 

The work is progressing very satisfactorily 
in New York, and interest in the truth 
now due is growing very perceptibly. 
Wishing you, Sister Russell and all the dear 
members of the Body at Allegheny a happy 
new year of joy and peace in Christ, I remain, 
Yours in him, E. C. M 



page 3 1 

Maryland. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose a 
letter which is an evidence that the good 
work is quietly but surely going on. The 
writer is one of six who have become interested 
through Brother Benner, who himself 
has seen the light only about twelve months. 
If all would go to work as those dear Brethren 
the work would go on just as it should. 
Yes, let us all be constantly watching for 



opportunities to bring the truth to the attention 
of all having ears to hear. 

While there is a good number of our brethren 
and sisters giving their entire time to 
this great work, yet there are many of us 
who are so situated that we cannot give all 
our time, yet we can all do something and so 
help the cause along— especially since we 
know that the "harvest" day is rapidly passing, 
and the night of confusion and trouble 
approaching, wherein no man can work. 
It will soon be too late to share in the good 
work; and, knowing the time, "It is high 
time to awake out of sleep; for now is our 
salvation nearer than when we first believed. 
The night is far spent, the day is at hand: 
let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, 
and let us put on the armor of light." 
(Rom. 13:11,12.) Yes, let us assist those 
who are willing to cast off the works of darkness 
(false doctrines), and help them to put 
on the armor of light (truth), in which we 
have been rejoicing, and which will enable 
us to stand in this evil day. 

With kindest regards to yourself and Sister 
Russell, and all who love the truth, 

Your brother in the service, H. WEBER. 

Following is the letter referred to- 
West Virginia. 

F. Benner, Esq., Dear Brother:— I received 
the package of tracts, for which accept 
many thanks. Will use them in the 
best way I can. You may have the books 

sent to J. S. W as soon as you can, as 

he is anxious for them. I would indeed like 
to meet Brother Weber, as you suggest; but 
cannot say when, as I am now here only at 
night. I hope to meet him soon. I am 
very much interested in this new light that 
has come to us, and hope and believe that it 
will be shed abroad throughout the entire 
world in God's "due time." 

But how hard it is to get people to turn 
away from the creeds of their various 
churches that are keeping them in old ruts, 
while the light is shining on more and more 
unto the perfect day. I have not heard yet 
what my father thinks of "The Plan of 
the Ages." I am expecting to meet him 
soon. Am anxious to get his idea of it, and 
if he is not convinced, I want to prove its 
truth to him. I would like to see you and 
have a talk. 

With best wishes for yourself and family, 
I remain, Yours in the faith, 



W. M. WATKINS. 



R1496 : page 31 

Maine. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The arrival 
of the TOWER reminded me to forward 
to you the dollar for the year '93, for 
I should feel sad without the wholesome food 
it gives. Never in the experiences of almost 
half a century have such blessed views of 
God's great and grand designs so filled my 
soul with joy. I studied "theology," and 
graduated in 1858; and as I now look back 
upon those years they appear very unprofitably 
spent. Oh, such a jumble as my soul 
brought from the Institution! calling it faith, 
and trying to steady myself upon it, and calling 
on others to accept the same and risk 
their eternal interest upon it. But thanks 
be to God for his unspeakable gift! I now 
can and do rest wholly upon the blood of 
Jesus. I feel exceedingly unworthy, and I 
am quite sure the feeling can never become 
greater than the fact of unworthiness; but 
our blessed Lord is worthy, and through his 
merits we are called children and heirs. God 
is dealing very tenderly with me and mine. 

R1496 : page 32 

I am trying to induce my Christian friends 
to read MILLENNIAL DAWN, and some of 
them seem to enter into the spirit of the 
books, while others, after reading till some 
superstition is exposed, return them with 
some disparaging remark. But it matters not. 
Indifference to God's truth will not destroy 
its vitality, or it would have been dead long 
ago. I stated in a recent social meeting my 
belief in a present Christ, and called attention 
to some of the huge errors that burden 
honest souls and hinder their prayers. Some 
appeared reflective, but incredulity sat graven 
upon most faces. My soul loves and rests on 
the glorious truths that our Lord is present, 
and that the sealing process is in progress. 

I have no language to describe the beauty 
and majesty of the truth as it now stands 
forth; and I hope to be able to do something 
to aid the work of the TOWER TRACT SOCIETY 
this summer. God is greatly blessing 
me in spirit, while in temporal things I suffer 
for nothing. Blessed be his name! 



May the blessing of God attend you and 
your colporteurs, is the prayer of your brother 
in Christ, W. F. EATON. 

It is well for us to remember, dear Brother, 
that milk is for babes and strong meat 
for those of full age, as the Apostle expresses 
it. (Heb. 5:12-14.) Was it not pretty 
"strong meat" for your newly interested 
friends, for you to tell them of our Lord's 
presence and the harvest work now in progress? 
I suggest that the simpler forms of truth 
be given first, and the "deep things" of the 
divine plan as your hearers develop interest, 
and capacity for them. This will be following 
the example of the Great Teacher, who 
told the plan of God only as it became 
"meat in due season," and who once said 
to his disciples, "I have many things to tell 
you, but ye cannot bear them now." It will 
also be obeying his instructions to us to be 
"wise as serpents, but harmless as doves." 

The part of the plan best calculated to arrest 
and interest an error-blinded child of 
God will be the foundation— the "Ransom 
for all." He has recognized our Lord's sacrifice 
as the ransom for the Church only. 
Show him that it was for ALL and is to be 
testified to all, in God's due time. (1 Tim. 2:4-6.) 
Next show the effect of the testimony 
in this and the next age— now a justification 
by faith, then an actual justification 
(or making perfect), by restitution process 
(Acts 3:19-21), for all who accept that 
ransom and its concomitant blessings. 

Next your hearers will be prepared to learn 
of the Gospel age "high-calling," by route 
of the "narrow way" of self-denying sacrifice, 
to joint-heirship with Christ in the Millennial 
Kingdom which, by God's arrangement, is to 
"bless all the families of the earth." 

Next show your hearers what the Scriptures 
teach concerning our Lord's resurrection-body 
and the manner of his second 
coming— that it will not be as a human being 
but as a spirit being; that flesh and 
blood has no part in the spiritual Kingdom 
of which he is the head; and that even the 
saints "must be changed" (1 Cor. 15:51) 
from mortal to immortal, from animal bodies 
to spirit bodies, before we can be like him 
and see him as he is. (1 John 3:2.) Not 
until all these points, with their Scriptural 
proofs, have been clearly seen by your hearers 
will they be ready to hear appreciatingly 
anything about the Lord's parousia (presence) 



and the harvest work now in progress 
—and this may require days or weeks or 
months, according to the receptiveness of the 
student and his previous familiarity with the 
Word. 

However, unless very skilful as a teacher, 
it is generally best to call attention to reading 
matter bearing upon the plan, as for instance 
the successive volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. After they have read carefully, 
then talk on the subjects, helping them over 
any parts misunderstood or not clearly seen 
by them. Every one who attempts to teach, 
in any capacity, represents the Lord, the 
Head and teacher of his body, the Church; 
and, as such representative, should feel his 
responsibility, and should continually seek 
divine wisdom that he may "speak as an oracle 
of God." Go on, dear Brother, and God 
bless you! I desire by the above comment 
merely to increase your usefulness and that 
of other readers by counseling wisdom in 
the handling of the sword of the spirit— 
the Truth.-EDITOR. 



page 34 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



EXTRA COPIES OF THIS ISSUE. 



Anticipating that extra copies of this double 
number may be desired by our readers for 
friends, we have published a larger quantity 
than usual, and will supply our readers such extra 
copies at half price,— five cents per copy. 
If desired we will post them for you, direct to 
your friends. 

THE SPRING MEETING. 



In our last issue we announced that the Lord's 
Memorial Supper, commemorative of his death, 
will be celebrated on its anniversary this year, 
as usual, by the Church at Allegheny, in Bible 
House chapel, Arch street, on Thursday evening, 
March 30th, at 7:30 P.M. To this all who 
believe in the merit of our Lord's sacrifice for 
our sins, finished, once for all, at Calvary, and 
who are consecrated to the Lord in thought, 
word and deed, will be made cordially welcome. 

This much of the notice is confirmed and repeated; 
but the notice that in connection with 
this Memorial there would be a General Meeting 
for Bible Study, is hereby canceled. 

Our application to the Railroads for excursion 
rates has from year to year past met with increasing 
objections and limitations which become 
burdensome. This year we are asked to 
pay the expenses of a railroad agent— eleven 
dollars for the first day and six dollars each for 
succeeding days, to see to the numbers in attendance, 
and to endorse all the returning, reduced-rate 
tickets. And then, if the proper 
certificates number less than one hundred, no 
reduction of rates would be allowed. The attendance 
from abroad is usually more than this, 
but many purchase other tickets than those 
specified— mileage, etc. 

Concluding that excursion rates from all parts 
to Chicago will be very cheap during the Summer 
(especially in August and September), and 
that a larger number would be served by having 
a general meeting there and then, than here, 
this year, we accordingly wrote the Railroad 
people declining their restricted offer of excursion 
rates to Allegheny this Spring. 

We trust that our decision will commend itself 
to all of our readers. Arrangements for 
the Chicago Convention will be effected for 
some date probably not far from September 1st, 
and will be such as will enable attendants to 
spend a few days in Bible Study, with profitable 
intermissions in which to learn some valuable 
lessons, by noting some of the wonderful 
inventions of this wonderful era which the Lord 
speaks of as "the day of his preparation"— 
preparing for the blessing of the world under 
the Millennial reign of righteousness and love. 

R1498 : page 34 

CHRISTIAN HOME-SCHOOLS WANTED. 



One or two Sisters who have children dependent 



upon them for support write that they 
could probably provide better for them if they 
were in the Colporteur work than they can 
now do— besides having the privilege of using 
their time and strength in the blessed service 
of carrying spiritual food to the Lord's starving 
people. 

The question therefore arises: Are there 
others of the consecrated so situated that they 
cannot engage in the more public work, but 
who could have a share in it by caring for 
such children? The mothers in question could 
not afford to pay large sums for boarding, etc., 
but could pay something. 

If it occurs to any of the mothers "of this 
way" that they would like to offer such a 
home, let such, before offering, consider carefully 
whether the conditions of her home are 
suitable; whether the influence of other members 
of the family would be favorable; whether she 
would care not only for the physical but also for 
the moral health of those entrusted. Then let 
any who believe that they see their way clear to 
thus offer their services correspond with us. 



R1498 : page 35 
