Behave in a Manner Worthy of the Good News
1 As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we desire to bring honor to Jehovah’s name. We know that our conduct, speech, grooming, and clothing can influence how others view true worship. This is especially true when we are at our meetings. We want to make sure that everything that is said and done at the meetings is worthy of the good news and brings honor to Jehovah.​—Phil. 2:4.
2 Many of the world’s standards for dress and grooming are unacceptable for Christians. This is a matter that should be given careful attention by ministers of the good news. The June 1, 1989, Watchtower, page 20, stated: “Our clothing need not be expensive, but it should be clean, tasteful, and modest. Our footwear should also be in good repair and of good appearance. Similarly, at all meetings, including the Congregation Book Study, our bodies should be clean, and we should be neatly and appropriately dressed.”
3 Punctuality is a mark of loving consideration and thoughtfulness. Occasionally, unavoidable circumstances may prevent us from arriving on time for a meeting. But habitually arriving late may display a lack of respect for the sacred purpose of the meetings and a failure to appreciate our responsibility to avoid disturbing others. Latecomers often distract others and prevent them from getting the full benefit from the program. Punctuality shows respect for the feelings and interests of all in attendance.
4 Love for our neighbors should make us careful to avoid causing distractions during the meetings. Whispering, eating, chewing gum, rattling papers, and making unnecessary trips to the rest room may interfere with the concentration of others and detract from the dignity due Jehovah’s place of worship. It is inappropriate for any to be conducting congregation business or conversing with others unless there is some emergency that requires the brothers to be away from their seats. Otherwise, all should be seated and listening to the program so as to benefit themselves and their families. Poor manners are out of place in the Kingdom Hall because “love . . . does not behave indecently.”​—1 Cor. 13:4, 5; Gal. 6:10.
5 The fine behavior of our children at meetings also brings praise and honor to Jehovah’s name. Close supervision by parents is vital. Children should be encouraged to listen and participate. Many parents with young children choose to sit in a location where they can easily exit and care for the needs of their youngsters without unduly distracting others.
6 Paul admonished: “Behave in a manner worthy of the good news.” (Phil. 1:27) Let us, then, strive to be mannerly and considerate of others when attending meetings. Cooperation by all will ensure that there will be “an interchange of encouragement . . . by each one through the other’s faith.”​—Rom. 1:12.

