Keep Your Mind Fixed on the Things Above
1 Commenting on the generation that surrounds us and its outlook on the future, an article in The New York Times of December 31, 1994, stated: “They’re fearing the future. They fear it in terms of jobs, in terms of disease, in terms of the economy, in terms of world situations.” Everywhere we look, there is a feeling of uncertainty about life. Our ministry as Jehovah’s Witnesses brings us into daily contact with people who feel this way. While we face the same problems as they do, our faith and confidence in the sure promises of God’s Word enable us to have a much different outlook on life and the future of mankind.​—Isa. 65:13, 14, 17.
2 Our optimism and outlook of sure hope cause many honesthearted people to listen to the message that we bring to them. Many individuals who feel depressed and downtrodden find it comforting to talk with us. Because they like what they hear, some agree to study the Bible with us. At times, however, people may first want to unburden themselves of their personal problems. While some time may be spent listening to someone’s personal anxieties, we should not lose sight of our objective, which is to teach people the positive truths of God’s Word.
3 We do want to be sympathetic toward those who are burdened down. Jesus set the example when he said, as recorded at Matthew 11:28: “Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down.” We want to encourage people in the same manner. Notice, however, at the conclusion of verse 28, Jesus said: “I will refresh you.” That should be our aim. We do that by sharing the refreshing promises from God’s Word. Being a good listener demonstrates our personal interest and concern and is vital to fulfilling our commission to preach the good news of the Kingdom, helping others to realize that the Kingdom is the only sure remedy for all the problems of mankind.​—Matt. 24:14.
4 Our work is not that of professional health-care experts. Rather, it is as the apostle Paul explained, as noted at 1 Timothy 4:6, a ministry that focuses on “fine teaching,” the teachings that are found in the Word of God. Those having personal or emotional problems may need to be encouraged to lean on Jehovah. Teach them to keep their “minds fixed on the things above”​—things that are related to the Kingdom hope. (Col. 3:2) When people keep their attention focused on the Word of God, they can be built up as a result of the powerful influence it exerts in their lives.​—Heb. 4:12.
5 So our goal is to help people concentrate their thinking on things that are ‘righteous, chaste, lovable, and praiseworthy.’ (Phil. 4:8) If they focus attention on the Kingdom hope, they will be blessed in the same way as we are. They too will experience the joy that comes with the knowledge that Jehovah will eventually solve all their problems through his Kingdom.​—Ps. 145:16.

