All Thrilled With Release of New Book at District Convention
New Book Highlights the Knowledge of God
1 At our district convention this past summer, how delighted we were with the entire program! On Saturday afternoon our joy overflowed when we heard the announcement concerning the new book, Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life, and the related information that followed. Earth’s billions of people need knowledge that only God can give​—knowledge of God and of his Son, Jesus Christ.​—Prov. 2:1-6; John 17:3.
2 How vividly the speaker described portions of the book! The captivating chapter headings, practical illustrations, positive presentation of the truth, uncomplicated questions, and, at the end of each chapter, a box entitled “Test Your Knowledge” are among the features that will appeal to all who read it. But our Bible students will especially benefit as they rapidly acquire the fundamentals of the Bible’s teachings.
3 During the concluding talks on Saturday and Sunday, we were encouraged to have a family study using this new book. By now, we have likely become acquainted with its contents. No doubt you have also discussed points to have in mind when offering this new book in the field.
4 Points to Review: You may recall that when presenting the subject “Why Mankind Needs the Knowledge of God,” the speaker emphasized a number of points, including the following: (1) When you use this book to conduct studies, it is not wise to bring in outside material, which could becloud the main points; just concentrate on conveying what the book is proving in each chapter. (2) Chapters are of moderate length so that you will usually be able to cover one each time you study. (3) At the end of each chapter, the questions in the box entitled “Test Your Knowledge” will provide a succinct review.
5 Use on Bible Studies: Quite a few publishers have inquired whether it is advisable to change their Bible studies over to this new book. If you are well along in the book being studied at present, it would be practical to complete the study of that publication. Otherwise, it is recommended that you switch over to the Knowledge book. If you used a brochure or a tract to start a Bible study, introduce the new book at the appropriate time and use it for the study. More information on the use of the Knowledge book will appear in Our Kingdom Ministry in the coming months.
6 Jehovah has provided this new book to help us teach others about the knowledge that leads to everlasting life. Now we need to prepare well and have a full share in the work yet to be done.

