Service Meetings for November
Week Starting November 6
Song 6
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “New Book Highlights the Knowledge of God.” Question-and-answer discussion. Encourage all to become completely familiar with contents of book so that they can make efficient use of it in the field.
20 min: “All Scripture Is Beneficial for Teaching.” Discuss features of the New World Translation, showing why it is superior to others. Explain advantages because it is rendered in modern language. (See “All Scripture” book, page 328, paragraphs 4-6.) Have two presentations demonstrated.
Song 2 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 13
Song 33
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Review arrangements for expanded field service activity during the worldly holiday period next week.
15 min: “Regular Meeting Attendance​—Essential to Our Standing Firm.” Talk and discussion with audience.
20 min: “Behave in a Manner Worthy of the Good News.” Questions and answers. Make additional comments based on June 15, 1989, Watchtower, pages 16-17, paragraphs 5-9.
Song 23 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 20
Song 64
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local needs. (Or give a talk “Do You Enjoy Personal Study?” based on June 15, 1994, Watchtower, pages 8-11.)
20 min: “Help Others to Appreciate the Bible’s Value.” Elder discusses with two or three publishers why we should make return visits with the goal of starting Bible studies. Review and then demonstrate suggested presentations for return visits, as in a practice session.
Song 8 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 27
Song 96
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Keep Your Mind Fixed on the Things Above.” Questions and answers.
20 min: Offering the New Book, Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life, During December. Review appealing features of the book​—striking chapter titles and interesting pictures as well as simplicity in explanations, compact size, and skillful use of questions. Isolate a few talking points that might appeal to people in local territory. The Knowledge book is uniquely designed for conducting progressive Bible studies, and a special effort should be made to follow up all placements, with a view to starting Bible studies. Have a capable publisher demonstrate one or two brief presentations. Encourage all to make good use of this new book in the field, starting in December.
Song 78 and concluding prayer.

