A Message with Real Appeal
HOW encouraging it would be to hear that crime and violence have at last been stopped world wide! Could anyone expect such a thing to happen soon? Yes, for it is promised by the One who is powerful enough to bring it about, man’s Maker, Jehovah God.
Convinced of the Bible’s promise, Jehovah’s Christian witnesses made a special effort in the month of May to reach millions of people with this upbuilding message. Their leaflet “How Crime and Violence Will Be Stopped” had a fine effect on many who accepted it.
An educator from Ontario, Canada, was moved to write: “Last Sunday as my family and I were just finishing our meal and were discussing the sorry state of the world, we were visited by two members of your persuasion. They expressed a desire to speak to us about how crime and violence could be stopped. Our minds were filled with doubt, but we thought that we could at least talk to these people. My wife and I discussed the problem with them for about an hour. They appeared to possess a clear and well-thought-out understanding of the difficulties with which we are faced in our troubled society.
“They left us somewhat unconvinced; however, that evening, the seeds which they had planted came to full blossom. My wife and I retrieved our copy of the Bible (a wedding gift), unopened for many years, and began examining the references recommended to us. In what was contained within these passages of prophecy, we began discovering the amazing relevance to today’s realities. Together, my wife and I realized that something fundamental had been missing from our lives​—the knowledge of our Savior.”
Interestingly, in at least one case, the tract was instrumental in stopping a crime. A Witness from Virginia reports:
“While working some apartments with the tracts, I approached a man who was heading for his car. I asked if he lived in that apartment and he replied, ‘Yes.’ I proceeded to draw attention to the subject ‘How Crime and Violence Will Be Stopped.’ He countered with the words, ‘How it will be stopped! Man, I’m on my way right now to commit some crime!’
“I paused for a few moments because he wouldn’t accept the tract. Then he showed me a pistol and told me someone had run off with his wife. I was hoping he didn’t think I was the one, because he was really upset. I finally got up enough courage to try to reason with him.
I pointed out to him that, if his wife had run off with someone else, she wasn’t about to come back. Anything he would do now could only get him into trouble with the law. I encouraged him to think the matter through, for it wasn’t worth shooting anybody over. I recommended letting the law handle it.
“He thought it over for a few minutes and then said he would take my advice. He reached out and took the tract.”
It may well be that you, too, received the leaflet “How Crime and Violence Will Be Stopped.” Have you availed yourself of the opportunity to learn more about how you and your family can be among those to enjoy a crime-free world? Jehovah’s Witnesses in your locality would be delighted to discuss with you what the Bible has to say about this.

