What Is the Bible’s View?
Transcendental Meditation​—for Christians?
“I’M HAPPIER. I think more clearly and work more efficiently, I find myself more involved in helping other people. I’ve learned to deal with stress, and at the end of the day I have more energy left for my family life.”
This is typical of comments by persons who claim that their lives have taken a turn for the better through the practice of “transcendental meditation,” also known as “TM.” Claims concerning the value of TM have aroused the interest of many. For example, back in 1972, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, founder of the TM movement, announced a “World Plan,” one of the goals of which would be “to solve the problems of crime and all behavior that brings unhappiness to the family of man.”
Likely the idea of overcoming stress and finding a solution to world problems appeals to you. Should you therefore take up transcendental meditation?
Some persons might approach this question by trying to analyze scientific claims regarding the state of deep relaxation that transcendental meditation is said to produce. But to a person interested in pleasing the Creator, a wiser approach is to investigate whether the practice harmonizes with the Holy Bible, which is “inspired of God.”​—2 Tim. 3:16.
What is transcendental meditation? It involves sitting upright with eyes closed and letting the mind drift effortlessly toward a word or phrase known as a “mantra.” Advocates of TM say that it is neither a religion nor a philosophy nor a way of life. They advertise TM as simply “a natural and effortless technique for improving all aspects of life.”
Is this so or is TM actually a religious practice that conflicts with Bible teaching? What do the facts reveal?
Did you notice that Maharishi himself is called a “yogi”? That term refers to one supposed to have achieved “union” with God, or “God-consciousness” through the Hindu practice of yoga (Sanskrit for “union”). Interesting, too, is how the Encyclopædia Britannica (1976) defines “mantra”: “in Hinduism and Buddhism, a sacred utterance (syllable, word or verse) considered to possess mystical or spiritual efficacy. . . . Mantras continue to be an important feature of Hindu religious rites and domestic ceremonies. Initiation into many sects involves the whispering of a secret mantra into the ear of the initiate by the guru (spiritual teacher).”
 The Hindu connections of TM are especially evident in the initiation ceremony. For that occasion, a candidate must bring along pieces of fruit, a white handkerchief and some flowers. The TM teacher, or “initiator,” places these upon an “altar” containing a candle, incense and a picture of Swami Brahmananda Sarasvati Maharaj, also known as “Guru Dev.”
After lighting the candle and incense, the initiator chants in the Sanskrit language a “puja” (worship). In a lengthy “invocation” to Hindu divinities and holy men, the puja includes the following: “To LORD NARAYANA, to lotus-born BRAHMA the Creator . . . I bow down. . . . To the glory of the Lord I bow down again and again, at whose door the whole galaxy of gods pray for perfection day and night.”
This chant continues with numerous praises of “Shri Guru Dev.” One of these praises mentions the Hindu trinity of Brahma, Vishnu and Siva, as follows: “GURU in the glory of BRAHMA, GURU in the glory of VISHNU, GURU in the glory of the great LORD SHIVA.”
In view of this, why do many claim that TM is not a religious practice? To make it more palatable to the public. In The Science of Being and Art of Living (page 299), Maharishi (called “His Holiness” on the title page) explains:
“Whenever and wherever religion dominates the mass consciousness, transcendental deep meditation should be taught in terms of religion. Whenever and wherever metaphysical thinking dominates the consciousness of society, transcendental deep meditation should be taught in metaphysical terms, openly aiming at the fulfillment of the current metaphysical thought. Whenever and wherever politics dominates the mass consciousness, transcendental deep meditation should be taught in terms of and from the platform of politics, aiming at bringing fulfillment to the political aspirations of the generation. Whenever and wherever economics dominates the mass consciousness, transcendental deep meditation should be taught from the level of economics, with the aim of bringing fulfillment to the economic aspirations and goals of the time.”
“So,” someone may object, “what difference does it make whether transcendental meditation is related to Hindu worship?” According to the Scriptures, it makes an important difference. How so?
The Bible plainly declares that the majority of the world’s religious beliefs and practices do not meet God’s approval. For instance, the apostle Paul wrote: “The things which the nations sacrifice they sacrifice to demons, and not to God; and I do not want you to become sharers with the demons.” (1 Cor. 10:20) On the other hand, Jesus taught that “true worshipers will worship the Father with spirit and truth.” (John 4:23) As to the only source of truth, Jesus said in prayer to God: “Your word is truth.” (John 17:17) Let us compare some features of transcendental meditation with the revealed “word” of God, as found in the inspired Scriptures.
As to who should be the object of all worship, Jesus stated: “It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.” (Matt. 4:10) We have already seen that, especially in its initiation ceremony, TM involves praise to Hindu gods and holy men. Can a person worship ‘Jehovah alone’ and participate in something like that?
And for Bible believers there is another serious objection. It is known that persons who delve into advanced states of yoga-type meditation often claim to develop powers of divination, which may include ability to predict future events. According to the Bible, non-worshipers of Jehovah who have such occult powers get them from wicked spirit forces, or demons. (Acts 16:16) Might not transcendental meditation open one up to such spiritistic influence?
Noteworthy is a comment of Maharishi concerning the purpose of mantras: “We do something here according to Vedic rites, particular specific chanting to produce an effect in some other world, draw the attention of those higher beings or gods living there. The entire knowledge of the mantras or hymns of the Vedas is devoted to man’s connection, to man’s communications with the higher beings in different strata of creation.”
Since the Scriptures portray non-Biblical worship as going “to demons, and not to God,” any “higher beings” contacted through mantra chanting would be among those whom the Scriptures call “wicked spirit forces in the heavenly places.” (1 Cor. 10:20; Eph. 6:12) Does it make sense to become involved in any way with a practice that in advanced states can lead to demonic influence?
What of the goal to make TM a significant means “to solve the problems of crime and all behavior that brings unhappiness to the family of man”? Scripturally speaking, that is impossible, for transcendental meditation does not come to grips with the real causes of world woes. Why not?
For one thing, the Bible attributes much of the failure, frustration and futility of human endeavors to inherited sin. (Ps. 51:5; Eccl. 7:20; Rom. 8:20) Even sickness, aging and death result from man’s imperfect condition due to sin. (Matt. 9:1-8; Rom. 5:12; 6:23) Moreover, the Bible reveals the principal cause of world woes to be “the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth.” (Rev. 12:9) Along with the Devil, the Bible shows that a host of demons function as “world rulers.”​—Eph. 6:12.
The real solution to world problems centers around God’s Son, Jesus Christ. According to the Bible, removal of human sin and death can come about only through Jesus’ ransom sacrifice. (Matt. 20:28; Acts 4:12; 1 Tim. 2:5, 6) And it is a heavenly Kingdom government made up of Jesus Christ and associated “holy ones” that will replace all earthly kingdoms with divine rule extended earth wide.​—Dan. 7:13, 14, 21, 22, 27; 2:34, 44, 45.
What, though, of playing down the religious aspects and fantastic claims regarding transcendental meditation, and viewing it as merely a means of relaxing and getting rid of excess tension? Surely there is nothing wrong with relaxing. Jesus himself drew away from the crowds to rest up. (Mark 6:31, 32) But he did not do so in ways that would violate Scriptural guidelines.
With regard to the religiously linked practice of transcendental meditation, however, it is good to consider that, with reference to false religious practices, the apostle Paul warned that even “a little leaven ferments the whole lump.” (Gal. 5: 9; compare Matthew 13:33; 16:6, 11, 12.) Indicating the correct view for Christians regarding any practice related to false religion, the Scriptures admonish: “Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers. For what fellowship do righteousness and lawlessness have? Or what sharing does light have with darkness? . . .’ “Therefore get out from among them, and separate yourselves,” says Jehovah, “and quit touching the unclean thing”’; ‘“and I will take you in.”’”​—2 Cor. 6:14-17.

