VOL. XV. JULY 15, 1894. NO. 14. 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



LABOR PANGS OF THIS KOSMOS. 

"The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together 
until now, ...waiting for the manifestation of the 
sons of God" in Kingdom power; for which we 
[the sons of God who are to be manifested for the 
blessing of all the families of the earth] also 
groan, praying, "Thy Kingdom come, thy 
will be done on earth as in heaven." 
--Rom. 8:22,23,19; Matt. 6:10. 

NO one can be indifferent to the phenomenal 
times in which we are living; for although 
the rush and crush of business and pleasure 
continue, and even increasingly, there is, deep 
down in men's hearts, even at the theaters and 
sporting grounds, a feeling of unrest which cannot 
be better described than by the prophetic 
words of our Master,— "Men's hearts failing 
them for fear and for looking after [toward] 
those things coming upon the earth." 

We who know what is coming are relieved 
from anxiety; for, although we see near us a 
dark night of intense trouble, such as has not 
been since there was a nation, we see also the 
glorious beyond— the Millennial day, which 
"lights the gloom with healing ray." We can 
wait patiently, although not without interest 
and deep concern, for the development of 
God's great Plan of the Ages, now so near its 
consummation. 

It is interesting to look back and note the 
accuracy of the fulfilment of God's Word, so 
that our hearts may be established with the 
greater confidence respecting the future,— the 
things coming upon the earth. For instance, 
as we look back and note that the Scriptures 
marked 1 873 as the end of six thousand years 
from Adam to the beginning of the seventh 
thousand, and the fall of 1874 as the beginning 
of the forty-year harvest of the Gospel age and 
day of wrath for the overthrow of all the institutions 
of "this present evil world [or order of 
affairs],"* we can see that facts have well borne 
out those predictions of Scripture. We see that 
the present world-wide distress had its beginning 
there; that it has been progressing with increasing 
momentum every year since; and that, 
as the Apostle Paul declared it would be, so it 
has been, and so it is— "As travail upon a 
woman with child." Each spasm of pain is 
more intense; and so it evidently will continue 



to be until the death of the present order of 
things and the birth of the new. 

It might be presumed that all this would seem 
plain to us who have been so preaching and 
writing for nearly twenty years on these lines; 
but it will be interesting to our readers to note 
that now, twenty years after, others who have 
no knowledge of our writings, or of the prophecies 
upon which our expectations were and are 
based, are calling public attention to these very 
dates. Rev. Josiah Strong, D.D., a man of 
world-wide reputation as a thinker, calls attention 
to the year 1873, as laying the foundation 
of present troubles, saying:— 

"Profound economic changes have attended 
the transition of the world's methods of production 
and distribution which has taken place 
during this century and more especially during 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chaps. 2, 6, 7; 
VOL. I., Chap. 15. 

R1675: page 228 

the past twenty-five or thirty years. It is to 

this source we must look for some of the principle 

causes of popular discontent which has 

been pronounced ever since the commencement 

of the industrial depression which began in 1873 

and affected all classes." 

Even more widely known is Mr. Powderly, 
for years at the head of one of the chief labor 
organizations of this country: he places the 
date of the beginning of present labor disturbances 
as 1874— just following the financial 
strain of 1 873 noted by Mr. Strong. Thus both 
gentlemen and both of their dates agree with 
the Scriptures. Mr. Powderly says: "Go back 
twenty years [to 1874], and you will find that 
the employer and employee had interests in 
common." 

But Mr. Powderly's address, of which the 
above is a part, will all be interesting, and we 
quote it below, from the N.Y. World of July 2. 

MR. POWDERLY'S ADDRESS. 



T. V. Powderly, ex-General Master Workman 
of the Knights of Labor, spoke at Prohibition 
Park, Staten Island, yesterday, on the 
railroad strike and the coal strike of Pennsylvania. 
He carried the strain of total abstinence 



throughout his remarks. 

"Until the laboring men of America," he 
said, "are made to realize that they carry their 
worst enemy with them in the shape of liquor, 
they will not solve the great problems that now 
confront them. 

"You all probably have made up your minds 
that 1 am a very terrible sort of a man. You 
have read of the hundreds of strikes that I have 
ordered, strikes that have paralyzed the business 
of the country, and carried want into tens of 
thousands of homes. Standing here before you 
and before my God, I can say that I never 
ordered a strike in my life. All the strikes that 
I have been credited with ordering have been 
precipitated before I knew anything of them; 
and then I have, as leader, simply made the 
best of what I have always regarded as a very 
bad situation. 

"We are all now intensely interested as to 
the outcome of the strike in the West. Every 
strike that takes place upon a line of railroad is 
a strike against the whole country. Our railroads 

R1676: page 228 

are so closely identified with the life of 
the nation that when you stop any one of these 
arteries through which the life blood of the 
nation's prosperity flows you injure those whom 
you least expect to injure and whom you would 
least desire to harm. 

"There is now a great feeling of unrest in 
this land. Go back twenty years and you will 
find that the employer and the employee had 
interests in common. But machinery, that Juggernaut 
which for good or for ill has crushed 
millions in its march of progress, has made men 
merely subordinates to it. Then, too, money 
has become centralized, and unheard-of fortunes 
are in the hands of individuals. There 
are twenty-four men in America to-day who 
possess more money than there was in the whole 
world when this country had the revolution 
which gave us a name and a flag. 

"Taken altogether the brotherhood of man 
seems to be a long way off. Is it any wonder 
that men who are working for wages that will 
barely sustain life should take desperate measures 
to undo a wrong? There is a cause for all 
these labor demonstrations, whether they be 
right or wrong, and the cause is not of to-day 
or of yesterday, but one that has grown with the 
century. 

"The great national highways, the railways, 
are as much the property of our Government 



to-day as were the old coach roads. There are 
many who believe that these railroad strikes, 
which during the past twelve years have become 
more extensive, will continue, doing more injury 
each time, and that there will be less 
chance of controlling them in the future, until 
we adopt a plan of national co-operation and 
run the railroads under the supervision of the 
United States Government, by and for the 
whole people. 

"This strike to-day is not for wages, not for 
the recognition of any association or organization. 
It is a strike for the control of the arteries 
of trade and industry. 

"If all the railroads could be nationalized, 
then all strikes upon them would be at an end, 
for every man, whether he be an employee of 
the railroad or not, would be an equal owner in 
it and equally interested in the system and 
equally anxious for its well being. 

"These great labor problems will not be 
solved by the laboring men alone, however. 
Men and women not directly engaged in labor 
must act and vote so that they will be a power 
between what are now called the opposing 
forces." 

After demonstrating the ridiculously low 
wages that the anthracite coal miners of Pennsylvania 
have been reduced to, Mr. Powderly 
said: "Place yourselves in their places. Ask 
yourselves whether you would go down into the 
mines every day to slave and toil for the purpose 
of supplying others with coal, when by 
your labor you could not supply your own 
household with the common necessities of life. 

R1676: page 229 

"The day will come when these coal deposits, 
too, will be owned by the Government that 
represents the people, who must have the coal. 

"Do you believe that God intended that six 
men sitting here in New York should dictate as 
to whether all the people should or should not 
have coal— whether they should be kept warm 
or cold; whether they should have their meat 
cooked or raw: by fixing prices to suit themselves? 
If I thought so, I would be a rank infidel. 

"This may sound like Socialism. Well, 
there are Socialists, and there are men who 
think they are Socialists. I believe that at 
heart most of the people are Socialists to-day, 
for any man who believes that the social conditions 
need improvement is a Socialist." 

A SOCIAL REVOLUTION. 



All speak of the present world-wide troubles 
as "strikes;" but this name is not appropriate 
to present disturbances. Strikes are revolts 
against employers, because of real or fancied 
grievances, or for better pay, shorter hours, etc.; 
but recent uprisings such as that of the dock-men 
and coal-miners in England, a year ago, 
the recent general combination of coal-miners 
throughout the bituminous coal regions of the 
United States, and the present uprising of railway 
employees which is disturbing the comfort 
and welfare of millions, are not strikes,— 
they are more, they are incipient revolutions. 
They do not express dissatisfaction with employers 
or wages; for between the employers 
and the so-called striking employees in many 
instances there is respect, if not friendship;— 
but they do represent a rebellion against the 
present social system. They are "sympathy 
strikes," the employees often declaring that they 
have no grievances, but want to show sympathy 
with others whom they believe have grievances. 

Laborers, mechanics and employees in general 
are beginning to realize what we pointed out 
twenty years ago (but what was then scoffed at), 
that machinery and invention, with the natural 
increase of the human family, would soon [under 
present social and financial arrangements] 
show an over-supply of humanity, because the 
power of profitable employment would be centralized 
in the hands of the few, who, operating 
under the general law of self-interest, would 
always employ the cheapest competent service; 
and thus the masses of humanity, being thrown 
into competition for the necessities of life, would 
soon become the slaves of the few— their very 
living necessities depending upon the charity of 
their employers in providing work. This is 
what we see in many parts of the old world;— 
e.g., millions in China and India barely subsisting 
upon a wage of four cents per day. 

This is the meaning of the "sympathy strikes:" 
the masses are realizing that their cause is one, 
and that if something be not done to alter the 
present social condition and its tendencies, 
they will become the chattel slaves of corporate 
wealth. They feel that what is done must be 
done soon, too; because each year the pinch 
becomes tighter and they fear that the time may 
come when they as a class will be too poor to 
strike or to offer any resistance to oppression; 
for already they feel as poor, with a wage of 
one dollar a day, as the East Indiaman does with 



four cents per day. 

Can we wonder, then, at "sympathy strikes," 
no matter how unreasonable they may appear 
on the surface? Surely not: to those engaged 
it seems to be a question of life or death, socially. 
To them the future looks not only dark, 
but black, and without a ray of hope except 
through the methods now being pursued. And 
others, in other departments of life, equally 
hopeless, are only restrained from joining a 
general revolution by the well-grounded fear 
that the results would be worse than the present 
condition, and by the undefined and baseless 
hope that somehow matters will right themselves. 
Surely such conditions call for sympathy 
on all sides. And the people of God, 
who have gained the good hope of the Gospel 
of God's Word, can sympathize heartily with 
these hopeless ones, and should point them to the 
only real remedy, the Kingdom of God, and earnestly 
continue to pray, "Thy Kingdom come." 

And then can we not also sympathize with 
the rich and those who employ labor? Surely 
this is their day of trouble in an especial degree, 
as said the Prophet and the Apostle. 
(Zeph. 1:14-18; Jas. 5:1-6.) Present conditions 
are not, as is sometimes claimed, the result 
of special legislation secured in their favor, but 
the result of increased knowledge, and with it, 
increased ambition. (Dan. 12:4.) The case is 
like that of an outgrown shoe: once it was a 
comfortable fit and a desirable shoe; but now 
it pinches;— not because the shoe has grown 
narrower and shorter, but because the foot has 
grown larger. So the metes and bounds of the 
present social order, that once were easy and 
favorable, now pinch;— not because they are being 
contracted, for the reverse is the case: they 
are being stretched in every direction. They 
can never again prove easy, however, but will 
prove more and more distressing, because the 
general increase of knowledge daily increases 
the desires and discontents of the masses. 

Evidently the rich men are not to be blamed 
for this, even though they be blameworthy for 
not recognizing the changed conditions and 
adapting themselves thereto. Indeed, only millionaires 

R1676: page 230 

could do anything out of the current 

of social and financial custom. Others are 

powerless: the average mine-operator, storekeeper, 

and manufacturer is so beset with competition 

and with maturing debts that even an 

attempt to change from the rut of present custom 



would mean financial suicide— the wreck 
of his own business and that of others more or 
less dependent upon its prosperity. Indeed, we 
may safely say that the majority of this influential 
class of busy brain- workers recognize the 
situation and would rejoice if they could see 
any feasible method of bringing about a moderate 
change. And yet in times of strikes and 
riots, when their business is most disturbed, and 
when they feel themselves close to the brink of 
financial ruin, these men cannot call out for 
public sympathy as can the laborers and strikers; 
they cannot tell their distress, because to 
do so would be to spoil their credit and only 
hasten their ruin. And these men also deserve the 
sympathy of all who "look not every man upon 
his own things [troubles and interests], but 
also upon the things of others."— Phil. 2:4. 

But, as selfishness is the basis of the present 
social system, so love must be the basis of the 
new and better order; and that radical change 
can only come about by the sound conversion 
of the majority of the people to God and his 
plan (which is not supposable under present 
conditions), or the interposition of divine power 
and law,— the very thing which the Scriptures 
predict. What can we advise? To all the 
"brethren" we say, "Have patience, brethren;" 
"avenge not yourselves;" they that take to the 
sword will suffer therefrom the more themselves. 

R1677: page 230 

Trust in the Lord, wait patiently for him, and 
he will bring to pass in his due time and way 
(the best time and way) all the gracious promises 
of his Word— including the blessing of all 
the families of earth. 

We see the various inequalities and wrongs 
of the present system of society more clearly 
than others, because we see them from the 
standpoint of the Lord's Word; but we can 
see also that, if it were within our power to suddenly 
revolutionize matters, that would be undesirable: 
it would produce a condition far worse 
than the present. Far better the present social 
system than none; and far better, while the present 
system continues, that the power remain in 
the hands of men of judgment and moderation 
than that the lever of power be suddenly transferred 
into the hands of the rash and inexperienced 
masses, unused to weighty responsibilities, 
and mere novices and experimenters upon all 
questions, social and financial. A thousand 
times better is a social system in the hands of 
education and experience, even though selfish, 



than no social system, or an experimental one 
in the hands of novices equally selfish, but not 
equally moderate. We much prefer then to 
stay as long as we can where we are than to 
change to any other arrangement that men can 
originate, or assist in any way to precipitate the 
trouble which sooner or later must inevitably 
involve all nations and all individuals. 

Better, far better, wait on the Lord,— wait 
until his time for establishing his Kingdom and 
have it come about in his way. He will eventually 
restrain the forces of evil and selfishness 
in both rich and poor and bring in equity and 
everlasting righteousness. 

So, then, although we know that the revolution 
and anarchy and trouble are surely coming, 
let us, "brethren" of Christ, do nothing to 
promote or hasten it. Let our advice be to the 
contrary, to any of our friends who seek our 
counsel. Especially let us improve the opportunity 
for pointing out to them the true and 
only remedy for present distress— Christ's Kingdom 
and its new social order under the law of 
Love. And, to all who have ears to hear, preach 
Christ the Redeemer, soon, as the Great Physician, 
to be the Restorer of all who cheerfully 
obey him. Point him out as now our Savior, 
your Savior. Tell them of the joy and peace 
and blessing which he gives and which he 
promises shall abide with us in every condition. 
Tell them that it is for this reason that "We 
will not fear though the earth [society] be removed; 
though the mountains [governments] 
be removed and carried into the midst of the 
sea [the ungovernable masses]; though the waters 
[the people] thereof roar and be troubled; 
though the mountains [governments] shake with 
the swellings [riots, tumults, etc.] thereof." 

And if they become interested and willing, 
lead them to the Lamb of God and the streams 
of truth that make glad the true people of God, 
—and if they be converted to God, seal them 
in the forehead (mind, intellect) with the wonderful 
present truth with which God has caused 
us to be sealed.— Rev. 7:3. 

Remember that now is the time to be active 
co-workers with God in doing this sealing work, 
and that the disturbing winds are being held 
back until the sealing work is done. Therefore, 
when the present disturbances pass away and 
another season of comparative calm follows, 
continue earnest and zealous in the sealing work, 
knowing that the time is short and that "the 
night [the darker period] cometh when no man 
can work." We must labor while it is called 
day, and cannot hope for a more favorable opportunity 



than the present. "Be thou faithful 

unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life," 

is the promise. 



R1677: page 231 

"ANGELS WHICH KEPT NOT THEIR FIRST ESTATE." 



"The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they 
were fair; and they took them wives of all which they 
chose.... And they bare children to them; the 
same became mighty men, which were of old, 
men of renown."— Gen. 6:2,4. 

THE Scriptures not only point us to the future 

age and call the spiritual government 

of Christ which shall then exist a "new heavens," 

and earthly society and institutions under 

it a "new earth," but the present spiritual rulership 

(under Satan, "the prince of this world"), 

with the earthly institutions under it, is termed 

"the present evil world," dispensation or epoch.* 

Moreover, we are informed that the present 

dominion of evil has not always existed, but 

that it was preceded by a still different dispensation 

or epoch, spoken of as "the world that 

was before the flood," which also had a heavens, 

or spiritual ruling power, and an earth, or condition 

of men subject to that spiritual dominion. 

The three worlds mentioned by Peter (2 Pet. 3:6,7,13) 
designate these three great epochs 
of time. In each, God's plan with reference 
to men has a distinct and separate outline, 
yet each is but a part of the one great 
plan which, when complete, will exhibit the 
divine wisdom, justice, love and power, to the 
wonder and admiration of all his creatures. 

Since that first "world" (heavens and earth, 
or that order of things) passed away at the time 
of the flood, it follows that it must have been 
a different order from the present, and hence 
that the prince of this present evil world was 
not the prince of that order which preceded this 
—the dispensation before the flood— however 
widely his influence was then exerted and felt. 

Several Scriptures throw light on God's dealings 
during that first dispensation, and give 
clearer insight into his plan as a whole. The 
thought suggested by these is, that the first 
world (the dispensation before the flood) was 
under the supervision and special ministration 
of the angels; who were permitted to do what 



they could and desired to do to recover and rule 
the fallen race, which, because of sin, needed 
a government other than its own. 

That angels were the rulers of that epoch is 
not only indicated by all references to that 
period, but may be reasonably inferred from the 
Apostle's remark when contrasting the present 
dispensation with the past and the future. He 
endeavors to show both the righteousness and 
the enduring character of the future rulership 
of the world, saying, "The world to come hath 
he not put in subjection to the angels." No, 
it is put under the control of our Lord Jesus 
and his joint-heirs, and hence it shall not only 
be more righteous than the present rule of 
Satan, but it shall be more successful than was 
the previous rule by the angels.— Heb. 2:2,5. 

In their original estate all the angels, it seems, 
possessed the ability to appear in earthly forms. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., Chapter iv. 

R1678: page 231 

Thus Satan appeared to Eve as a serpent, or acting 
through a serpent. Other angels frequently appeared 
as men, thus performing their ministry, appearing 
or disappearing, as the work demanded. 

It was at this time, it seems, that the fall of 
some of the angels occurred. It is a common 
supposition, though we think without foundation, 
that the fall of Satan's angels occurred 
before man's creation. We are told that Satan 
was a murderer (man-killer) from the beginning. 
(John 8:44.) Certainly not the beginning 
of his own existence, for every creation 
coming from God's hand is perfect; nor can 
we think any other beginning referred to than 
man's beginning, in Eden. But, so far as we 
are informed, he was then alone and had no 
followers or angels. 

The ambition of Satan, one of the mighty 
angels, to become a ruler seems to have developed 
as he beheld the first human pair with 
their procreative powers, and the grand possibilities 
of an extended dominion through their 
posterity. He probably reasoned that, if he 
could obtain the control of this man, he would 
have the dominion over all his offspring, and be 
in power and influence above others— a rival of 
Jehovah himself; and his growing ambition said, 
"I will be like the Most High."-Isa. 14:14. 

Successful in contaminating the stream at its 
source, Satan gained a great influence over the 



race; but his power over them was limited because 
of the competition of the great company 
of angels, who, as guardians, instructed and 
ruled mankind for a time in harmony with the 
will of God. But man's corruption was contagious, 
and some of these angelic rulers soon fell 
victims to the plague: left their own habitation, 
or condition as spiritual beings, keeping not 
their first or original estate. They misused the 
powers which they possessed, of assuming a human 
form, and became of a reprobate and licentious 
mind, copying after degenerate man, 
and started a new race of men in the world, as 
the above text (Gen. 6:2-4) affirms. 

This Scripture is applied by some to two 
classes of men— one class, more righteous than 
the other, called "sons of God." But such a 
position is untenable; for it is not a sin for one 

R1678: page 232 

man to take for a wife another man's daughter. 
Marriage among men is never in the Scriptures 
condemned as sinful. On the contrary, it was 
ordained of God, and has always had his sanction. 
(Gen. 2:24; Heb. 13:4.) Our Lord attested 
his approval by his presence at the marriage in 
Cana. (John 2:1-11.) Neither is the propagation 
of the race, under proper conditions, 
condemned as sinful. God commanded it, that 
the earth might be filled with a race of beings 
generated from one pair, and in order that the 
redemption of the race might be secured by the 
obedience and sacrifice of one— Christ. (Gen. 1 :28; 
Rom. 5:19.) However, those to whom 
the Lord has granted a knowledge of his truth 
sometimes forego marriage, as they deny themselves 
many other earthly rights and privileges 
"for the Kingdom of Heaven's sake" (Matt. 19:12), 
if they consider that thereby a more 
efficient service may be rendered to the Lord.* 

Again, if it were merely a union of two classes 
of the same race, why should the offspring be 
specially called "men of renown?" If the 
righteous and the wicked marry to-day, are their 
children therefore giants or mightier or more 
renowned men? 

Through the deterioration of several hundred 
years, mankind had lost much of its original 
vigor and perfection of mind and body; but 
with the angels it was different. Their powers 
were still perfect and unimpaired; hence it is 
clear that their children would partake of that 
vitality and much more resemble the first perfect 
man than those around them, among whom 
they would be giants both in physical and mental 



strength. 

Those angels which kept not their first condition, 
but sought the level of sinful men, and 
left their own habitation, or spiritual condition, 
God placed in age-lasting chains. That is, 
God restrained or limited their powers, taking 
from them the power and privilege of appearing 
in an earthly form, human or other. Hence, 
though we know that they did thus appear before 
the flood, there is not one instance recorded 
in which they have been able to free themselves 
from this restraint or chain since. On 
the contrary, the angels who left not their first 
estate are not so restrained, and have appeared 
frequently as men, as a flame of fire, as a pillar 
of cloud, etc., as recorded in both the Old and 
New Testament Scriptures. 

Having become depraved in their tastes, and 
being given over to a reprobate mind, and debarred 
from all association with God and his 
works and plan, these fallen angels have no 
longer any pleasure in things on the spiritual 
plane, but crave association with depraved mankind 
and a participation with men in sin. How 
wise and kind the Almighty hand which has restrained 
their power and influence over men, by 
preventing their personal intercourse! Now, 
they may indeed enter and act through any who 
invite their companionship, as spirit mediums, 
but no more can they do. Thus far shalt thou 
go, saith the Almighty, but no further. This 
is the explanation of what is known as Spiritism. 

Some of this class, possessed by devils, our 
Lord and his disciples met in their ministry. 
Out of one he cast a legion of devils. (Mark 5:1-15.) 
Anxious in some manner to become associated 
with humanity, yet unable to assume 
human form because restrained, when they found 
a man willing to have such company, a legion 
crowded into him, thereby making him a maniac. 
Even when they perceived that the Lord 
would release the man from their possession, 
they in despair requested as a favor that they 
might be permitted to inhabit and use the bodies 
of a herd of swine near by. But the swine were 
crazed thereby, and madly rushed into the sea. 

Jude (6,7) gives conclusive evidence on the 
subject, and clearly shows the nature of the sin 
for which the fallen angels were condemned and 
restrained, when, after mentioning the angels 
who sinned, he says, "Even as Sodom and 
Gomorrah,... IN LIKE MANNER giving themselves 
over to fornication and going after strange 
flesh." That God prohibits any mixture or 
blending of natures, and designs that each should 
keep its own original or first estate is clearly 



taught by this passage and also by Lev. 18:23; 
20: 15,16. And that our race as it exists to-day, 
coming through Noah, is purely Adamic 
stock, and contains no mixture, is shown by the 
expression— "These are the generations of Noah: 
Noah was a just man and perfect in his 
generation,"— i.e., not contaminated in the 
manner before described.— Gen. 6:9. 

Glancing back, then, we see the first epoch 
under angelic control, the inability of those 
angels to lift man out of his fallen condition, 
and the debasing influence of man's continued 
degradation upon some of the angels. The 
angels were utterly unable to accomplish the 
great work of man's recovery. Doubtless they 
were anxious to do it, for they sang and shouted 
for joy at his creation. God let them try it, 
and it was doubtless part of their trial and discipline, 
but they failed. Some joined the ranks 
of evil, while the rest stood by powerless to arrest 
the terrible course of sin. Later we find the 
good angels still interested, desiring to look into 
the plan which God has since been working 
out, and ever ready to do his bidding in our 
service. (1 Pet. 1:12.) Thus was proven to 



*See issue of July '93— "Man and Woman in God's 
Order." 

R1678: page 233 

both men and angels the futility of angelic 
power to save men. 

In the beginning of "this present evil world," 
notwithstanding Noah's endeavor to serve God 
and to teach his posterity to follow his example, 
and the exhibition of God's judgment in the 
deluge, the tendency was still downward; and 
soon the wickedness of Sodom brought its destruction. 
Mankind were bent on an evil course, 
and God permitted them to take it. Then the 
ministration of angels, except to the few of 
God's children, was withdrawn; and now, instead 
of sending heavenly messengers to declare 
to us his will, he has given us his Word, "that 
the man of God may be thoroughly furnished 
[thereby] unto all good works."— 2 Tim. 3:16,17. 

Ever since the fall, God's plan has been 
gradually and quietly developing, and in due 
time will bear abundant fruit unto eternal life; 
and he has now demonstrated to all his creatures 
that his plan is the only one which could 
accomplish the great work. It selects and tests 
first of all the "little flock," the Royal Priesthood, 



and then reaches out to lift up and restore 

all who will accept life upon God's conditions. 

THE SPIRITS IN PRISON. 



"Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death 
in the flesh but quickened in the spirit. By which also [in 
addition to this work done for us] he preached to the 
spirits in prison; which sometime [before] were disobedient, 
when once the long-suffering of God waited in the 
days of Noah."-- 1 Pet. 3:18-20. See Diaglott, foot note. 

A satisfactory interpretation of this Scripture 
has long been sought, and but few have 
found a solution perfectly consistent and satisfying 
even to themselves. But in view of the 
truth gleaned from the suggestions of the preceding 
article, the above statements of the 
Apostle Peter become luminous. 

The two views of this passage commonly held 
we state first, and then give our present view of it. 

The most common view is, that during the 
time that Jesus was entombed he was off on a 
missionary tour preaching to the antediluvian 
sinners who were suffering torture in a supposed 
place called hell. 

If its advocates would consider it, they would 
find that their interpretation favors a view of 
future probation for the antediluvians, a thing 
which they strenuously oppose. For if Christ 
preached to them it must have been for some 
purpose. Surely it was not merely to mock and 
deride them. Consequently he must have 
preached a message of hope— a part of his 
blessed "good tidings of great joy." And if 
there is a future for the antediluvians, why not 
accept our position as correct— that in Christ 

R1679: page 233 

"all families of the earth shall be blessed?" 

This is the objection which consistency would 
urge against this view, from the standpoint of 
those who hold it. But if we view it from the 
Scriptural standpoint, and with the correct idea 
of death and "hell," we must reason that if 
Jesus were really dead during those three days, 
as the Apostles declare, then he could do no 
preaching; for "the dead know not anything" 
(Eccl. 9:5), and "there is no work, nor device, 
nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave." 
(Eccl. 9:10.) Second, If Jesus had been an 
exception to the rule, and could have preached, 
the antediluvians could not have heard; for 



certainly they have no wisdom, nor knowledge, 
in the grave. Hence this view is found generally 
unsatisfactory and as well as unscriptural.* 

The second view, and the one which seemed 
most reasonable to us until the considerations 
of the preceding article threw light upon this 
scripture also, is to refer the preaching to that 
which Noah did under the direction of the 
Spirit of God to the antediluvians, who at this 
time were imprisoned in death. The objection 
to this view is, that the preaching was not to 
men, nor to the spirits of men, but to spirits, 
spirit beings; and the preaching was not done 
by Noah, nor by the Spirit of God, nor before 
the flood, but after they had been chained,— 
by the death and resurrection of our Lord. 

It seems very clear, therefore, that the spirits 
are those spirit beings who were disobedient 
during the days of Noah, and whom God therefore 
imprisoned or restrained in some of their 
former liberties and privileges, even "those 
angels who kept not their own principality, but 
left their own habitation [or normal condition]. 
He has kept them in perpetual chains [restraints], 
under thick darkness, for the judgment of the 
great day."— Jude 6, Diaglott. 

This interpretation seems to meet all the circumstances 
of the case thus far. Now we inquire, 
In what way could our Lord preach to 
those spirits during the time he was dead? We 
answer that it is not so stated. It was by the 
facts that he preached, as we sometimes say that 
"actions speak louder than words." It was by 
his sufferings, death and resurrection that the 
preaching was done. Thus, as Jesus went from 
step to step in his work, his course was preaching 
a good sermon to those angels who once 
had been placed in control of man, and had 
themselves fallen, instead of lifting up mankind. 
In Jesus they saw exemplified obedience even 
unto death, and its reward— resurrection to 
spiritual being of the divine nature. Such was 
the great text; and the lesson from it is stated 



*For a full treatment of the subject of "hell," future 
punishment, etc., see our issue of Feb. 1-15, '93. Concerning 
"immortality" see issue of Apr. 15, '94. 

R1679: page 234 

by the Apostle (1 Pet. 3:22), viz., that Jesus 
was now highly exalted and given a name (title) 
above every name, that he was "gone into 
heaven, and is at the right hand of God [the 



position of highest favor]; angels and authorities 
and powers being made subject to him." 
They knew Jesus before he left the glory of the 
heavenly condition and became a man. They 
knew the object of his self-sacrifice as a man. 
They saw him obedient even unto death, and 
then that his high exaltation came as a reward. 
(Phil. 2:9.) They must have felt keenly their 
loss through disobedience, being cut off from 
communion with God, restrained as unworthy 
of former liberty and communion with the purer 
minded of mankind, and their own future an 
unsolved mystery. We can but imagine that 
sorrow and chagrin filled their hearts, as they 
contrasted their course of disobedience and its 
results with our Lord's obedient course and its 
grand results. We can fancy at least some of 
them saying, Would that we had realized before, 
as fully as we now do, the wide contrast 
between the results of obedience and disobedience. 
Would that we might have another trial: 
with our increased knowledge, our course would 
be very different. 

A clear distinction should be borne in mind, 
as between Satan and these angels. Satan evidently 
sinned against great light, so that infinite 
wisdom finds no place to do more for him, 
and his ultimate destruction is clearly predicted. 
-Heb. 2:14. 

But did not the Lord, in Matt. 25:41, declare 
eternal torment to be the punishment awaiting 
these fallen spirit beings? No: this scripture 
cannot be used as an argument against a hope 
for a probation for the imprisoned spirits; for 
though, by force of circumstances and restraint 
from any other service, they are now Satan's 
angels— messengers or servants—yet they may 
not always continue such, if an opportunity 
be granted them to return to God's service 
and be angels of God. This passage relates to 
the "lake of fire" or destruction (Rev. 20: 10),* 
into which, at the close of the Millennial 
age, all are to be cast, who are out of harmony 
with God. Satan will be of those cast into 
that everlasting destruction, and with him all 
who do unrighteousness or have pleasure therein 
—all of whom, spirits or men, are reckoned 
to be on his side, his angels or messengers. 
All evil-doers shall be cut off from life. To 
cut off such, and such only, was God's plan from 
the beginning. The wilfully wicked and not 
the merely ignorant, misled, blinded or deceived 
are meant when it is said, "All the wicked will 
God destroy." 



*See our issue of Feb. '93. 
THE PROBATION OF ANGELS. 



Will those "spirits in prison," "those angels 
which kept not their first estate," and who received 
such a powerful lesson from the ministry, 
death and resurrection of our Lord, ever have 
an opportunity to profit by those lessons? will 
they ever have an opportunity to repent of their 
sin, to leave Satan's service and to return to 
loyalty to God? 

If at first we thought the Scriptures were 
silent on the subject, we have found that to be 
a mistake; and when God speaks we may 
reasonably conclude there is something profitable 
for us to hear. Hence, let us give ear that 
we may learn whatever our Father deems expedient 
to communicate. 

Jude (verse 6) informs us that those angels 
which committed fornication and went after 
strange flesh, "also," "in like manner" to the 
Sodomites (verse 7), God is keeping under restraint 
(as a penalty or punishment) "unto the 
judgment of the great day." The "great day" 
is the Millennial Day, and mankind is also 
waiting for this judgment (krisis— trial). The 
Apostle Peter's testimony is in harmony (2 Pet. 2:4); 
and St. Paul settles the matter that these 
fallen and now imprisoned spirit beings, as well 
as mankind, will have a trial under the reign 
of Christ— the Church, the Kingdom of God 
in exalted power. Speaking of the impropriety 
of the saints appealing to earthly courts of justice 
for adjustment of their difficulties, he says, 
"Do you not know that the saints shall judge 
the world?. ..Know ye not that we shall 
judge angels?" (1 Cor. 6:1-4.) The Greek 
word here rendered "judge," is krino, of the 
same root as krisis, rendered "judgment" in 
Jude 7, and signifies, to govern, to test, as to 
mete out to each individual blessings or stripes, 
according to the merit of his course when 
brought fully into the light of truth, and under 
all the blessings of the reign of Christ. Thus 
it is seen that it will be part of the work of the 
Christ to rule over and direct both human and 
angelic sinners— "to judge the world" of fallen 
men, now restrained in death, from which 
they have been redeemed, and also fallen spirits, 
restrained alive until this judgment or trial 
of the Great Millennial Day, when the Church under 
the headship of her Lord shall try their cause 



also, giving everlasting life and favor to those who 
shall then prove themselves worthy of it, and 
everlasting destruction to those unworthy. 

Besides, we find frequent references to a work 
Christ is to do in subjecting heavenly or spiritual, 
as well as human powers, when the Church 
has been selected and the work of judging 
and blessing is commenced. For instance, we 

R1679: page 235 

read (Eph. 1:10), "In the dispensation of the 
fulness of times, to re-establish [under God's 
dominion and law] all things in Christ [the 
disordered things] that are in heaven [spiritual] 
and on earth [human] in him."— Douay translation. 
Again, "In him it hath well pleased 
the Father that all fulness should dwell, and 
through him to reconcile all things unto himself, 
making peace by the blood of his cross, 
both as to the things on earth, and the things 
in heaven"— earthly and spiritual transgressors. 
-Col. l:20.-Douay. 

In Eph. 3:8-10, it is shown that the length 
and breadth of God's redemptive plan has been 
hidden by God until the Gospel age, when the 
apostles were commissioned to declare to men 
the conditions upon which they might become 
sharers with Christ in the execution of God's 
loving plans; and the intent is, ultimately, to 
have all the heavenly or spiritual beings know, 
through the instrumentality of the Church, the 
boundless wealth that is in God's great gift — 
His Son— and the different methods and steps his 
wisdom marked out for all his creatures. We quote 
the passage from the Diaglott translation:— 

"To me, the very lowest of the saints, was 
this favor given— to announce among nations 
the glad tidings— the boundless wealth of the 
Anointed One: even to enlighten all as to 
what is the [method of] administration [or 
operation] of that secret [plan] which has 
been concealed from the ages by that God who 
created all things; in order that now [henceforth] 
may be made known to governments 
and the authorities in the heavenlies, through 
[the instrumentality of] the congregation [the 
Church] the much diversified wisdom of God, 
according to a plan of the ages," "which he 
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord." 

It would appear, then, that God's bountiful 
plan and diversified wisdom contains something 
of interest to the angels, and, if of interest to 
any, of special interest to those confined or 
restrained, and awaiting a trial in the judgment 
of the great day. They see the saints and seek 



to look into things revealed by the Spirit and 
Word to these; but in no other way can they 
learn of their future, or of what provision has 
been made for them in the boundless wealth 
and diversified wisdom of God, because it is to 
be "made known" "through the Church." 

These condemned angels have been learning 
much since the first text and sermon;— not only 
the lesson of our Lord's obedience and exaltation 
(1 Pet. 3:18-20; 1 Tim. 3:16), but also of 
his followers; for we read that "we are made a 
spectacle both to angels and to men." (1 Cor. 4:9 
—Diaglott.) The spectacle and lesson are 
to both men and angels for the reason that both 
men and angels will shortly be judged by the 
Church, and blessed by it, if found obedient 
and worthy of life. When the testimony in 
due time is given, all things, both in heaven 
(the spiritual condition) and on earth (the human), 
shall bow to Jehovah's Anointed and 
confess him their Lord and Ruler; and those 
who refuse obedience to his righteous authority 
shall be cut off, as unworthy of life.— Isa. 45:23; 
Rom. 14:11; Acts 3:23. 

The angels that sinned in the days of Noah 
have had a bitter experience since: no doubt 

R1680: page 235 

death would have been preferable in many respects. 

Cut off from association with good 

angels, and placed in companionship of each 

other and Satan, without God and having no 

hope, they must have had a terrible experience 

with sin's demoralizing effects, while their observation 

of mankind, dying on account of sin, 

would lead them to surmise that death might 

ultimately be their portion also. That such 

was the fear of these unclean spirits is evidenced 

by the protest of one whom the Lord cast out: 

"Art thou come to destroy us?" (Mark 1:24; 

Luke 4:34; Matt. 8:29.) But this no more 

proves that their suppositions were correct, than 

the belief of millions of professed Christians, 

that nine-tenths of humanity will be everlastingly 

tormented, proves that to be so. The 

fact is, we find that Satan, who taught men 

thus to blaspheme God's character through misrepresentation 

of his plan, was the master and 

chief over these cast-down spirits; and evidently 

he had misrepresented Jehovah's plan to the 

imprisoned spirits as he has to men. He is the 

father of lies. 

Neither can we forget their respectful conduct 
toward our Lord and his apostles, and the 
message they delivered; far more respectful indeed 



than that of the strictest sect of the Jewish 
Church. While the latter scoffed and said, "Is 
not this Jesus, the son of Joseph?" (John 6:42), 
the former exclaimed, "Thou art the Son 
of God." (Mark 3:11.) While the former said, 
"Thou hast a devil and art mad," the latter 
said, "I know thee who thou art, the holy one 
ofGod."-Mark 1:24. 

The "legion," which had crazed the Gadarene, 
worshiped him, acknowledging him to be 
"Son of the Most High God. "--Mark 5:6,7. 

While they respected the true, they opposed 
the false, saying to some who pretended to exercise 
power— "Jesus I know, and Paul I know, 
but who are ye? And the man in whom the 
evil spirit was, leaped on them and overcame 
them."-Acts 19:15. 

The Jews and Gentiles beat and stoned the 
messengers of God, when they came among 
them with the glad tidings of salvation; but 

R1680: page 236 

some of these fallen angels seemed desirous of 
spreading the glad tidings. One followed the 
apostles, saying, "These men are the servants 
of the Most High God, which show unto us [angels 
and men] the way of salvation."— Acts 16:17. 

THE BASIS OF THEIR HOPE. 



But an important question now arises. The 
Scriptures show us that man's hope centers in 
the fact that a ransom-price was given for our 
sins; but what is the basis of hope for these 
fallen angels? On what ground can they have 
a trial and a hope of everlasting life? Did our 
Lord die for them? 

We are not so informed: The ransom-sacrifice 
was human, a ransom for men. "Verily," 
says Paul, "he took not on him the nature of 
angels," etc. (Heb. 2:16.) Furthermore, they 
were not under condemnation to death, and 
hence have never lost their life in any measure, 
and need no ransom from death. It was because 
the sentence of death had passed upon men that 
a ransom was necessary in order that we might 
regain life. Those angels which kept not their 
first estate were condemned, not to death, but 
to restraint and confinement, until a day of 
trial, when God will judge both men and angels 
in righteousness by that man whom he hath 
ordained. (Acts 17:31.) They are therefore 
undergoing their penalty as truly as man is suffering 



his, though the penalties be very different 
in kind,— "according to the much diversified 
wisdom of God." 

And yet they had a great interest in our 
Lord's sacrifice; for though they were not being 
redeemed, bought by the precious blood, as 
was man, and did not need to be, not being 
under condemnation to death, yet their hope 
centered in the power which he should gain 
through his exaltation to the divine nature, in 
consequence of his obedience even unto death, 
to judge and restore them in due time. 

Again, if we have a correct view of the matter, 
that these angels had been tempted and seduced 
by evil men, which had become very 
great (Gen. 6:5), we may see how the reconciliation 
accomplished by the blood of the cross 
for man could apply to and cancel both direct 
and indirect guilt, if it resulted from the one 
man's disobedience and was not consented 
to by the will of the sinner. So that now we 
are assured in the words of the Apostle, "It 
pleased the Father,. ..having made peace 
[propitiation— satisfaction] through the blood 
of his cross, by him to reconcile unto himself 
all things [out of harmony];. ..whether 
things in earth, or things in heaven."— 
Col. 1:20. 

GOD'S COMPREHENSIVE LAW. 



God's wisdom, love and justice decide on 
what is best, and that decision is his will or 
law. But, strictly speaking, only so much of 
God's will as he expresses to his creatures is 
law to them. Hence, while his laws never conflict, 
they may be more or less fully expressed 
on one occasion than on another. 

All of God's intelligent creatures are under 
instruction, being taught those laws which his 
infinite love, wisdom and justice have enacted 
for the well-being of all. Though created perfect, 
each in his plane of being, yet they all lack 
that scope of knowledge and wisdom which belongs 
in full measure to the divine nature only. 
They all lack experience; hence, in giving them 
instruction in the wisdom and propriety of his 
laws, it has pleased Jehovah to make an illustration 
which would manifest and practically exemplify 
his own character and prove to his creatures 
the wisdom and righteousness of his laws. 

It is evident that the spirit of his law is not 
to take advantage of some transgressive slip, occasioned 
by lack of experience on the part of 



his creatures, but that he intends it to apply to 

the thoughts and intents of the hearts. That 

this is the real intent of God, we shall see illustrated 

by his dealings with those who have from 

lack of knowledge become sinners. 

His law in full, as we now see it in the light 
of his Word, is, "Thou shalt love the Lord 
thy God, with all thy heart, mind, soul and 
strength," and "thy neighbor as thyself;" and 
the penalty attached to the slightest deviation 
from that law is, "The soul that sinneth, it 
shall die;"— that no being shall be permitted to 
live, who, when fully informed of God's righteous 
will, and enabled to obey it, shall not conform 
thereto; that all such be cut off from life. 
But this is as it may be seen now. Once it was 
not so clearly expressed, nor so clearly seen. 

To fully exemplify this law, God caused man 
to be used as an illustration before this extreme 
penalty was placed upon the angels. So man 
was placed under the extreme penalty of his 
law— death; God knew that through inexperience 
man would violate that law and come under 
its penalty; but he purposed to make an 
illustration to all his creatures of the exceeding 
sinfulness of sin and its sure consequences, 
while at the same time his love and wisdom so 
marked out the plan, that mankind, the illustration, 
might not suffer loss, but be blessed 
by the lesson as learned. 

Nor should we forget that God's dealing with 
man was perfectly just. He had a right to demand 
perfect obedience from a perfect creature; 
and the fact that he at first did not inflict death 

R1680: page 237 

upon the angels was a favor toward them; even 
as toward man he has displayed his favor also, 
though in a different manner— through a ransom, 
and Savior, and restitution, and future 
trial for life, more favorable than the first, because 
of the knowledge of sin and its effects, 
meanwhile acquired by experience. This was 
a masterly stroke of wise economy on God's 
part; for had the death penalty been pronounced 
on the angels who sinned, a redeemer of their 
own kind would have been necessary for their 
recovery; and not only one, but many— one 
redeemer for each transgressor; for they were 
legion and were individually on trial; and the 
requirement of God's law is, Eye for eye, tooth 
for tooth, life for life. 

Let us briefly view the exhibition of God's 
character as displayed in his dealing toward 
mankind whom he made a spectacle to angels. 



(1 Cor. 4:9.) In so doing, let us guard against 
the common error which judges of God's actions 
exactly as of our own. Let us remember 
that justice, love, wisdom and power, as commonly 
displayed by the fallen race, in dealing 
with each other, and by human parents with 
their children, are far from perfect. In our 
first parents those qualities were perfect: they 
were in the image of Jehovah; but in our experience, 
in consequence of the fall, these qualities 
are constantly at war with each other. 
Sometimes love has a victory over justice, and 
sometimes justice has a victory over love. 

But with Jehovah there can be no conflict; 
and neither ever gains a victory or ascendancy 
over the other. Both are perfect, and work 
only in perfect harmony. 

Before man was created, the Justice, Wisdom, 
Love and Power of God held conference on the 
subject, and devised the plan which has since 
then been developing. The plan was suggested 
by Wisdom and concurred in by the other 
attributes; the arrangement and execution of 
it being left in Wisdom's hands. 

Wisdom designed to have the largest returns 
from the experience of man, and the most valuable 
illustration of God's character to all his 
creatures, on every plane of being. Accordingly 
Wisdom said, Let the man come under the 
control of Justice, Love and Power, separately, 
that the force and operation of each may be the 
more forcibly illustrated. Let Justice first have 
complete control, let men be dealt with by the 
strict law, "Thou shalt not"—. "In the 
day that thou dost. ..dying thou shalt die." 
And it was so. 

Man, inexperienced and unused to self-control 
and liberty, violated the law, and experienced 
the full weight of Justice, as Wisdom had 
foreseen and prepared for. 

The lesson under Justice has been long and 
severe, but the lesson must be thorough, so that 

R1681 : page 237 

it shall never need repeating. Men and angels 
must learn that Justice is relentless, irrevocable 
and unalterable. Then, too, before it could be 
realized that the remedy for man lay only in 
Jehovah and nowhere else, an opportunity was 
offered for the trial of other methods for man's 
recovery. First, the angels were given rulership 
(during the age before the flood), and 
made a miserable failure; for, while man became 
more and more corrupt himself, his evil influence 
led to the fall of some of those who attempted 



his assistance— "those angels which 
kept not their first estate." 

With the deluge that order of affairs passed 
away. Then, under the Law Covenant, given 
to one selected nation, another and different 
opportunity was presented, to prove to man that 
even if God should cancel all enmity, or resentment, 
and receive the world into covenant relations, 
they would require a Restorer, so that 
they could continue in harmony with God, even 
after being forgiven. Hence sacrifices and 
offerings for sin were instituted, and God treated 
that nation as though original sin and guilt 
had been removed, and then placed them under 
laws to prove to them, to us and to all, their inability 
(as degenerate creatures) to keep his law without 
a restitution to perfection— to his likeness. 

Meanwhile Love stood ready to manifest itself 
at the moment Wisdom should give the 
word. Love would have done so at once, but 
for two reasons: First, it could not oppose or 
interfere with the action of Justice in condemning 
man and delivering him over for the execution 
of the prescribed penalty. Second: though 
Love might have acknowledged Justice and approved 
its action by promptly providing a ransom 
(an equivalent price), Wisdom objected 
and did not permit this course at that time, because 
it saw best to make the lesson complete 
and thorough. 

Hence for over four thousand years Love was 
not permitted to manifest itself, and might only 
speak in shadowy sacrifices and ceremonies, 
and more or less obscure promises. But, finally, 
when the right time had come, "in due time," 
"in the fulness of time," Wisdom gave the 
word, and Love began to manifest itself for 
man's relief. The first act was to produce a 
perfect and sinless man to be a suitable "ransom 
for all:" one not under the Adamic curse 
—who would lay down his life for the race, and 
whose sacrifice would meet all the requirements 
of Justice, and therefore be acceptable as a 
ransom and propitiation for man's sins. And 
Love's great exhibition was seen in the gift of 
the grandest and greatest and first of all God's 

R1681 : page 238 

creation, who stooped and became man, to redeem 
men: and "they called his name Jesus." 

"Ah!" says one who judges by his own feelings, 
"Now comes Love's victory over Justice. We 
shall see that God is more loving than severe." 

But not so; God is not more loving than 
severely just: he is perfect in both respects. 



It will be indeed a victory for Love, but not 

over Justice. It will be much grander than that. 

It will prove a victory for both Justice and 

Love; for it will be gained by Love's paying 

the price demanded by Justice— a ransom, "an 

equivalent price." (1 Tim. 2:4-6.) The love 

of God, so long veiled from sight, was manifested 

in the gift of his Son to be our Redeemer 

and Savior. The record is: "Herein is love, 

not that we loved God, but that he loved us 

and sent his Son to be the propitiation [satisfaction 

or appeasement] for our sins." "In this 

was manifested the love of God toward us, because 

that God sent his only begotten Son into 

the world, that we might live through him." 

When Love had ransomed man, and was 
ready to reveal itself by restoring the willing 
and obedient of mankind to perfection and 
harmony with God, Wisdom postponed this on 
the ground that a further development of the 
plan would ultimately enhance Love's glory, 
and perfect the work: that an interlude (the 
Gospel age) must occur in which should be selected 
some from among the redeemed, some 
sharers in Christ's sufferings and reproach, who 
should be counted worthy to share his glory 
and to be his associates in the execution of 
Love's triumph in "the restitution of all things 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets." 

Long and faithfully has Love labored; but 
all her labor will yet be lost, unless in due time 
Wisdom shall commission Power to do its special 
part in the great plan. 

Power thus far has stood in the background, 
doing nothing directly in man's relief, save in 
the resurrection of our Lord, and in the miracles 
which shadowed forth its coming work. 

Now, we are living in the day when Power 
begins to act, not in opposition to Justice, but 
in harmony with Wisdom, Justice and Love. 
Oh, blessed day! The Lamb that was slain and 
who redeemed us by his blood is now invested 
with Power to bless all whom he bought; and 
he is now about taking unto himself his great 
power, and shall reign until he has subdued all 
enemies.— Rev. 20:6; 1 Cor. 15:25. 

God has chosen the plan which most fully 
and grandly exemplifies his unalterable justice, 
and exhibits the exceeding riches of his grace 
—his love; and in the restoration of man ("all 
who come to the Father by him") from destruction, 
from death, to perfection and life, 
will God's power be illustrated far more forcibly 
than even in man's creation. And as men 
and angels come to recognize the full fruition 
of God's plan in the ages to come, will they 



not with one consent exclaim with our brother 
and Apostle Paul, as he caught a glimpse of it: 
"O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom 
and knowledge of God! how unsearchable 
are his judgments, and his ways past finding 
out! For who hath known the mind [plan] of 
the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor? 
...Because out of him, and through him, 
and for him are all things. To him be the 
glory for ever."— Rom. 1 1:33-36. 

R1682: page 238 

THE DIVERSIFIED WISDOM OF GOD. 



"The much diversified wisdom of God" 
(Eph. 3:10— Diaglott) pursued one course with 
reference to the angels, not delivering the latter 
over to justice under the extreme penalty of the 
law, but pronouncing a lesser penalty until they 
should learn of evil and its consequences from 
the "spectacle" furnished them in mankind. 

But the result of Wisdom's course in either 
case is the same. The angels being perfect, 
and having had an example of the extreme penalty 
of the law, will be able to conform to God's 
law when again offered the opportunity, and 
doubtless many of them will be glad to do so. 
Man, who experienced the extreme penalty of 
the law, will also be able to appreciate forever 
good and evil, and, if he will, to choose that 
which is good, while both, in the event of 
non-conformity to God's will and a persistence 
in an evil course, will then be liable to 
the extreme penalty— the Second Death. Those 
counted worthy of everlasting life will then, as 
God does, love righteousness because it is good, 
and hate unrighteousness because it is evil. 

Though the experience of angels might at 
first appear less severe than man's, yet when it 
is remembered that man's dying experience was 
limited to an average of three-score years and 
ten, while the angels who sinned experienced 
over four thousand years of living restraint under 
Satan's rule, it will generally be conceded that 
their experience was not less severe than man's. 

In view of the great work to be accomplished, 
how necessary is the elevation of the Christ 
(Head and body) to the divine nature, since 
his mission is to govern, direct and bring to 
perfection "whosoever will," both of spiritual 
and human beings. And does not the selection 
of this class, made different from both angels 
and men— of the divine nature— illustrate yet 



further the much diversified wisdom of God, 
whereby he is able to work all things according 
to the counsel of his own will? Verily it does! 



page 239 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1681 : page 239 

THE FLIGHT INTO EGYPT. 



III. QUAR., LESSON IV., JULY 22, MATT. 2:13-23. 

Golden Text— "The Lord shall preserve thy going 
out and thy coming in."— Psa. 121:8. 

There are five points in this lesson worthy 
of special notice; viz., (1) The foresight 
and providence of God. His fore-knowledge 
is past our comprehension: the finite 
cannot fathom the depths of the infinite 
mind. But it is our privilege to know the 
comforting fact that Jehovah's knowledge 
and wisdom are superior to all the 
exigencies of his universal empire; and 
that the wrath of man and of all the combined 
powers of darkness cannot in the 
slightest degree frustrate the divine plan. 
The same power that was able to transform 
the spiritual Son of God to the human 
nature was able also to protect him against 
all opposers, from helpless infancy up to 
the appointed time of his sacrifice for the 
world's redemption. 

(2) We note again the ministry of angels 
—"Are they not all ministering spirits sent 
forth to minister for them who shall be heirs 
of salvation?" (Heb. 1:14.) Yes; and gladly 
are they ready for any service.— 1 Pet. 1:12. 

(3) The faith and prompt obedience of 
Joseph and Mary to the warning and counsel 
of the angel of the Lord is notable. They 



did not hesitate nor question, but immediately 

acted upon the command of the Lord; 

and his blessing and protection went with 

them, both in departing for Egypt and in 

returning to Palestine. In seeking to avoid 

the power of the new king Archelaus 

(Herod's son and successor, who even surpassed 

his father in oppression, cruelty, 

egotism and sensuality) and going to Nazareth 

instead of to Bethlehem which was 

near to Jerusalem, Joseph and Mary did not 

disregard the Lord's directions which were 

to go into the land of Israel— in any part 

of which they might settle. 

(4) In the circumstances here recorded 
we see the fulfilment of several prophecies 
—viz., (a) "Out of Egypt have I called my 
Son." This, like many other prophecies, 
was one of double significance, applying 
originally to the exodus of Israel from the 
bondage of Egypt (Hos. 11:1; Exod. 4:22,23), 
and subsequently to the return of the 

infant Son of God from Egypt after Herod 

was dead. (Matt. 2:15.) And on a still larger 

scale Egypt represents the world, and 

Christ and the entire Church of God are the 

called-out promised seed, (b) The circumstances 

which led to the settlement 

in Nazareth thereby led to the fulfilment of 

the prophecy of Matt. 2:23, "He shall be 

called a Nazarene." (c) The slaughter of 

the infants in Bethlehem was also prophetically 

mentioned. See Jer. 31:15; Matt. 2:17,18. 

It should be remembered, however, 

that in these cases the events were not made 

to fit the prophecies; but the prophecies 

were made to foretell the events, and become 

indications of the foreknowledge of God. 

(5) It is also worthy of notice that in protecting 
the infant Redeemer God's course 

did not interfere with the existing order of 
things. Although all power was in his 
hand, he did not strike Herod dead, nor 
overturn nor interfere with his authority and 
power. The time for such radical measures 
had not yet come. The lease of power had 
been granted to the kingdoms of this world 

R1682: page 239 

until the "Times of the Gentiles" should 

be fulfilled; i.e., until A. D. 1915. Consequently, 

they must (according to his plan) 

be permitted to take their own course for 

good or for evil, except in so far as their 

actions would interfere with the divine 



plan. And in such cases God always either 
overrules or prevents them. 

In the case here mentioned God interfered 
only so far as to protect his Son in 
whom the plan of salvation centered. But 
when the appointed time came for the sacrifice 
of that Son for the redemption of the 
world, then the rulers of darkness of this 
world had their way. They were then permitted 
to crucify the Son of God, because 
for this purpose came he into the world— 
to give his life a ransom for many; and because 
his hour was come.— Matt. 20:28; 
John 2:4; 7:6; Luke 22:53. 

The weeping and lamentation for the 
slaughtered infants who did not escape the 
wrath of the king, was but another note of 
the long wail of distress of the groaning 
creation, of which the Lord has not been 
unmindful, but which his far-sighted wisdom 
permits for wise and benevolent ends, 
until "the times of restitution of all things." 

R1682: page 240 

The promise of the Golden Text) has special 
reference to the spiritual life of the 
Lord's consecrated people— spiritual Israel. 
As new creatures they are always safe in 
God's keeping, while they abide in Christ. 

R1682: page 240 

THE YOUTH OF JESUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON V., JULY 29, LUKE 2:40-52. 

Golden Text— "And Jesus increased in wisdom and 
stature, and in favor with God and man."— Luke 2:52. 

In this incident of the early life of Jesus 
we catch a glimpse of the rapid development 
of perfect humanity. "The [perfect] child 
grew and waxed strong* [physically and 
intellectually], filled with wisdom; and the 
grace of God was upon him." His humble 
birth gave him none of the advantages of 
education or social culture, yet even at the 
age of twelve years all that heard him in 
conversation with the matured and learned 
doctors of the law in the temple were 
astonished at his understanding and answers. 
(Verse 47.) And later, when he 
taught in the synagogues, the astonished 



people said, "Whence hath this man this 

wisdom and these mighty works? Is not 

this the carpenter's son? is not his mother 

Mary? and his brethren. ..and his sisters, 

are they not all with us? Whence 

then hath this man all these things?" (Matt. 13:54-56.) 

"And all... wondered at 

the gracious words that proceeded out his 

mouth." (Luke 4:22.) "And the Jews marvelled 

saying, How knoweth this man letters, 

having never learned?" (John 7:15.) 

And others said, "Never man spake like this 

man."— John 7:46. 

At the tender age of twelve he was intellectually 
more than a match for the mature 
and learned doctors; and he did not assume 
to be a teacher, but with becoming modesty 
he heard and asked questions— questions, 
however, so keen and penetrating as to indicate 
a very superior comprehension of the 
law and the prophets. As a perfect human 
being his mind was active and strong, 
his reasoning powers were astute, his perceptives 
awake to every educating influence 
with which he came in contact, his moral 
perceptions always discarding every thing 
that was evil, and his memory treasuring 
up all that was worthy of a place in his 
mind. Thus he grew and waxed strong and 
was filled with wisdom. 

Joseph and Mary were, of course, unable 
to measure the breadth and capacity of such 
a mind, or to realize that at such an early 
age their child was developed so far beyond 
his years. But, having some appreciation 
of it, they did not give themselves 
special concern as to his whereabouts all 
the time of their stay in Jerusalem. They 
even started home and had gone a day's 
journey supposing that he was with friends 
in the company. Finding their mistake, 
they spent another day returning, and a 
third in searching for him, and finally found 
him in the temple earnestly studying the 
law and the prophets in the midst of the 
learned doctors. 

To their solicitous inquiry as to why he 
had thus dealt with them, his somewhat 
surprised answer was, "How is it that ye 
sought me? wist ye not that I must be 
about my Father's business?" He evidently 
thought they understood him better than 
they did. But "they understood not the 
saying which he spake unto them." (Verses 48-50.) 
They probably had never told him 
of his wonderful origin, and that Joseph 



was only his reputed father. How then 

could he know? thought they. The fact 

was that the mystery of his incarnation was 

incomprehensible to them. They did not 

know of the previous spiritual existence of 

this wonderful Son of God that he was now 

made flesh. They only knew him as the 

promised Seed of Abraham. But he knew; 

for as he grew and developed on the human 

plane of existence, memory carried him 

back to the glory that he had with the Father 

before the world was (John 17:5), so 

that he knew who he was and whence he 

came (John 8:58,14), and that he came to accomplish 

his Father's business. He seemed 

somewhat surprised that Joseph and Mary 

did not more fully comprehend him; but 

since they did not, he meekly conformed to 

their ideas and was subject to them until 

he reached the years generally recognized 

as the years of maturity or manhood. 

"And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature 
and in favor with God and man." 
(Verse 52.) Though the wisdom of twelve 
years surpassed that of the sages among men, 
neither his mind nor his body had yet reached 
full development. And not until he was a 
fully developed man was he suitable to the 
purpose for which he had been called. Not 
until he attained the age of thirty was he 
the full grown man ready for sacrifice.— 
1 Chron. 23:3; Num. 4:3; Heb. 10:5-9. 



*Sinaitic and Vatican MSS. omit the words, "in spirit. 



page 242 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1683 : page 242 

"GO LABOR ON: SPEND AND BE SPENT." 



Two have written that they feel discouraged 
because unable to do labor in the harvest field 
as colporteurs. They seem to feel that if not 
colporteurs they are not overcomers. This is a 
serious mistake; and since others may feel similarly, 
we reply publicly, although we have 
stated the same things in substance in previous 
TOWERS. 

While the colporteur work is one of the best 
means of serving the truth, it is by no means 
the only one. If you have not the needful 
strength for travel, or if you have a large family 
dependent on you for support, or if you have 
not the gifts necessary to success in that work, 
you may know that it is not your work. Then 
look about you, while you pray the Lord to 



show you what you can do—most to his praise, 
most in the service of his truth, most to the 
blessing of his people. 

However humble your talents may be, rest 
assured they will be accepted if presented in 
the name and merit and love of Christ. But be 
assured that you have at least one talent, else 
you would not have been granted an acquaintance 
with the truth. Be assured, too, that 
whatever the number of your talents, they 
must be used— must not be buried in pleasure or 
business or work of an earthly, selfish sort. If 
you do not use your talents (whatever they may 
be), it will be a proof of your lack of love, and 
hence a proof of your unworthiness to be one 
of the Lord's "little flock," all of whom will 
be so full of love for him and his that to sacrifice 
earthly good things in his service will be a 
part of their chiefest joy. And surely these are 
objects to draw upon our love and service, 
always and everywhere;— the Church of Christ 
in general, excepting only the "goats" and 
"wolves," are fainting for the true bread and 
the true water of life— truth. Under such conditions, 
while God's children are striving for 
what we can give, to be idle or pleasure-seeking 
would be almost criminal,— surely loveless. 

So, then, if you cannot do one thing, be all 
the more diligent to do another. Tracts can 
be distributed, and it needs just such as yourself 
to hand them out effectively with perhaps 
"a word in season," in the evenings, or on 
Sundays,— in the cars, in the hotels and on the 
street corners. The brethren and sisters in 
Cleveland have distributed thirty-five thousand 
(35,000) tracts during the past month, and the 
results are showing favorably. Turn to your 
TOWER for May last and read again our suggestions— 
"Fervent in spirit, serving the Lord."— 
Page 140. 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Our meetings are held in Bible House Chapel, Arch St., 
Allegheny, Pa. Readers and friends will be warmly welcomed. 
Preaching every Sunday at 3:30 P.M. 



R1683 : page 243 
