
‘Let God’s Will Take Place’




 1. What is the theme of the special assembly day program for the 2012 service year, and why is it appropriate that we consider this subject?
1 We were created because of Jehovah’s will. (Rev. 4:11) Thus, it would be impossible to fulfill the purpose of our existence without learning and doing the will of God. This is not as easy as it may seem, forasmuch as we have to fight an inward tendency to do “the things willed by the flesh and the thoughts” or to do “the will of the nations.” (Eph. 2:3; 1 Pet. 4:3; 2 Pet. 2:10) Without God’s help, we would even risk being “caught alive by [the Devil] for the will of that one.” (2 Tim. 2:26) Our special assembly day program for the 2012 service year will help each of us to work in harmony with the third primary entreaty in the model prayer, namely, “let your will take place.”—Matt. 6:9, 10.
 2. What questions will be answered during the program?
2 Questions That Will Be Answered: As you listen to the program, look for the answers to these questions: What is as important as hearing God’s Word? How can we go on perceiving what God’s will is for us? Why do we need to be willing to reach out to all sorts of people? How can we find a rich, satisfying life? Young ones, what do you need to prove to Jehovah? What rewards come from doing God’s will? Why is it urgent that we build up and encourage others?
 3. How can we benefit fully from this spiritual provision?
3 Be sure to be in attendance and to pay careful attention to the program. A Bethel representative or a traveling overseer will likely be present as a visiting speaker. Before and after the program, feel free to speak with him and his wife, if he is married. When you return home, do not become “a forgetful hearer,” but review the program as a family and discuss how you can work in harmony with God’s will more fully.—Jas. 1:25.
 4. Why is it important that we make the doing of God’s will our priority?
4 Very soon those who are pursuing their own desires and who refuse to submit to the will of Jehovah will be destroyed. (1 John 2:17) We are therefore thankful that Jehovah has prepared this timely information to help us make the doing of God’s will our priority!




