Announcements
DISTRICT ASSEMBLIES IN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA FOR 1954
The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society is planning a series of district assemblies in different parts of the United States and Canada. The details have not been worked out as yet, but we can announce now that from June 24 to 27, inclusive, we expect to have conventions in the states of Massachusetts, Ohio and Virginia.
From July 21 to 25, inclusive, we hope to arrange for a district assembly at Toronto, Canada.
During the dates July 29 to August 1, inclusive, we plan to have district assemblies in California, Colorado, Florida, Iowa, Louisiana, Missouri, Montana, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Utah and Wisconsin. These dates are not definitely established, but as soon as they are notice will appear in The Watchtower. From August 5 to 8, inclusive, we will try to arrange an assembly in British Columbia. The next week end, in Saskatchewan; and the following week end, the 19th to 22nd, in Nova Scotia.
This early announcement may help some of the brothers, when making plans for their vacations, to include the assembly nearest to them. At this time we are planning for 23 district assemblies to serve the United States and Canada.
INDIVIDUALLY CHOOSING THE DESTINY OF ETERNAL LIFE
Has God beforetime fixed each man’s destiny? The Bible answers: “I have put life and death before you, . . . and you must choose life in order that you may keep alive.” (Deut. 30:19, 20, NW) Clearly God states each individual chooses life or death for himself by obeying or disobeying the commandments of God. Many of them will be helped this month of January as Jehovah’s witnesses go from house to house offering a year’s subscription for the Watchtower magazine for $1. Three enlightening booklets will be given free with each new subscription for this Bible study aid. If you would like to share in this Christian work, contact Jehovah’s witnesses in your local community or write to the Watchtower Society for information.
1954 YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
The 1954 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses is now available for 50 cents a copy, and contains a report on the world-wide preaching work Jesus said would take place at this time. Also for 25 cents, or five or more to one address at 20 cents each, you may obtain the beautiful 1954 color calendar.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 31: They Shall Talk of the Glory of Jehovah’s Kingdom, ¶1-25.
Week of February 7: They Shall Talk of the Glory of Jehovah’s Kingdom, ¶26-36; also, Keeping a Clean Organization of Talkers, ¶1-21.
Week of February 14: Keeping a Clean Organization of Talkers, ¶22-26; also, “Become Doers of the Word, and Not Hearers Only.”

