They Shall Talk of the Glory of Jehovah’s Kingdom
“To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glory of the majesty of his kingdom.”—Ps. 145:12, AS.
 1. What is it that has made Jehovah’s witnesses talkers, and the right kind of talkers?
JEHOVAH’S witnesses are the most expressive creatures on the earth. Having gained knowledge of their Creator, Jehovah God, and of his Son, Christ Jesus, they cannot refrain from expressing themselves; that makes them talkers. The right kind of talkers, too—not gossipers—because they talk the truth as expressed in God’s Word. Really, they have something to talk about, the most wonderful news of good things to come that you have ever heard. It is very evident that they know their God, Jehovah. They know of his majesty, glory, power, wisdom, love, righteousness and the sovereignty of their Creator. They will show you that Jehovah God is the greatest one in all the universe, and that by studying Jehovah’s Word one can find out what he has done, is doing and will do as that Sovereign Ruler. When anyone comes to appreciate what Jehovah’s name means, what his mighty acts are, what he purposes to do, that one will not refrain from talking about Jehovah and the glory of his kingdom.
 2. Why is it that they must be such talkers?
2 Do you appreciate that he has done much in the past for you to talk about, that he is accomplishing great things now that must be mentioned to others not informed, and do you understand what he is going to do in the future, and that this you must declare? Has he revealed himself to you through his Word? If so, and if you are acquainted with his Word, then you must tell others what you know. You have come to know how to gain eternal life. With life you are able to do things yourself and to express yourself. If death is your goal, you have no incentive to make expression. “Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in Sheʹol [the common grave], whither thou goest.” (Eccl. 9:10, AS) But Jehovah’s people are expressive people because they believe and want to live. Christ Jesus said: “He that hears my word and believes him [Jehovah] that sent me has everlasting life, and . . . has passed over from death to life.” (John 5:24, NW) Thus you will want to talk about the things you learn from God’s Word because you want to live in Jehovah’s kingdom.
 3, 4. (a) According to Psalm 145:11 and in view of the war in heaven, of what do they have reason to speak and talk? (b) Whose command and whose example do they follow in thus doing?
3 Psalm 145:11 says: “They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.” Reflect for a minute: think of some of the wonderful things that Jehovah has done concerning his kingdom. Read Revelation chapter 12 and see there described Christ Jesus receiving to himself his authority and reigning in the heavens and casting the Devil down out of the heavens to the earth. “And war broke out in heaven: Michael and his angels battled with the dragon, and the dragon and its angels battled but it did not prevail, neither was a place found for them any longer in heaven. So down the great dragon was hurled, the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth; he was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were hurled down with him. And I heard a loud voice in heaven say: ‘Now have come to pass the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ, because the accuser of our brothers has been hurled down, who accuses them day and night before our God! And they conquered him because of the blood of the Lamb and because of the word of their witnessing, and they did not love their souls even despite the danger of death.’”—Rev. 12:7-11, NW.
4 In view of this you can speak of the power and glory of Jehovah God as expressed through his Son to cleanse the heavens of all unrighteousness and to prepare things for the glorious new world of righteousness now near. That battle in heaven was fought and won; the next and final one, the battle of Armageddon, is still to be fought for complete vindication of Jehovah’s name and Word. Do you want to survive it? Then start now studying and talking about the glories of Jehovah’s kingdom. Those who have come to know Jehovah God and his Son and of the new global nation are happy and want to follow Christ’s command to preach. Jesus said: “And this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for the purpose of a witness to all the nations, and then the accomplished end will come.” (Matt. 24:14, NW) Nineteen hundred years ago this special Kingdom message was given a powerful impetus in the ministry of Jehovah’s Son Christ Jesus. His followers preached the Kingdom too and organized the faithful slaves of Christ into one congregation. They were all called to one calling, a heavenly calling, “the kingdom of heaven,” to be the bride of Christ, his body. (Col. 1:18, NW) James said: “God chose the ones who are poor respecting the world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom which he promised to those who love him, did he not?” (Jas. 2:5, NW) Those rich in faith talked to others about the Kingdom and believed that Christ did go away to prepare a place for them so that they could be with him in heavenly glory. That place is now established in the heavenly Zion:
 5. What vision in Revelation shows them enjoying the promised place prepared for them?
5 “And I saw, and look! the Lamb standing upon the mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand having his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads. And I heard a sound out of heaven as the sound of many waters and as the sound of loud thunder; and the sound that I heard was as of singers who accompany themselves on the harp playing on their harps. And they are singing as if a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the persons of advanced age; and no one was able to master that song but the hundred and forty-four thousand, who have been purchased from the earth.”—Rev. 14:1-3, NW.
 6. What does Daniel 2:44 show to be Jehovah’s purpose concerning the Kingdom, and who else must now show faith in it, singing His praises?
6 The glorious kingdom of heaven will accomplish Jehovah’s purpose with Christ Jesus again taking the lead soon in the battle of Armageddon against the Devil, who still is the god of this world and its disunited nations. We read: “And in the days of those kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed, nor shall the sovereignty thereof be left to another people; but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.” (Dan. 2:44, AS) When that happens, in our generation, the other sheep now being gathered into Jehovah’s New World society will have the opportunity to sing Jehovah’s praises for eternity. But they must show faith now in Jehovah their God and in his now permanently-established government.—Isa. 9:6, 7, AS.
 7. What society is that Kingdom now governing and what divine words must the other sheep members of it remember?
7 The kingdom of heaven is now governing the New World society, which includes the other sheep of Christ Jesus whom he is now gathering together so as to have the opportunity of living for eternity in happiness, in peace and in prosperity in the new world of righteousness. Have you become one of these other sheep by dedicating your life to Jehovah’s worship or service? If so, remember God’s words, “I Jehovah your God am a God exacting exclusive devotion, . . . You must not take up the name of Jehovah your God in a worthless way, for Jehovah will not leave the one unpunished who takes up his name in a worthless way.”—Ex. 20:5, 7, NW.
SELFISHNESS IMPRACTICAL
 8. Why is Psalm 145 today not just a dreamy expression?
8 While the 145th Psalm is one of praise and adulation and expresses many things about the glory of Jehovah God and his kingdom, it is not just a dreamy expression. It is not the imagination of an individual who is sitting back and just thinking how wonderful such things might be if they were that way. What the psalmist writes are real, down-to-earth expressions of things that are now happening and things that will happen. He is speaking of the glory of Jehovah’s established kingdom. It is real, it is living, it is a going concern. It is something to work with and for, not against.
 9. In the light of this what pointed questions about the Kingdom must we face, and what do worldly men insist is necessary for the progress of this old world?
9 Is such a kingdom possible? Do you believe it is? When you meditate upon Jehovah’s Word does that Word live to you? Does it convince you that Jehovah’s kingdom is a reality, that the Kingdom is here, that it is in operation, that it is ruling Jehovah’s servants today? Can you observe the physical facts alongside the Bible prophecies? Are the Kingdom work and its way of operation practical, or do you think that this old world’s system is more practical? When one speaks to men of this old dying world who are supporting it and trying to hold it together, he soon sees that their theory is that there must be selfishness between nations to survive, there must be selfishness among men to make progress, to advance civilization. Just take a look at the selfishness of this world. Is it practical?
10. What fulfillment of prophecy shows whether selfishness has made this world better or not?
10 Selfishness has resulted in the condition foretold in these words: “But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, self-assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, without gratitude, with no loving-kindness, having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with self-esteem, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God, having a form of godly devotion but proving false to its power; and from these turn away.” (2 Tim. 3:1-5, NW) Now ask yourself, Has the selfishness of the world made it better? Has it progressed and has its selfishness made it a peaceful, happier world? No, you answer. So selfishness is not practical.
11, 12. What do the people of this world need, and so between what two big things must we express our choice?
11 What does it need? It is not selfishness, but love as expressed by Jehovah in the new and glorious kingdom of God. That righteous government, now already functioning, is based on love, for God is love. Jehovah God shows that that is the principle on which he works; and that is the principle every one of us has to work on if we are going to be in that new world of righteousness. Love is the foundation of it all.
12 So we might as well begin learning to love now: love Jehovah God, the Sovereign Ruler; love his Son, love his other creatures and do things for them. One of the best ways to show your love to people now is to talk to them of the glory of Jehovah’s kingdom. It is a real government, a growing organization that hundreds of thousands of persons already recognize. It has been and is constantly bringing blessing and happiness to millions of persons since its birth in 1914, and will bring life and happiness and peace to yet more millions in the future. Love will make the new world a marvelous place in which to live! You have seen what selfishness has done to this old world. So you make your choice: God’s kingdom or the Devil’s world.
13. What things have resulted in dividing this old world?
13 What a divided world you have! You see languages spoken by different groups of people in all parts of the earth, making it impossible for them to communicate with other groups of people. Nations just do not understand one another. Language has been a dividing factor. Nations have set up their own boundaries and fought over those boundaries, because they are selfish: ‘Stop! do not cross this line; this is mine!’ But this selfishness has not brought about any unity, peace or happiness in this divided world today. This is true also of religion. Whether pagan or so-called “Christian,” it is one of the greatest forces to separate people.
14, 15. Have politics and commerce proved themselves unselfish, and in what have all forms of selfishness resulted to humans everywhere?
14 Then there is politics with its different parties, its different forms and ideas of government, all of which claim to be “unselfish.” But are they? Finally, there is commerce, marked by its competitive, selfish way of handling deals and building up powerful organizations to get all the wealth of one kind, like oil or iron, into the hands of a few, so that its owners can control the world.
15 Now what has all that selfishness brought? To humans everywhere, hatred, wars, death.
16. By whom is God’s kingdom represented on earth today, and how does Psalm 145 mark a contrast between the Kingdom and the Devil’s world?
16 In Psalm 145, David, a man after God’s own heart, was talking about the glory of Jehovah’s kingdom. There is no glory in the kingdoms of this old world. Now we know of Jehovah’s kingdom as revealed through his Word, and it is a government based on love, righteousness, peace and justice. Which do you want? Which will you serve? We have just looked at the old world. How do we see the new world? We see it represented in the people whom Jehovah God has gathered together today and built into an organization, a New World society. Yes, they are still living on this globe that they know is, since 1914, his eminent domain, but they have come out of that old world. They have all the infirmities and sicknesses of the common man, but not the unhappiness and selfishness of this old world. By Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, he has, in these “last days,” gathered together those who are seeking him, seeking righteousness, meekness, happiness, contentment, and he has brought them into the New World society. The 145th Psalm shows how Jehovah God will reach out to help those who have fallen and who want to get up, and to help those who have been forced to bow down. He offers them his hand; he says he will feed them. There is a great contrast in principle governing these two organizations, Jehovah’s and the Devil’s. The Devil’s is a wicked, selfish world, oppressing people. Jehovah’s is the glorious kingdom based on love and sinlessness, for he arranged to take away the sin of the world by the blood of his Lamb, Christ Jesus.
17. Whose need and desire does Jehovah satisfy?
17 Psalm 145:14-16 shows how Jehovah helps the poor and lowly of heart, for he ‘satisfies the desire of every living thing.’ Well, certainly those who have come to know Jehovah and have studied his Word have been satisfied with truth and their present happiness in life. But let us go beyond just his people and look into the earth itself, even to the animal kingdom. He satisfies even all their desires. The birds that fly above the earth fully enjoy their life span though it is short. He satisfies their needs by the food, by the nests, by the trees and by the open sky in which to fly. Look in any department of creation—the animal life that crawls upon the earth or the fish that are in the sea—he satisfies all their needs. Well, if he looks after them so thoroughly, certainly he will look after you, if you come within his organization. What a marvelous provision he has made for everything that he has created in the heavens and on earth! “Observe intently the birds of heaven, because they do not sow seed or reap or gather into storehouses; still your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not worth more than they are?”—Matt. 6:26, NW.
18. So why are we unable to be expressionless, and to what expression toward Jehovah does Psalm 103:15 give way?
18 Are we going to be expressionless when we know these things? How can we be when it is a natural thing for us to talk about someone who loves us and whom we love, and whom we want to bless? “To bless” means to bestow favor or honor upon, or to speak well of a person. Psalm 103 (AS) shows how those who have come to know Jehovah God want to do this. Its first five verses Ps 103:1-5 express their gratitude: “Bless Jehovah, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless his holy name. Bless Jehovah, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits: who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases; who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth thee with lovingkindness and tender mercies; who satisfieth thy desire with good things, so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle.”
19. Why, then, ought we also to bless Jehovah and his holy name? And what keeps us active as His representatives?
19 Do you bless Jehovah and his holy name? You ought to, because you have seen all of his benefits, or can see them if you look. He has healed you and helped you into the path of the living, or will heal you if you seek him and the truth. He has provided the truth for all to follow and to benefit by it. He will show all the way to gain eternal life if they want to know. He has redeemed you from destruction in this old world because you have come into his New World society. If you have not come you can do so, or at least can investigate. He has crowned you with loving-kindness and he has shown you his tender mercies by making his Word accessible. If you study the Bible, he will satisfy every desire. Then you can say: ‘I have the truth. I know Jehovah. I appreciate that I can work for him and that I can gain life by continually taking in knowledge of him.’ And what does that do to us? It keeps us young; it keeps us alive; it keeps us active in his New World society, as representatives of him. “We are therefore ambassadors substituting for Christ, as though God were making entreaty through us. As substitutes for Christ we beg: ‘Become reconciled to God.’”—2 Cor. 5:20, NW.
20. In what way is our youth renewed now, and what kind of youth will men of good will enjoy in the new world?
20 Anyone who has come into the truth and has dedicated himself to Jehovah God has experienced this loving-kindness and tender mercy, and that gives him real faith and enables him to live an active Christian life and not be a hypocrite. Regardless of age, whether his years be many or few, it seems that a Christian shows only his youth, because no one will become old in the Kingdom, and the Kingdom is now here. So now every morning when we rise to talk of the glory of Jehovah’s kingdom we rise as a man in his youth. David says: “Thy youth is renewed like the eagle.” No longer are we in captivity to Babylon, but are now free. “They go from strength to strength; every one of them appeareth before God in Zion.” (Ps. 84:7, AS) “They that wait for Jehovah shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and not faint.” (Isa. 40:31, AS) We have something to keep us so busy. We have no time to get old and retire from serving the prospering Kingdom, which soon will clean out this old world with Gog of Magog and destroy it all. Then the people of good will are to enjoy continual youth under the new and glorious system of things longed for through all earth’s ages by men of righteousness, and each of them will see it continually expanding and flourishing in the new world.
IN ITS FORTIETH YEAR
21. In what year of the established Kingdom do we now live, and, despite what the year may mean, why are we content?
21 Since 1914 we have been living under the rule of this kingdom. Today we live in the fortieth year of its irresistible reign. What does that year mean to us? We cannot say. It will be much better for us to wait until this fortieth year is completely past and then look back to see whether that fortieth year of the Kingdom had some special significance. Regardless of whether there is or is not anything special in this fortieth year of Jehovah’s glorious rule as King (Rev. 11:16, 17; 19:6, NW), in which year we are now living, we certainly feel young, fully satisfied with what has happened thus far. We are content. Wherever Jehovah’s name-people are they are still able enthusiastically to praise their God and worship him day and night and they are fully aware of Jehovah’s interest in them.
22. How has Jehovah’s immeasurable kindness been shown us, and so how do we express ourselves toward him?
22 Jehovah’s witnesses, therefore, continually talk of the goodness of Jehovah God. They advertise his kingdom. They preach the Word and, like their God, they are happy. To them Jehovah continues to reveal himself, and they know Jehovah and they must express themselves concerning him. He has shown Jehovah’s witnesses immeasurable kindness, and has been forgiving and long-suffering with them as well as with all mankind. We who know the happy God and his truth have felt his mercy; we have been endowed with his tenderness. With David (Ps. 34:1-3, AS), therefore, we have reason joyously to say: “I will bless Jehovah at all times: his praise shall continually be in my mouth. My soul shall make her boast in Jehovah: the meek shall hear thereof, and be glad. Oh magnify Jehovah with me, and let us exalt his name together.”
23. (a) Who is it that hear such blessing of Jehovah on earth, and to what invitation do they respond? (b) In what does the power of the New World society lie?
23 Do you feel and talk that way? Do you want to bless Jehovah at all times, and continually praise him with your mouth? If you do, what happens? Psalm 34 shows that when you praise Jehovah with your mouth others who are meek will hear your praise. One who has come to Jehovah and keeps on devoting his life in service will talk regularly, and the meek will hear his talk; and then they are going to be invited to magnify Jehovah with him, and to exalt his name together. And then the meek will respond to the invitation: “Let us exalt his name together.” Now, are you going to do this praising and exalting of Jehovah God in this fortieth year of his established kingdom? The New World society is globally organized to do just that “in all the inhabited earth for the purpose of a witness to all the nations.” (Matt. 24:14, NW) As a society for such witness-bearing each of such associated preachers will talk “from house to house.” There is no question about it. The power of that organization we now see, but not because of the 510,228 praisers who are now in the New World society. No, its power is not in numbers. While the organization is great in numbers, the power, the backing, the support these numbers get is Jehovah’s holy spirit. You individually feel that power, that active force, because you have come into Jehovah’s organization. His favor is seen upon his witnesses. They all move forward in service under Jehovah’s appointed Shepherd-Prince, Christ Jesus.
24. Why do we invite others to magnify Jehovah’s name with us, and what recent manifestation of his Kingdom glory are we continuing to talk about?
24 These hundreds of thousands of praisers doing house-to-house witnessing work are joyously inviting others every day, every night, throughout this whole world, to magnify Jehovah’s name with them. We are not asking them to magnify Jehovah’s name just to get them to be called “Jehovah’s witnesses,” as the religious organizations do to get members throughout this earth. No, it is because we want talking ministers who will promote true worship of Almighty God and who will want to magnify Jehovah and exalt his name, not hide it. We want all persons of good will to appreciate the glory of Jehovah’s kingdom and to get from it all the blessings in store for them, and to allow the glory of Jehovah’s kingdom to be reflected through them in the true worship they give to Jehovah God. We want to see them “bless Jehovah at all times” and bear witness to the world of the glory of Jehovah’s kingdom. That glory we could see at Yankee Stadium July 19-26, 1953, during the New World Society Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses. With people present there from all nations, kindreds, tongues and families of the earth, having one mind and spirit, one love for Jehovah God, you could see it. It was a glorious feast. If you were there you enjoyed it and talked of the Kingdom to others and, by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, you will continue to do so.
25. What was there to be seen in Jehovah’s witnesses at the assembly to induce one to be gathered into the New World society?
25 If you were not there, what did others see in Jehovah’s witnesses as the New World society? Was it not the peace, quietness, friendliness, love, sincerity and unity of that group? If it was, why do you not allow yourself to be gathered by Jehovah’s Right Shepherd, Christ Jesus, into his New World society? If your heart is right you will respond to the invitation: “Magnify Jehovah with me, and let us exalt his name together.”—Ps. 34:3, AS.
26-32. What did many of the press reports, comments and editorials have to say about Jehovah’s witnesses attending the assembly?
26 Turn to a few of the thousands of press reports, comments and editorials, as follows:
27 “This weekend, thousands of them are swarming into New York City from all over the world . . . They’re called Jehovah’s witnesses, and each . . . a minister in name as well as in deed. Although most of them earn their livelihoods by worldly jobs, they devote the rest of their time to spiritual business—visiting homes, preaching on street corners, passing out literature.”—Dispatch of The Associated Press widely published July 18 and 19, 1953.
28 “Jehovah’s witnesses are ardent believers in the Bible as ‘God’s word of truth.’ . . . Their dynamism strikes admiration, however. Their devotion points an answer to the oft-expressed question of whether religion has failed mankind. Of course it hasn’t, but mankind seems often to have failed to find the ideals of true religion.”—Editorial in Paterson (N. J.) Morning Call, July 20, 1953.
29 “We are going to miss those Jehovah’s witnesses when they are gone. . . . Those folks seem to be the cream of the country when it comes to politeness, courtesy, and a few other things that most of us neglect these days. . . . Those folks are just as polite when they are back of a steering wheel as we are when we are in a hotel lobby, and that is something.”—Dunellen (N. J.) Weekly Call, July 23, 1953.
30 “The eight-day world assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses brought to New York City area nearly 150,000 members of this durable sect—men, women and their families from all over the world who live their faith vividly.”—Editorial in Vancouver (Wash.) The Columbian, July 24, 1953.
31 “We vote that our city’s latchstring be permanently left out for these earnest people. . . . We hope, too, that their example will start a trend among some of the wayward, middle-aged adolescents who hold their annual cutups here.”—Editorial in New York (N. Y.) World-Telegram and Sun, July 22, 1953.
32 “In the persons of Jehovah’s witnesses who passed through this city on their way home from the world conference in New York last week . . . were whites and blacks and apparently American Indians and peoples of oriental background, of both yellow and brown races . . . family groups, quietly happy in the possession of a religion that engrosses them and to which they have dedicated their lives. . . . Wherever they go they proudly and joyfully advertise their cause but in the quiet, orderly fashion to which they have become disciplined. They are a splendid people who are growing in numbers and influence. And wherever they go they are welcome. By their behavior they create such goodly opinion that they are urged to return. And that does not go for all conventions and gatherings.”—Editorial in Allentown (Pa.) The Morning Call, July 28, 1953.
33. What was there at work with good results, but what fails to work in this world, noticeably in its United Nations?
33 From that you would say that love, God’s way, worked and brought results, real happiness and contentment! Do you want to try it? Do not answer as the world does. “No,” says the old world, “our idea of life is ‘selfishness means advancement.’” They think Jehovah’s witnesses have done a wonderful thing in meeting together peacefully in upward of a hundred and fifty thousand, but it will not work as a world-wide setup. Well, look at the United Nations. It is a world-wide setup and its selfishness does not work. Why do not the clergy and rulers try Jehovah’s kingdom and God’s way of love?
34. In the actuality of what rule is there every reason now to believe, and who will heed Psalm 145:18, and who not?
34 Jehovah’s kingdom has been established and is now in its fortieth year. It is a working government with Christ Jesus at the helm. He has returned and he rules as Jehovah’s appointed King. Are you with him? There is every reason to believe his rule has begun. Will you serve Jehovah with his King? Do you see the glory of Jehovah’s kingdom, and will you talk about it? Will you go forward in the ministry service now and prove to Jehovah God that you believe his kingdom is the only hope for mankind? Psalm 145:18 says that “Jehovah is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth.” Why does not the United Nations organization try it and then, of course, listen to Jehovah? Good advice for the clergy too, but they will not heed it. Thousands more individuals will, though.
35. To whom, then, will Jehovah prove himself near, and where is it now the time to flee?
35 Even though you may be isolated in some part of the world or in a small congregation of his people, Jehovah will be near to you if you call upon him in truth. At no time is he far away. Even when two or three are gathered together in his name, there he is in their midst, by his power and care. Being Jehovah’s witnesses and having dedicated yourselves to Jehovah God, you have a hope. You know the Kingdom is a reality. You have proof from the Scriptures that it was established in 1914. Now you see the gathering of the other sheep in great numbers, by the thousands; and you have seen manifested the spirit of Jehovah God upon the New World society. Why, then, should you ever doubt? Now is the time to flee to the mountains with Jehovah’s people. Do not try it alone later on. It will be too hazardous.—Matt. 24:19-21, NW.
36. What should we not waste time in doing, but, instead, what is the most important work for us to do now?
36 Do not waste your time now predicting what is going to happen in this fortieth year of Jehovah’s kingdom. You should fully appreciate that Jehovah knows what he will do and what his purpose is in this year or any other year in the future, and that he is fully able to accomplish it in his own due time. For the present, we have his command to talk of the glory of his kingdom. For us there is nothing else to do. It is the most important work in all the world.
Ponder over these things, be absorbed in them, that your advancement may be manifest to all persons. Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Stay by these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.—1 Tim. 4:15, 16, NW.

