Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
We are living at a time when many persons pride themselves on being well informed on important matters. However, despite the great strides made in scientific knowledge, the majority of the people have not been brought closer to God. To the contrary, we live in an age when the vast majority know very little about God and his loving purposes. How fitting it would be for such ones to acquaint themselves with God! (Job 22:21) Many fine provisions are available to help sincere persons who want to get acquainted with God. During the month of January those who are already acquainted with God will be extending the invitation to others to learn about his grand purposes by offering a year’s subscription for the Watchtower magazine, along with three booklets, for $1.
FAITH THAT PLEASES GOD
“Faith is not a possession of all people.” That is because not all people have an accurate knowledge of God. Paul prayed that the believers would be “filled with the accurate knowledge” of God’s will in order to walk worthily of Jehovah to the end of fully pleasing him.” (Col. 1:9, 10) Besides that, Jesus pointed out that taking in knowledge of the only true God and of his Son, Jesus Christ, means life. But something else is required also: works that prove the sincerity of our faith. As Jesus’ disciple James said: “Faith, if it does not have works, is dead in itself.” (Jas. 2:17) You can build a faith that is pleasing to God by studying his Word, the Holy Bible. Read it with real understanding with the aid of The Watchtower. One year, $1. Send today and receive three timely booklets on Bible subjects free.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
February 1: The Coming “Great Tribulation” Foreshadowed, ¶1-18. Page 41. Songs to Be Used: 2, 16.
February 8: The Coming “Great Tribulation” Foreshadowed, ¶19-30, and Peace with God amid the “Great Tribulation,” ¶1-6. Page 45. Songs to Be Used: 6, 90.
February 15: Peace with God amid the “Great Tribulation,” ¶7-25. Page 51. Songs to Be Used: 4, 119.

