
PART 7
Who Practice the True Religion?




 1. What must we do to please God?
TO ENJOY a warm, loving relationship with God, we must have nothing to do with false religion. We must practice true religion. Today millions of people throughout the earth are doing that.
 2. Where may Jehovah’s Witnesses be found, and what is their work?
2 As the Bible foretold, the true worshipers make up “a great crowd” who have come “out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues.” (Revelation 7:9) In 235 lands, millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses are actively helping others learn about Jehovah’s loving ways and requirements.



Identifying the True Worshipers

 3. To whom do the Witnesses direct their worship, and what types of worship do they avoid?
3 The Witnesses recognize that Jehovah alone is worthy of worship. They refuse to bow down to idols or religious pictures. (1 John 5:21) They do not venerate the dead by taking part in wakes or other ceremonies that promote false religious beliefs and “teachings of demons.” (1 Timothy 4:1) However, they do comfort those who are bereaved by explaining God’s promise that there will be a resurrection of the dead to a paradise earth.​—John 5:28, 29; Acts 24:15.
 4. What is the position of God’s people concerning magic?
4 The Witnesses have nothing to do with magic, sorcery, or witchcraft, knowing that these things are from the Devil. They do not trust in magic to protect them​—their trust is in Jehovah.​—Proverbs 18:10.
 5. In what way are Jehovah’s Witnesses “no part of the world”?
5 Jesus said that his disciples would be “no part of the world.” (John 17:16) Jesus himself refused to take part in the politics of his day. (John 6:15) Likewise, the Witnesses take no part in the politics, nationalism, and class struggles of this world. However, they do pay their taxes and obey the laws of the land in which they live.​—John 15:19; Romans 13:1, 7.
 6. What guidelines do God’s servants follow concerning marriage and divorce?
6 Because they are obedient to governmental direction, Witnesses make sure that their marriage is legalized. (Titus 3:1) They are obedient to God’s direction, and therefore they avoid polygamy. (1 Timothy 3:2) Further, since they apply Bible principles in their life, servants of God are less likely to see their marriage end in divorce.
 7. How do the Witnesses show love for one another?
7 The Witnesses love one another. This love, along with their love for God, unites them in true brotherhood, though they are of many tribes and nations. When disaster strikes or times of need arise, the Witnesses are quick to come to the aid of one another. The Witnesses show love in the way they live.​—John 13:35.





Jehovah’s Witnesses are united in a worldwide brotherhood




 8. What bad practices do God’s people avoid?
8 Jehovah’s people work hard to live honest, upright lives. They avoid stealing, lying, immorality, drunkenness, and dishonest business practices. Husbands do not beat their wives. Before becoming Witnesses, some practiced these things, but with Jehovah’s help they stopped. They were “washed clean” in God’s sight.​—1 Corinthians 6:9-11.



Doers of God’s Will

 9. What did one book say about Africa’s spiritual churches?
9 Of course, many religions claim to have the truth. They may point to impressive works to support their claims. For example, concerning what are called spiritual churches in Africa, one book says: “The function of the magician or medicine man has been largely taken over by [new Christian groups]. . . . They claim to give oracles and perform miracles. Prophets among them give visions and interpret dreams. They use holy-water, sacred oil, ashes, candles and incense to heal and to prevent diseases.”
10, 11. Why do so-called miracles today not show that a religion is from God?
10 Members of these religions claim that miracles prove that their religion is blessed by God. But so-called miracles do not prove that a religion has Jehovah’s approval. Satan empowers some false worshipers to perform ‘powerful works.’ (2 Thessalonians 2:9) Furthermore, the Bible foretold that miraculous gifts from God, such as prophesying, speaking in tongues, and special knowledge, would “be done away with.”​—1 Corinthians 13:8.
11 Jesus cautioned: “Not everyone saying to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the kingdom of the heavens, but the one doing the will of my Father who is in the heavens will. Many will say to me in that day, ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name, and expel demons in your name, and perform many powerful works in your name?’ And yet then I will confess to them: I never knew you! Get away from me, you workers of lawlessness.”​—Matthew 7:21-23.
12. Who will enter the Kingdom of the heavens?
12 Who, then, will enter the Kingdom of the heavens? It is those who do the will of Jehovah.



Preachers of God’s Kingdom

13. What is the work that God directs his people to do today, and who are the ones doing it?
13 What is God’s will for his people today? Jesus said: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations.” (Matthew 24:14) This is the work that Jehovah’s Witnesses are carrying out with zeal.





14. What is God’s Kingdom, and who will rule in the Kingdom?
14 Throughout “all the inhabited earth,” Jehovah’s Witnesses proclaim God’s Kingdom as a heavenly government that will rule the entire earth in righteousness. They teach that Jehovah has appointed Christ Jesus to be King of that Kingdom, along with 144,000 associate rulers selected from among mankind.​—Daniel 7:14, 18; Revelation 14:1, 4.
15. What will the Kingdom destroy?
15 Using the Bible, the Witnesses show people that God’s Kingdom will destroy Satan’s entire system. Gone will be false religion with its teachings that dishonor God and glorify the Devil! (Revelation 18:8) Gone, too, will be all human governments that stand in opposition to God!​—Daniel 2:44.





16. Who will be the subjects of Christ Jesus, and where will they live?
16 Moreover, Jehovah’s Witnesses make known that Christ Jesus will bring marvelous benefits to all who do what God requires. They will be his subjects on earth. The Bible promises: “He will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper. He will feel sorry for the lowly one and the poor one, and the souls of the poor ones he will save.”​—Psalm 72:12, 13.
17. Who alone are proclaiming God’s Kingdom?
17 There is no other group of people that does God’s will by preaching the Kingdom good news. Only Jehovah’s Witnesses are making known God’s Kingdom throughout the entire earth.



