Now Is the Time to Seek Jehovah
“As for Jehovah, he has looked down from heaven itself upon the sons of men, to see whether there exists anyone having insight, anyone seeking Jehovah.”​—PSALM 14:2.
 1, 2. (a) How do many view the true God, Jehovah? (b) How do we know that Jehovah is aware of mankind’s indifference?
TODAY, the true God, Jehovah, is rejected by atheists, agnostics, worshipers of false gods, and millions who claim to believe in God but deny him by their works. (Titus 1:16) Many believe like the 19th-century German philosopher Nietzsche that “God is dead.” Is Jehovah unaware of this crass indifference? No, for he inspired David to write: “The senseless one has said in his heart: ‘There is no Jehovah.’ They have acted ruinously, they have acted detestably in their dealing. There is no one doing good.”​—Psalm 14:1.
2 David continued: “As for Jehovah, he has looked down from heaven itself upon the sons of men, to see whether there exists anyone having insight, anyone seeking Jehovah.” Yes, the Sovereign Lord is aware of those who seek to know and serve him. Thus, our earnestly seeking him now is vital. It will mean the difference between everlasting life and everlasting extinction.​—Psalm 14:2; Matthew 25:41, 46; Hebrews 11:6.
 3. What potential exists for the future?
3 Therefore, we can see why it is so important that we help others to seek Jehovah now. There are still millions of people who have never met one of Jehovah’s Witnesses or heard the “good news of the kingdom.” And how much greater in number the “great crowd” will turn out to be before “the great tribulation,” we do not know. But there is certainly the potential for more to seek and find Jehovah God in the immediate future before it is too late. The question now is, What can we do to help myriads more to find God?​—Matthew 24:14; Revelation 7:9, 14.
 4, 5. In their search for a god, what do many prefer?
4 Many people in the world today are searching, but searching for what? Very few are really seeking the one true God, Jehovah. Scores prefer a god who fits their own personal desires and prejudices. As U.S. pollster George Gallup, Jr., stated: “You really don’t find much difference between the churched and unchurched in terms of cheating, tax evasion, and pilferage, largely because there is a lot of social religion.” He adds that “many are just putting a religion together that is comfortable for them and titillates them . . . Somebody called it religion à la carte.”
5 Others will say, “My religion is good enough for me.” Of course, the question really should be, “Is my religion good enough for God?” True, the majority in Christendom and Hinduism are content to venerate their images and idols. Most so-called Christians find that a nameless Trinitarian god is sufficient for them. And over 900 million Muslims believe in Allah. On the other hand, millions of atheists say there is no God.
Those Who Need Help
 6. What have many readers of The Watchtower discovered?
6 But what about those of us who regularly read this magazine? We have searched for the true God and have found him. We have proved true the words of James 4:8: “Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you.” By active association with the Christian congregation, we have drawn closer to God, and we have experienced for ourselves how Jehovah draws closer to us.​—John 6:44, 65.
 7. How do we know that there are many persons who are still interested in becoming active in the truth?
7 However, we know that there are still many who are happy to associate occasionally with Jehovah’s people but as yet have not taken positive action to draw close to Jehovah by dedication and baptism. How do we know this? In 1990 nearly ten million people attended the Memorial of Jesus’ death. But how many are actively publishing the good news of the Kingdom? Just over four million. That means we have about six million who are friendly toward the truth and who sometimes enjoy associating with us but who have not yet started to recommend the pure language of the truth by preaching the good news of the Kingdom. Without a doubt, on incidental occasions many speak up in behalf of Jehovah and his Kingdom rule. However, they have not yet clearly identified themselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses. These too we want to help.​—Zephaniah 3:9; Mark 13:10.
 8, 9. (a) What does Jehovah encourage us to do? (b) Why is it unwise to neglect Jehovah’s counsel?
8 We want to encourage these to become happy, active Witnesses of Jehovah in the final phase of the great work now being accomplished worldwide. Please note Jehovah’s loving invitation at Proverbs 1:23: “Turn back at my reproof. Then to you I will cause my spirit to bubble forth; I will make my words known to you.” (Compare John 4:14.) How encouraging to know that Jehovah will respond to our taking positive steps to identify ourselves with his name and worship! Certainly, we do not want to be included among those described at Proverbs 1:24, 25: “I have called out but you keep refusing, I have stretched out my hand but there is no one paying attention, and you keep neglecting all my counsel, and my reproof you have not accepted.”
9 Those who neglect Jehovah’s counsel that they search for him while he may be found and who put off their decision until they actually see the great tribulation starting will find they have waited too long. Such a course would indicate a lack of faith and wisdom and would be contemptuous of Jehovah’s undeserved kindness.​—2 Corinthians 6:1, 2.
10. Why are apathy and indifference dangerous?
10 To illustrate the need for immediate action, would you follow a doctor’s good advice only when you already had double pneumonia? Or, rather, when you noted the first symptoms of sickness? Then why wait any longer to separate yourself from Satan’s sick world and to side with Jehovah and his Witnesses? The consequences of apathy, indifference, and neglect are made clear at Proverbs 1:26-29: “I also, for my part, shall laugh at your own disaster, I shall mock when what you dread comes . . . At that time they will keep calling me, but I shall not answer; they will keep looking for me, but they will not find me, for the reason that they hated knowledge, and the fear of Jehovah they did not choose.” Let us not be found ‘looking for Jehovah’ when it is too late!
11. What help is available for those seeking to serve God?
11 Some who read this magazine may still be in the course of searching for the true God. We are glad you are persisting in your search. We pray that your Bible knowledge will motivate you to take further positive action to stand firm for the truth. Be assured that each congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses stands ready to help you in your search.​—Philippians 2:1-4.
Time for Zeal and Action
12, 13. Why do we need to take action regarding true worship?
12 Why is it essential that all of us take action to identify ourselves with Jehovah God and his true worship? Because world events are heading for a climax. The pages of history are turning faster than man can read them. Now is not the time to sit on the fence or be lukewarm. Jesus stated very clearly: “He that is not on my side is against me, and he that does not gather with me scatters.” He also said: “Whoever becomes ashamed of me and of my words, the Son of man will be ashamed of this one when he arrives in his glory and that of the Father and of the holy angels.”​—Matthew 12:30; Luke 9:26.
13 Now is the time for zeal and action! We know which way world events are moving, and Armageddon looms on the horizon. Therefore, the call is to seek Jehovah now before the ‘day of his anger,’ while he may yet be found. At the great tribulation, it will be too late.​—Zephaniah 2:2, 3; Romans 13:11, 12; Revelation 16:14, 16.
14. What reasons do we have for seeking God?
14 Really, all mankind should be seeking God’s favor now. The apostle Paul expressed it appropriately at Acts 17:26-28: “[God] made out of one man every nation of men, to dwell upon the entire surface of the earth, and he decreed the appointed times and the set limits of the dwelling of men, for them to seek God, if they might grope for him and really find him, although, in fact, he is not far off from each one of us. For by him we have life and move and exist.” That last expression, “for by him we have life and move and exist,” gives us adequate reason for seeking God. Thanks to Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, we exist in the narrow but vital biosphere of this tiny earth. Should we not be grateful to the Sovereign Lord of the universe? And should we not show our gratitude to him in practical terms?​—Acts 4:24.
15. (a) What did historian Arnold Toynbee feel to be the purpose of higher religion? (b) What must we do in order to be able to glorify God?
15 Historian Arnold Toynbee once wrote: “The true purpose of a higher religion is to radiate the spiritual counsels and truths that are its essence into as many souls as it can reach, in order that each of these souls may be enabled thereby to fulfil the true end of Man. Man’s true end is to glorify God and to enjoy Him for ever.” (An Historian’s Approach to Religion, pages 268-9) In order to glorify God, we must first seek him and gain accurate knowledge of him and his purposes. Thus, Isaiah’s call is so appropriate: “Search for Jehovah, you people, while he may be found. Call to him while he proves to be near. Let the wicked man leave his way, and the harmful man his thoughts; and let him return to Jehovah, who will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will forgive in a large way.”​—Isaiah 55:6, 7.
What Practical Help Can We Offer?
16. (a) What challenge faces the Christian congregation? (b) In what practical way can we assist others to serve Jehovah?
16 The millions of interested people who are not yet active publishers present a challenge to all of us. What are we doing in a practical way as elders, ministerial servants, pioneers, and publishers to help those who are friendly toward the truth to become active participants in true worship with us? One way to offer practical help where needed is to call at their homes and take them to the meetings at the Kingdom Hall so that they too can enjoy the benefits of Jehovah’s spirit on a regular basis. Paul’s counsel to the Hebrews, in Heb chapter 10, verses 24 and 25, is as urgent today as it was then: “Let us consider one another to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.” We encourage all who wish to experience Jehovah’s goodwill to associate with Jehovah’s Witnesses regularly at their local Kingdom Hall.
17. If we are to help Bible students progress in their search for Jehovah, what questions need answering?
17 If we study the Bible with someone who regularly attends meetings, can we help that one to qualify as a publisher of the good news? (See Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, pages 97-9.) And once he or she becomes an unbaptized publisher, is the invitation extended to go along with us regularly in the public preaching work and on some of our studies and return visits? (See the December 1, 1989, issue of The Watchtower, page 31.) In other words, once such new ones qualify, do we encourage them by letting them see firsthand some of the positive results of our preaching activity?​—Matthew 28:19, 20.
Jehovah Worthy to Be Sought
18. How has Jehovah shown his mercy toward mankind?
18 Because of the ransom sacrifice of Christ Jesus, Jehovah does not hold our past sins and neglect against us if we repent and exercise faith. Note the words of David: “He has not done to us even according to our sins; nor according to our errors has he brought upon us what we deserve. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, his loving-kindness is superior toward those fearing him. As far off as the sunrise is from the sunset, so far off from us he has put our transgressions. As a father shows mercy to his sons, Jehovah has shown mercy to those fearing him. For he himself well knows the formation of us, remembering that we are dust.”​—Psalm 103:10-14; Hebrews 10:10, 12-14.
19. What encouragement is there for those who may have drifted away from the truth?
19 Jehovah is the truly beneficent and merciful God. If we come to him in humility and repentance, he forgives and forgets. He does not bear an eternal grudge with everlasting hellfire torment as the consequence. No, it is as Jehovah stated: “I​—I am the One that is wiping out your transgressions for my own sake, and your sins I shall not remember.” What an encouragement that should be for any who may have drifted away from the truth and have neglected their relationship with Jehovah! They too are encouraged to search for Jehovah now and come back into active association with his name people.​—Isaiah 43:25.
20, 21. (a) What encouraging example do we have in ancient Judah? (b) What did the inhabitants of Judah have to do to get Jehovah’s blessing?
20 In this respect we have an encouraging example in King Asa in ancient Judah. He rooted out false worship from his kingdom, but vestiges of pagan worship still remained. The account at 2 Chronicles 15, verses 2 to 4, tells us what the prophet Azariah said to Asa as a reminder: “Jehovah is with you as long as you prove to be with him; and if you search for him, he will let himself be found by you, but if you leave him he will leave you. And many were the days that Israel had been without a true God . . . But when in their distress they returned to Jehovah the God of Israel and looked for him, then he let himself be found by them.”
21 Jehovah did not play hide-and-seek with King Asa but “let himself be found.” How did the king react to this message? In the same chapter, 2Ch 15 verses 8 and 12 answer: “As soon as Asa heard these words . . . , he took courage and proceeded to cause the disgusting things to vanish from all the land . . . and to renew Jehovah’s altar that was before the porch of Jehovah. Furthermore, [Judah] entered into a covenant to search for Jehovah the God of their forefathers with all their heart and with all their soul.” Yes, they earnestly searched for Jehovah “with all their heart and with all their soul.” What was the result for the nation? 2Ch 15 Verse 15 tells us: “And all Judah gave way to rejoicing over the thing sworn; for it was with all their heart that they had sworn and with full pleasure on their part that they had looked for him, so that he let himself be found by them; and Jehovah continued to give them rest all around.”
22. What encourages us to be active now in Jehovah’s service?
22 Now, is not that an encouragement for all of us to take positive action regarding Jehovah’s pure worship? We know that the potential exists for millions more to praise Jehovah. Without a doubt many of these are making changes in their lives in order to meet the Scriptural requirements for Jehovah’s service. Others are growing in insight and faith, are seeking Jehovah, and will soon be moved to share the pure language with others by conveying to them an in-depth understanding of the truth about Jehovah and his Kingdom. And why is it so vital that all of us search for Jehovah now when he can be found? Because his promised new world is at hand!​—Isaiah 65:17-25; Luke 21:29-33; Romans 10:13-15.
Do You Remember?
□ Who show indifference toward the true God, Jehovah?
□ To what degree does religion often affect conduct?
□ What potential is there for increase in active Witnesses?
□ Why is now the time for zeal and action?
□ Why is Jehovah worthy of being sought?
[Picture on page 10]
Many friends of Jehovah’s Witnesses who attend the Memorial are potential servants of God
1990 Memorial attendance: 9,950,058
1990 peak publishers: 4,017,213
[Picture on page 12]
In King Asa’s day, the nation turned to Jehovah

