Kingdom Proclaimers Report
“Every Scripture She Read Touched My Heart”
“THE word of God is alive and exerts power,” said the apostle Paul. (Hebrews 4:12) This proved true in the life of a woman from Vietnam who was raised as a Buddhist. This is her story.
“My parents, who are still in Vietnam, are nominal Buddhists, so I was raised as a Buddhist until my marriage at the age of 22. My husband’s family tried to force me to get baptized in the Catholic Church. They said that my dead mother-in-law was being prevented from going to heaven because I was a Buddhist! At first I refused to do so, but later I was baptized in order to please them. However, deep in my heart, I felt ridiculous because I hated the hypocrisy in the Catholic Church. It was no different from the Buddhist religion. It was just as involved in war and politics, and both religions encouraged ancestor worship.
“If I had stayed in Vietnam, I would have had very little chance of learning the truth. I grew up at the time when political upheavals swept over South Vietnam, and I lived in a town a great distance from Saigon. So it was a blessing to be able to escape to Australia.
“I was one of the more fortunate boat people. With my two-month-old baby in my arms, I had to run in the darkness to escape from the police and get on the small fishing boat. After seven days at sea, we arrived in Malaysia, where we stayed a few months in a refugee camp before coming to Australia.
“After two and a half years in Australia, I was contacted by Jehovah’s Witnesses in their house-to-house ministry. On the first call, I accepted a regular Bible study because I saw this as a good opportunity to learn English. But the conduct of the Witness who found me and the truth she taught me impressed me very much. Every scripture she read touched my heart, and I could see no hypocrisy in Jehovah’s organization. After studying the Bible for one and a half years, I dedicated my life to Jehovah and was baptized.
“I must say that the truth has changed my entire view of life. My husband is an unbeliever, but Jehovah has helped and sustained me, together with my little family. He has been my Grand Instructor and has taught me to become a better wife and mother. I continue to thank Jehovah that he has helped me out of spiritual darkness into the light of Bible truth.”
Truly, God’s inspired Word exerted power for good in this case. Studying the Bible and applying what is learned gives meaning and purpose to life and leads to eternal life in God’s new world. As God inspired Moses to state, “it is no valueless word for you, but it means your life.”​—Deuteronomy 32:47.

