Questions From Readers
We sometimes hear brothers speak of or pray for God’s Kingdom to come to the earth. Is this a correct expression?
Strictly speaking, it is not a Scriptural way of expressing things. God’s Kingdom is heavenly. Thus, the apostle Paul could write: “The Lord will deliver me from every wicked work and will save me for his heavenly kingdom. To him be the glory forever and ever. Amen.”—2 Timothy 4:18; Matthew 13:44; 1 Corinthians 15:50.
The Kingdom was established in heaven in 1914, and it will never be transferred to the restored earthly Paradise or elsewhere. Jesus Christ is King of the Kingdom. As King, Jesus has authority over the angels. Hence, his proper place of rulership is at God’s right hand in the heavens. Anointed Christians join him as kings and priests in heaven.—Ephesians 1:19-21; Revelation 5:9, 10; 20:6.
Does this mean, then, that we should no longer express to God the petitions found in the part of the Lord’s Prayer that says: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth”? (Matthew 6:10) On the contrary, that prayer is proper and is still full of meaning.
God’s Kingdom will yet act in a decisive way toward this earth, and this is what we have in mind when we pray and use expressions similar to the wording of the Lord’s Prayer. For example, Daniel 2:44 foretells that the Kingdom will “come” to destroy all the nations and will take over the rulership of this earth. Revelation 21:2 speaks of New Jerusalem coming down out of heaven. New Jerusalem is made up of the 144,000 anointed Christians who will be the bride of Christ. They are also joint heirs with Jesus in the Kingdom. So Revelation 21:2 describes their turning attention to the earth, with great blessings resulting to faithful mankind.—Revelation 21:3, 4.
Until these and other wonderful prophecies are fulfilled, it will continue to be proper to pray to Jehovah God in line with Jesus’ words, “Let your kingdom come.” But we should bear in mind that the Kingdom will not come to the planet Earth in a literal sense. The Kingdom government resides in heaven, not on earth.
[Picture Credit Line on page 31]
Earth: Based on NASA photo

