When Prejudice Will Be No More!
REPORTEDLY, scientist Albert Einstein once said that in this sad world, it is more difficult to overcome a prejudice than to split an atom. Similarly, Edward R. Murrow, a journalist who became famous during World War II and later was director of the U.S. Information Agency, stated that “no one can eliminate prejudices—just recognize them.”
Do these statements ring true? Is it impossible to eliminate discrimination and racism? How does God feel about prejudice?
God Is Not Partial
The Bible speaks against partiality. (Proverbs 24:23; 28:21) It states that “the wisdom from above is first of all chaste, then peaceable, reasonable, ready to obey, full of mercy and good fruits, not making partial distinctions, not hypocritical.” (James 3:17) Such wisdom was stressed to the judges in ancient Israel. “You people must not do injustice in the judgment,” they were instructed. “You must not treat the lowly with partiality, and you must not prefer the person of a great one.”—Leviticus 19:15.
The Bible’s firm position against partiality and prejudice was emphasized by Jesus Christ and his apostles Peter and Paul. Jesus was impartial toward those who “were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.” (Matthew 9:36) He taught: “Stop judging from the outward appearance, but judge with righteous judgment.”—John 7:24.
Peter and Paul reassure us that Jehovah God himself is not partial. Peter stated: “For a certainty I perceive that God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34, 35) The apostle Paul tells us: “There is no partiality with God.”—Romans 2:11.
The Bible’s Influence
The Bible has the power to change the personalities of those who are guided by it. Hebrews 4:12 says: “The word of God is alive and exerts power.” With Jehovah’s help a prejudiced person can even change his way of thinking and become impartial in his dealings with others.
Take, for example, the case of Saul of Tarsus. According to the Bible account, he at one time violently opposed the Christian congregation because he followed rigid religious traditions. (Acts 8:1-3) He was fully convinced by Jewish tradition that all Christians were apostates and enemies of true worship. His prejudice led him to support the killing of Christians. The Bible says that he was “breathing threat and murder against the disciples of the Lord.” (Acts 9:1) While doing so, he imagined that he was rendering a sacred service to God.—Compare John 16:2.
Yet, Saul of Tarsus was able to shed his extreme prejudice. He even became a Christian himself! Later, as Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, he wrote: “Formerly I was a blasphemer and a persecutor and an insolent man. Nevertheless, I was shown mercy, because I was ignorant and acted with a lack of faith.”—1 Timothy 1:13.
Paul was not the only one who made such drastic changes in his way of thinking. In his letter to Titus, a fellow evangelizer, Paul admonished Christians “to speak injuriously of no one, not to be belligerent, to be reasonable, exhibiting all mildness toward all men. For even we were once senseless, disobedient, being misled, being slaves to various desires and pleasures, carrying on in badness and envy, abhorrent, hating one another.”—Titus 3:2, 3.
Breaking Down the Barriers of Prejudice
Today, genuine Christians strive to follow that counsel. They want to avoid judging people on the basis of superficial impressions. This prevents them from ‘speaking injuriously’ of others. They enjoy an international brotherhood that crosses all the nationalistic, ethnic, and racial boundaries of this world.
Consider the experience of Henrique, a dark-skinned Brazilian. Himself a victim of racial discrimination, he developed a deep-seated hatred for white people. He explains: “Two light-skinned Witnesses came to my house to talk about God’s name. Initially I did not want to listen because I did not trust white people. But soon I could see that their message had the ring of truth. Well, I accepted a Bible study. The first question I had was, ‘Are there many black people in your church?’ They answered, ‘Yes.’ Then they showed me the last picture in the book My Book of Bible Stories,a depicting young people of different races. Included was a black boy, and this encouraged me. Later I visited the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses, where I saw people of different races treating one another with respect. This was very important to me.”
Now, as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Henrique is delighted to belong to a genuine Christian brotherhood. He understands that the credit does not go to any human. He says: “Today I am thankful to Jehovah and Jesus for everything they have done in my behalf. I work with millions of Jehovah’s loyal servants of all races, colors, and backgrounds, united in one purpose.”
While growing up, Dario was another victim of prejudice. At 16 years of age, he began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. He observed: “Among the Witnesses, I have found that there are no feelings of racial superiority.” He was impressed by the atmosphere of genuine love. He especially noticed that individuals of different races served in positions of responsibility within the congregation. Whenever he is subjected to some type of prejudice or discrimination by people outside the congregation, Dario remembers that Jehovah loves people of all nations, tribes, and tongues.
How to Cope
All of us like to be treated with dignity and respect. That is why being a victim of prejudice is a difficult trial to endure. The Christian congregation does not protect us from all exposure to the prejudicial attitudes of this wicked world. As long as Satan the Devil is controlling the affairs of the world, there will be injustices. (1 John 5:19) Revelation 12:12 warns us: “Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing he has a short period of time.” His intention is not merely to cause discomfort. He is compared to a predatory animal. The apostle Peter tells us: “Your adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.”—1 Peter 5:8.
The Bible also tells us: “Subject yourselves, therefore, to God; but oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.” (James 4:7) A fine help to cope with prejudice is looking to God for protection, as King David did: “O my God, provide me with escape from the hand of the wicked one, from the palm of the one acting unjustly and oppressively.” (Psalm 71:4) We may even pray like the psalmist: “Show me favor, O God, because mortal man has snapped at me. Warring all day long, he keeps oppressing me.”—Psalm 56:1.
How will God respond to such prayers? The Bible answers: “He will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper. He will feel sorry for the lowly one and the poor one, and the souls of the poor ones he will save.” (Psalm 72:12, 13) How good to know that in due time Jehovah will bring relief to all who are victims of injustice!
“They Will Not Do Any Harm”
The governments of this world may continue to fight prejudice with their laws and programs. They may continue to promise equality and fairness. But they cannot succeed. (Psalm 146:3) Only God can and will eliminate all prejudicial treatment. He will transform mankind into one united family. “A great crowd, which no man was able to number, out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues” will survive the end of this wicked system and enjoy living in peace.—Revelation 7:9, 10.
Jehovah will undo all harm caused by racial and social prejudice. Imagine, no one will be treated unjustly! “They will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble.” (Micah 4:4) And Isaiah 11:9 says: “They will not do any harm.”
If you are a victim of prejudice now, this marvelous hope for the future will strengthen your relationship with Jehovah. It will help you to endure the injustices of this wicked system. As you cope with prejudice and look ahead, follow the Bible’s wise advice: “Be courageous, and may your heart be strong, all you who are waiting for Jehovah.”—Psalm 31:24.
[Footnote]
Published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Picture Credit Line on page 4]
U.S. National Archives photo

