You Will Not Want to Miss It!
MISS what? The fast-approaching “Messengers of Godly Peace” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses! In most places the convention will begin at 9:30 Friday morning with a musical program. After listening to faith-strengthening interviews during the part “Hearing From Zealous Proclaimers of Peace,” you will enjoy the encouraging talk “What Does God Require of Us?”
A highlight on Friday afternoon will be the stirring keynote address “Our Role as Messengers of Godly Peace.” Then the part “Helping Others to Learn God’s Requirements” will offer suggestions on teaching new ones. This will be followed by the timely symposium “Watch Out for the Hidden Snares of Entertainment.” Friday’s program will conclude with the talks “Oppose the Devil—Tolerate No Rivalry” and “Loyally Upholding the Integrity of God’s Word.”
Saturday morning’s program will stress the importance of the disciple-making work in the three-part symposium “Messengers Bringing Good News of Peace.” The session will conclude with the discourses “Cheerful Giving Within Jehovah’s Organization” and “Life and Peace Through Dedication and Baptism,” after which there will be opportunity for new disciples to be baptized.
Saturday afternoon’s presentation “Consider Jehovah’s Thoughts on Matters” will answer such questions as ‘Are Christians sharing in a separating work today?’ and ‘What is the Bible’s view of capital punishment?’ You will also enjoy the heartwarming two-part symposium “The God of Peace Cares for You” and especially the concluding talk “Pursue Godly Peace in Family Life.”
Sunday morning’s program will include the three-part symposium “Identifying the Right Kind of Messengers” and the talk “Listen to and Obey God’s Word.” The morning program will conclude with a full-costume drama that will draw valuable lessons from the Bible account of Judge Gideon.
The convention’s final session on Sunday afternoon will feature the public discourse, entitled “True Peace At Last!—From What Source?” Finally, the motivating talk “Moving Forward as Messengers of Godly Peace” will bring the convention to a close.
Make plans now to attend. To find the location nearest your home, contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses or write to the publishers of this magazine. The June 8 issue of Awake! will list the addresses of all convention locations in the United States, Canada, Britain, and Ireland.

