Kingdom Proclaimers Report
“All Your Commandments Are Truth”
SHORTLY before his death, Moses exhorted the people of Israel to obey each and every one of Jehovah’s commandments. He said: “Apply your hearts to all the words that I am speaking in warning to you today, that you may command your sons to take care to do all the words of this law. For it is no valueless word for you, but it means your life.”—Deuteronomy 32:46, 47.
Hundreds of years later, the psalmist highlighted the importance of all of God’s teachings when he said: “You are near, O Jehovah, and all your commandments are truth.” (Psalm 119:151) In the first century, Jesus himself made reference to the value of “every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matthew 4:4) And under God’s direction the apostle Paul wrote that “all Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial.”—2 Timothy 3:16.
Clearly, Jehovah God expects his worshipers to give serious consideration to the entire message conveyed to us in the pages of his Word. There is not a single passage in the Bible that lacks value. That is how Jehovah’s Witnesses feel about God’s Word, as illustrated by the following experience from Mauritius.
Mr. D—— lived in a remote village, where he was a night watchman. For a long time, he had been sincerely searching for the right way to worship God. At night during his watch, he began to read the Bible. In time he had read it from cover to cover. He learned that God’s name is Jehovah—a name that appears many times in his Hindi Bible. He found that the book of Revelation was especially intriguing.
Then he asked himself whether there was a religion that followed the Bible in its entirety. He noticed that the religions he was acquainted with were, at best, merely following parts of the Bible. Some religions accepted the Hebrew Scriptures and rejected the Christian Greek Scriptures. Other religions were ignoring the Hebrew Scriptures, ascribing practical value only to the Christian Greek Scriptures.
One day Mr. D—— saw a couple getting wet in the rain and invited them to find shelter in his home. They were Jehovah’s Witnesses. The wife was holding the book Revelation—Its Grand Climax At Hand!a Immediately Mr. D—— asked them for the book. The Witnesses felt that the material on the prophecy of Revelation was too deep for him, so they offered him another publication instead. But Mr. D—— insisted on having the Revelation book.
When he got his copy, he read the book quickly. He then accepted a Bible study with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Soon he was impressed by the fact that the Witnesses hold the entire Bible in high esteem. He began to attend meetings regularly at the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses, where both the Hebrew Scriptures and the Christian Greek Scriptures are studied carefully. He is now a Kingdom proclaimer and a baptized member of the Christian congregation.
[Footnote]
Published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.

