Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace”
“To the abundance of the princely rule and to peace there will be no end, upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom in order to establish it firmly and to sustain it by means of justice and by means of righteousness, from now on and to time indefinite. The very zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.”​—ISAIAH 9:7.
 1, 2. (a) The birth of God’s Kingdom would be an occasion for what, and when did this birth take place? (b) What does the charter of the United Nations assign to that organization, but what has the Kingdom covenant assigned to Jesus Christ? (c) How do we know that Jehovah will unfailingly hold to the Kingdom covenant?
JUST as the birth of Jesus, the perfect man-child, was an occasion of extraordinary joy, so the birth of his long-promised Kingdom would be an occasion of immense joy. (Psalm 96:10-12) According to the facts of modern history, that government was placed upon the shoulder of the glorified Jesus in 1914. The existence of the United Nations organization today does not belie that fact. None of the rulers of the 159 members of the UN are of the house of David. Nevertheless, the charter of that world conspiracy assigns to them the task of achieving worldwide peace and security for mankind.
2 But Jehovah’s covenant for the Kingdom has never been canceled. At Isaiah 9:7 the expression “upon the throne of David” confirms the covenant that God made with David for an endless kingdom. Moreover, Jehovah has sworn to its successful completion. That Jehovah will hold to this covenant is made clear at Psalm 89:3, 4, 35, 36: “I have concluded a covenant toward my chosen one; I have sworn to David my servant, ‘Even to time indefinite I shall firmly establish your seed, and I will build your throne to generation after generation.’ Once I have sworn in my holiness, to David I will not tell lies. His seed itself will prove to be even to time indefinite, and his throne as the sun in front of me.” That covenant, as well as the title “Prince of Peace,” assigns to Jesus Christ the task of bringing in worldwide security.
 3. Why was the time for the “Prince of Peace” to begin his rule not a time of peace for heaven or for the earth?
3 However, the time for Jehovah God to put the government upon the shoulder of his Crown Prince was not to be a year of peace either in heaven above or on earth down below. According to Revelation chapter 12, the birth of his Kingdom would be followed by war in heaven. Satan the Devil and his demons fought against the newly established government, and the newly enthroned King with his holy angels fought those demonic forces. The result was that Satan and his demons were hurled out of the heavens and down to the vicinity of our earth. Consequently, the cry rang out: “Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing he has a short period of time.” (Revelation 12:12) Since the Devil’s debasement, our earth has sadly become the site of unparalleled violence and warfare. How mankind needs the rule of the “Prince of Peace,” for it will result in worldwide security!
 4. Why should the title “Mighty God” not be confused with almighty God?
4 According to Isaiah 9:6, other titles, in addition to “Prince of Peace,” were to be added to the glorious name of Jesus Christ. One of these titles was to be “Mighty God.” He was not to be called almighty God, as though he were a coequal member of a trinity of gods. Even on his resurrection day, he let it be known that he was still inferior to Jehovah. He made an appearance to Mary Magdalene and sent her to inform his anxious disciples that he was returning to their Father and his Father and to their God and his God. (John 20:17) Down to this very day, he continues to lead all creation in the worship of the “God of gods,” Jehovah. (Daniel 11:36) Ah, yes, Jesus Christ has a God and that God is not Jesus himself but is the heavenly Father Jehovah. How grandly the “Prince of Peace” serves as the precursor of universal lasting peace and security!
 5. Why is Jesus Christ the most qualified one to lead all intelligent creatures in the worship of the true and living God, Jehovah?
5 For all eternity, the glorified Son of God will continue to lead all intelligent creatures in the worship of this one and true living Deity, Jehovah. The exalted Son of God is eminently qualified for this. Of all creatures in heaven and on earth, the glorified Son of God is the one who has known Jehovah for the longest period of time and that most intimately. At 1 Corinthians 2:11 the apostle Paul says: “For who among men knows the things of a man except the spirit of man that is in him?” So it is in the case of Jesus Christ. Although he was used by Jehovah God in the creation of man, it was another thing for him actually to become a man himself, to be surrounded by all the earthly circumstances and experience the feelings of a man firsthand. Thus it is written that “although he was a Son, he learned obedience from the things he suffered” as a man down here on earth. (Hebrews 5:8) He indeed proved worthy to be safely entrusted with ‘all authority in heaven and on the earth’ and to bear the title “Mighty God.”​—Matthew 28:18; compare Philippians 2:5-11.
“Wonderful Counselor” and “Eternal Father”
 6. How has Jesus Christ been serving as “Wonderful Counselor,” and how has the “great crowd” benefited from his wonderful counsel?
6 For all these potent reasons, God’s heavenly Prince is fully able to serve mankind as “Wonderful Counselor.” (Isaiah 9:6) His counsel is always wise, perfect, and infallible. As the Mediator between Jehovah God and those who have been taken into the new covenant, he has been serving indeed as a wonderful counselor for these past 19 centuries. Now, since 1935, “a great crowd” of his “other sheep” has been taking in his wonderful counsel and is getting the finest instruction and guidance. (Revelation 7:9-17; John 10:16) As an agency for this counseling work, he has in this “conclusion of the system of things” raised up the promised “faithful and discreet slave” class and set it up over all his earthly goods, or royal interests. (Matthew 24:3, 45-47; Luke 12:42-44) The “great crowd” is now receiving spiritual counsel that is indeed wonderful and trustworthy because it is based upon the revealed Word of God.
 7. Why is Satan the Devil no longer a mighty god to Jehovah’s people?
7 As a result of their responding to that counsel, Satan the Devil, “the god of this system of things,” is no longer a mighty god to us as Jehovah’s people. (2 Corinthians 4:4) We have obediently come out of Babylon the Great, the world empire of false religion, and we no longer share in her vicious sins. We have taken our stand immovably upon the side of the One upon whose shoulder Jehovah God has laid His government.
 8. (a) Why is the title “Eternal Father” especially appealing to the “great crowd”? (b) What will happen to those who allow Satan the Devil to be their spiritual father?
8 The title “Eternal Father” is an endearing one. The “great crowd” of the “other sheep” especially appreciate this term. The fatherhood of Satan the Devil has not appealed to them. They shudder as they recall the Jewish religious leaders who opposed Jesus and to whom he said: “You are from your father the Devil, and you wish to do the desires of your father. That one was a manslayer when he began, and he did not stand fast in the truth, because truth is not in him. When he speaks the lie, he speaks according to his own disposition, because he is a liar and the father of the lie.” (John 8:44) The “great crowd” has got out from among those spiritual children of Satan the Devil, whose fatherhood over fallen mankind will not be everlasting. Those who allow him to be their spiritual father will perish with him. Utter destruction, symbolized by “the everlasting fire” of Matthew 25:41, awaits the Devil and all humans who do not escape from under his fatherhood.​—Matthew 25:41-46.
 9. How is the “great crowd” getting a foretaste of the fatherhood of the “Eternal Father”?
9 On the other hand, the “great crowd” is getting a foretaste of the fatherhood of the “Eternal Father.”a How? By listening to his voice and becoming his “other sheep” and by associating with the remnant of spiritual Israel. This warm family relationship bespeaks peace. Writing under inspiration, the apostle Paul referred to Jehovah at Romans 16:20 as “the God who gives peace.” How appropriate, then, that his only-begotten Son should be called “Prince of Peace”! By restoring peace to the entire universe, the “Prince of Peace” will without fail live up to the significance of his great title.
The Royal Government of the “Prince of Peace”
10, 11. After foretelling the grandest childbirth ever, what did Isaiah go on to say, and what do his words mean?
10 After Isaiah foretold the grandest childbirth ever​—yes, that of the Son of God who would be honored with the title “Prince of Peace”—​the prophet was borne along by Jehovah’s spirit to say: “To the abundance of the princely rule and to peace there will be no end . . . The very zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.”​—Isaiah 9:7.
11 In saying “the abundance of the princely rule,” the prophecy shows that the realm of the “Prince of Peace” will not end short of embracing the entire earth. There will be no boundaries on earth that will limit his domain. It will cover the entire globe. Furthermore, in the Paradise earth to come, there will be no end of peace. Never will there be disorders anywhere. Peace will extend all over the earth and always abound. (Psalm 72:7) Peace in this case means more than the absence of violence and war. It includes justice and righteousness, for Isaiah said that the princely rule would be sustained “by means of justice and by means of righteousness, from now on and to time indefinite.” There will be a plentitude of blessings for mankind. And the indefatigable zeal of Jehovah God will accomplish it within our time.
12. How is the government that is on the shoulder of the “Prince of Peace” being represented throughout the earth?
12 Even now, this government on the shoulder of the “Prince of Peace” is being represented throughout the earth. The acceptance of his royal heavenly government is spreading rapidly. The remnant of the spirit-begotten disciples of Jesus Christ has been fully gathered out from among the nations. In addition, the “great crowd” is being gathered out from over 200 different lands. There are now 3,229,022 witnesses of Jehovah, and the joyful work of ingathering is not yet completed. This “great crowd” acclaims the government that is upon the shoulder of the “Prince of Peace.” Its members are most thankful to be subject to that government and to be envoys of it throughout the whole earth, in association with the “ambassadors substituting for Christ,” the anointed remnant.​—2 Corinthians 5:20.
Modern-Day Conspiracy to Be Shattered
13. (a) What do the Kingdom envoys endeavor to do among themselves? (b) How does God view the United Nations?
13 The Kingdom envoys also keep peace among themselves. They ‘earnestly endeavor to observe the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.’ (Ephesians 4:3) They do this despite all the turmoil that now rages throughout the earth. National entities inside and outside the United Nations are in reality lined up against the government of the “Prince of Peace.” As God views it, the United Nations is a colossal world conspiracy. Why? Because it declares itself set to gain the objectives that God has laid only upon his “Prince of Peace” to gain. And it calls upon the peoples of all nations to support it in establishing worldwide security by man’s efforts. It even proclaimed 1986 to be the “International Year of Peace.” It thus proves itself to be a conspiracy against the “Prince of Peace” and against Jehovah’s covenant with him for the everlasting Kingdom.
14. How did the prophet Isaiah warn all those in opposition to Jehovah and his Kingdom covenant?
14 For a reason like that, the prophet Isaiah warned King Ahaz and his subjects back there against seeking peace and security by entering into an alliance with the Assyrian World Power. The warning is found at Isaiah 8:9, 10. In poetic grandeur, the prophet warns all of those in opposition to Jehovah and his Kingdom covenant: “Be injurious, O you peoples, and be shattered to pieces; and give ear, all you in distant parts of the earth! Gird yourselves, and be shattered to pieces! Gird yourselves, and be shattered to pieces! Plan out a scheme, and it will be broken up! Speak any word, and it will not stand, for God is with us!”
15. What will happen to the conspiracy against the Kingdom covenant today, as demonstrated by the conspiracy in the days of King Ahaz?
15 So let the nations under the prince of this world, Satan the Devil, conspire against the Kingdom covenant and its princely Heir and Ruler. The conspiracy will be shattered to pieces, just as was the conspiracy in the days of King Ahaz. King Rezin of Syria and King Pekah of Israel did not fear Jehovah of armies but conspired against his covenant for the Kingdom. Well, their conspiracy was broken to pieces. Likewise, King Ahaz of Judah did not fear Jehovah but entered into conspiracy with the world power of Assyria. This did not really help Ahaz and bring him peace and security. It brought distress and bondage. Worst of all, it put Ahaz out of favor with Jehovah.
16. How did Jehovah break the Assyrian conspiracy against the Kingdom covenant, and what did this foreshadow for our day?
16 After the death of Ahaz and in the days of his son Hezekiah, Jehovah of armies broke the Assyrian conspiracy against the Kingdom covenant. The king of Assyria was forced to retreat from the land of Judah after Jehovah’s angel annihilated 185,000 of his soldiers. The enemy did not get to shoot even one arrow against the city of Jerusalem. (Isaiah 37:33-36) A like defeat of the present-day world conspiracy against Jehovah’s Kingdom covenant and “Prince of Peace” is a certainty, for God is with his Prince Immanuel and with all who acclaim him!
Standing Fearlessly for Jehovah’s Universal Sovereignty
17. (a) What will the political elements shortly do to Babylon the Great, and what will Jehovah’s people need and receive? (b) After disposing of Babylon the Great, what will the atheistic rulers now do, prompting Jehovah to take what action?
17 The political elements will soon direct their efforts not just against Christendom but against all of Babylon the Great, the entire world empire of false religion, to wipe it out of existence. At that critical juncture, divine protection of Jehovah’s people will have to come into play to an extraordinary degree. Egged on by the gory victory over Babylon the Great, the atheistic rulers will viciously turn against those who are on the side of God’s government by Jesus Christ. Then Jehovah will use his “Prince of Peace” to fight “the war of the great day of God the Almighty.” (Revelation 16:14) Jesus Christ will prove to be an unconquerable Warrior whose government is to experience no decrease. He will prove to be the “Mighty God” under the triumphant almighty God, Jehovah. This “Mighty God” will crown his brilliant career with the victory at Armageddon that will resound without fading at all to time eternal. All hail to that peerless victory!
18. In the face of the modern-day conspiracy against the Kingdom covenant, what are Jehovah’s Witnesses determined to do, and with what outcome?
18 So, then, onward to greater world prominence than ever before, all you witnesses of Jehovah, with complete trust in your God and his reigning King, the “Prince of Peace”! Display outright fearlessness of the present world conspiracy. By your proclamation everywhere of the message of the Kingdom and its coming victory over the world conspiracy at Armageddon, be all of you for signs and miracles to the honor of Jehovah. When the Devil turns the worldly rulers against us, remember, the victory will be with those who stand true and faithful for the Kingdom of Immanuel, the “Prince of Peace,” for “With Us Is God”! (Matthew 1:23; compare Isaiah 8:10.) And let all the angels of heaven and all integrity-keeping mankind on earth say “Amen” to the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty over all created things in heaven and on earth, with a security never to end!
[Footnotes]
For a detailed discussion of the role of Jesus Christ as the “Eternal Father,” see chapter 20 of the book Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace,” published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
Questions in Summary
□ How does the title “Mighty God” apply to Jesus Christ?
□ How has Jesus been serving as “Wonderful Counselor”?
□ Whose fatherhood should we seek, and whose should we reject?
□ What in reality is the United Nations?
□ What will happen to today’s conspiracy against the Kingdom covenant and its Heir, the “Prince of Peace”?
[Picture on page 16, 17]
The entire universe will be united in peaceful worship of the Universal Sovereign

