From Our Readers
Young People Ask . . . How Can I Make Bible Reading Enjoyable? (April 2009)  I am a 24-year-old wife and mother, and I have always struggled with Bible reading. I took to heart the suggestions in this article, and I am making good use of the cutout that was provided. Now I look forward to Bible reading. I can see how the books of the Bible harmonize and are interwoven like a beautiful tapestry. I have never been this excited over Bible reading. Thank you so much!
K. T., United States
A Book You Can Trust—Part 6 (April 2011)  The article “Rome in Bible History” stated: “What happened to Jerusalem? The Roman armies returned, led by Vespasian and his son Titus—this time numbering 60,000 soldiers.” The wording implies that Vespasian and Titus were at the head of the army when Jerusalem was attacked. However, historical references indicate that Vespasian was in Rome during this period.
J. O., Australia
“Awake!” responds: According to “Josephus—The Essential Writings,” by Paul L. Maier, “Titus quickly arrived from Alexandria, bringing the Fifteenth legion, and joined his father at Ptolemais, where Vespasian waited with the Fifth and Tenth legions.” Additionally, the “Encyclopedia of the Roman Empire,” by Matthew Bunson, states the following about Vespasian: “With his son Titus at his side, he crushed the Jewish Rebellion and was preparing to lay siege to the temple of Jerusalem in 68 when word came that Nero had fallen and had been replaced by Galba. . . . In the fall of 70, he arrived in Rome.” So it seems that initially Vespasian and Titus were together in the attack against Jerusalem. However, at some point Vespasian returned to Rome and left Titus in charge.
Do You Have Realistic Goals? (February 2011)  When giving examples of unrealistic goals, this article included “fame, riches, the ideal marriage mate, or perfect health.” Why is an “ideal marriage mate” included? Why is the goal of getting a life partner in marriage “unrealistic”?
S. K., United States
“Awake!” responds: The article did not assert that marriage itself is an unrealistic goal. Rather, it spoke of the quest for “the ideal marriage mate.” In the context of the article, the “ideal” mate refers to a spouse that is flawless, possessing no negative traits. The pursuit of such a mate is vain for two reasons: First, such a person does not exist. (Romans 3:23) Second, the quest to find such a mate focuses on what one will get from a marriage rather than what one will give to it. In this regard, even some married people have the unrealistic goal of turning their spouse into their vision of the “ideal” mate. In contrast, a solid marriage is made up of two people who acknowledge each other’s imperfections but are still able to “continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely.”—Colossians 3:13.

