What Will Change?
“Nation will not lift up sword against nation.”
“No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”
“Death will be no more.”
THE statements above might seem too good to be true. But we can be sure that they are more than wishful thinking. Why? Because those are not the empty pledges of politicians who are powerless to change our world. Rather, the promises quoted above are found in the Bible.a
Many people feel that the Bible is an ancient book that has no relevance to our day. Is that what you believe? If so, why not take a closer look at what the Bible contains? The fact is, the Bible is the only sacred book that traces mankind’s history to the very beginning. It explains the following:
● How the human race fell into despair.—Romans 5:12.
● How God purposes to remedy the situation.—John 3:16.
● Why governments cannot change our world.—Jeremiah 10:23.
● Why we can trust God’s promise to do so.—Joshua 23:14.
Will God really eliminate starvation, war, sickness, and death from the human experience? Such a prospect is not difficult to believe once you accept the following:
1. God created us.
2. He cares about us.
3. He has the power to change the world.
4. He purposes to do so.
Are there good reasons to accept those four points? Jehovah’s Witnesses, who publish this magazine, invite you to find out for yourself through a study of the Bible.
Perhaps you own a Bible but seldom read it or do not read it at all. Even many people who read the Bible say that they find it difficult to understand. If that is true of you, we invite you to contact Jehovah’s Witnesses for a free home Bible study. Millions of people worldwide are benefiting from that arrangement. How does it work?
Each week, without charge, one or two of Jehovah’s Witnesses can come to your home or another convenient location to discuss the Bible with you. These Bible study sessions will help you to answer such questions as, Why do we suffer? Why are man’s governments powerless to change the world? What is God’s Kingdom, and how will it accomplish what human governments cannot?b
For more information on how you can benefit from a home Bible study, contact Jehovah’s Witnesses locally or visit our Web site www.jw.org. You may also write to the appropriate address found on page 5 of this magazine.
[Footnotes]
The quotations at the top of this page are from Isaiah 2:4; Isaiah 33:24; and Revelation 21:4.
See also the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Who Can Change Our World?” on pages 26 and 27 of this magazine.

