VOL. XVIII. FEBRUARY 15, 1897. No. 4. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 47 

Misfit Ethics 47 

Wounded by Professed Friends 48 

Brother Moody's Alarm 50 

Modern Exegesis 50 

The Undefiled One 52 

The First Christian Martyr 55 

Persecution Overruled for Good 57 

The Ethiopian Convert 58 

Letters of Interest 60 

page 46 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2108 : page 46 

THE GERMAN WATCH TOWER. 



OUR German friends express their joy at the prospect of having 
even a small monthly publication devoted to the spread of the truth 
amongst readers of German. Promises have been made of large subscriptions 



for gratuitous circulation. Accordingly we have made a very 
moderate scale of prices, as follows— 

America. Germany. Switzerland. 
Two copies each month, a year 25c Mk. 1.30 Fr. 1.50 
Five " " " " 50c " 2.50 " 3.00 

Twelve $1.00 " 5.00 " 6.00 

Postage included. 

Those of the interested who by reason of accident or infirmity are 
unable to pay will be supplied free upon application. We believe that 
divine providence is guiding in the undertaking, and will proceed 
with it shortly. Let us hear from all who favor it at once. 

A TRACT FOR HEBREWS. 



We have calls for a tract for Hebrews— to help honest Israelites 
to find the Lord, Redeemer and Messiah. We would like to hear from 
all who consider that there is an opening for such a tract; how many 
they could judiciously use and in what language it would best serve its 
purposes— English, German, Polish or Jargon. 



R2105 : page 47 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



ETHICS OF SAINTS MISFITS ON WORLDLINGS. 



We are living in a day when history is being made as 
never before. Before us lies an account from the Chicago 
Times-Herald, stating that at a meeting of the 
Chicago City Federation, recently, the secretary of the 
Bureau of the Associated Charities of that city declared 
that there are 8,000 families in Chicago actually starving 
to death; and that the President of the South Chicago 
Relief and Aid Society says, "There is greater 
poverty here than there was in 1893, for we are less 
able to care for the poor now than we were then." 
The pastor of the First Congregational Church declares 
also that "at every turn one finds an object of misery. 
People crowd to our services and beg for food for their 
children. This is the hardest winter we have had. We 
can get no work for the men." 

Another account is from Louisiana, of which Congressman 
Boatman declares that there are one hundred 
thousand destitute people in the Northern part of that 
State on account of the failure of crops in that vicinity. 

The London Chronicle sums up a total of eighty-four 
millions of the population of India affected by the 



famine, and says, "We are only at the beginning of the 
existing scarcity, which must now under any circumstances 
go on increasing until June next." And the 
famine has recently been supplemented by the Bubonic 
plague, which is making terrible ravages. 

Before us also are accounts of the now celebrated 
Bradley-Martin dress ball, at which about eight hundred 
of the elite of New York City, and indeed contingents 
from various parts of the world were present in 
silks, satins, velvets and broadcloth— both men and 
women ablaze with jewels. The newspaper accounts 
tell us that this was the grandest affair of the kind ever 
witnessed on this continent; that the ladies and gentlemen 
who participated were dressed to represent 
kings, princes, queens and noble ladies of the 15th, 
16th, 17th and 18th centuries, and that the entertainment 
as a whole cost $223,000. 

The Rev. Dr. Rainsford, in whose congregation 
are quite a number of millionaires, found it his duty to 
warn his hearers that it would be very unwise to attend 
this ball, giving as the reason that at the present time 
there are many people in New York city who are in 
very straitened circumstance and that such a display of 
luxury and extravagance would surely excite and 
strengthen the envy and hatred already felt by many 
of the poor against the wealthy and aristocratic. This 
started quite a hubbub, and the opinions of many of 
the prominent ministers were sought and published in 
the daily press. Some agreed with Dr. Rainsford; 
some were fearful to express an opinion if they had 
one; and some took an opposite view, claiming that the 
expenditure of the money would be a benefit to the 
poor, etc. The Rev. Thos. Dickson, Jr., was one of 
the most pronounced in his difference of view, declaring, 
according to the public press, "If I had millions, 
would I spend all in charity? No! Why, the position 
is nonsensical. If I had millions I would build a boat 
that could go around the world and would spend solid 
years of my life in rounding out my education. If I 
should have one million of dollars, and if the public 
should dictate to me how I should spend it, I would say 
as did a certain member of the Vanderbilt family, 
'The public be d d.'" 

In these conflicting views respecting the responsibilities 
of wealth and the proper uses to be made of it, 
we perceive the grand confusion into which nominal 
Christianity has fallen, which unbalances its reason 

R2105 : page 48 

upon every subject. The continued failure in judgment 
upon such subjects arises from the fact that the 
Bible lays down certain lines and conditions of Christian 
responsibility which do not fit a merely nominal 
Christianity, hence the misfit in attempting to apply 
the terms and conditions of true cross-bearers to those 



who bear none other than diamond crosses— however 
polite, refined and educated the latter may be. Our 
opinion of those who patronize such extravagant displays 
is, that they are Christians merely in name— after 
the manner of the man who, when asked, Are you 
a Christian, sir? replied, "Well, I am not a Jew nor 
heathen; I presume, therefore, I must be a Christian." 

Let us learn to distinguish in our minds between 
nominal Christians and those who bear about in their 
person the marks of the Lord Jesus,— who are fully 
consecrated to him; whose will is to do the will of the 
Father in heaven, and to finish his work. Such being 
fully consecrated to the Lord will have neither time, 
nor influence, nor money to spend in such extravagant 
displays as this bal-masque. The restraining influence 
upon such will not be the point chiefly suggested by 
Dr. Rainsford— lest the display excite the cupidity and 
envy of the poor;— nor will it be merely to parsimoniously 
save money in the hand, where it will do no 
person very much good; but the object will be to spend 
the time and the means in some better channel, calculated 
to bring greater and more permanent blessings 
and happiness, both to others and to themselves. 

But those who have this consecration of heart, 
whether they have much or whether they have little, 
need not feel envious of the rich; nor indeed should 
they seek or expect to force "the children of this 
world," who are not actuated by the same motives of 
consecration to the Lord's service and appreciation of 
divine things, present and future, to act as they act in 
such matters. Let the worldly who have wealth spend 
it in luxury, and in any manner not immoral. This 
will not only circulate the money amongst the people, 
better than if it were hoarded in banks, but it will help 
to manifest more clearly than ever the difference between 
the consecrated and unconsecrated condition of 
heart and conduct of life, and thus it will make wider 
the breach between the true Church and the worldly 
class which falsely under deception of false teaching 
bears the name of Christ but is none of his. 

WOUNDED IN THE HOUSE OF (PROFESSED) FRIENDS. 



Dr. Abbott, of the Plymouth pulpit, Brooklyn, continues 
to lead along the paths of "higher criticism." 
In some lectures on "The Bible Literature," recently, 
he provoked his congregation to laughter by the amusing 
manner in which he made reference to the story of 
Jonah and the great fish, which he termed a "fiction," 
—"the Pickwick papers of the Bible." The worldly-minded 
newspaper reporters could see through the absurdity 
of a man pretending to be a Christian minister 
and yet thus making light of the very basis of Christian 
faith— the Bible. The reports in the New York papers 



put the matter in its true light, and in consequence 
the Manhattan Ministers' Association took it up at 
its meeting and strongly rebuked the language. We 

R2106 : page 48 

are not to forget, however, that probably a large majority 
of the ministers in New York City, and in all 
large cities, are already in full agreement with Dr. 
Abbott along the lines of "higher criticism" and, so 
far as faith in the inspiration of the Bible is concerned, 
might be termed rationalists, agnostics or even infidels: 
there are good reasons for such convictions. We must 
therefore suppose that the Manhattan Ministers Association 
were not so much in opposition to Dr. Abbott's 
agnosticism, called "higher criticism," as to the public 
statement of this agnosticism in Dr. Abbott's mirthful 
vein. As a minister of this city once said to the 
writer, "It is very well for us ministers to study these 
subjects, but it is not prudent to tell them to the people." 



Dr. Abbott, noting the criticism, made two very 
significant remarks: (1) "No minister should criticize 
another minister in public;" and (2) "I have every 
reason to believe the Plymouth Church is an absolute 
unit in supporting its pastor." The latter statement 
shows to what an extent this modern infidelity called 
"higher criticism" has already taken root and born 
fruit among the people, the "laity." The former statement 
shows how ministerial etiquette is expected to 
intimidate and seal the lips of any disposed to obey the 
Word of the Lord and lift up their voice like a trumpet 
to show God's people their sins and dangers. Only 
those who fear to offend God rather than men will escape 
this influence which the prophet declares will 
make the majority like "dumb dogs, they cannot bark" 
-Isa. 56:10,11. 

Meantime, the Rev. J. H. Barrows, D.D., famed 
as the president of the Chicago Parliament of Religions, 
of similarly broad and indefinite ideas of the Bible and 
Christianity, is now lecturing in India, having for his 
topic, "The Harmony of Religions." Surely, it is 
these people who have repudiated the Bible, and incidentally 
all of Christianity except civilization and refinement, 
who probably see no reason why they should 
not as truly fellowship the deluded believers in the 
creeds of the Orient, as that they should fellowship 
those of us whom they believe to be the deluded believers 
in the Bible. 



Another bold man who denies the faith and is yet 
"worse than an infidel" in that he still masquerades 



R2106 : page 49 

as a minister of the Gospel of Christ, while doing all 
in his power to undermine that gospel, is the Rev. M. 
J. Savage, pastor of the "Church of the Messiah," 
New York City. One would think that few except 
those "of the synagogue of Satan" (Rev. 2:9) would 
enjoy or support such preaching. From his recent 
sermon, as reported in the New York Sun we clip the 
following malodorous morsel as a sample. He said:— 

"Archaeology has established that man has been 
on earth not for a thousand years or ten thousand, but 
for at least two hundred thousand. Evolution, as developed 
by Herbert Spencer, and biology, the province 
worked out by Darwin, are no longer the subjects for 
debate by educated and intelligent people, though prominent 
theologians, who show that they don't know 
what they are talking about by the first words that 
they utter, will discuss it. Man was not created in 
the garden of Eden or anywhere else, but began in the 
ooze of far-off primeval seas. What we know, then, 
means that there has never been any fall of man, but 
a continuous ascent. This one fact compels the complete 
reconstruction of all the theological theories of 
the past." 

It is time that all who have faith in the Word of 
God and its message of a fall and a redemption by our 
Savior's precious blood should be no less outspoken 
than are the enemies of the truth. Whoever denies the 
fall into sin, denies the redemption from sin and its 
penalty and such are no more Christians than are Hottentots 
or Mohammedans or other unbelievers. 

We pointed out in 1879, in this journal, that the 
great "falling away" from the faith predicted of the 
close of this age would come along this line;— the denial 
of the need and of the fact of the ransom. The 
cross of Christ (the great ransom-sacrifice) is to the 
Jew a stumbling block and to the Greeks (the worldly 
wise) foolishness, but to us who believe it is the power 
of God and the wisdom of God.— 1 Cor. 1:18-24. 

The true light, the true plan of God, is now clearly 
manifested for the succor of all who are truly his people. 
The true "sheep," as they realize the confusion, 
will turn attentively and humbly to the great Shepherd 
to listen to his voice to guide them. Such only 
will be guided and kept in his way, led to the green 
pastures and still waters of present truth. These will 
be delivered from the great delusions of this evil day, 
which, if it were possible, would deceive the very elect. 
All others we may expect will be more or less deluded 
or blinded. Only a remnant will escape the blinding 
influence now as in the end of the Jewish age. 

CHURCH UNION. 



Along the same lines of "union" with anything 
and everything that will help to support our present 
social arrangement is a prominent article in the New 
York Evangelist which after giving a number of reasons 
for federation and cooperation among Protestants 
includes also Roman Catholics, and urges peace and 
fraternity with them, saying:— 

"We differ from them in some points, but we 
cannot deny that they hold the main truths of our religion. 
[It is, alas ! too true that Protestants hold still 
to many of Papacy's perversions of the truth.— EDITOR.] 
...There is another reason why we should have a 
care how we disparage the Catholic priests, namely, 
that some day, not so far off in the next century, we 
may have to call upon them for help against political 
and social dangers. The late Professor Roswell D. 
Hitchcock has often said to me that the time might 
come when the Roman Catholic Church would prove 
the greatest bulwark and safeguard against the Socialism 
and Communism which have been imported into 
our country from abroad. That is what all Europe 
is afraid of at this moment— a cataclysm, not from 
above, but from beneath: an earthquake that will yawn 
so wide and so deep as to swallow up civilization itself. 
If such destruction sweeps over the Old World, it will 
not be long in crossing the ocean to the New. Let us 
be on our guard that we do not break down any strong 
barrier against it." 

Thus we see how one error leads to another, 
and helps still further to blind and prejudice the mind. 
How many Protestants there are who are totally unable 
to see in the Papal system the fulfilment of the 
prophesied Antichrist,— the result of the great "falling 
away" from the faith; because, having unscriptural 
views of the present social economy, they are drawn 
toward Papacy or anything else which will help to 
sustain the social structure with which all that they 
have and are is intimately associated;— their spiritual 
interests, the nominal Church institutions and their 
temporal interests. Can we wonder that under the 
lead of "higher criticism" and under the pressure of 
the supposed necessity for the continuance of the present 
social order, the majority of the nominal Church 
are drifting further and further away from the Bible 
and from its teachings— respecting Romanism as Antichrist; 
respecting the Babylon-confusion of sectarianism; 
respecting the social change to be inaugurated by 
the fall of present institutions and the erection in their 
stead and upon their ruins of the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son? We cannot wonder at the tendency to fall 
away from "the faith once delivered to the saints." We 
find a general tendency to lose faith in the Bible and 
to rely upon human wisdom and the light of conscience 
merely, except among those who in some manner or 



degree are looking for the second coming of Christ and 
the establishment of his Kingdom. 



A Federation of Churches and Christian Workers 
has been formed in New York City, including educational 
and charitable institutions. The New York 
Journal says, "One hundred and forty churches and 
eleven such institutions are now included in the membership, 
and it is expected that the number will be 
doubled this winter." 

R2106 : page 50 

BROTHER MOODY SOUNDS AN ALARM. 



The New York Independent publishes a lengthy 
account of what is termed the progress of Christianity 
during the past year, which makes an extremely favorable 
showing so far as denominationalism is concerned; 
but all familiar with such matters know that such reports 
are quite unreliable, that the lists of nearly every congregation 
contain names of many who are dead physically 
and of many others who have departed from all 
spiritual life and interest and who have not attended 
meetings for years. 

Evangelist D. L. Moody has been looking over 
the reports of last year, and as a result sent in the following 
to the editor of the Independent:— 

"In a recent issue of your paper I saw an article 
from a contributor which stated that there were over 
three thousand churches in the Congregational and Presbyterian 
bodies of this country that did not report a 
single member added by profession of faith last year. 
Can this be true? The thought has taken such hold 
of me that I can't get it out of my mind. It is enough 
almost to send a thrill of horror through the soul of 
every true Christian. 

"If this is the case with these two large denominations, 
what must be the condition of the others also? 
Are we all going to sit still and let this thing continue? 
Shall our religious newspapers and our pulpits keep 

R2107 : page 50 

their mouths closed like 'dumb dogs that cannot bark' 
to warn people of approaching danger? Should we 
not lift up our voice like a trumpet about this matter? 
What must the Son of God think of such a result of 
our labor as this? What must an unbelieving world 
think about a Christianity that cannot bring forth any 
more fruit? And have we no care for the multitude 
of souls going down to perdition every year while we 



all sit and look on? And this country of ours, where 
will it be in the next ten years, if we don't awake out 
of sleep? 

"I wish some of you editors of the influential 
papers, who are in close touch with the ministers and 
churches, would tell us what the matter is. Is this the 
result of what they call the 'Modern Criticism' of the 
Bible? Is this a specimen of the better times, when we 
get rid of the old stories about Moses writing the Pentateuch, 
and the sun and moon standing still, and the 
fish swallowing Jonah? How much of all this is owing 
to the politics our ministers have been preaching 
lately, and the talks on the labor question, and the 
stereopticon shows on Sunday evenings, and all these 
other things that have been driving out the blessed 
gospel of Jesus Christ? When ministers go into preludes 
on current topics, how can they expect any 
afterludes of conversions?" 

Bro. Moody gives evidence of being awake to the 
real situation; but all the more, his expressions are 
thorny to the average minister and Church member, 
and many are crying out against him. Like some of 
old they say, "Prophesy unto us good things!" or 
"Let us alone!" 

"MODERN EXEGESIS" OR "HIGHER CRITICISM." 



It would appear that the theological colleges are 
becoming the very hot-beds of unbelief and repudiation 
of the Scriptures, under what is termed "modern 
exegesis" and "higher criticism." Professor S. I. 
Curtis, of the Congregational Seminary of Chicago, is 
the latest who has made himself a name and fame by 
some published articles in which he endeavors to refute 
the application of the so-called Messianic prophecies to 
Christ;— thus repudiating the interpretations of those 
prophecies given by our Lord and the apostles as recorded 
in the New Testament. Professor Curtis simply 
gives the Jewish interpretation of these prophecies; 
namely, that they referred to God's dealings with 
the nation of Israel. The Interior (Presbyterian), 
criticising Professor Curtis and defending the interpretations 
of prophecy given us by our Lord and the 
apostles, says:— 

"The situation then is this: It is admitted by this 
new school of scholarship that the New Testament 
writers were all of the 'old school of exegetes,' that 
they all gave the weight of their authority to the exegesis 
which finds in the Old Testament specific, particular 
and personal descriptions of our Lord, his deity, 
his birth, history, sufferings, death and the divine 
purpose in his incarnation and vicarious sacrifice— and 
that the authority of our Lord and of the New Testament 
writers, in affirming this fact, has universally 



prevailed for nearly 1,900 years, but is now set aside 
as 'not in accordance with modern views.' 

"They admit that what they denominate the 'old 
school of exegetes' included our Lord himself and his 
evangelists and apostles. But they say this exegesis 
did not originate with our Lord and the writers of the 
Gospels who found it prevailing among the Jews of 
their times, and were not able to free themselves from 
it. Besides, it was to the interest of our Lord and of 
the New Testament writers to employ the false exegesis 
which they found in the public mind. 

"Thus are the Scriptures plowed, harrowed and 
sown with the salt of perpetual desolation. But let us 
remember that salt-plains and bitter waters are found 
only in arid lands. Where the rains fall and the white 
snows drift there are none. The showers of spiritual 
blessing, falling upon the church of God, dissolve and 
wash away these alkaline destroyers of spiritual life, 
and leave her fountains of water pure, her trees laden 
with fruit, and her vales waving with corn." 

We are glad to see that the Bible has still some 
friends in the nominal church and that higher criticism 
has not perverted the judgments of all. 



Since the so-called higher criticism of the Bible 
began in Germany, it is interesting to notice its progress 
there. Reliable authorities inform us that, "In all the 
faculties of the twenty Protestant Theological Universities 
of Germany, there is not a single representative 
of the 'older views' and traditional teachings of 

R2107 : page 51 

the Church, in reference to the Mosaic origin of the 
Pentateuch, the integrity of the book of Isaiah, etc." 

Professor Zockler of Griefswald is an acknowledged 
authority upon this subject. In a recent article in 
German he expresses himself about as follows:— 

The Old Testament criticism is raging now with 
more intensity than ever before. The contending parties 
are the liberal or advanced and the conservative. 
The differences between these two schools of thought 
have as a consequence become sharply defined, and in 
some cases quite bitter, and the interest in the struggle 
is widening. Outsiders also are beginning to appreciate 
the fact that great issues are at stake; that the 
new views practically remove from the sacred books of 
the Old Testament the basis of revealed religion, the 
historic faith-foundation upon which the Church has 
rested for more than eighteen centuries. The Church 
in general is realizing the destructive consequences of 
the critical teachings of the Wellhausen-Kuenen school 
of thought. What began as a controversy respecting 
the Pentateuch twenty years ago has now become a 



contest of radical criticism covering the entire Old 

Testament, and a question of principle for the life of 

the Church. The professor adds that the defendants 

of the "old views" are found in the ranks of the ministry 

only, and none of them amongst the university 

men. 



Likewise the American college professors are leading 
in this attack upon the Scriptures. They seem to realize 
that they might live and die comparatively unknown, 
except as they may come into prominence by attacking 
the Bible. Professor Paul Haupt of Baltimore has 
begun a translation of the Bible in conjunction with 
certain other professors of this country and Europe. 

These gentlemen make such bold statements that 
not only the world but modest and moderate humble-minded 
Christians are inclined to suppose that they 
must have found some very positive information upon 
which to rest such wonderful and positive claims. 
They even attempt to indicate when and which certain 
words, sentences and sometimes paragraphs were added, 
here and there, at various times and by various persons. 

These gentlemen, of course, profess to be more wise as 
well as more honest than any who have ever undertaken 
such work before. Their edition of the Bible, they 
inform us, will be printed in various shades of color 
and thereby indicate different features of the text. Of 
course, the world is ready and waiting for any and 
every thing that would cast discredit upon the Book 
which has successfully withstood the assaults of its 
enemies for many centuries. Consequently, it is not 
surprising that the world-pleasing and success-seeking 
publishers of New York journals are very willing to 
advertise such works as these freely. Thus a New York 
Sunday paper of January 31st illustrates what the new 
Bible is to be, giving selections from Genesis, showing 
the coloring of the text as it will appear, heading the 
whole thus:— 

"AMAZING DISCOVERIES CONCERNING THE BOOK OF 
GENESIS. IT IS A PATCHWORK OF FOUR OR 
FIVE WRITERS AND IS NOT THE FIRST 
BOOK OF THE BIBLE." 

Few of those who read the bald and brazen 
claims of these modern wise men and their advertisers 
have any conception of the character of the information 
possessed by these schoolmen, which authorized 
their division of Genesis and other Bible Books into 
"patchwork." Have these gentlemen found the original 
manuscript of Genesis, and there seen the various additions 
they claim, in various styles of handwriting, 
some with more and some with less faded inks? Is it 
upon such evidences as these that they base their strong 
statements? No! They never saw the original manuscripts, 
nor has any one else now living seen them. 



Critics have access to nothing to which other men have 

not access to-day. Upon what, then, do they base 

their conclusions which they state with such positiveness? 

may be asked. We answer, They merely fancy 

that they notice a little change in the phraseology here 

and there. They find that certain words are used in 

one paragraph or section freely and that those words 

do not occur in another paragraph or at least are not 

so freely used. And on the strength of this flimsy 

foundation they decide, and declare with great positiveness, 

and unholy boldness, that the two paragraphs 

were written by different persons. They not only undertake 

to say about what time they were written, but 

presumably men of such keen discernment could almost 

tell what the men looked like who wrote the different 

passages. 

The Scriptures do not declare that Moses was the 
author of the Book of Genesis in the sense that he 
wrote it of his own personal knowledge. It is to be 
presumed that since much of it was history, covering 
the two thousand years preceding Moses' day, the record 
may have been kept and handed down from father 
to son, some of it from Adam and Seth and Enoch, 
Methuselah, Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. All that 

R2108 : page 51 

is claimed for the Book of Genesis is, that Moses was 
its editor and that he as a servant of God was granted 
a superior wisdom and grace in bringing together into 
proper form, thus, the items of past history and of divine 
revelation which God designed for his people— 
"That the man of God might be thoroughly furnished." 

It is quite sufficient for those who have learned of 
the wisdom of God's Book from its internal evidences 
and harmonies, to know that the records of Genesis 

R2108 : page 52 

are in complete harmony with the entire Word of God; 
and that it was one of the Books of the Scriptures at the 
time our Lord prayed, "Sanctify them through thy 
truth: thy Word is truth;" that various of its items 
were referred to by our Lord and by all the inspired 
apostles, without the slightest suggestion that either 
the whole or part of it was unreliable or a "mere human 
patchwork." Anyone who will compare the account 
of Creation as given in Genesis with any account of 
Creation given in any of the so-called sacred books of 
heathendom will be convinced that it is as far in advance 
of them all as the daylight is brighter than midnight. 
And we hold that the account of Creation in 
Genesis, rightly understood, is in full accord with all 
that science has been able to prove; although it disagrees 
with some things which science claims without 
a sufficiency of evidence. The harmony between the 



Bible account and the proved positions of science was 
shown in a series of articles by T. J. Conant which appeared 
in our issues of Jan. 1, Feb. 1, and Feb. 15, '94. 



R2108 : page 52 

THE UNDEFILED ONE. 



"Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one.— Job 14:4. 

THAT the preexistent Son of God "was made 

flesh and dwelt among us," is clearly stated in 

the Scriptures (John 1:14); that he was "holy," "undefiled," 

and "separate from sinners," is plainly stated 

(Heb. 7:26-28 and Luke 1:35); and that he knew no 

sin, while all other men are sinners, is also stated. (2 Cor. 5:21; 

Rom. 5:18,19; and 1 Pet. 2:22.) The 

Apostle's argument, that he was able to, and did, give 

himself a ransom or corresponding price for the forfeited 

life and right of Adam (Rom. 5:17-19; 1 Tim. 2:6), 

proves the same, because the first Adam was 

perfect until he sinned; hence one who could give a 

corresponding price or ransom must have been likewise 

perfect, without sin and free from its condemnation. 

The same thought is logically deduced from the statement 

that Jesus fulfilled all the requirements of the 

Law (Matt. 5:17; John 8:46); for we know that the 

Law of God was the full measure of a perfect man's 

ability. Hence the conclusion is irresistible that he 

must have been a perfect man when able to do what 

no imperfect man had done or could do.— Psa. 49:7; 

Heb. 1:3; 4:15; 9:28; 10:5-10; Isa. 53:9-12; John 1:29; 

IPet. 1:19. 

But notwithstanding the mass of Bible testimony 
as to his human perfection, some inquire, Can the possibility 
of this be scientifically shown? Others assert 
that it is an impossibility, and that the laws of nature 
are in direct opposition. They give unbounded weight 
to their imperfect understanding of nature's laws, and 
lightly cast aside the weight of Bible testimony. 

The question, however, is well worthy of an examination 
from a scientific as well as from a Scriptural 
standpoint, in order that the agreement of science and 
Scripture may be clearly seen. Science and Scripture 
always agree when properly understood. There is no 
law against our seeking evidence from every good 
source, but only egotism, or blindness, or both, will 
exalt human reasonings above the divine testimony. 

We raise the query then: How came it that "the 
man Christ Jesus" was perfect, holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate from sinners, while his mother was imperfect; 
a partaker of the weaknesses of the fallen and 



condemned race?— Who can bring a clean thing out of 
an unclean? 

Seeking to answer this query, the Church of Rome 
promulgated the doctrine of the "Immaculate Conception:" 
not the doctrine that Jesus was miraculously 
conceived by the holy power of God, as recorded by 
the Evangelists, and hence was immaculate or spotless; 
but that Mary, the mother of Jesus, was miraculously 
conceived, and hence that she was pure, holy and free 
from Adamic sin and imperfection. But the originators 
of this doctrine could not have been far-seeing, or they 
would have known that by the same reasoning it must 
be proved that Mary's mother was of immaculate conception, 
and so all the way back to Eve, "the mother 
of all living," whose fall into sin before she bore any 
children is clearly stated in the Scriptures.— See Gen. 3 
and 1 Tim. 2:14. 

However, this subject is perfectly clear and plain 
now, from a scientific as well as from a Bible standpoint. 

The Scriptures hold out the thought that all EXISTENCE, 
LIVING ENERGY, OR BEING, comes from the father 
and not from the mother. The mother receives the 
sperm or seed of life from the father, furnishes it a cell-nucleus 
out of which a form or body is produced, 
and nourishes the germ of being until it is able to maintain 
an independent existence; i.e., until it is able to 
appropriate to its maintenance the life-sustaining elements 
which the earth and air supply— then it is born. 

The word father has the significance of life-giver. 
Accordingly, God was the "FATHER," or life-giver, 
while the earth was the mother of Adam, and hence of 
the human race. (Luke 3:38.) Adam's form or organism 
was of and from earth (which therefore served 
as a mother); but his spark of life which constituted 

R2108 : page 53 

him a man came from God (who thus was his Father 
or life-giver): and in the male has since resided the 
power to communicate that spark of life or living seed 
to progeny. 

In harmony with this principle, all children are 
spoken of as being of or from their fathers, and borne 
by their mothers. (Gen. 24:47.) Thus the children 
of Jacob, counted through his sons, were seventy when 
he came down to Egypt. (But if Jacob or the twelve 
patriarchs had daughters, which we cannot doubt, the 
children of those daughters were not counted as Jacob's 
children; such children were counted to their own 
fathers.) All of those seventy souls or beings are expressly 
said to have come out of the loins of Jacob. 
(Gen. 46:26,27, and Exod. 1:5.) So of Solomon it is 
said, that he came out of the loins of David. (1 Kings 8:19, 
and 2 Chron. 6:9.) So also the Apostle Paul and 
Israelites in general claimed that they all came out of 
the loins of Abraham; and of Levi it is written that 



"he was yet in the loins of his father when Melchisedec 
methim."--Heb. 7:5,10. 

Thus also the whole race was in and sprang from 
Adam their father, but not from Eve. And thus it is 
written that all in ADAM die, but not all in Eve. Because 
the race came of Adam, it was tried in his trial, 
condemned in his failure and included under his 
sentence. 

This, which the Scriptures teach, is the latest deduction 
of science on this subject of Progeneration, as 
applied to humanity and to all mammalia. Scientists 
find abundant and conclusive proof in nature that life 
or being comes always from the male. The simplest 
form of illustration is a hen's egg; Of itself it originally 
contains no life; but is merely a cell-germ ready 
to produce an organism as soon as vivified or fecundated 
or impregnated with the life-germ or life-seed by 
the male bird. 

The egg contains not only the germ-cell but also 
the proper elements of nutrition and in proper proportion, 
adapted to the minute organism begotten in it by 
the sperm or life seed; and under proper conditions 
that organism develops. The yolk becomes wholly absorbed 
into the body, while the clear liquid albumen 
serves as its later nourishment until it breaks the shell 
and is able to sustain itself by appropriating cruder 
elements of nutrition. The principles here involved 
are the same in human and other animals. 

In view of these harmonious testimonies of the 
Bible and science, it is a reasonable deduction that if 
the father were perfect, the child would be so. Under 
even moderately favorable conditions a perfect sperm 
or life-seed in uniting with the female germ-cell would 
produce a living germ so vigorous and healthy as to be 
capable of appropriating the proper elements of nutrition 
and avoiding, throwing off or neutralizing the unfit; 
and thus would develop a perfect being; continually 
throwing off without self-injury, through its perfect 
functions, all elements not beneficial. On the contrary, 
if the sperm or life-seed be imperfect, the living germ 
will be proportionately weak and unable to overcome 
the unfavorable conditions of its environment, it will 
appropriate whatever its mother furnishes— good or bad 
—and will be the prey of disease. Being imperfect, it 
will be unable to reject wholly the poisonous elements 
of disease. 

This is on the same principle that if two persons 
eat of strong food, the one with good digestive powers 
can appropriate its nutriment and pass off its unwholesome 
qualities, while the other with weak digestion 
could appropriate little nutriment from the same food 
and would be injured by its evil qualities. 

It follows, then, that had mother Eve alone sinned, 
the race would not have died. Had Adam remained 
perfect, his life unforfeited and unimpaired, his offspring 
would have been the same. And even had death 



sentence passed upon mother Eve, bringing imperfections, 
these would not have impaired her offspring; 
being perfect, they would have appropriated good elements 
and have passed off naturally any unwholesome 
elements without injury. 

On the other hand, suppose that Adam had sinned 
and Eve had remained sinless, Adam's condemnation 
and death would have affected the entire posterity just 
the same; however perfect the germ-cells and nourishment 
provided by mother Eve, only imperfect dying 
beings could be produced from diseased sperm of life-seed 
from Adam. Hence the appropriateness of the 
Scriptural statement that "All in Adam die," and "By 
one man's disobedience. ..death passed upon all." 
(1 Cor. 15:22; Rom. 5:12,19.) How wonderful the 
correspondence here between the first and second Adams 
and their brides. As the death of the race depended 
not upon Eve but wholly upon Adam, and yet she 
shared in the bringing of it, so the restored life of the 
race redeemed depends not at all upon the bride of 
Christ, but upon Jesus, though by divine favor it is 
arranged that his bride shall share in the restitution of 
"that which was lost." 

The fountain, Adam, having become contaminated 
by sin and death, none of his posterity can be free from 
contamination; for, "Who can bring a clean thing out 
of an unclean? Not one." The reference here must 
be understood as applying to the man, and not to the 
woman: none coming from or out of the contaminated 
fountain can be clean. Hence, "There is none righteous, 
no, not one;" none can redeem his own life, nor 
give to God a ransom for his brother.— Rom. 3:10; 
Psa. 49:7. 

R2108 : page 54 

It follows, then, that the only obstacle to the generation 
of a perfect man is the lack of a perfect father 
to give a perfect life-sperm; and hence the teaching of 
Scripture, that in the case of Jesus a perfect life-sperm 
(not of or from the Adamic fountain) was transferred 
by divine power from a preexistent condition to the 
embryo human condition, was born "holy" (pure and 
perfect), though of an imperfect mother (Luke 1:35): 
That he was uncontaminated with any imperfection- 
mental, moral or physical— which his mother in common 
with the entire human race shared, is entirely reasonable 
and, as we have just seen, in perfect accord not 
only with Scripture but also with the latest scientific 
findings and deductions. 

Another fact which scientists are demonstrating to 
themselves, which seems to concur with Scripture testimony, 
is, that though life or being comes from the 
father, form and nature come from the mother. The 
scientific proofs of this are more abstruse and less easily 
grasped by the ordinary mind; and this, because in 



wisdom God has not only separated the various kinds, 
or natures, but in great measure has limited them, so 
that they cannot mix or blend beyond certain limits 
without losing all fecundity. A common illustration 
of this is the mule. 

The old idea that form and nature came from the 
male is abandoned by modern students of nature, who 
now agree that the female furnishes organism as well 
as sustenance— in fact all except the life-seed or sperm, 
which comes from the father or life-giver. Take as a 
Scriptural illustration of the foregoing claims, the improper 
union between "the daughters of men" and 
those angels which kept not their proper estate or condition. 
(Gen. 6:2,4; Jude 6; 2 Pet. 2:4.) The angels, 
when they assumed human form being perfect in 
vitality begat children far superior to the then greatly 
fallen race of Adam in mental acumen as well as in 
physical powers, so that the record is— "the same were 
men of renown." These wonderful men, let us remember, 
were born of imperfect, dying mothers, but were 
begotten by vigorous, unimpaired fathers. 

The dying race of Adam would have had hard 
masters in those superior Nephilim (Hebrew, fallen 
ones) which had not been recognized by God either by 
a trial for life, nor by a condemnation to death. It was 
a mercy indeed which, not having authorized their existence, 
blotted them from existence in the flood and 
spared only Noah and his family with the comment— 
"Now Noah was perfect in his generation," which almost 
implies that the remainder of Adam's race had 
become more or less a new race by association with the 
angels in human form and powers. We say a new race because 
of their new life and vigor coming from new fathers. 

So great was the renown of these "Nephilim," that 
it is to be found with more or less distinctness in heathen 
mythologies to this day, and hundreds of years after 
their destruction in the flood, the false report that some 
of these were yet alive caused a panic among the Israelites 
while flushed with the victory of recent battles. 
(See Num. 13:33; 14:36,37.) No doubt there were 
some large men in Canaan, as other Scriptures show, 
but never except in this "evil report" are they called 
Nephilim.— See our issue of July 15, '94, "Sons of God 
and Daughters of Men." 

Another illustration of this principle that life comes 
from the father and nature from the mother is found in 
the fact that Jehovah, himself of the divine nature, has 
begotten sons of various natures. He is the father or 
life-giver of those of the angelic nature (Job 2: 1 ; 38:7; 
Heb. 2:9), and of the human nature (Luke 3:38), 
as well as of the "new creatures" who shall be made 
partakers of his own divine nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) The 
spirit or energy of Jehovah operating upon spirit-substances 
produced and developed angels; operating upon 
earthly substances (Gen. 2:7; 1 Cor. 15:47), man was 
produced. And when he would give us a clear conception 



of the generation of the new creatures to the divine 
nature, he represents them as begotten of his word of 
promise in the womb of the Covenant which he made 
with Abraham, which he symbolized by a woman, 
Sarah, telling us that as Isaac was the heir of Abraham 
and child of promise (by Sarah), so we, as or like Isaac, 
are children of God, being children of the promise, or 
Sarah covenant-See Gal. 4:23-31; 1 Pet. 1:3,23; 
2 Pet. 1:4. 

The same principle is illustrated in the fact that in 
the typical Jewish dispensation, prior to the Christian 
age, a child inherited blessings and privileges of its 
father, according to the favor and standing of its mother, 
thus again declaring that the mother's nature, 
rights, privileges and liberties attached to the child, 
though not of necessity the father's.— See Gen. 21:10; 
Ex. 21:4; Gal. 4:30. 

The foregoing arguments are clinched by the fact 
that our Lord Jesus was born of a woman. The "holy 
thing" born of a woman partook of the woman's 
nature, i.e., human nature— "of the earth earthy." 
Though retaining all the purity and perfection of the 
preexistent (spirit) state, the transferred germ of being 
(in harmony with this law we are examining) partook 
of the nature of the mother and was "made flesh" 
by being "born of a woman." Yet the "clean thing" 
came not out of the unclean race, but "proceeded forth 
and came from God" and was merely developed and 
nourished in Mary. 

It is yet further in harmony with this same principle 
that though Christ has been highly exalted to the 
divine nature, and is no longer human, yet it is declared 

R2108 : page 55 

of him that he shall be the life-giver or "father" 

of the whole human race, while it is also shown that 

his work for the race is to restore the perfection of human 

nature, which was lost for all through Adam's 

sin. Thus, while their "father" or life-giver will be 

on the divine plane, the children will be on the human 

plane, born out of a covenant of restitution, illustrated 

by Keturah, Abraham's third wife. 



R2108 : page 55 

THE FIRST CHRISTIAN MARTYR. 

-FEB. 21. -ACTS 6:8-15; 7:54-60.- 

"Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life."— Rev. 2:10. 

APPARENTLY Stephen's martyrdom occurred 



not a great while after Pentecost, but the 

interim had been a period of considerable progress. At 

the time of the ascension "about one hundred and twenty" 

were reckoned as being in full and deep fellowship 

in Christ; ten days later at Pentecost three thousand 

converts were added; shortly after five thousand more 

as recorded in our last lesson; later (Acts 5:14) "multitudes, 

both men and women, were added to the Lord;" 

still later, "the number of the disciples was multiplied 

in Jerusalem greatly, and a great multitude of priests 

were obedient to the faith." (Acts 6:1-7.) This period 

of gathering the ripe wheat and establishing them in 

the doctrines of Christ was a very necessary prelude to 

the period of trial, persecution and suffering which 

shortly followed. The persecution, however, was no 

less a divine mercy than the previous peace and prosperity: 

the divine rule for the Gospel Church evidently 

is that each member shall be "made perfect through 

suffering." The stoning of Stephen was merely the 

beginning of the general persecution which in one form 

or another has continued ever since, and must continue 

until the last members of the body of Christ shall have 

proven themselves faithful even unto death and been 

accounted worthy of the crown of life mentioned in 

our golden text. 

Stephen, it will be remembered, was chosen as one 
of the assistants of the apostles and was known as a 
deacon— minister or servant— the original intention 
being that the service should be chiefly with reference 
to the temporal interests of the Church. His choice 
would indicate that he was considered at the time a 
man of ability, and that faithfulness to the work entrusted 
to him led on to still greater privileges and opportunities 
for service. Accordingly we find him in 
this lesson ministering spiritual things with imbuement 
of the spirit and ability closely approaching that of the 
apostles. He was full of faith and power, says our 
common version, and no doubt truly, but the oldest manuscripts 
render this "full of grace and power." Both 
were true, because he could not have had the grace 
and the power without the faith. "This is the victory 
which overcometh the world, even your faith." In 
Stephen's case the faith working by love had produced 
zeal for the Lord and his cause; and the faith and zeal 
blended with the spirit of holiness gave Stephen extraordinary 
grace and power, as pointed out in verse 8. 
And the same combination will produce like grace and 
power in all of the Lord's people in proportion as these 
elements of character are found in each. 

Tradition has it that Stephen's ability as a speaker 
(verses 9,10) brought him into special prominence and 
that as a religious logician he met with the learned men 
of his time, amongst whom it is said Saul of Tarsus 
was one. The Jews, while in a general sense one in 
religious matters, were nevertheless broken up into 
various little cliques and schools of thought, much after 



the manner of the denominations of Christendom today. 
The classes here mentioned as disputants with 
Stephen are supposed to have represented the advanced 
philosophies of that day, combined with Judaism; 
but all of their philosophy could not cope with 
the wisdom and spirit of the truth which were with 
Stephen. Naturally this led wicked hearts to envy, 
malice and hatred; for those who are not above all 
things lovers of the truth are always moved to more or 
less hatred when successfully opposed by the truth. 

(11-14) Many have supposed that Stephen met 
his death at the hands of a mob. But this is incorrect. 
Those who were his enemies because unable to resist 
the force of his arguments had no authority to stone 
him, nor did they wish to appear before the people in 
the light of persecutors of their opponent. They therefore 
suborned or procured witnesses outside of their 
own cliques to bring charges against Stephen before 
the Sanhedrin and then while he was disputing with 
them the official representatives of the Sanhedrin came 
upon him and "caught him" and brought him before 
the council,— as though caught in the very act of 
blasphemy. 

At the trial the witnesses testified falsely in the 
sense that they misrepresented the words and arguments 
of Stephen, putting them in a false light. There was, 
nevertheless, probably considerable truth in the charge 
that Stephen said that Jesus of Nazareth would destroy 
their city and change the customs of Moses. Had they 
confined themselves to a strict statement of the matter 
as Stephen represented it, they would not have been 

R2108 : page 56 

false witnesses; but, evidently anxious to serve those 
who employed them as witnesses, they exaggerated 
Stephen's statements to the extent of misrepresentation 
of certain connecting facts and statements in his 
discourse. 

(15) It is recorded that when the apostles, Peter 
and John, stood before a similar council, a short time 
previous, their judges marveled at their courage in view 
of the fact that they were unlearned men. So also 
Stephen was courageous. Notwithstanding the fact of 
his arrest, and that he was on trial, and that if found 
guilty the punishment would be death by stoning, according 

R2109 : page 56 

to the law, Stephen was not daunted. Instead 

of a look of fear and servility, or of anger, malice, hatred 

and defiance, the record is that they beheld his face 

"as it had been the face of an angel;"— a face beaming 

with love, kindness, interest in their welfare, desire to 

do them good, of purity and holiness of motive, combined 

with humble confidence in God and fearlessness 



of men. We believe that to a greater or less extent 
this is the case with all who receive the holy spirit, in 
proportion as they progress in the knowledge, faith, 
love, zeal and character of Christ their Lord. This 
change does not come instantaneously; it comes gradually. 
The spirit of the world places the marks of selfishness 
and hardness upon the countenances of all the 
slaves of sin, in proportion as they are faithful thereto. 
But when the spirit of the truth is received and these 
become freed from the slavery to sin and become the 
servants of righteousness, the result is a proportionate 
displacement of the marks of slavery upon the countenance 
and an illumination instead, which more and 
more approaches the angelic. Look the worldly man 
or woman in the face, and see how the cares and battles 
of and for sin have left their traces: look then into the 
faces of those who are fully and intelligently the Lord's, 
and notice how the marks of care are superseded by a 
look of confidence and trust and peace proceeding from 
the hearty acceptance of their new Master's spirit. And 
this illumination will be found most remarkable and 
conspicuous when such saints are actively engaged in 
telling the good tidings, and particularly when opposing 
the error. 

Stephen's discourse before the Sanhedrin (Acts 7:1-53) 
marks him as having been a man of great ability. 
It reads more like the language of the Apostle Paul 
than that of any other New Testament writer. And 
the Apostle Paul, then Saul of Tarsus, is supposed to 
have been one of his hearers, a member of the Sanhedrin. 

The closing of Stephen's address (verses 51-53) 
laid upon the Jewish people, and especially upon the 
Jewish Sanhedrin as the representatives of the religious 
law, the full responsibility for the death of the "Just 
One"— as his betrayers and murderers. This pointed 
application of Scripture and facts, as might have been 
expected, only aroused the evil hearts of the judges. 
Of those converted by Peter's discourse it was said, 
"They were pricked to the heart;" but of these it is 
said, "They were cut to the hearts" by the words of 
truth— the evil of their natures was aroused to the full, 
they gnashed on him with their teeth— they were exceedingly 
incensed. 

(55-58) Full of the holy spirit, Stephen was wholly 
unmoved by their manifestations of anger. He was 
testifying for God and for the truth, and instead of fear 
of man his heart was brought into the closer sympathy 
and union with the Lord. The Lord knew all about 
the termination of the trial and what the sentence would 
be, and no doubt gave Stephen a vision of heavenly 
glory— of the Father, and of Christ at the right hand 
of his majesty. This no doubt was for the strengthening 
of Stephen's own faith for the martyrdom just at hand; 
and perhaps also intended to act as it did upon his unjust 
judges. His declaration of the vision which he 
saw capped the climax of their indignation, at his supposed 



opposition to God and to Moses and to themselves 
as representatives of the Law. They construed this to 
be additional blasphemy— that Jesus of Nazareth, whom 
they condemned as a blasphemer, and whose crucifixion 
they had procured, was acceptable to God; and not 
only so, but made next to the Father— at the right 
hand of God, or place of power and influence. Using 
this as a pretext, they terminated the trial and executed 
the sentence of stoning— stopping their ears as though 
they would thus say, what no doubt some of them actually 
felt, that such an exaltation of Jesus next to Jehovah, 
far above Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the prophets 
was gross blasphemy which they could not justify 
themselves in hearing and felt bound to resent by stoning 
the blasphemer. 

According to the Law, those who heard the blasphemy 
did the stoning; and they laid their outer garments 
at the feet of Saul, which would seem to indicate 
that he not only consented to the verdict that Stephen 
was a blasphemer worthy of death, but that he was 
one of the leaders in the prosecution, as well as an influential 
man in the Sanhedrin. 

(59-60) Without attempting to dissuade them 
from their course, Stephen offered up prayer to the 
Lord, and a beautiful prayer it was— not only for the 
preservation of his spirit, but also that the sin might 
not be laid to the charge of his murderers. 

Thus he "fell asleep." This testimony respecting 
Stephen is in full accord with the testimony of other 
Scriptures. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and the prophets 
"slept" with their fathers in death; and the Apostle, 
after enumerating some of the faithful ones of the past 
(who were stoned, etc., in hope of a better resurrection), 

R2109 : page 57 

grouping them all together, says (Heb. 11:39,40), "These 

all... received not the promise; God having provided 

some better thing for us, that they without us should 

not be made perfect." They all are represented as 

sleeping and waiting for the morning— the resurrection 

morning— the Millennial morning— the morning of 

which the prophet David spoke, saying, "Weeping 

may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning;" 

the morning of which the prophet Job spoke, 

saying, "Hide me in the grave until thy wrath be 

past [the reign of death during the present age with 

all of its concomitants of sorrow, trouble and pain, are 

evidences of divine wrath]. Thou shalt call, and I 

will answer thee: thou wilt have a desire to the 

work of thine hands." Our Lord, speaking of the resurrection 

morn, the same great day of awakening from 

the sleep of death, corroborates Job's statement, saying, 

"All that are in the graves shall hear his voice and 

shall come forth." (John 5:28,29.) Stephen slept 

with the others, but as one of the overcomers of the 



new dispensation he will have a share in the first resurrection 
(Rev. 20:6), and thus awake earlier in 
the morning than others not winners of the prize of the 
high calling of this Gospel age.— Psa. 46:5, margin. 

The expression "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit" 
signifies that Stephen understood that the spark of life, 
the spirit of life, was passing from his control; and by 
this expression he gave evidence of his faith in a future 
life, committing it wholly to the care of him who redeemed 
him from the power of the grave and who is 
shortly to deliver therefrom all who trust in him. 

Stephen's faithful witness unto death was followed 
in turn by that of many others likewise faithful unto 
death and heirs of crowns of life according to the promise. 
The beneficent influences of the gospel of Christ have 
since Stephen's day so permeated the civilized world, 
and so affected it, that the followers of Christ are not at 
present in danger of being stoned to death for preaching 
his gospel. Nevertheless, the Apostle's words still hold 
good, "All who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall 
suffer persecution." It is still necessary to suffer with 
Christ, if we would be glorified with him and share his 
coming Kingdom. But the persecutions of to-day are 
more refined than in any previous period. The faithful 
to-day are not stoned with literal stones or shot 
with literal arrows or literally beheaded, but it is still 
true that the wicked shoot out arrows at the righteous, 
"even bitter words," and many because of faithfulness 
are reproved and slandered and cut off from 
fellowship— beheaded for the testimony of Jesus. (Rev. 20:4.) 
Let all such emulate Stephen, the first Christian 
martyr. Let their testimonies be given with radiant 
faces like his. Let their eyes of faith perceive 
Jesus at the right hand of the majesty on high as their 
Advocate and Deliverer. Let their words be with moderation 
as were Stephen's, and let it be true of them, 
as written of him, "full of grace and power" and "filled 
with the holy spirit." 



R2109 : page 57 

PERSECUTION OVERRULED FOR GOOD. 

-FEB. 28.-ACTS 8:1-17.- 

"They that were scattered abroad went 
everywhere preaching the Word."— Acts 8:4. 

THE tendency of the early believers, as we have 
seen, was to gather together— to swarm. This 
was evidently in harmony with the divine program, to 
foster and establish the Church in the religious capital 
of the world. Those first few years were evidently 
designed of the Lord to permit the Church to put on 



the armor of God, to grow from babes in Christ, 
by the use of the sincere milk of the Word, and afterward 
by its strong meat, up to the stature of Christian 
manhood;— thoroughly furnished unto every good word 
and work. This gathering at Jerusalem was in harmony 
with our Lord's direction before his ascension, 
when, after instructing them to preach the gospel, he 
added "beginning at Jerusalem." But now Jerusalem, 
having had its full period of favor, the Church having 
been rooted and established, the divine plan led on to 
a wider work; and the persecution which arose at the 
time of Stephen's martyrdom became very general in 
the city of Jerusalem, and very grievous, and led to the 
flight of many of the faithful who, we are told, went 

R2110 : page 57 

every where— especially throughout the regions of Judea 
and Samaria. The apostles no doubt considered it 
a part of duty that they should remain at Jerusalem as 
a kind of center of influence; partly because they had not 
yet fully learned the lesson that the gospel they 
preached, although to the Jew first, is also to the Greek 
and the whole world. 

(3) Saul of Tarsus was an energetic man, on whichever 
side of a question he stood. When an opponent 
of the Lord Jesus and his Church and gospel, he was 
its most active enemy, and we cannot doubt that his 
activity in the matter was backed, as he himself afterward 
declared, by a "good conscience," which believed 
that he "verily did God service" in opposing what he 
considered to be the sect of the Nazarene. God seems 
to be specially on the lookout for just such earnest 
characters, and they are far more certain to get the 
truth than are the cold, listless and indifferent kind 

R2110 : page 58 

who neither love nor hate either righteousness or sin. 

Peter and James and John were of this positive and 

strong character, and they with the Apostle Paul, consequently, 

were the ones most freely used by our Lord 

in conveying the blessings of the gospel to us and to 

the world. 

(4-13) It will be noticed that in the primitive 
Church there was no such distinction of class as there 
is in the nominal church to-day. There was no division 
into clergy and laity, but they were "all one in 
Christ Jesus." The division of the church into clergy 
and laity took place when the great falling away came, 
which developed into Papacy; and from that baneful 
influence many have not yet fully escaped. All of the 
early Church were preachers, and if persecuted they 
went everywhere preaching the Word. An instance is 
given respecting this preaching. One, Philip— not the 
Apostle— did successful work in a city of Samaria and 



was used of the Lord in casting out devils and healing 
the sick, the means then in use for drawing attention 
to the gospel. The results of his preaching were marvelous 
—even Simon the sorcerer became a believer. 

Sorcery, witchcraft and enchantments of olden 
times were manifestations of Satan and demons for the 
delusion of mankind, and were strictly forbidden under 
the Mosaic law. The same evil spirits in more recent 
years have slightly altered the character of the demonstrations, 
and so-called Spiritualists are their "mediums." 
The change is merely made in conformity to 
the changed conditions, and both are to be reckoned 
amongst "the works of the flesh and the devil." There 
can be no fellowship between the power of the adversary 
working in his agents for witchcraft and Spiritism 
and the power of Christ working in his agents and 
representatives and through the Word of truth. The 
two are in opposition, however much at times the evil 
may claim relationship to the good. So it was in Samaria, 
as related in this lesson: the gospel opposed the 
doctrines of devils propagated through witchcraft and 
sorcery, the effect was to make the people free, and 
even Simon the medium was convicted and professed 
outwardly a conversion and was baptised. 

Philip's discourse is but briefly outlined, but it 
was along the same lines as the discourses of the apostles 
noticed in the previous lessons. He preached the 
"things concerning the Kingdom of God." How fully 
he explained these things— that the Kingdom would 
be a spiritual Kingdom, that flesh and blood could not 
enter it or even see it, and that not the Jewish nation 
would be heirs of that Kingdom with Messiah, but only 
such as become believers in Jesus, devoted to him 
and suffer with him, thus attesting their loyalty to the 
divine plan. We cannot doubt, however, that Philip 
preached the second coming of Messiah to establish 
and exalt with himself the Kingdom heirs now being 
sought out, and subsequently through that Kingdom, 
to bless the world of mankind. We cannot doubt that 
he urged them to believe in Christ, and by a consecration 
to him to become joint-heirs with him in the Kingdom, 
if so be that they suffered with him, that they 
might also reign with him. Nor did his preaching omit 
the things pertaining to "the name of Jesus Christ," 
and connecting his name as Messiah with all the Kingdom 
hopes which were before the Jewish mind. We 
doubt not that he pointed out to them that the names 
of Moses and of Abraham and of the prophets, although 
great, were insufficient for salvation— that there is none 
other name given under heaven or amongst men whereby 
we must be saved. 

(14-17) It is worthy of note that Philip the 
evangelist, although possessed of the holy spirit and 
possessed also of certain gifts of the spirit, did not possess 
the power to communicate such gifts to others. 
Evidently that power resided only in the twelve apostles 



—Paul being the twelfth in place of Judas. Consequently, 
two of the apostles were sent to lay their 
hands upon the believer and to communicate the gifts 
of the holy spirit. 

After seeing the wonderful gifts and powers which 
the apostles were able to communicate, and no doubt 
after he had received a gift from them himself, Simon 
the sorcerer offered the apostles money in order to be 
endued with this apostolic power of communicating 
gifts of the spirit to others. Hence the name, "Simony," 
given to any attempt to purchase spiritual powers. Up 
to this time Simon had passed for a thoroughly converted 
man; but on the strength of this evidence of his 
non-appreciation of spiritual things the Apostle Peter 
tells him with very great plainness of speech that he 
has neither part nor lot in the matter but is yet in the 
gall of bitterness— is still unregenerate— merely a spectator 
and not a participator in the spiritual things. 

Alas! how many to-day, like Simon, are associated with 
spiritual things, but have neither part nor lot in them; 
who merely give their money in hope of some advantage, 
and not with an appreciation of the spiritual things. 



R2110 : page 58 

THE ETHIOPIAN CONVERT. 

-MARCH 7.-ACTS 8:26-40.- 

"Then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same 
Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus."— Acts 8:35. 

WE are not to suppose that up to this time the 

gospel had been preached to any except Jews. 

The eunuch, the story of whose conversion is before 

us, was a Jew. The law made special provision by which 

an alien could become a Jew, and this Ethiopian evidently 

had availed himself of that provision. He was 

R2110 : page 59 

a devout Jew, an Israelite indeed, a man of influence 
and some wealth; his devotion had led him to the Holy 
City, to which hundreds of thousands came yearly from 
various quarters. 

His sincerity as a worshiper of the true God was 
evidenced by his desire to know the will of the Lord, 
as indicated by his searching the Scriptures. It is to 
such that the Lord draws nigh and reveals himself: 
not by whispering to him an understanding of the passage 
in question, but by sending a Philip to him to expound 
the Scriptures; just as in the case of Cornelius, 
Peter was sent to tell him words of salvation that 
should be for the saving of himself and household. 



Philip was evidently a zealous servant of the Lord, and 
hence was used of the Lord in the especial manner recorded 
in this lesson; the Lord seems to look out for 
those who are of a ready mind, emptied of self and 
filled with his spirit, and zealous, to be used in his 
hand, and such are his special servants. Let us all 
more and more be emptied vessels for the Master's use 
made meet. 

Philip's inquiry— "Understandest thou what thou 
readest?" was a very pertinent one; a question that 
might be applied to a great many Christian people today 
who, if they answered truly, would admit that very 
much of the Scripture is to them "as a book that is 
sealed"— some claiming that it is sealed, others claiming 
that they are unlearned and therefore unable to 
interpret. (Isa. 29: 1 1-14.) Would that more had the 
spirit of the eunuch— a desire to understand the Scriptures 
and to avail themselves of such humble instruments 
as the Lord may be pleased to send to them for 
their aid. 

How the Lord drew the attention of the eunuch 
to the particular passage of Scripture which perplexed 
him is not recorded; but no better one could have been 
found as a text from which to preach Christ crucified, 
a sin-offering, a sin bearer, a ransom for all. And 
Philip improved the opportunity to preach Jesus as the 
fulfilment of this prophecy, the propitiation for our 
sins, by whose stripes we are healed. Whoever will 
read over the announcements of discourses for fashionable 
churches in almost any large city will be struck 
with the dissimilarity of the themes discussed from 
those upon which Philip and the apostles discoursed with 
so much power and with so great results eighteen centuries 
ago. And who will say that this has nothing to 
do with the admitted coldness and deadness in the 
nominal church? The gospel which is the power of 
God unto salvation is not the gospel of politics, nor of 
social reform, nor of temperance, etc., but the gospel 
of salvation from sin and death by a Savior who has 
bought us with his own precious blood. 

Philip's directness of discourse is worthy of note. 
He did not ride along in the eunuch's company avoiding 
the principal theme, making inquiries about Ethiopia, 
the condition of crops, the business outlook, etc., 
but, as having a particular business to attend to as a 

R2111 : page 59 

servant of the Lord, he got to preaching immediately. 
But then, the eunuch was an attentive inquirer. As a Jew 
he had been waiting and hoping and praying for the Messiah 
and his Kingdom. He knew of certain passages 
of Scripture which extolled the glory of that Kingdom 
and the blessings that would flow from it: other passages 
which seemed somewhat in conflict he did not 
understand, and now an explanation had been offered 



to him which in every sense of the word fitted the 
prophetic statement and reconciled all differences. What 
else could he or any honest man do than accept the 
facts of the case? Quite possibly indeed he had already 
heard of Jesus, and possibly had heard this very Scripture 
referred to as fulfilled in him. 

Now that the matter was set clearly before his 
mind— what it meant and how it was fulfilled— he wasted 
no time in acknowledging Jesus the Messiah; he straightway 
inquired whether or not anything hindered his 
espousal of the cause of the Nazarene and his recognition 
as one of his disciples by baptism? We should 
mark also the directness of Philip's answer. He did 
not say, You will have to go to the mourners' bench 
and be prayed for, quite a while, before God will accept 
you; nor did he say, The proper thing for you to do 
is to join this or the other denomination after you have 
studied its catechism and made a profession of its 
lengthy man-made creed or covenant. On the contrary 
he said, If you believe with all your heart, you may 
properly perform this symbol of union with Christ, 
burial into his death. 

It is well to note also that Philip did not say to 
the eunuch, It is sufficient if you have the real baptism, 
the real consecration of your life to the Lord, the burial 
of your will into the Lord's will, and you need not perform 
the outward symbol in water. Philip said nothing 
of this kind; nor had he or anyone else authority 
to thus offset the word of the Lord and the apostles, 
directing all believers to thus symbolize their faith and 
consecration. It is worthy of note, also, that Philip 
did not say to the eunuch, "I will go yonder and fetch 
a little water in the palm of my hand, and sprinkle it 
upon your forehead;" but the record says that "they 
both went down into the water" and came "up out of 
the water." 

In what manner the Lord by the spirit caught 
Philip away is not stated, but we should remember 
that this was at a time when means of locomotion were 
limited and when God was pleased to exert his infinite 
power in various ways in connection with the establishment 
of his Church. 



R2111 : page 60 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 



Indiana. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel that I owe you 
an apology for my long silence, and wish to say that 
it has been more carelessness on my part than anything 
else. I have felt less the necessity of writing you often 
since others of our company have written, and in this 



way you heard from us, and we from you. 

We have just had a week of meetings: meeting 
every evening for counsel, prayer and song, in which 
all were benefited who attended, and this included 
nearly all our number, though some were kept away 
through sickness and other causes over which they had 
no control. We all felt the need of a closer walk with 
our dear Lord, and to this end sought a deeper work 
of grace in our hearts, and the Lord responded to our 
petitions by meeting with us and granting to all that 
sweet subtle communion which every true child of God 
has experienced and yet cannot describe. I can see 
the benefits of the meetings already in the increased 
zeal of those who attended. Some are suggesting that 
we hold a series of public meetings, and it looks just 
now as though the way would open up for a series of 
meetings in Pool's Hall, about 1 1/2 miles east of here. 

The churches in Indianapolis are making a special 
effort now to arouse a fresh interest in religious things. 
The ministers all seem to realize their spiritual deadness, 
which has come (as one of them expressed it to 
me) like a mighty wave over all the churches. I attended 
the meeting of the Indianapolis Ministerial 
association the 1st Monday of this month. I noticed by 
the papers that the subject for discussion was, "Is 
there a lack of spiritual life in the churches?" and 
what are the causes? and the remedy? The gentlemen 
who had the first part of the subject did not even debate 
the subject but spent the first four minutes of ten 
allotted to him in reading and commenting on statistics 
which might well arouse them to greater energy. 
The next speaker was Pastor of the 1st Presbyterian 
Church, and said among other things that the increase 
for the year just closed in four of the leading Presbyterian 
churches of the city was less than 4 per cent, 
and that in 1600 (if I remember rightly) of the Presbyterian 
churches of the country there were no accessions 
whatever. A dark picture, surely, to all those 
who believe that all efforts for the salvation of the 
race will end with this age. 

This same speaker mentioned the fact that he had 
attended Moody's meetings in New York about 20 years 
ago and that then the Word seemed to go out with 
power and take hold of the people, especially church 
people. But that in Moody's recent meetings, which 
he had attended also, there seemed to be a total lack of 
power, for which he was unable to account. 

The gentleman who took the next phase of the 
subject, i.e., "What are the causes of this deadness?" 
after naming various causes, mentioned as perhaps the 
principal cause a tendency among ministers to speculate 
on various subjects "thereby dividing the thought 
and confusing the minds of their audience." He mentioned 
as a particularly detrimental subject of speculation, 
"The Second Coming of Christ," and then added 
by way of apology "that he did not wish to criticise 



those who had views upon this subject, as doubtless 
some present did, but as for himself he had no views 
at all." Poor "blind leader of the blind!" Had he 
the least conception of the depth of shame involved in 
such a confession as this, falling from the lips of a so-called 
minister of the gospel, he would surely bow 
his head in shame. But no, as Paul puts it, he seemed 
to "glory in his shame;" and not a minister present 
raised his voice in rebuke of such shameful ignorance. 
The gentleman who took up the last division of the 
subject, whose business it was to suggest a remedy for 
existing evils in the church, was a "Holiness man" 
and, of course, suggested a baptism of the "Holy 
Ghost." Some seemed to coincide with this view and 
feel their own deep needs, while others sleepily listened 
and seemed to think that everything was in a fairly 
prosperous way, though none of them were very hilariously 
jubilant. Surely, "the wisdom of her wise 
men shall perish." 

The last speaker mentioned the fact that he too 
had been present at Moody's meetings in New York 
20 years ago, and that he had recently heard from 
friends in the East who attributed Moody's lack of 
power to his speculations as to the Second Coming of 
Christ. Is it not significant that two out of three 
speakers gave as the most potent factor in producing 
this "spiritual deadness" and "lack of power" the agitation 
of the second coming of our Lord? I think it is. 
It seems to be an index showing how unpopular this 
subject is among the D.Ds. It seemed so queer to me: 
everybody addressed every other body as Doctor. I 
could not help thinking how ridiculous it would sound 
to say, "Doctor Peter," and what the impetuous old 
fisherman would have thought. I really felt sorry for 
these men. But as I witnessed their anxiety and seeming 
helplessness, I felt like suggesting that preaching 
the gospel would be an experiment worth trying at 
least as a remedy for the deadness of their churches. 

With Christian love, in which Sister Owen joins, 
to yourself and Sister Russell, I am as ever, 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, C. A. OWEN. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We have had some 
very peculiar experiences of late. We have been holding 
public meetings (lectures from the chart), and announced 
them in the papers. At our first meeting a 
lady attended (a stranger) and at the next brought 
along four more. After attending four meetings they 
desired us to fill an appointment at one of their homes, 
which I did. The room was well filled; subject, "The 
Church, and Her Steps to Glory;" and they all expressed 
themselves as well pleased, and have asked for 
regular meetings. 

This is all a great surprise to us. We learned that 



there are some fifteen or twenty, nearly all women, who 
have come out of the churches and are holding meetings 
among themselves. No objections have been offered 
to any of our views, but many intelligent questions 
were asked; reading matter was acceptable, and 
we distributed a lot of tracts. 
Your brother in Christ, S.J.ARNOLD. 



page 6 1 