page 1 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI JANUARY 1 No. 1 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 3 

Outlook for the Truth 4 

Greetings to Pilgrims and Colporteurs 5 

"Give Thee for a Covenant" 6 

The Ministry of Reconciliation 6 

The Last of the Prophets 7 

Our Lord's Second Coming 8 

Jesus Baptized and Tempted 9 

"For This He Did Once" 10 

Drinking the Lord's Cup 12 

The Wedding Garment 12 

Growth in Grace and Knowledge 13 

Questions on the Covenants 13 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 15 

page 2 



THIS JOURNAL AND ITS SACRED MISSION 



THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments in the system 
of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension," now being presented in 
all parts of the civilized world by the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & 
TRACT SOCIETY, chartered A.D. 1881, "For the Promotion of Christian 
Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students 
may meet in the study of the divine Word, but also as a channel of 
communication through which they may be reached with announcements of 
the Society's Conventions and of the coming of its traveling representatives 
styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's 
published "Studies," most entertainingly arranged, and very helpful 
to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, 
viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which translated into English 
is, Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S.S. 
Lessons is specially for the older Bible Students and Teachers. By 
some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defence of the only true foundation 
of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 
through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 
aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (I Pet. 1:19; 
I Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 
and precious stones (I Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 
of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 
of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 



that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 
God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men 
as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of his Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-I Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; Jno. 1:9; I Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
hisjoint-heir.-I John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the 
next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, 
at the hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the 
wilfully wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST. 



BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS AND SPECIAL SERVICES 
ADDRESSED BY THE EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL 



WINNIPEG, MAN., THURSDAY, JAN. 6 

All meetings in Manitoba Hall, 293 Portage avenue. 
Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony meeting at 10:30 
o'clock. Address to the interested at 3 o'clock. Public 
meeting at 8 p.m. Subject, "Man's Past, Present and 
Future in the Light of the Bible." Visiting friends heartily 
welcomed. 



HAMILTON, ONE, SATURDAY, JAN. 8 

Public meeting at 8 p.m., in Y.M.C.A. Hall, James 
and Jackson streets. Subject, "Man's Past, Present and 
Future in the Light of the Bible." 



MID-WINTER NORTHERN CONVENTION, 
TORONTO, ONT., JAN. 8-10 

Come, all who can, with hearts prepared for a blessing. 
We are not able to advise at this issue where the general 
sessions will be held, but the public meeting on Sunday 
afternoon at 3 o'clock will be in the Royal Alexandra Theatre. 
Reduced rates on the certificate plan are expected, so 
that it will be desirable to ask for certificate when purchasing 
the one-way ticket at full fare. This, when properly 
validated, will entitle the holder to return trip ticket 
at a very low rate. 

Local particulars may be had from Mr. F. W. Man ton, 
100 McPherson avenue, Toronto, Ont. 

FOUR SPECIAL SERVICES SUNDAYS-JAN. 16, 23, 30 
AND FEB. 6-BROOKLYN ACADEMY OF MUSIC 

(Lafayette Avenue and St. Felix Street.) 



CHURCH FEDERATION-COUNTING THE COST 

Jan. 16, 3.00 p.m.— Topic: "What Congregationalists, 
Methodists and Presbyterians Must Surrender." 

Jan. 23, 3.00 p.m.— Topic: "What Baptists, Disciples 
and Adventists Must Surrender." 

Jan. 30, 3.00 p.m.— Topic: "What Episcopalians, Catholics 
and Lutherans Must Surrender." 

Feb. 6, 3.00 p.m.— Topic: "The Church Militant's Surrender 
to the Church Triumphant." 

Because of its large seating capacity, these will be held 
in the Academy of Music instead of the Brooklyn Tabernacle. 
However, a testimony meeting will be held at 10.00 
a.m. each of these Sundays in the Tabernacle, and a plain 
luncheon will be served at noon, also in the evening at 6.00 
p.m., preceding a question meeting at 7.30 p.m. 

An opportunity for Baptism will be arranged for the 
evening of Jan. 23. 



NORFOLK, VA., FEB. 13 
WILMINGTON, N.C., FEB. 14 
CHARLESTON, S.C., FEB. 15 

SAVANNAH, GA., FEB. 16 
JACKSONVILLE, FLA., FEB. 17 
MID-WINTER SOUTHERN CONVENTION AT 
TAMPA, FLA., FEB. 18-21 
CUMBERLAND, MD., FEB. 27 



SMALL CROSS AND CROWN BUTTONS 



We have these again in stock at 2 for 5 cents, or 25 
cents per dozen. 

SPIRITISM BOOKLET IN SWEDISH 

At 10 cents each, or 60 cents per dozen, postpaid. 

QUESTIONS ON "TABERNACLE SHADOWS" 

We have these printed in cheap form and will supply 
them free to those who have "Tabernacle Shadows" and who 
will request them. 



R4539 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

THE YEAR 1910 opens auspiciously upon a world which 
may be said to be nervous and doubtful, if not fearful. 
Hope still holds the reins, however. MONEY 
IS THE KING IN THE PRESENT ORDER OF 
THINGS, EVERYWHERE! His palace is entrenched, a 
veritable fortress, practically impregnable. His interest from 
bonds— National, State, County, Municipal, Railroad— and real 
estate mortgages represents more each year than all the gold 
money in the world could pay. Hence the debtors must 
make good the deficiency with other bonds, etc. Thus 
Money owns, and, in the last analysis, Rules the World. 
Moreover, its debts are protected by most stringent laws and 
regulations, and with armies and navies, militia and police. 
Money could not be better off than it is to-day. 

Indirectly money has noted the fat things of the world 
and has appropriated them and operates them through 
gigantic trusts and combines. The smaller business enterprises, 
Money disdains to touch. It leaves these to the weary 
and heavy-laden, that they may have some share in the 
property and be able to pay the interest on the bonds. The 
smaller manufacturers of the world, between satisfying the 
demands of trades' unionism and paying the interest on their 
bonded debts, find it impossible to say that the New Year 
opens prosperously. Still they hope, and, as they read descriptions 
of their fellow-manufacturers in other lands, they 
rejoice that business is no worse than it is, and hope for 
"better times." 

A bountiful harvest has given foundation for a fair degree 
of prosperity amongst the people as a whole and, everything 
considered, America is a very favored land. 

For a long time the wealth of Europe has been largely 
derived from its trade with foreign countries. King Money 
in Great Britain has levied tribute on the entire heathen 
world. To protect this he has the largest navy on earth and 
watches jealously any neighbor who might be a competitor. 
King Money in Germany is growing rapidly rich and has 
great ambition. He can produce more manufactures than 



he can use and he desires to share the trade of the British 
King Money. To get this he is willing to spend hundreds 
of millions of dollars in building battleships. The English 
King Money fears that his supremacy of the seas would thus 
be endangered if the German King Money were on an equal 
sea-footing. His servants, the English Press, of course, are 
greatly interested and excited. The whole British Nation 
is aroused to excitement. 

A German war scare makes some fearful and some belligerent. 
The claim is, that a strong German navy would 
compete with the British, take away her trade and starve 
her people by blockading her ports. The argument advanced 
is that war should be declared against Germany speedily, 
while the British navy is so much the stronger of the two, 
and that, with her navy destroyed, Germany should never be 
allowed to rebuild one which would in any degree be a 
menace to that of Great Britain. Meantime the British and 
the Germans are impoverishing their treasuries with war 
preparations, and latterly Austria has become bent on being 
a sea power, and is also building Dreadnaughts. With the 
amount of zeal everywhere manifested to serve King Money 
it would not at all surprise us if there should be a cruel 
and dreadful war between the two great "Christian" nations, 
Great Britain and Germany, within two years. 

How far-reaching would be the influence of such a war 
is difficult to guess. India, which has for so long been under 
British control and yielded rich returns to King Money, is 
already in a ferment of revolution. Russia at such a time 
would be glad to free India from the domination of Great 
Britain and then would seek to grasp India as her own 
possession. 

Meantime China and Japan are making wonderful strides 
in civilization— especially in war preparations. Soldiers are 
being drilled; cannon are being manufactured— and in general 
these great heathen powers which have been dormant 
for so long are getting awake. Presumably they have their 
own King Money managing their affairs. In the event of a 
war between Britain and Germany, if Russia should interfere 
with India, Japan as a British ally, would attack Russia, 
with China as her assistant. It would be easy for imagination 
to picture other nations becoming embroiled in the 
strife. Thus a great European war may be comparatively 
near. Many prominent Englishmen have expressed themselves 
much more positively than this— that war cannot be 
long averted. 

Late advices from China and Japan indicate great business 
prosperity there. Some who have been examining the 
fundamental causes for the industrial awakening tell us that 
the basis of it lies in the fact that although gold is the 
nominal money standard of those lands, silver is the real 
standard— the money in which the business is conducted. 
Doing business with the cheaper money practically gives 
China and Japan a tariff wall of one hundred per cent, and 
increasingly closes the ports of those great nations to European 
and American goods manufactured on the gold basis. 
The demonetization of silver, which was intended by King 



Money to bring to him wealth from peoples afar, as well as 

at home, is gradually closing upon him the doors of heathendom, 

representing three-fourths of humanity. The Chinese 

and Japanese hope soon to be able to duplicate at lower prices 

the wares of Europe and America. And those who ignore 

the imminence of Messiah's Kingdom might well stand in 

dread of "a commercial invasion," as well as a political one, 

from Oriental lands within a quarter of a century. 

The peoples of Southern Europe are feeling the influences 
of civilization and education, and are arousing themselves 
from lethargy and beginning to feel the gnawings 
of discontent. Socialism is spreading through the armies 
of Europe, and the various States are instructing their discontented 
millions in the use of all the implements of warfare 
and death, even while their national lives are threatened. 

R4539 : page 4 

It looks as though five years more would see the 
poorer classes of Europe awake, and, mad with envy and 
discontent, ready to pull down upon their own heads the 
social structures of the world in the vain hope that thus they 
can get more of the coveted gold. 

In our own land it is really surprising to see how quickly 
and how thoroughly the millions of emigrants from Europe 
are absorbed and Americanized and civilized. Here everything 
is very quiet socially, but occasionally we have evidences 
that underneath the surface there is anger, malice, hatred, 
envy, strife— that the poor world as a whole is not Christianized. 
It is really only galvanized with a semblance of 
Christianity in outward conduct, and liable at any moment 

R4540 : page 4 

to manifest those characteristics which St. Paul describes 
as sensual and devilish. Certainly comparatively few have 
the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit— meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, love! 

At any time in any quarter of the world conditions might 
suddenly arise which would convulse the financial world, 
and through it the social world, or vice versa. We cannot 
say that this might not come soon, although we see no apparent 
cause of such a convulsion in this year, 1910. The 
power of the Labor Unions all recognize. The unionists well 
know that they could paralyze business and bring starvation 
or surrender within one month. 

THE "RELIGIOUS WORLD" 

Strictly speaking, the world is not religious, yet so closely 
allied are nominal Christianity of all denominations and 
worldly institutions of every kind that some name is needed 
to describe the Babylonish mixture. 

Thank God, there are still good people, and apparently 
some of them in every denomination; but most evidently they 
not only are not in the majority, but are a very small 



minority— quite unable to control the situation. The outward 
forms continue in all denominations, but they all seem to 
be honey-combed with unbelief. Higher Criticism, Evolution, 
Theosophy, Christian Science, Psychic Research, etc., have 
practically swallowed them up and there is left only the 
"form of godliness without its power," except in the small 
minority of consecrated saints already referred to. And those 
we are seeking for, and shall seek for by every power at 
our command, for they are all to be found and enlightened, 
blessed, ripened, gathered, before the end of the harvest time. 

Church Federation on a large scale comes on slowly, but 
the spirit of it is making great progress in various directions. 
Church Federation is getting into practical shape in 
many cities. Undoubtedly it already is a force, but we are 
still to expect a still more formal organization or Federation, 
and the vitalizing of the same through affiliation with the 
Episcopal system. Not until then will the "image of the 
beast" have power to speak, to command, to enforce its 
edicts. -Rev. 13:15-17. 

OUTLOOK FOR THE TRUTH 

In some respects the Truth has never had a brighter or 
more prosperous outlook than at the present time. It has 
never wielded as much influence as now for the enlightenment 
of the people. Never before have so many millions 
of intelligent, thinking people been brought in contact with 
a knowledge of the Divine Plan of the Ages and a knowledge 
of the effectiveness of the Ransom Price laid down on Calvary! 
Never before has the trumpet given a clearer sound! 
Never before have the soldiers of the cross had the armor 
more completely at their command or been better versed in 
how to use the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of 
God! Never before have those who understand the Truth 
seemed more awake to the responsibilities of the hour or 
more zealous to use them to the glory of Immanuel! What 
may we not expect, accordingly, in the year 1910 in the line 
of scattering the Volunteer matter and putting the "Bible 
Keys" into the hands of every Bible student; and THE WATCH 
TOWER into the hands of every one who manifests interest; 
and the sermons weekly into the hands of all our neighbors ! 

Dear Brethren, what solemn resolutions or vows do you 
intend to make to the Lord respecting your faith and zeal 
and self-denials in his service during the year beginning? 
Let us promise nothing rashly; but, after considering well 
our wonderful privileges and opportunities, let us promise 
and do with our might, what our hands find to do. 

"YOUR ADVERSARY THE DEVIL" 

What we have said respecting the glorious opportunities 
for service and a good outlook for the work should not be 
understood to signify no attacks from the Adversary. Quite 
to the contrary indeed. If from time to time in the past 
our great Enemy has assaulted the Truth and all who would 
seek to be faithful to it, what reason have we for supposing 



that he would be less on the alert or less aggressive in the 
present or succeeding years? On the contrary our expectation 
is that the battle for right, for Truth, will wax hotter 
and hotter. Those unwilling to trust the Lord and those who 
are confident of themselves might about as well surrender 
now as any other time. Be assured that only the faithful 
and the courageous overcomers will stand the testing of this 
evil day. But this will not discourage us, if we will trust 
in the gracious promises of our Lord that greater is he that 
is for us than all that are against us. 

The Apostle calls particular attention to "perils amongst 
false brethren" in our day and he particularly pointed us to 
the heady and high-minded and told us that "Of your own 
selves shall men arise speaking perverse things to draw 
away disciples after them." Such things are to be expected 
in 1910. Let us not be surprised, but on the alert to resist 
such besetments by increased humility. It surely is a fact 
that those who once enjoyed the light of present Truth and 
who have left it seem thereafter more deficient of decency, 
reasonableness, honesty, manhood and womanhood than do 
worldly people, or those who have never seen the Truth. 
One might know how to calculate on what the worldly foe 
might do or say or insinuate, for they all have limits beyond 
which they would not think of going; but as for these false 
brethren, there is no calculating what they may do or say. 
Expecting such assaults we need not be disconcerted but 
"trust in the Lord and do good." 

WHAT MANNER OF SPIRIT ARE YE OF? 

Eighteen centuries ago when the Samaritans refused to 
sell bread for our Lord's company, the Apostle James and 
John in their loving zeal for the Master, said, "Lord, Wilt 
thou that we command fire from heaven" to destroy these 
men and their city? But Jesus rebuked them, saying, "Ye 
know not what manner of spirit ye are of. The Son of man 
came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them."— 
Luke 9:54-56. 

These words are to be the guide of all the Lord's followers 
to-day, as well as before. We are not to render evil 
for evil, nor slander for slander, but, contrariwise, are to 
speak kindly, lovingly, generously, of those who, as foretold, 
will say all manner of evil against us falsely for Christ's 
sake— because we are his servants and representatives. And 
the more prominent our position, the more virulent will be 
their attacks. If we can remember that they are deluded 
and that the attacks are really from the Adversary, it will 
help us to feel kindly, sympathetically toward them, instead 
of maliciously and hatefully. 

We urge upon the dear readers of this Journal that during 
the year 1910, more than ever before, they shall seek to 
walk very close to the Lord— in meekness and humility, in 
patience and love to the brethren, and in love and zeal for 
the Lord and for the Truth. 

Although somewhat disappointed that we are not even 
able to report seven thousand names to the Vow— not more 



than one-third of THE WATCH TOWER list, nevertheless we 
have many reasons for believing that some of the dear friends 
who have not taken the Vow formally are striving to live 
up to its principles, and striving thereby to have a share of 
the blessings which it seems to be bringing to all who take 
it in sincerity, and in love of the Truth and the principles of 
righteousness. 

We urge all to beware of making the Vow a test of 
brotherhood in Christ. Leave every matter of personal liberty 
with the individual, recognizing all who fully turn from 
sin to righteousness and avow full faith in the Redeemer as 

R4540 : page 5 

the Savior and a full consecration to him as "members of his 
Body." What preference you should give in the election of 
Elders to one who has taken the Vow or to one who has not 
taken it is for yourselves to decide, according to your own 
judgment; just as the matter of the use of tobacco would not 
bar Christian brotherhood, but might be considered in the 
choice of an Elder of the Church. 

Should any in opposing the Vow show a bitter spirit, a 
fighting spirit, remember the Apostle's words, "Mark them 
which cause divisions. ..and avoid them." (Rom. 16:17.) 
Nevertheless treat them not as enemies and think not of 
them as such, and hope for their return to a better spirit. Let 
us each remember, however, that his own chief ground for 
scrutiny and criticism is his own heart and his own life. 
Let us each fight the good fight there and avoid in every possible 
manner contentions and strife with the brethren, except 
it should be unavoidable along the lines of some violation 
of righteousness or the spirit of a good conscience and then 
let it be with loving and peaceable desires and endeavors. 

THE NEW COMMANDMENT 

Many of you have already obtained this year's motto card, 
the low prices of which are mentioned elsewhere. The texts 
for the year are most beautiful. The first is the New Commandment 
of the Master given to those who will be his 
disciples— those who would consecrate their lives with his, 
even unto death. "Love one another as I have loved you"— 
unto self-sacrifice. (John 15:12.) The second text might 
be termed an apostolic commentary on this New Commandment. 
St. John wrote to fellow-Christians, "We ought (also) 
to lay down our lives for the brethren" (I John 3:16)— following 
the example of our illustrious Redeemer and glorified 
Head. If you have several of these motto cards, have one 
in each room so that you will think continually upon brotherly 
love, assured that it is the final test of character in God's 
sight. Not only keep the motto card in sight, but keep the 

R4541 : page 5 

sentiments continually in mind. Thus striving together in the 
unity of the Spirit and the bonds of peace and seeking to 



walk closely under the shadow of the Almighty, the year 1910 
will assuredly be to us all a happy year. It will be full of 
happiness, however many trials and difficulties it may contain. 
The Lord knows how to make all things work together 
for our good! 



R4541 : page 5 

1910-GREETTNGS TO PILGRIMS 
AND COLPORTEURS-1910 

BELOVED IN THE LORD: --The opportunity for a 

Christmas and New Year's Letter is again at 

hand. My heart goes out with peculiar warmth 

and interest to the six hundred co-laborers whom 

I now address. I feel that you individually and 

collectively are very close in my heart's affections. It is right 

that we should consider, appreciate and admire the Christian 

likeness of the Lord in each other— and I see so much of 

this in you, dear friends. Your loyalty and faithfulness to the 

Truth, coupled with your zeal for its service, are continually 

an inspiration. I doubt not they also inspire many of the 

Lord's dear sheep who long for some such service as that 

in which you are engaged, but are denied the privilege, because 

of other duties and responsibilities. 

As I look over the various departments of the harvest 
work I perceive that every feature of it is being used of the 
Lord for the blessing of his people and the enlightenment of 
the world. The Conventions and other public meetings are 
doing a grand work; the printed sermons are influencing many 
minds; THE WATCH TOWER and the newspapers and the Volunteering 
are accomplishing much. But the Colporteur work, 
in connection with the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, seems 
to be pre-eminently used of the Lord, in the full deliverance 
of those who have been more or less influenced by the Truth 
through other channels. I inform you of this for your 
special encouragement, well knowing of your many discouragements. 
Dear Colporteurs, you are awakening more than 
ever to an appreciation of your wonderful opportunities, and 
I rejoice accordingly! 

Some years ago the work was esteemed more as a business. 
Of late an increasing number appreciate the fact that 
they have a great ministry of the Truth to serve. No longer 
are they satisfied to sell the books— good as that work alone 
often is. More and more the privilege is appreciated of watering 
the seed sown— of calling back upon those who gave evidence 
of Christian character and spirit— to see if they were 
reading and to help them wisely over any difficulties, and later 
to assemble them with others for Chart Talks, which later 
on develop into Dawn-Bible-Studies. The kind word, the 
happy face, the gentle presentation of Christian work in the 
encouragement of the study of the Scriptures, etc., find the 
hearts of those who are really hungering and thirsting after 
righteousness. It finds some hearts that never before tasted 



of the grace of God. 

The Spirit of the Lord in the Colporteurs magnetically attracts 
the "wheat" class, and family relationship and oneness 
in Christ is recognized. The tired, the troubled, the soul-hungry, 
find in these "angels" which are flying through the 
midst of heaven (Mark 13:27), the sympathy, consolation, 
Christian love, etc., which their hearts have longed for and 
nowhere else found. The solace which they have sought in 
vain in the sects they had reason to expect in the Lord's 
followers, but rarely found. Is it any wonder that such 
would be ready to hear the message of Truth, and ready to 
confess that they had long been burdened and perplexed with 
the error? 

At the opening of another year we bid you God-speed 
for the New Year, dear fellow-Pilgrims and Colporteurs. 
May the Lord's blessing continue with you richly, rewarding 
you, not only in the life to come, but also with large measures 
of blessing in the present time, and, if for your good, 
granting you to see some fruitage to your labors. One dear 
Colporteur reports that during the year, by the Lord's grace, 
she has been guided with the message to seven who have 
received it gladly. It is not merely the planting of the seed, 
but the watering of it and the holding of it that brings it to 
fruitage. 

We take this opportunity of calling your attention to the 
great work that is being done through the newspapers and 
Volunteer work. You may not have great opportunities of 
assisting in either of these departments of service directly, 
but you can at least exercise a good influence in favor of 
them with others. There are many cities and towns which 
have never been volunteered. We offer the printed matter 
free every year, but the dear friends residing in or near these 
places have not yet realized what a blessing they are missing 
when they neglect this service. Cannot you give them suggestions 
and examples along these lines and thus add to the 
service of the Truth and to their joy and spiritual blessing 
through participation? 

In the matter of the newspapers publishing the sermons: 
Where a paper in the County publishes, mention the fact in 
your canvass. It will help you effect a sale of the books and 
you may secure an order for the paper in combination. Make 
such price as you think proper: You have the published prices 
in the Peoples Pulpit and this will permit you to give a 
clubbing discount, as between the newspaper, THE WATCH 
TOWER and the DAWN-STUDIES. Make such combinations as 
you please. The one important thing is that no price ever 
shall be quoted in the combination that would be less than 
the cost of the newspaper. 

Inform the friends you meet of the importance of sustaining 
the publishers of the sermons in view of the fact that the 
Adversary is ever on the alert through various channels to 
discourage them and to interrupt this form of spreading the 
Truth. Have in mind that the publishers of these newspapers 
have no interest in the Truth, but merely in the circulation 
of their paper and in the profit. Advise friends not to attempt 
to write theology to the editor, but to leave that to the 



sermons, and merely to express their own pleasure, interest, 
satisfaction in the reading of them and that this constitutes 
their chief interest in the paper. 

R4541 : page 6 

We invite the Pilgrims, as well as the Colporteurs, to 
send to us the addresses of such persons as desire the sermons 
but cannot afford the cost. 

We desire to send a little Christmas token to each regular 
Pilgrim in the service and to each regular Colporteur. 
By "regular" we mean such as devotes entire time to the 
work, or at least one-half of his time. 

Please accept one of the new gold Cross and Crown pins 
and advise us at your convenience where we shall send it. 
Reckon on its leaving here January 1 1, which will give us 
time to get through with our Christmas rush. 

We will enclose one of the little booklets, "The Sweet Brier 
Rose," and trust that the sentiments of the poem are those of 
your heart. We send also one of the "Heart Bookmarks" 
and trust that the sentiments thereon expressed will find echo 
in your souls throughout the coming year. "Keep thy heart 
with all diligence" for the Lord and in his service and love, 
which means in the love and service of all who are truly his. 
Thus doing, undoubtedly the year 1910 will be to us a very 
happy and profitable one. As you look at the grape clusters 
on the bookmark, let them remind you of the Master's words, 
"Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit"— 
fruits of the spirit of love. 

Still remember throughout the coming year, as in the past, 
that my Christian love for you is very deep and very warm, 
and that in all your afflictions I am afflicted, and that if at 
any time you are in trouble, I would have you call on me, 
after you have first called upon the Lord. 

Wishing you a very joyous Christmas and a very happy 
New Year, 1910, 1 remain, as ever, 

Your brother and servant in Christ, C. T. RUSSELL. 

The above was prepared as a letter, but later concluded 
that as we are rushed in the office work it would save labor 
and reach you equally well through THE WATCH TOWER. We 
conclude, indeed, that others might be interested also. 

Possibly amongst their New Year's resolutions the dear 
Colporteurs will include the following: (1) To send us 
promptly the lists of addresses of those who purchased 
STUDIES. (2) That on each Report Sheet they will give their 
own name and address. (3) That they will begin on the first 
page of Report blank. (4) That they will give at the head of 
each list name of the town and county. (5) That they will 
write very plainly. We use these lists for sending samples of 
our literature and have been obliged to destroy many because 
imperfect along some of the above lines. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR FEBRUARY 



After the singing of the hymn the Bethel Family 
listens to the reading of "My Vow unto the Lord," 
then joins in prayer. At the breakfast table we consider 
the MANNA text: (1) 130; (2) 219; (3) 293; (4) 
259; (5) 109; (6) 291; (7) 41; (8) 325; (9) 50; (10) 
214; (11) 52; (12) 72; (13) 32; (14) 296; (15) 294; 
(16) 4; (17) 264; (18) 144; (19) 313; (20) 316; (21) 
210; (22) 162; (23) 272; (24) 18; (25) 226; (26) 60; 
(27) 110; (28) 178. 



R4542 : page 6 

"GIVE THEE FOR A COVENANT" 

THUS saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his 
Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him 
whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant of rulers: 
Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, 
because of the Lord that is faithful, and the Holy One of 
Israel, and he shall choose thee. Thus saith the Lord, In an 
acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation 
have I helped thee, and I will preserve thee and give thee for 
a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to 
inherit the desolate heritages that thou mayest say to the 
prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in darkness, Shew yourselves. 
They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall 
be in all high places."— Isa. 49:7-9. 

Full often have we made application of this Scripture 
to our Lord, the Head, and the Church, his Body. We now 
call attention particularly to the feature which declares, "I will 
preserve thee and give thee for a Covenant unto the people, 
to establish the earth," etc. Notice the fact that the people 
and their earthly inheritance are here differentiated from the 
great Mediator of the Covenant, through whom the people 
are to be blessed. Our Lord has not yet received the heathen 
for an inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for 
a possession. He has not yet regathered and blessed natural 
Israel and made them the special channels of his blessings 
to mankind. For more than eighteen centuries he has been 
waiting at the right hand of majesty for his foe to be turned 
over to him— for the time to come when he shall take to himself 
his great power and reign. The beginning of that reign 
will be the binding of Satan. Then the blessing and uplifting 
of the groaning creation will follow. Gradually the world 
will be prepared to resume covenant relations with God at 
the close of the Millennium. 

Why the delay? Why did he not begin the work at 
once, immediately after he ascended up on high? The Scripture 
answer is that, in harmony with the Divine Plan, he has 
been waiting for the "members" of his Body to join with 
him in sacrifice in the sufferings of this present time, that 
they may share with him as his "members" in the glorious 
work to which he has been appointed as the spiritual Seed of 



Abraham. (Gal. 3:29.) From this standpoint all the work 
of God's people during this Gospel Age is so much of the 
ministry of the world's New Covenant— serving that New 
Covenant by getting themselves and each other ready for 
the future work of glory at the expense of self-denials as 
respects earthly things and the present life. 

Note St. Paul's application of our text to the Church. 
He quotes the passage as applicable to the Body of Christ, 
saying, "We, then, workers together, beseech also that ye 
receive not the grace of God in vain. For he saith, I have 
heard thee in a time accepted [the antitypical Atonement 
Day], and in the day of salvation have I succored thee: behold, 
now is the accepted time [when we, like our Lord, may 
sacrifice earthly rights and restitution privileges and thereby 
attain the spiritual blessing of our 'high calling of God in 
Christ Jesus']; behold, now is the day of salvation"— the great 
salvation to the Divine nature.— 2 Cor. 6:1,2. 

Reading again the prophecy from which this quotation is 
made— our text— we perceive that there is no room to question 
that the entire Christ Head and Body was given as a Covenant 
for the people, the world, to institute general times of restitution 
of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of 
all the holy prophets since the world began.— Acts 3:19-21. 

We see, in this connection, also the appropriateness of 
our Lord's speaking of his "Cup" of suffering and death which 
he invited his faithful to share with him as being not only 
his own blood shed for us, but also "the blood of the New 
Covenant shed for many," in which we are privileged to participate. 
Those who see and who appreciate the privilege 
rejoice to be accounted worthy to have fellowship or participation 
with Christ in his sufferings and sacrifices, that they 
may have share with him also in his glories and work. The 
blood of the New Covenant signifies the "better sacrifices" 
by which God has been pleased to arrange to bring the whole 
world anew into Covenant relations with himself. 

THE MINISTRY OF RECONCILIATION 

"If any man be in Christ, he is a New Creature: old 
things are passed away; behold, all things are become new. 
[Such are already back into harmony or covenant relationship 
with God.] And all [these] things are of God, who hath 
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ [brought us back to 
covenant relationship], and hath given to us the ministry 
of reconciliation: to wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling 
the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto 
them; and hath committed unto us the word of reconciliation. 
Now, then, we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God 
did beseech men by us; we pray men in Christ's stead, Be ye 
reconciled to God. For he [God] hath made him [Jesus] 
to be sin [offering] for us [him], who knew no sin; that we 
might become God's righteousness in him."— 2 Cor. 5:17-21. 

The careful student will note in the words quoted four 

R4542 : page 7 



parts distinctly separate: God, our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Church, and the world. God and the world are in opposition. 
Divine sentence of condemnation passed upon all the human 
family, determining that they were out of covenant relations 
with God— imperfect, unable to keep the Divine requirements, 
and therefore under death condemnation. In due time God 
sent forth his Son, with the avowed object of reconciling the 
world. Jesus did not even attempt to do so. He confined his 
efforts entirely to the Jewish nation and amongst them to 
the seeking for the "lost sheep," as many as the Father would 
draw to him. 

Having finished his ransom-sacrifice, he ascended on high 
and applied it, not for the world, but for those who should 
believe on him and become his followers by consecration. 
The Apostle was one of these, as he explained to others, and 
incidentally to us of the same class to-day. The results of 
our Lord's appropriation of his merit on our behalf, was our 
consequent harmony with God and share in the reconciliation, 
not done by our Lord, but in a measure committed to us, 
his "members." He says, as above quoted, "God hath reconciled 
us to himself through Jesus and hath given to us the 
ministry [service] of reconciliation"; not the service of our 
own reconciliation, which is already passed, but the service of 
making known to the world the great fact that through the 
merit of Christ's death, whosoever wills may return to harmony 
with God, be reconciled to him. Our message is that 
this reconciliation is eventually to reach the whole world, but 
that, at the present time, it is intended only for "him that hath 
an ear to hear." 

As ambassadors for God, as "members" of The Christ, 
it is our ministry or service in the world to carry the message 
to all who can hear it— to persuade men, to encourage them 
by word and example, to be reconciled to God— to accept his 
terms and conditions and to submit themselves fully to his 
will. This ministry or service in the present time affects 
merely the gathering of "the household of faith," including 
the "elect," but this is not the end of the service. Those 
faithful in the present work of the ministry of reconciliation 
will be counted worthy by the Lord of a share in the glorious 
work of the future. The reconciliation of that time will 
differ from the message of the present time. Now we persuade, 
we urge, we entreat, we lay down our lives for the 
brethren. We seek by word and example to encourage, to 
entice them to the Lord— to have fellowship in his sufferings 
and in our ministry. 

The ministry of the future will be entirely different- 
it will be glorious. Instead of suffering and sacrificing and 
being rejected of men, the future reconciliation work will be 
accomplished on a plane of glory. Our Lord and Head, 
glorified, will be the King of kings and Lord of lords. We, 
his humble followers, will be "changed" by the power of the 
First Resurrection and, as "members" of his "glorious Body," 
we will sit upon his throne. We will exercise under him the 
office of Prophet, Priest, King, Mediator between God and 
men, the world. No longer will men be entreated, but, on the 
contrary, the Law shall go forth from Mt. Zion and the Word 



of the Lord from Jerusalem. (Isaiah 2:3.) And "the soul that 
will not obey that Prophet shall be destroyed from among his 
people," after full, fair warning and helpful advice.— Acts 3:23. 

This ministry of reconciliation committed to the Church, 
now and hereafter, is sometimes referred to as the ministry 
of the New Covenant— the service of bringing Israel in covenant 
relationship with God anew. These royal priests serve 
the New Covenant by way of making ready, under the guidance 
of their Head, the sacrificing of their restitution rights 
as underpriests. The duties and privileges of this "royal 
priesthood" are now a sacrificing service; by and by a reigning, 
restoring and teaching service. "As he was, so are we in this 
world."-I John 4:17. 

Verse 21 above quoted tells how our Lord became the sin-offering 
for us, the household of faith, and that this is in order 
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. In 
other words, we his "members" may be the channels through 
whom his merit would be applied for the propitiation of the 
world's sins, under the terms of the New Testament, or 
bequest, in his blood. This is in harmony with the Apostle's 
statement that God's mercy through Christ will be extended 
to Israel through the Church. As it is written, "They shall 
obtain mercy through your mercy." It is God's mercy through 
Christ which will pass through the Church to natural Israel 
to whomsoever wills of all the families of the earth. Thank 
God for the privilege of this ministry of reconciliation committed 
unto us!— Rom. 11:27. 



R4543 : page 7 

THE LAST OF THE PROPHETS 

-JANUARY 2.-MATTHEW 3:1-12.- 

Golden Text:— "The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare 
ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight."— V. 3. 

JOHN the Baptist was the last of the prophets and, 

as Jesus declares, "one of the greatest." To him 

was committed the honorable service of directly announcing 

the Savior, who said of him, "Verily I say 

unto you, Among them that are born of women there hath not 

risen a greater than John the Baptist; notwithstanding, he that 

is least in the Kingdom of heaven is greater than he." (Matt. 11:11.) 

The last representative of the "house of servants," he 

discharged the duties of his office with dignity, declaring Jesus 

to be the long-promised Messiah-King, who was about to 

select a Bride class, to be his joint-heirs in his Kingdom. 

The Prophet recognized that he himself was not eligible to 

this class, yet rejoiced in his privilege of announcing the 

Bridegroom, saying, "He that hath the Bride is the Bridegroom; 

but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and 

heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's 

voice; this my joy therefore is fulfilled."— John 3:29. 



The Scriptures maintain a clear distinction between people 
of God prior to Pentecost, called friends and servants of 
God, and the people of God since Pentecost, called the sons 
of God. The latter are sons because begotten of the holy 
Spirit to a new nature— a spirit nature— to be fully attained 
by a share in the First Resurrection. This important point 
is distinctly marked by St. Paul. After recounting the faithfulness 
of God's people of the past, who had this testimony, 
"That they pleased God," he declares "All these died in faith, 
not having received the promise (fulfillment), God having 
reserved some better thing for us, that they without us should 
not be made perfect."— Hebrew 11:39,40. 

The "better thing for us" is the spiritual part of the 
great Abrahamic promise. We are invited to become members 
of the spiritual Seed of Abraham— the Christ, the Messiah, 
Prophet, Priest, Mediator, King, of which our Redeemer, 
our Lord, is Head. The work of this spiritual Seed as King 
and Mediator of the New Covenant between God and the 
world will progress throughout the Millennial Age. Divine 
favor was cut off from the natural seed of Abraham during 
the past eighteen centuries and bestowed upon the spiritual 
Seed selected from both Jews and Gentiles. 

But as soon as the spiritual Seed, "the Elect," shall be 
completed, the blessing of the Lord shall proceed from and 
through the spiritual Seed to the natural seed, eventually fulfilling 
God's promises of an earthly kind so long deferred 
to Israel. Notice how distinctly St. Paul outlines all this in 
Romans 11:25-32. 

Thus seen, John's mission was to arouse the people of 
Israel to the fact that Messiah had come, that the time of 
the inauguration of the long-promised Kingdom of God was 
at hand, and that if they, as a people, desired to share in it, 
in harmony with their long-cherished hopes, they should at 
once begin preparation. Not as a whole would the favored 
nation be accepted, but as individuals. All, therefore, should 
make a searching of their hearts, and if they found evil 
therein, if they have been living in known violation of the 
Law, they should repent and turn from the sin, and they 
should symbolize their reformation in the presence of witnesses 
by a baptism which symbolically represented this putting 
away of sin. 

R4543 : page 8 

God chose a strong, rugged character to bear this message. 
Providentially John's experiences in the wilderness specially 
qualified him; and his peculiar raiment and food enabled him 
to be independent of all religious sects and parties amongst 
the Jews and gave him freedom of utterance, which he might 
not otherwise have had. At the same time these peculiarities 
made his message all the more striking to the minds of the 
people. 

As an illustration of his boldness, he challenged some of 
the prominent religionists of his time, who came to his preaching 
and baptism. He declared that they were the offspring 
of vipers and that their repentance would not be considered 



genuine without certain proofs, and that they might rid themselves 

of the delusion that they could inherit any share in 

the Kingdom merely because they were the natural children 

of Abraham, since God was able to fulfil his promise to 

Abraham along other lines. 

John's declaration that now the axe was laid at the roots 
of the trees and that all not bringing forth good fruit would 
be hewn down and cast into the fire, was merely a figurative 
way of saying that the testing time for the Jewish people 
had come, that it was an individual matter, and that only 
such as bore good fruit in their characters and lives would 
any longer be recognized of the Lord as Israelites and 
identified with the Kingdom. All the remainder, cut off from 
those privileges, would go into the fire of tribulation and 
destruction with which their national existence would cease. 

He was faithful in telling his hearers that his work and 
his baptism were merely preparatory; that the greater teachings 
and the higher baptism Messiah would institute. The 
honor and dignity of Messiah were so great that in comparison 
he was not worthy to be his most menial servant to 
carry his shoes. Messiah's baptism would be of two parts, 
the one upon the faithful, the other upon the unfaithful. 
"Israelites indeed" he would baptize with the holy Spirit and 
subsequently the unworthy, the non-fruitbearing, would experience 
a baptism of fire, of trouble, of national destruction. 

Again he illustrated the character of Messiah's work in 
their nation, comparing it to the winnowing of wheat from 
chaff. 

The entire mass, the entire nation, would be tossed about 
by the great winnower, in order that every grain of wheat 
might be found and separated from the chaff. The wheat 
was cared for, garnered, to a new state or condition at 
Pentecost and subsequently. The chaff of the nation was 
cast into a fire of trouble, insurrection and anarchy, which 
consumed them as people, as a nation, A.D. 70. That fire 
was unquenchable in the sense that it was the Divine intention 
that the nation should be consumed and it was not in 
the power of the ablest of statesmen and rulers to prevent 
this— to quench the fire. It burned itself out, as stated. 

St. Paul calls attention to this matter saying, "Wrath is 
upon this people unto the uttermost," that all things written 
in the Law and the prophets concerning them should have 
fulfillment. Space does not permit our rehearsing here what 
we have already presented at length in the SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 
Series II, Study VIII, respecting the fact that John the Baptizer, 
as forerunner of Jesus, Jesus' representative to the 
Jews, was but a partial fulfillment of the type of Elijah. As 
many of our readers have the SCRIPTURE STUDIES in their 
libraries, we commend to them this most interesting feature, 
which is closely related to to-day's study. An antitypical 
Elijah is there shown, composed of Jesus in the flesh and 
his followers in the flesh, who must do a preparatory work 
in the world, in introduction of the Messiah of glory, Jesus 
the Head, and the Church his Body. 



R4543 : page 8 

OUR LORD'S SECOND COMING 

NOTWITHSTANDING all that we have written on 
this subject, some appear not to fully comprehend 
it; as, for instance, is implied in a query just received: 
If the Church must "fill up that which 
is behind of the afflictions of Christ" (Col. 1:24); if every 
"member" must finish the work of presenting his "body a 
living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God" through Jesus 
(Rom. 12:1); if the blood of the New Covenant will only 
then be sprinkled on the antitypical mercy-seat "for the sins 
of all the people," before the great antitypical Priest comes 
forth to bless the world, would not this prove that the 
parousia of our Lord did not begin in October 1874; that 
we are not now living in the days of his parousia? Our 
answer is, No, it would not. 

To the very best of our ability we have endeavored to 
make clear that the parousia of our Lord is wholly different 
from his epiphania. Both of these Greek words are translated 
coming in our common Bible, but in the Greek they 
have very different significations. The word parousia signifies 
presence, but does not signify any outward manifestation 
of that presence. It is used in respect to the first stage 
of the Second Advent, in which our Lord is said to come 
"as a thief in the night" to reckon with his own servants 
and to take the faithful of them with him to the heavenly 
mansion or condition prepared for them. 

Our Lord's parousia and the gathering of the elect, we 
understand, has been in progress since October, 1874. It will 
continue until all of the "elect" shall have been gathered and 
glorified. In one sense our Lord will continue to be present 
as the world's King to the conclusion of the Millennial Age; 
but his parousia, in the sense of secrecy of presence, will terminate 
when, as the Scriptures declare, "He shall be revealed 
in flaming fire (judgments), taking vengeance on all who will 
not obey the Truth," but enlightening and revivifying all who 
will hear and, to the extent of their opportunity, obey his 
message. The parousia is to the Church and for the Church 
only. The epiphania or apokalupsis of the Lord in power and 
great glory is not to the Church nor for the Church, but 
to the world and for the world. "When he shall thus appear 
we also shall appear with him in glory," the Apostle declares. 
--Col. 3:4. 

R4544 : page 8 

Applying these things to the Atonement Work of this 
Gospel Age and the resulting restitution work of the Millennial 
Age, the matter is clear. Our Lord, as the great High 
Priest, ascended on high and applied his blood— the merit of 
his sacrifice— on behalf of the Church— the antitypical priests 
and Levites. Immediately, as shown in the type, after making 
atonement for our sins, the High Priest appeared at the 



door of the tabernacle— amongst his consecrated ones waiting 
at Pentecost in the upper room. His presence was manifested 
amongst them by the holy Spirit, and the sacrificing of the 
Church, made acceptable by Jesus' blood, began. The work 
has progressed ever since with those who are spiritually 
seated with Christ in the holies. Soon the last of the great 
Priest's "members" will have suffered in the flesh. 

Now, in the harvest time, he is present to gather the 
sleeping ones and to further test and perfect "us who are 
alive and remain." The High Priest is doing no work outside 
of the "holy" of the antitypical Tabernacle. His presence 
is unknown to the world. Soon Bridegroom and Bride will 
be ushered into the presence of the Father in eternal glory. 
The "marriage supper of the Lamb" will be celebrated, and 
then Bride and Bridegroom, Head and members complete in 
glory, will come forth to bless the world. That crowning 
day of joy to the Church will be followed by our Lord's 
apokalupsis and epiphania. To the world he shall be revealed 
in flaming fire of the time of trouble, but nevertheless with 
power and great glory, "and all his saints with him." The 
great Mediator of the New Covenant will not be seen with 
the natural eye, nor by any except as their eyes of understanding 
open and they begin to grasp the situation. The 
first to "look upon him whom they pierced" will be the natural 
Israelite. Brought into Covenant relationship with God 
through the "better Mediator than Moses," they will be 
trained, chastened, blessed and uplifted by him during the 
Millennium; so that by the end of the Millennium they shall 
be ready for the everlasting Covenant condition of perfection 
in harmony with God. 



R4544 : page 9 

JESUS BAPTIZED AND TEMPTED 

-MATTHEW 3:13-17; 4:1-1 1 .-JANUARY 9.- 

Golden Text:— "In that he himself hath suffered being tempted, 
he is able to succor them that are tempted."— Hebrews. 2:18. 

JOHN'S baptism, as we saw in a previous study, was 
intended merely as a sign of reformation. There is 
no intimation that either John or his disciples or 
others of the "Israelites indeed" made use of it. 
Nothing in the Jewish Law required it either. Our lesson 
notes the fact that John objected to our Lord's being baptized, 
because he was not a sinner. He was "holy, harmless, 
undefiled and separate from sinners." 

Our Lord's baptism, therefore, as intimated in his reply 
to John, was a new institution, which he did not explain at 
the time, but which, later on, he showed was a symbol of his 
consecration unto death, not as a sinner, but as a sin-offering. 
He thus consecrated as soon as he was thirty years of 
age, the legal age at which a priest could offer sacrifice. The 



language of his heart is told us by St. Paul, "Lo, I come, 
as in the volume of the Book it is written of me, to do thy 
will, O God." (Heb. 10:7.) There, declares the Apostle, he 
began to set aside the typical sacrifices of the Law Covenant 
by beginning the "better sacrifices"— the antitypes. 

In symbol our Lord declares that his perfect human will 
and all his earthly rights and powers were fully consecrated, 
even unto death, and that he was trusting the Father's promise 
that such an obedience would result in his resurrection 
from the dead to the spirit plane which he left, in order to 
become man's Redeemer. This symbolical consecration to 
death was responded to by the Father by the impartation of 
the holy Spirit as a beginning or start of the new spiritual 
nature which he would enter into fully by resurrection after 
the completion of his sacrifice. He was there begotten of 
the Spirit. Three and a half years later, in his resurrection, 
he was born of the spirit, "The first born from the dead." 
(Col. 1:18.) An additional attestation of Divine favor was 
the voice, saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am 
well pleased." 

From a child Jesus sought to be about the Father's business, 
and to know the teachings of the Scripture respecting 
his appointed work. His anointing by the holy Spirit quickened 
his understanding and made all that he had learned much 
more significant. At once he began to see lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths not possible of discernment 
previously, because, as the Apostle declares, "The natural man 
[even though perfect] discerneth not the things of the Spirit 
of God, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually 
discerned. ...But God hath revealed them unto us [Christ 
and all of his Spirit-begotten followers] by his Spirit, which 
searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God."— 
I Cor. 2:14,10. 

This illumination (Heb. 10:32) gave Jesus such new views 
respecting his work that he was thereby impelled to go 
aside into the wilderness to think and pray and study what 
his course should be as outlined by the Law and the prophets. 
He spent forty days thus, fasting, praying, studying. When 
weak as a result of these experiences the Tempter was permitted 
to assault him with suggestions of ways and means of 
carrying out his work, which were far different from those 
which he found in the Scriptures,— which his perfect mind 
grasped completely, having heard them read by course in the 
synagogue from childhood. 

OUR LORD'S THREE TEMPTATIONS 

The three temptations experienced by our Lord illustrated 
all the temptations of his followers as New Creatures. 
"He was tempted in all points like as we are, yet without 
sin." He was not tempted as a father, as a mother, as a 
drunkard, as a gambler— and neither are these the temptations 
experienced by his followers. Of the weaknesses of 
the flesh he had none, while his followers have many; but 
the merit of his sacrifice is efficacious for the forgiveness of 
all the blemishes of his followers to the extent that they are 



unwilling, unintentional faults. Their testing is not along 

those lines, even as his were not. Proper understanding of 

our Lord's three temptations reveals to us that they are the 

same by which we are tested as New Creatures, his spirit-begotten 

disciples. 

Temptation I. Hungry after his long fast, our Lord's 
flesh cried out for nourishment, and the Tempter, affecting a 
kindly interest in his welfare, suggested that, having received 
the holy Spirit, he now possessed the power of miracles 
and should use it to transform the stones into food. Our 
Lord subsequently used this power in feeding multitudes, 
but it would have been sinful for him to use it upon 
himself— to sustain the human life which he had already consecrated 
to death. He might use any ordinary means to supply 
his physical needs, but the holy Spirit was given him 
for another purpose— not for gratification of the flesh, even 
legitimately. Our Lord at once recognized the principle 
involved and promptly refused the suggestion, declaring, "It 
is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every 
word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." In a word, 
if he would deserve eternal life it must be as a result of 
absolute obedience to the Divine Law. To create and eat the 
bread for the nourishment of his life in opposition to the 
Divine Law would be disobedience; and that, so far from 
meaning life, would have meant death everlasting. 

Applying this temptation to our Lord's subsequent career 
and that of his followers, the lesson is this: Obedience to 
the Divine will is paramount every way, and holy privileges 
of the Church in spiritual matters must not be bartered for 
earthly advantage. The wrong course is symbolically prefigured 
in Esau's selling his birthright for a mess of pottage. 
(Heb. 12:16.) Every temptation to sacrifice spiritual 
privileges or violate spiritual responsibilities for the attainment 
of earthly advantages would be a yielding to this form 
of temptation. 

Temptation II. It is not necessary to suppose that our 
Lord went to Jerusalem and to the pinnacle of the Temple 
in person to experience his temptation. On the contrary he 
was all the while in the wilderness and went to the Holy 
City merely mentally, guided there by Satan's suggestion that 
he could bring himself and his glorious mission quickly to the 
attention of all the people by performing a stupendous miracle 
—by leaping from the pinnacle of the temple into the 
chasm below and then arising unhurt. He could then explain 
to the multitude his heavenly errand and awe them to faith. 
Seeing that our Lord had repulsed his first temptation by 
quoting Scripture, Satan now attempted to support the second 
temptation with a text of Scripture, which, on its face, 
might appear to be properly applied by him. The passage 
reads much as though it were specially intended as a suggestion 
to our Lord to perform the very feat suggested— "For 
he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all 
thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou 
dash thy foot against a stone."— Psa. 91:11,12. 

Our Lord promptly discerned the fallacy of the argument 
and the misapplication of the Scripture, which really 



belongs to the feet members of the Body of Christ, which is 

R4545 : page 9 

the Church, in this very time in which we are living, when 

stumbling-blocks to Christian faith are in the way, and when 

God is providing special light upon his Word and special assistance 

to the "feet" members of the Body of Christ— that 

they may surmount the difficulties and receive blessing instead 

of injury. 

It would have been sin for our Lord to follow the 
course indicated because, although not misusing the Divine 
power, he would have been tempting God to use Divine power 
for his deliverance, whereas this was unnecessary, as he 
had not been called upon to thus hazard his life, but rather 
was required to sacrifice it— laying it down in the service of 
the Truth and of humanity. Our Lord's answer was directly 
to the point and was another quotation from Holy Writ; 
"Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." In every case 
Satan seems to have realized that he was promptly and fully 
met by the quotations and his temptation shown to be contrary 
to the Divine instruction. 

Our Lord's followers are tempted along this line also- 
tempted to presume on the goodness of God and by words or 
acts to place themselves in such positions as would test or 

R4545 : page 10 

tempt God in respect to his providential care of them— 
along lines which he has never authorized in his Word. The 
wonder-working spirit is contrary to the spirit of humility 
anyway and, if gratified, would lead to spiritual pride and 
egotism. God wishes his people now to "walk by faith and 
not by sight." Moreover the "call" of this Gospel Age is 
along lines of faith in the promises, rather than faith respecting 
the wonder-working achievements of others or of ourselves. 
Meekness, humility, faith, all stand arrayed on the 
side of the question which our Lord took and which his followers 
should take. 

Temptation III. Again it is unnecessary for us to assume 
that there is any very high mountain in the wilderness in 
which Jesus was being tempted, for there is no such high 
mountain there. Nor is there a mountain in all the earth 
on whose pinnacles all the kingdoms of the world could 
be seen in a moment. In this case, also, our Lord was mentally 
transported to a high mountain, to a great, lofty kingdom 
overlooking and overtopping all earthly empires. For 
in Bible symbology a mountain represents a kingdom. In a 
brief moment Satan pictured himself to our Lord as the 
ruler of all earth's kingdoms— as having the ruling empire 
of earth, controlling all empires. This is in accord with the 
Scripture which declares that Satan is the Prince of this 
world (this age), and that he "now ruleth in the hearts of 
the children of disobedience"— thus ruling the vast majority. 

After thus picturing his own power over the world— the 
power of a usurping prince imposing upon the ignorance and 



superstition of mankind, Satan's argument paraphrases thus: 
I know well the object of your coming, and the promise that 
your kingdom shall bless all the world and uplift the willing 
and obedient out of sin and death conditions. I assure you 
that I wish you well in the enterprise. As the ruler amongst 
men, I deplore present conditions myself. I suggest, therefore, 
that you undertake the work of reform amongst men as my 
lieutenant and assistant. If you will thus recognize, honor, 
reverence (worship) me, I will co-operate with you and turn 
the world of mankind over to your care. You, then, will be 
their earthly king or ruler, while I, Satan, as a spirit-being, 
would still control after the manner of an over-lord. This 
is the best you could do. The matter is fully in my hands, 
as you will judge from your present view of human conditions. 
If you take any other course, it will bring you disappointment, 
scorn, defeat, shame. If you take the course 
I suggest it will bring you prosperity and honor. 

Our Lord's reply was, "Get thee hence, Satan; for it is 
written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only 
shalt thou serve." The temptation passed successfully, Satan 
withdrew and holy angels ministered to our Lord. 

A similar temptation is sure to come to every follower 
of the Lord, from the same Adversary, in one form or another. 
These are permitted by the Lord for the testing of our 
characters, even as in his own case. The temptation is, Will 
we connive with and recognize unjust and sinful institutions, 
because they have power and because to oppose them would 
imply their opposition and the braving of shame and scorn 
and death. Such temptations may come to the tempted 
through political or social or religious institutions, saying, 
serve us and we will assist you. But in every case behind the 
temptation is the Adversary. Those who have not learned 
to love righteousness and to hate iniquity— all who have not 
come to the point of a full submission of their will to the 
Divine will— are in danger of falling in such a temptation. 
But those whose hearts are loyal to the core, as was the 
Redeemer's, will repulse the Adversary and disdain his proffer 
of assistance on such terms or any terms. 

Our Lord had no Advocate to sympathize with him and 
to succor and encourage him in the hour of temptation: "Of 
the people there was none with him." With us, however, 
matters are different. Our Lord, as our great High Priest, 
by the merit of his own sacrifice for man's sin, has ascended 
on high and has appeared as the Advocate of all those who 
are now being "called of God" to faith in his blood, and to 
walk in his steps, and to be baptized into his death, and to 
share with him glory, honor and immortality in "His Resurrection. 
(Phil. 3:10.) This great Advocate, having been 
tempted in all these lines, is able to succor us. Yet he waits 
for us to realize our needs and to apply for succor at the 
throne of grace, as intimated by our text. 



R4545 : page 10 



"FOR THIS HE DID ONCE" 

"Such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled; 
...who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to 
offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then 
for the people's; for this he did once, when 
he offered up himself."— Heb. 7:26,27. 

HAD St. Paul written this epistle for the purpose of 

explaining the typical and antitypical Sin Atonement, 

he would have written differently. As heretofore 

shown, he was merely combating the prevalent 

thought amongst Jews of his day that the Law Covenant 

and its priestly arrangements were Divinely intended 

to be perpetual. Whoever so thought would be unable to 

discern the fact that God intended a new priesthood, symbolized 

by Melchizedek— one combining the kingly with the 

priestly office. Until the Jews could get this view of the 

matter, they could not properly understand: 

(1) That the Jewish nation and priesthood and sacrifices 
and legal code must pass away. 

(2) St. Paul would show them the Divine intention of a 
New Covenant with a new high priest and new underpriests 
and better sacrifices for its institution. 

(3) Only by so seeing could they comprehend the Gospel 
message: that Christ the New Creature is the High Priest of 
a new order and that we, "his members," are the underpriests 
of that new order, as spirit-begotten New Creatures. 

Only from this standpoint could they comprehend how the 
spirit-begotten Jesus, as the Priest, could put to death Jesus 
in the flesh and make of him a sin-sacrifice. Only from this 
standpoint could they understand how the members of Christ, 
under the headship of the glorified High Priest, could follow in 
his footsteps of sacrifice and, begotten of the holy Spirit as 
New Creatures, present their bodies as living sacrifices, holy 
and acceptable to God through the merit of the High Priest 
already entered into the Most Holy as their Advocate and the 
Mediator of the New Covenant for the world. Only from this 
standpoint could they understand how we are called of God 
to suffer with Christ, that by and by we, his members, may 
share his glory— as his Bride. 

Our text declares that Christ our High Priest "needeth 
not daily [continually] as those typical high priests, to offer 
up sacrifices— first, for his own sins, and then for the people's 
—"for this he did once, when he offered up himself." Turning 
to the record in Leviticus XVI, we find that the typical 
Priest made two offerings; the first "for himself and his 
house," and the second for all the remainder of "the people" 
of Israel. The first sacrifice was a bullock. The second was 
a goat. These St. Paul elsewhere refers to as the typical 
"better sacrifices." (Heb. 9:23.) Let us meet the question 
squarely. What is signified by these two sacrifices— the bullock 
and the goat. Our opponents, and indeed everybody else, 
say that the death of our Lord Jesus is the antitype of both— 
the slain bullock represents him and the slain goat represents 
him. They tell us that both sacrifices took place at the same 



time, being finished at Calvary. 

We request them to explain why two animals should be 
killed to represent the one death of Jesus, but they cannot 
answer. They merely repeat that they believe the two sacrifices 
were one and simultaneous— that they merely represented 
two aspects of the same sacrifice. We ask if that be so, why 
did the Apostle state the matter so differently— "First for his 
own sins and then for the sins of the people." Why was this 
same order distinctly marked in the Day of Atonement type? 
(Leviticus 16.) They have no answer. We ask them further 
how they understand the statement that the High Priest offered 

R4546 : page 1 1 

sacrifice first for his own sins? Did our Lord Jesus 

have sins of his own which needed a sacrifice? Was he not 

holy, harmless and undefiled? Again they have no answer. 

The answer to this question presented twenty-nine years 
ago, when the pamphlet, "Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices, 
was first published, is the only answer consistent with 
the facts and the testimonies of Scripture. Those who now 
are opposing these teachings once believed the presentations 
of "Tabernacle Shadows" or claimed that they did. Now their 
blindness is so sudden and so complete that they hesitate to 
admit that they ever believed our presentations. To beginners 
they endeavor to make it appear that THE WATCH 
TOWER has suddenly changed its teaching on this subject. 

We recommend to all WATCH TOWER readers a careful, 
prayerful review of the teachings of "Tabernacle Shadows"— 
a re-examination of the first principles of the "mystery of 
God." Meantime we briefly rehearse certain features of the 
teachings applicable to the text under consideration. 

In the preceding verse (26) the Apostle declares our 
High Priest "holy, harmless and undefiled, separate from sinners." 
We should not, therefore, understand his statement in 
the 27th verse, that Jesus offered up sacrifice "first for his 
own sins" to mean the contrary of what he had just stated— 
that our Lord had no sins. We should understand him here, 
in harmony with his statement elsewhere, to refer to the 
Church as the Body of Christ. The "Head" was perfect, but 
the "Body" was imperfect. The Head needed no covering 
during the day of sacrifice, but the Body needed the white 
linen garments symbolical of justification. It is the Church, 
therefore, that is referred to as "himself," his "members," 
for whom he offered the first sacrifice— his personal sacrifice 
finished at Calvary. 

The Leviticus account shows that this first offering was 
not for himself only, but also "for his house"— in the type 
the house or tribe of Levi; in the antitype the "household of 
faith"— the "great company." We cannot think of any objection 
that any reasonable mind could offer to this explanation, 
which is the only one that in any sense of the word fits the 
facts. At one time we supposed that only these two classes 
were intended to be saved. And as a matter of fact, none 
others are yet saved in any sense of the word. Unbelievers 
have not escaped the "condemnation that is upon the world." 



The unregenerate have not received the mark of Divine acceptance 
of the holy Spirit. "The whole world lieth in the 
Wicked One"— unto this day.— I John 5:19. 

The type shows us that the great Priest not only sacrificed, 
but additionally that he made appropriation of the merit 
of that sacrifice in the "Most Holy" before he offered the 
second sacrifice— "the Lord's goat." How was this fulfilled? 
We reply that forty days after our Lord completed his sacrifice 
at Calvary and arose from the dead, he ascended on 
high, appeared in the presence of God for us (his members 
or Body and his house). He applied the merit of his sacrifice 
on our behalf, and secured for all consecrated believers 
of this Gospel Age full reconciliation with the Father and full 
privilege to become dead with him to earthly interests and 
restitution favors, and alive with him to the glories, honors 
and immortality of the Spirit nature. 

The manifestation of the Father's acceptance of the arrangement 
was given at Pentecost. The disciples and others, 
"about five hundred brethren," had already exercised justifying 
faith and had already consecrated to be dead with him, but 
this arrangement could not go into effect until it had the 
Father's approval. And God could not approve nor consider 
our sacrifice "holy and acceptable" (Rom. 12:1) until our 
great Redeemer, the Chief Priest of our order, had appeared 
for us and applied on our behalf the merits of his sacrifice- 
justifying us to restitution rights. As soon as these were 
properly credited to us, our sacrifice of them could be accepted, 
and no sooner. Hence the Pentecostal blessing 
signifies: 

First, that our Lord's sacrifice was every way acceptable 
to the Father. 

Second, that it had been applied to the household of 
faith, including his proposed Body. 

Third, the Church there waiting at Pentecost was representative 
of the entire Church and household of faith of this 
entire Age. 

Fourth, the impartation of the holy Spirit signified God's 
acceptance of the Church's sacrifice already tendered— signified 
the killing of the Lord's goat, as represented in the type. 
Thus the two sacrifices of the great antitypical High Priest 
have already been performed, though the second one has not 
yet been completed. The first one Jesus made at Jordan, 
when "he offered up himself." There the Father's acceptance 
of his sacrifice was indicated by the descent of the holy Spirit 
upon him in the water. That sacrifice he finished at Calvary, 
as we have seen. His second sacrifice— "the Lord's goat"— 
was offered at Pentecost and acknowledged by the holy Spirit. 
This work of sacrifice in the various members has progressed 
for over eighteen centuries. Soon, we believe, all 
the sufferings of the Body of Christ will be accomplished. 
Already the members have begun to go beyond the veil and 
to be joined to the Head. Soon the last member will have 
completed his share in these sufferings of Messiah and shall 
have passed beyond the veil. Then a little while longer and 
the special tribulations of the close of this Age upon the 
"great company" class will serve for the destruction of their 



flesh, that they may attain spirit conditions on a lower plane 
than the Body of Christ.-I Cor. 5:5. 

Thus will be accomplished first, the glorification of the 
Head; secondly, the union of the members to the Head will 
complete the glorious High Priest, who, as Prophet, Priest 
and King, will be the great Messiah, the great Mediator of 
the New Covenant, which through natural Israel will bless 
all the families of the earth. The scapegoat class will constitute 
the servants of the glorified Priest. 

Do our opponents inquire why our text says, This he did 
once, after specifying two offerings, "first for his own sins, 
and then for the people's"? 

We reply: that when the Apostle wrote these words the 
High Priest had already made both sacrifices, and had sat 
down on the right hand of the Majesty on High, awaiting the 
time when the last member of his Body shall have suffered 
with him faithfully unto death— awaiting the end of this Age— 
for the inauguration of the great Mediatorial Kingdom which 
is to bless Israel and the world. "Once" is here used in the 
sense of already. This he did already. 

Do our opponents inquire what is meant by "daily" in 
the statement, "Who needeth not daily to offer up sacrifice"? 
We reply: that the word daily here is used as we frequently 
use the term, in the sense of continually. We have already 
called attention to a similar illustration, where Daniel's prophecy 
speaks of antichrist taking away the daily sacrifice. We 
have shown that this signifies that antichrist set aside the 
merit of the continual sacrifice of Jesus. (See Vol. III. 
STUDIES, page 25.) 

As a matter of fact, the sin-offerings here described were 
not performed every day, but merely on a certain day every 
year— "year by year continually," or time after time on the 
appointed day of the year. In this text the thought would be 
that our High Priest needs not to be continually repeating his 
"better sacrifices," as did the earthly priests year by year 
repeat the types. The once doing of this sacrificial work in 
the beginning of this antitypical "Atonement Day" is sufficient 
for all time. And as the High Priest, when the first sacrifice 
was finished, applied its merit for justification to his Body 
and to his house, so at the end of the second sacrifice— the 
sacrifice of the Lord's goat, which typified his "members," he 
will present the blood of that sacrifice to God on behalf of 
the world. But he will not apply it directly on behalf of the 
world, because the world is in no condition to be reconciled to 
God; hence we are shown that with the blood of these two 
sacrifices the High Priest will seal or negotiate the New 
Covenant with Israel, that under its terms all the families 
of the earth will have the privilege of its blessings— the 
mediatorial blessing. 

In the type the blood of the goat was sprinkled upon 
the Mercy Seat or propitiatory, just the same as the blood of 
the bullock, but for a different purpose. As the first was for 
the Body, the "members," and the household, the second was 
not for those, but for all the people of Israel other than those 

R4546 :page 12 



represented in the tribe of Levi. The antitype of this is 
clear and shows us that the great High Priest will apply the 
blood of the antitypical goat on behalf of all the world of 
mankind, who by restitution and instruction will be brought 
into relationship with God as his Israel— under the terms of 
the New Covenant. 

Both sacrifices were made by the priest, not by the bullock, 
not by the goat; and when our Lord shall present the 
blood of his secondary sacrifice— the blood of his Church, 
"holy and acceptable to God" (Rom. 12:1)— he will be presenting 
"his own blood"— not yours, not mine. Our individuality 
was all surrendered to our Lord at the beginning, 
so that his faithful followers, even in their earthly lives, are 
reckoned as his "members" and their flesh as his flesh. 
Moreover, since all the merit which justified us and made 
our sacrifice acceptable was appropriated to us by our Redeemer 
—loaned to us for the purpose of sacrificing it— is it 
not eminently proper that the results should be spoken of as 
his blood? It surely is! 

Take another view of the matter. Our Lord at his consecration 
surrendered up all his right to earthly things as a 
man, as an act of obedience to the Father's will. He did not 

R4547 : page 12 

appropriate those earthly rights to the world or to anybody. 

(Heb. 9:14.) Those earthly rights, therefore, were to our 

Lord's credit in the heavenly accounts— at his command, to 

be used as he might please. When the Father rewarded his 

obedience with high exaltation to a spirit nature in his resurrection, 

it left him with those human rights to his credit for 

his disposal. He had not disposed of them to anybody, up 

to the time that he "ascended up on high." Then he appeared 

in the presence of God for us— as our Advocate. He applied 

those earthly rights to us— not thereby giving us heavenly 

blessings, but restitution rights, represented in his sacrifice of 

the earthly things. But it was not the Divine Plan to give 

the elect those earthly restitution blessings to keep, and thereby 

to cut out natural Israel and the whole world from 

restitution. 

Those restitution rights were given to us conditionally, 
or, we might say, they were loaned to us, or made ours 
reckonedly for a time, and for a purpose. The purpose was 
that we, accepting these by faith, might consecrate them to 
the Lord unreservedly— even unto death— that thus the 
merit loaned to us would go back again to the credit of our 
Redeemer, in order that he might use that merit over again, 
applying it the second time for the release of natural Israel 
and the world from condemnation and death. Meantime the 
blessing granted to us through this loan or imputation of 
restitution earthly rights secured by our Lord's death, gives 
us the privilege of sacrificing those earthly rights as members 
of the Body of Christ. And this in turn gives us the right, 
the privilege, of sharing with him in his glory. "For if we 
suffer with him, we shall also reign with him." If we drink 



of his cup and be baptized by baptism into his death, we 
shall thus share life and blessings on the spirit plane and sit 
with him in his Throne.— 2 Tim. 2:12. 



R4547 : page 12 

DRINKING THE LORD'S CUP 



"Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of?"— 
Matt. 20:22. 

"The cup which my Father hath given me shall I not 
drink it? "-John 18:11. 

"The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion 
[koinonia, partnership or participation— Strong's Concordance] 
of the blood of Christ?"-I Cor. 10:16. 

St. Paul knew of only two cups— the cup of the Lord and 
the cup of devils.— I Cor. 10:21. 

Did our Lord drink of his own cup? And was it his 
cup which he passed to his disciples? And is it not this cup 
in which we must have "participation" if we would sit with 
him in his throne, and share also in due time his cup of joy 
in the Kingdom? 

If our Lord did not participate in his own cup, but gave 
it all to us (his Church) to drink, in what sense would it be 
his cup which the Father poured for him and in which he 
allows us to participate? 

Let no man beguile you from the prize by voluntarily 
(without reason) submitting to and reverencing as messengers 
(of Truth those who thus far have given no evidence 
of teaching ability in that God never sent you any message 
through them). They are merely intruding into what they 
admit they have not seen. Their fleshly mind being vainly 
puffed up they fail to hold the Headship of the Lord and the 
membership of the Church as his Body. They fail to recognize 
that "God hath set the various members in the Body of 
Christ." Hence they fail to see that the "Body" having nourishment, 
eating of the living bread and drinking of the cup, 
is knitted together and "increaseth with the increase of God." 
-Col. 2:18,19. 

Some dear friends think that we are laying too much 
stress on the importance of our drinking of the cup of which 
our Lord drank. The above quotation shows that our 
Lord laid similar stress on it. Neither James nor John nor 
any one can sit on His throne unless he drink of Christ's 
cup. Our opponents make a serious error in thinking that 
the Lord's "cup" symbolizes justification. On the contrary, 
only the justified by faith are privileged to drink of His cup. 
The cup symbolizes the means of our sanctification, by which 
we exchange our justified earthly rights for the heavenly inheritance 
and j oint-heirship . 

The Apostles, when invited to drink of the cup, were 
already justified by faith— counted, like Abraham and others 
of the past, worthy of actual restitution under Israel's New 
Law Covenant when the due time should arrive. But they 



could not actually drink of the Redeemer's cup and be "baptised 

with his baptism" "into his [sacrificial] death" until he 

as their Advocate should appear in the presence of God for 

them. Then the holy Spirit at once came upon them recognizing 

them as Christ's "members"— his "brethren," his fellow 

or joint-sacrifices, who have a share or participation in his cup. 

All the sufferings of Christ are sacrificial. "As he is, so 
are we in this world." (I John 4:17.) The sufferings of the 
Head are the sufferings of the Body and the sufferings of the 
Body are the sufferings of the Christ as a whole. "If one 
member suffers all the members suffer with it." 

Our opponents who are losing their sight on this subject 
answer, that our sufferings are not like those of our Lord, 
because his were sacrificial, whilst ours are expiatory or because 
of our sins and weaknesses. Nay, we answer. St. 
Peter says that some indeed suffer as busybodies and evildoers; 
but he declares, "If any man suffer as a Christian, 
let him glorify God on this behalf." A Christian suffers as 
Christ suffered, not for his sins, but for his right-doing. Jesus 
was just, we are justified by faith. He consecrated his just 
self to death in obedience to God's invitation. We in obedience 
to the same invitation consecrate our justified selves 
to be dead with him, to be baptised with his death-baptism, 
to drink of his sacrificial cup and by partaking of it to become 
his "members" in glory and participators in the work 
of his Mediatorial Kingdom. 



R4547 : page 12 

THE WEDDING GARMENT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have read with interest and profit THE TOWER of December 
1st. I was especially interested in the article on the 
"Wedding Garment," and would like to ask you a question 
concerning it: Is it your thought that only those who 
consecrate are ever really justified— have the robe of Christ's 
righteousness imputed to them, covering their sins and reckoning 
them perfect; that other believers have only the blessing 
of the knowledge of provision of justification which will be 
freely given them only on condition that they sacrifice in the 
footsteps of our Redeemer? 

With much Christian love, I remain yours in the One 
Hope. CLARENCE E. FOWLER. 

R4547 : page 13 

IN REPLY. 

We understand the Scriptures to teach that there is a 
difference between a faith -justification and an actual-justification. 
The world during the Millennial Age under the 
processes of restitution will have full, grand opportunities for 
advancing from sin and death conditions to actual justification, 



righteousness— Covenant relationship with God. In the 

past the Ancient Worthies, because of faith in God, were 

esteemed by him and treated as in harmony with him, in 

Covenant relationship by faith, as though they were perfect. 

But more than that faith-justification they could not attain 

until after the merit of Christ's sacrifice would be appropriated 

for them. Christian believers of this Gospel Age are 

in a still different position. They are justified by faith in 

the same manner as were the Ancient Worthies, but additionally, 

Christ, having now made a special application of 

the merit of his sacrifice on their behalf under agreement 

that they will not keep it in a restitutionary 

sense, but that they will sacrifice it— after the manner shown 

us in our Lord's example. 

So, then, at the beginning of our Christian experience we 
are granted fellowship with God through a faith-justification, 
which continues available for a reasonable time to permit 
us to come to a knowledge of the grace of God. It permits 
our coming to a knowledge of our privileges of sacrificing 
with our Redeemer; in becoming dead with him to all earthly 
interests, as well as dead to sin. The taking of this stand 
of consecration— self-sacrifice— brought to us Divine acceptance, 
manifested by the begetting of the holy Spirit, and 
from that position as New Creatures we must progress and 
make our calling and our election sure. Those who, after 
coming to a knowledge of the Truth and to an opportunity of 
consecration to sacrifice unto death, and then fail to respond 
obediently, lose their justification, in the sense that it fails to 
become vital— divinely approved. Such receive the grace of 
God in vain— they receive a knowledge of God's mercy and 
of their own privileges without profiting thereby— without 
accepting the only "call" of this age.— Eph. 4:4. 

Our conclusion or summary, then, is this: There is a 
justification by faith, which for a time gives a reckoned 

R4548 : page 13 

standing with God in his favor, during this age; but in order 

for this to become vital justification, it must be followed 

sooner or later by a full consecration. It is to those who 

consecrate to sacrifice, "those who have made a covenant with 

me by sacrifice" (Psa. 50:5), and who thus by faith become betrothed 

to Christ as members of his Body through fellowship 

in his sufferings— it is to these that the wedding garment 

is given. At a Jewish wedding, we cannot imagine the offering 

of robes to passers-by, who merely have knowledge that 

a wedding is in prospect. The parabolic picture applies to 

such persons as have heard of the wedding and believed in 

it and have turned from other works and pleasure with a 

desire to enter and participate in the matter. Their desires 

would extend to the taking of the first steps, of entering the 

door, before they would be handed the wedding garment. So 

with us. We had a reckoned justification from the time we 

first believed in Christ, trusted in his merit and heard something 

of the conditions upon which we could become his 

joint-heirs. It was not until we had counted the cost and 



fully decided to enter in, that we were reckoned as members 
of the Church of the First-born— members of Christ's 
Betrothed. 

It follows, then, that the taking off of the wedding garment 
would properly enough symbolize either of two acts: 

(1) Repudiation of the sacrificial work of Christ; or, 

(2) Repudiation of our nuptial contract— to suffer with 
him; to be dead with him; to drink of his cup; to be baptized 
into his death; to go to him without the camp, bearing 

his reproach. 



R4548 : page 13 

GROWTH IN GRACE AND KNOWLEDGE 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Apostle enjoins, "Humble yourselves therefore, 
under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in 
due time." Following this advice I write to say that I fear 
that some of the matters reported to you respecting me 
were at least partially true. I have always sought to have 
a conscience void of offense toward God, but fear that I 
neglected the after part of that text— "and toward men." I 
have been inclined to please myself and to have others 
recognize my ideals and standards of thought, word and 
deed, whereas I should have sought, rather, to have my every 
word and deed such that everyone, saint and sinner, would 
have approved— had that been possible. 

The third item of the Vow, which I read daily, should 
have helped me on this point had I gotten the full force of 
it, as I now do. How plainly it states and emphasizes the 
matter: "I vow to thee that I will still more carefully, if 
possible, scrutinize my every thought and word and deed, 
to the intent that I may be the better enabled to serve thee 
and thy dear flock." Why did I not see that satisfying my 
own conscience was not enough; I should have been prompt 
to cut off any liberty (though cherished as a right hand), 
if thereby I might more efficiently serve the flock of God for 
whom Christ died. 

I now perceive that the Adversary's trap lay in drawing 
inferences and putting subtle meanings on words— somewhat 
as the Christian Scientists do, but not to so great an extreme. 
My brain structure naturally leads me toward the 
mystic, the symbolic, and occult. Doubtless I would have 
been swallowed up with occultism and spiritism had it not 
been for the Truth. I still had several books on things occult 
when the Vow came out; and when I took the Vow I burned 
those books. I now see, however, that I did not entirely 
rid my mind of the influence of those books— they still influenced 
my reasoning. 

I now resolve afresh, dear Brother Russell, that my influence 
shall be all it possibly can be for the Lord and for 
his flock. I have resolved that following your advice and 
example I shall hereafter stick closer than ever to the Word 



and also to the Vow— in their letter and spirit. 

I heartily appreciate your kind admonitions, and pray God 
that they may not only bless me, but also through my ministries 
help many of the Lord's dear household of faith. And I 
here suggest that if in your judgment this very letter might be 
helpful to others, I am quite agreeable to your publishing it. 

Relying upon the grace promised to help in every time 
of need, and upon the merit of the precious blood presented 
on my behalf on the part of our great Advocate for our 
sins (I John 2:1), I remain, beloved Brother Russell, 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, our Sin-Offering, 
M. L. HERR. 



R4548 : page 13 

QUESTIONS ON THE COVENANTS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

(1) Please explain Heb. 9:15, viz., Revised Version— 
"And for this cause he is the mediator of a New Covenant, 
that a death having taken place for the redemption of the 
transgressions that were under the first Covenant, they that 
have been called may receive the promise of the eternal 
inheritance." 

(2) I understand the Man Christ Jesus, by the sacrifice 

of his human life, paid the ransom price for the whole world. 

(3) Then he could offer his "footstep followers" a share 
in that sacrifice. 

(4) If he did not then at his death seal the New Covenant 
with his blood and become mediator of that New 
Covenant, could he offer the Church a share in his mediatorial 
work? 

(5) I understand the New Covenant is the law of love; 
am I right? 

(6) Please explain John 13:34— "A new commandment 

I give unto you, that ye love one another." Was it a forerunner 
of the New Covenant he was about to seal for them? 

For convenience we have numbered the items above, and 
will now number our replies to correspond. 

R4548 : page 14 

(1) This text shows a contrast between the old Law 
Covenant and the New [Law] Covenant. The original or 
Abrahamic Covenant, under which Christ and his Body as the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham is being developed, is not in the 
discussion. The Apostle wrote to those who still trusted in 
the Law Covenant and declared that it was necessary, not 
only to believe in Christ, but also to keep the Law and to be 
circumcised, in order to have any Divine favor. This the 
Apostle is controverting as untrue. He shows that the Law 
Covenant mediated by Moses was typical of a superior New 
Covenant, of which Messiah is the Mediator. 

Moses' Covenant was already dead, to the extent that the 



prize it offered had been won by Jesus. It is still 

alive, however, upon all the Jews as a bondage from which 

they could get free only in one of two ways; either by 

dying to the Law Covenant and to all of its hopes and prospects 

and renouncing all earthly restitution rights and thus 

becoming a joint-heir with Christ as a member of Messiah's 

Body during this Gospel Age; or, accepting the other alternative, 

get free from the old Law Covenant by transfer, when 

the New [Law] Covenant shall go into effect as its substitute, 

at the beginning of the Millennium. Then all Jews and their 

appurtenances will be transferred from Moses, the incompetent 

mediator, to the Messiah of glory, the competent 

Mediator of the better Covenant, whose provisions will bless 

Israel and all the families of the earth willing to come in 

under its benevolent provisions. 

This text has no reference to any except Jews who were 
under the old Law Covenant. It does not at all refer to 
Gentiles. It shows that God's provision is that Messiah is 
the Mediator of Israel's New Covenant and that his death, 
when so applied, will be sufficient to cancel the transgressions 
of Israel under their old Law Covenant. This will make it 
possible for them as a nation yet to attain the earthly part 
of the Abrahamic Covenant's provision for Abraham's earthly 
seed, as the sand of the sea shore. Thus eventually Israel 
as God's "called" nation will receive all that they ever expected 
—and more. Israel's promises were not heavenly or 
spiritual, but earthly: "All the land that thou seest to thee 
(Abraham) will I give it, and to thy seed after thee"; and 
as the chief nation of earth they were to teach all nations 
"every man under his own vine and fig tree." 

Those promises are sure as God's word. They merely 
wait until the "Mystery" of a multitudinous Mediator shall be 
finished (in sacrifice and in resurrection glory). Then the 
"Mystery" Mediator will have sealed Israel's New Covenant 
by his death as its Testator. Then the "called" nation of 
Israel will "receive the eternal inheritance" for which they 
have waited more than thirty-five centuries. St. Paul explains 
this further in Romans 1 1 :27-29,3 1 . 

(2) As elsewhere shown, our Lord's sacrifice did not 
pay for the sins of the world, but did provide the ransom 
price which he will later present to Justice on behalf of the 
sins of the world. 

R4549 : page 14 

(3) Your argument is not logical. If our Lord had 
finished his work of sacrifice he could not give his footstep 
followers a share therein. 

(4) The Scriptures nowhere say that our Lord sealed 

the New Covenant with his blood. Neither was it necessary 
for him to seal the New Covenant before he would be its 
Mediator. He was the Mediator of the New Covenant in the 
Divine purpose and promise centuries before he became the 
man Christ Jesus. He was the Mediator of the New Covenant 
when born in Bethlehem in exactly the same sense that he 
was then the Savior of the world: not because he had sealed 



the New Covenant nor because he had saved the world, but 
because he was the One through whom the world's salvation 
and the New Covenant for its blessing were eventually 
to be accomplished. 

Our Lord has not yet saved the world, nor has he acted 
as the Mediator of the New Covenant; but he will accomplish 
both purposes during the Millennial Age; and at its conclusion 
the prophecy will be fulfilled, "He shall see of the 
travail of his soul and shall be satisfied." Our Lord was 
privileged to offer his Church a share with himself in his 
Mediatorial Kingdom on condition that she would share in 
his cup of suffering and self-sacrifice— share in his baptism 
into his death. So doing she shall share his reward of glory, 
honor and immortality in "his resurrection." (Phil. 3:10.) 
And sharing his glory and throne as his join t-sacrificer and 
joint-heir of the promise she would be with him jointly the 
Mediator between God and men— the world— during the Millennial 
Age— the work of reconciling the world, or so many 
of them as may prove willing to receive the blessing of 
regeneration. 

(5) You are not right. There is a difference between 
a covenant and the law of a covenant. God's Law given to 
Israel summarized was, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with all thy being and 
with all thy strength; and thou shalt love thy neighbor as 
thyself." That Law is perfect and will be the basis or Law of 
the New Covenant. Moses as a Mediator under his Covenant 
purposed to help Israel to keep that Law, and God covenanted 
to give them eternal life, if they would do so. But they were 
unable to keep that Law perfectly in act and thought and 
word, and hence they reaped its condemnation of death and 
not its proffered blessing of life. Under that Covenant 
Moses was privileged to arrange sacrifices and offerings for 
sin, and thus year by year to cleanse the people for a year 
at a time from their original condemnation. But he had no 
means of actually blotting out their sins and no power or 
right to actually restore them to perfection and ability to keep 
that Law. 

The New Covenant will have the same Law exactly, but 
the Mediator having by then paid over to Justice the ransom-price 
of the world, secured by his own sacrificial death, will 
then have full charge of mankind and be fully empowered to 
deal mercifully with their imperfections and to help them 
step by step out of their sin and death condition back to perfection, 
and to cut off the rebellious in the Second Death. 
At the close of the Millennium he will present the willing 
and obedient to the Father actually perfect. 

Thus it will be seen that God's dealings with mankind 
under the typical Law Covenant, and under its antitype the 
New Covenant, is along the lines of actual obedience to the 
Divine Law, and not along the lines of reckoned obedience 
through faith. As obedience to the old Law Covenant held 
the reward of human perfection and life, so the rewards of 
the New [Law] Covenant will be similar— eternal life or 
eternal death. 

Quite to the contrary of both of these arrangements, the 



Church is now called to a "heavenly calling" under the Abrahamic 
Covenant— to be members of the Body of Christ, who, 
with Jesus her Head, will constitute the Mediator of the New 
Covenant. The Church is "not under Law, but under grace," 
not judged according to the flesh and earthly restitution, but 
judged according to the heart and intention; and required 
to sacrifice restitution rights to the attainment of "the high 
calling" life and glory on the spirit plane as members of the 
Mediator of the New Covenant. 

(6) No, that "New Commandment" represents a higher 
law than was given to the Jew under the Law Covenant, 
hence higher also than will be given to Israel and mankind 
under the New Covenant. The New Commandment mentioned 
by our Lord is not the Father's commandment at all, 
but the command of our Head, our Teacher, to all those who 
have entered the School of Christ and who are hoping to become 
"members" of the Anointed One— members of the 
Mediator, Prophet, Priest and King of the new dispensation. 
Justice could not give this new command: all that Justice 
could command is expressed in the Law given to Israel, 
namely, supreme love for God and love for the neighbor as 
for one's self. This new commandment which the Lord gave 
applies only to the Church of this Gospel Age. In effect it is 
this: If you would be my disciples, if you would share my 
throne and glory and immortality, you must have my spirit. 
You must do more than keep the Law. You must be more 
than just. You must be self-sacrificing. If you would share 
my glory I command and direct that you love one another 
as I have loved you. (John 15:12.) I have loved you to the 
extent of laying down my life for you sacrificially. You must 
have this same spirit and cast in your lot with me in self-sacrifice, 
or you cannot be my disciples, nor share my glory, 
and associate in my work as the Mediator for the blessing 
of Israel and mankind. Whosoever will be my disciple must 
take up his cross and follow me, that where I am there shall 
my disciple be. Surely no one can doubt the Savior's meaning 
—my disciples must die with me. 



page 15 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES (V)* 

Questions on Life and Immortality 

It is recommended that each question be answered by 

the members of the class first, before referring to the comments 

of the DAWN-STUDIES. 

FEBRUARY 6 

(1) State the difference between the imaginings of 



worldly philosophers respecting the immortality of the soul, 
and the distinct statement of God's Word on the subject. 
P. 387, par. 1. 

(2) Give some arguments to the proposition that God 
intends to give life everlasting only to the righteous and to 
withhold it from others. P. 387. 

(3) State what is the ordinary acceptation of the word 
"immortality," and then give the Scriptural limitations of 
that word. P. 388. 

(4) In discussing a subject with those who have the 
usual thought that the words eternal life and immortality 
signify the same thing, is it not wise on our part to assent 
that we believe in immortality as our friends in general do; 
that we believe that Divine arrangements have made possible 
everlasting life for every member of our race? 

Would it not be wise, then, before leaving the topic to explain 

that the Scriptures make a distinction between these 

terms everlasting -life and immortality, and that, while declaring 

that all the obedient ones of God's creation shall 

have everlasting life, they also declare that God alone possessed 

immortality originally and that he has given this great 

blessing of inherent life to his son and purposes to give this 

same inherent life to the Bride class and to none others? 

P. 388. 

(5) Is there hope of immortality held out in the Scriptures 
for any human being? P. 388, last par. 

(6) Show the reason (philosophy) of your answer. 
P. 389. 

(7) What is the correct definition of the word "mortal" 
and of the word "immortality"? P. 390, par. 1. 

(8) Was Adam created mortal or immortal? Show the 
philosophy of the answer. Pp. 390, 391. 

FEBRUARY 13 

(9) What is said of immortal souls, dying souls, never 
dying souls? P. 392. 

(10) What do we know about the mortality or immortality 
of angels? P. 392. 

(11) When was immortality brought to light in the 
Scriptures and by whom and how? P. 393. 

(12) Did Christ's death secure immortality to men or 
to the angels or to the saints of this Gospel Age? 

(13) Explain the relationship of Christ's death to human 
Restitution and to the obtaining of immortality on the part 
of the Church. P. 393, last par. 

(14) What did our Lord's Gospel bring to light respecting 
God's provision for mankind in general? P. 393, last par. 

(15) What is God's provision for the "elect" of this 
Gospel Age? Pp. 393, 394. 

(16) Is immortality an element of the Divine nature? 
Prove the answer. P. 393. 

(17) Will the "elect" attain to a station more or less 
glorious than that of the holy angels of the highest order, 
and why? Pp. 394, 395. 

(18) When is the reward of the Divine nature conferred 



upon the Church? At the begetting of the Holy 
Spirit, or in the First Resurrection? Explain. P. 396. 

(19) If we are all called in the one hope of our calling 
and all begotten by the same word of Truth and same holy 
Spirit, how does it come that only a "little flock" of these 
really obtain the divine nature, while the "Great Company" 
obtain spirit life, but without the immortal feature? 

(20) Is the natural begetting and birth the figure or 
illustration of the spiritual begetting and birth? And would 
not the fact that some are born males and some born females 
fully correspond to the fact that in the spiritual birth some 

will be of the "Little Flock" and some of the "Great Company"? 
And if it is a fact that no appreciable difference is 
discernible between the male and the female foetus for a 
considerable time, does not this correspond to the thought 
that there is no difference between early experiences of the 
"Little Flock" and the "Great Company" for a considerable 
time after justification, consecration and the begetting of the 
holy Spirit? 

FEBRUARY 20 

(21) Why is the resurrection of the Church spoken of 
as "The" resurrection? P. 396, par. 1. 

(22) Are the terms of our election too exacting or is 

the Divine requirement only a "reasonable service"? Show 
how. Explain John 5:26 and also Ephesians 3:6, and say 
whether or not these texts give intimation of the gift of 
immortality extending beyond the elect Church. P. 396, par. 3. 

(23) Is there more than one word translated immortality 
in the Bible? What other? P. 396, last par. 

(24) Give two Greek words rendered immortality and 
state the particulars of their meaning. P. 397. 

(25) Quote all the texts of Scripture in which the 
word athanasia (immortality) occur. 

(26) Quote the texts in which aptharsia and apthartos 
occur. And examine and explain each of these sixteen texts, 
in harmony with the foregoing. Pp. 397, 398. 

FEBRUARY 27 

(27) What are the claims of evolutionists respecting 
mankind's hope for everlasting life? Explain the falsity 
of their premises and deductions. P. 398. 

(28) What does the Christian see in the Bible contrary 
to these evolution propositions? P. 398. 

(29) Taking the Bible as the oldest authority and 
crediting it with no higher authority than other histories, 
what are the evidences that father Adam and mother Eve 
were close relatives to the ape family? Elaborate this. 

P. 399. 

(30) What can be said of the shallow reasoning of 
some who pose as scientists and who claim that matter is 
indestructible and that this proves that humanity is indestructible? 
Does not such a claim imply a desire for eternal 

life and also a desire to get away from the Divine provision 



as expressed in the sentence of death and in the promise that 
through Christ there shall in due time be a resurrection of 
the dead? P. 399, last par. 

(31) Explain the Divine Program from the Bible standpoint 
and show the reasonableness thereof. P. 400-402. 

(32) If the word "curse," as used in connection with 

the condemnation of our race, signifies the blight of sin and 
death, what does the promised removal of the "curse" imply? 
P. 403, par. 1. 

(33) What advantages accrue through the Divine arrangement 
of permitting sin, redeeming from sin, and, in 

due time, restoring obedient sinners to Divine favor and 
everlasting life? P. 403, par. 1. 

(34) Why has the dying of the race been a gradual 

one, rather than a sudden execution of the sentence, "Dying 
thou shalt die"? P. 403, par. 2. 

(35) Quote three strong texts of Scripture in support of 
the thought that death, not eternal torment, is God's penalty 

for sin, and answer the queries of those who claim that resurrection 
would require of the Almighty more power than he is 
able to exercise. P. 404. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; 
and hence page for page they differ. The references given in 
these Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of 
which postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, 
for unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 18 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 
THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 
PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 
WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c (IS.l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. 1 l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth 25c. (IS. l/2d.). India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. 1 l/2d.). 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End." the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 



a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth 
25c ((IS. l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. (3s. 1 l/2d.). 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24, and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth 30c, (IS 3d.). 
India paper edition. 85c. (3s. 6 l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages 
in embossed cloth 30c. (IS 3d.). India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6 1.2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week, 
Genesis 1 and 2, and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (IS 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c ((3s 6 l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12. 6d.), plus postage 60c (IS.). 

Published in foreign languages as follows: in German, six volumes; 
in Swedish, vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; in 
Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, 
Hungarian and Polish, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with 
English edition, prices the same; vol. 6 in Swedish, leather bound, $1.50. 



page 17 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI JANUARY 15 No. 2 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Where Are the Dead? 19 

What Say the Scriptures? 22 

Death, Not Torment, the Penalty 22 

God's Penalty a Just One 23 

What Say the Scriptures About Hell 25 

Erroneous Theories Exposed? 26 

Hell in English, Hebrew and Greek 26 

The Rich Man and Lazarus 35 

The Sheep and the Goats 37 

Everlasting Punishment 39 

The Lake of Fire and Brimstone 40 

Parabolic and Symbolic Figures 42 

Forgivable and Unpardonable Sins 46 

Future Retribution 46 

Let Honesty and Truth Prevail 48 



page 18 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



Send us the addresses of your Christian friends for free samples. 



THIS ISSUE IS A DOUBLE ONE-32 PAGES. 



NONE TOO POOR TO HAVE THIS JOURNAL 
REGULARLY 

If a developed child of God, you are interested in Bible study, and 
if so, you cannot afford to deprive yourself of the helping hand God 
has provided for all such through the semi-monthly visits of this journal. 
If obliged to ask for it on credit, do so; if never able to pay you need 
not fear offending us. We will cancel the debt at any time on request. 



If you have no prospect of being able to pay, then say so as above 
and have it free— paid for out of a fund provided by loving "brethren" 
who desire thus to assist and serve the Lord. Write at once, and be 
sure to renew each May. 

HOW TO WRITE US 

Write your name and full address very plainly at the head of your 
letter sheet if it is not printed there;— giving street and number. And 
do this on every letter. Write your order on a separate sheet from 
your letter— or on a separate page. 

Address business communications to our Society as above, and personal 
or doctrinal queries to the Editor at same address. 

VOLUNTEERS-SERVICE FOR JESUS 

Our Society's object is— The Promulgation of Christian Knowledge: 
to the intent that the Lord's people may be sanctified by the Truth— the 
only genuine and acceptable sanctification. Everyone willing is invited 
to share this service as a true soldier of the cross. Ammunition in 
the form of tracts will be supplied free to all who will promise to use 
the same faithfully and judiciously. Write for samples free. 

"FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS" 

A Pamphlet by this title by the Editor of this journal, but now 
out of print, is much more than replaced by the "Scripture Study" 
Series, mentioned following. These volumes are invaluable aids to 
Bible study. They are sold at cost, and loaned to those too poor to 
purchase, who will promise a careful reading and to return them. 

You really cannot afford to be without these books if you are a 
Christian and desirous of understanding your Bible. 



R4549 : page 19 

WHERE ARE THE DEAD? 



Our Friends, Our Neighbors; the Holy, 
the Unholy; the Civilized, the Vile? 



The proper answer to this question stands related to 
our own destiny, colors and influences our theology 
and the entire trend of our lives! The correct 
answer gives strength, confidence, courage 
and assists towards the spirit of a sound mind! 



"Men and brethren, let me freely speak to you of the patriarch 
David, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre 



is with us unto this day. For David is not ascended 
into the heavens." (Acts. 2:29,34.) "And no man 
hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down 
from heaven, even the Son of man."— John 3:13. 



FOR a man to declare himself uninterested in 
this subject would be to proclaim himself 
idiotic— thoughtless. If the ordinary affairs 
of this present life, food, raiment, finance, politics, 
etc., which concern us but for a few years, are 
deemed worthy of thought, study, how much more 
concern should we have in respect to the eternal 
future of ourselves and neighbors and mankind in 
general? 

Of course, so important a question has had the 
most profound study, ever since the reign of Sin and 
Death began six thousand years ago. By this time the 
subject should be threadbare. The entire world should 
be so thoroughly informed respecting this question 
that there would be nothing new to say and nobody 
curious to hear. But the large audiences of intelligent, 
thoughtful people which come to hear, and which listen 
with breathless interest to what we have to say, imply 
that after all the study the subject has had, but few 
are thoroughly satisfied with their conclusions. 

THE AGNOSTIC ANSWERS THE QUESTION 

Before presenting what we claim is the Scriptural 
and only satisfactory answer to our query, we think it 
but proper respect to the intelligence and thought of 
our day and of past centuries to make general inquiries 
on the subject and have before our minds the 
most profound thoughts of the most astute thinkers 
of our race. We cannot, however, go into this matter 
elaborately and give lengthy quotations. We must content 
ourselves with brief, synoptical answers, which 
will be stated kindly and truthfully, and with a desire 
not to offend anybody, however much we may disagree 
with his conclusions. We recognize the right of every 
man to do his own thinking and to reach his own conclusions, 
whether these agree with our conceptions or 
not. 

We begin our examination by asking our agnostic 
friends, who boast of their untrammeled freedom of 
thought, What say you, "Free-thinkers," in reply to 
our query, Where are the dead? Their answer is, 
"We do not know. We would like to believe in a 
future life, but we have no proof of it. Lacking the 
evidences our conclusion is that man dies as does the 
brute beast. If our conclusion disappoints your expectations 
in respect to having joy for the saints, it 
certainly should be comforting to all as respects the 
vast majority of our race, who certainly would be 



R4550 : page 19 

much better off perished like the brute beast than to be 
preserved in torture, as the majority believe." 

We thank our agnostic friends for the courteous 
reply, but feel that the answer is not satisfactory, either 
to our heads or to our hearts; which cry out that there 
must, or should be, a future life; that the Creator 
made man with powers of mind and heart so superior 
to the brute that his pre-eminence in the Divine plan 
should be expected. Furthermore, the brevity of the 
present life, its tears, its sorrows, its experiences, its 
lessons, will nearly all be valueless, useless, unless 
there be a future life— an opportunity for making use 
of these lessons. We must look further for some more 
satisfactory answer to our question. 

THE HEATHEN ANSWER TO OUR QUERY 

Since three-fourths of the world are heathens, the 
weight of numbers implies that they next should be 
asked for their solution to the question— Where are 
the dead? Heathenism gives two general answers. 

(1) Prominent are those which hold to Transmigration. 
These reply to us, "Our view is that when 

a man dies, he does not die, but merely changes his 
form. His future estate will correspond to his present 
living and give him either a higher or a lower position. 
We believe that we lived on earth before, perhaps as 
cats, dogs, mice, elephants, or what not, and that if the 
present life has been wisely used, we may reappear as 
men of nobler talents, as philosophers, etc.; but if, as 
usual, life has been misspent, at death we will be remanded 

R4550 : page 20 

to some lower form of being— an elephant, a 

worm, or what not. It is because of this belief that we 

are so careful in respect to our treatment of the lower 

animals and refuse to eat meat of any kind. Were we 

to tramp ruthlessly on the worm, our punishment might 

be a form in which we ourselves would be treated ruthlessly 

after the change which we call death." 

(2) The other large class of heathen believe in a 
spirit world with happy hunting grounds for the good 
and a hell of different torments for the wicked. We 

are told that when people seem to die they really become 
more alive than ever and that the very minute 
they cross the river Styx they go to the realms of 
either the blessed or the ever doomed, and that there 
are steps or degrees of punishment and reward. We 
inquire, Where did you receive these views? The 
answer is, They have been with us for a long, long 
time. We know not where they came from. Our 
learned men have handed them down to us as truths, 



and we have accepted them as such. 

But heathenism's answer is not satisfactory to 
our heads and hearts. We must look further. We 
must not trust to speculation. We must look for Divine 
Revelation; the message from him with whom we have 
to do— our Creator. 

THE CATHOLIC ANSWER TO OUR QUESTION 

Turning from heathenism we address our question 
to that intelligent one-fourth of the world's population 
known as Christendom. We say, Christendom, 
What is your answer to the question? The reply is, 
"We are divided in our opinion, more than two-thirds 
of us holding the Catholic and nearly one-third the 
general Protestant view. Let us hear the Catholic 
view (Greek and Roman) first then, because age, as 
well as numbers, suggests such precedence. 

Catholic friends, Give us, please, the results of 
your labors and studies, the conclusions of your ablest 
thinkers and theologians, in respect to the Revelation 
which you claim to have from God on this subject, 
Where are the dead? We will hear you thoughtfully, 
patiently, unbiasedly. Our Catholic friends respond: 
"Our teachings are very explicit along the lines of 
your question. We have canvassed the subject from 
every standpoint in the light of Divine Revelation. 
Our conclusion and teaching are that when anyone 
dies, he goes to one of three places: first, the saintly, of 
whom we claim there are but a few, go immediately 
to the presence of God, to heaven. These are referred 
to by our Lord, saying, "Whosoever doth not bear his 
cross and come after me, cannot be my disciple." 
(Luke 14:27.) Those who faithfully bear the cross 
are the "little flock," the "elect." Respecting these 
Jesus says, "Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, 
that leadeth to life, and few there be that find it." 
(Matt. 7:14.) These saintly do not include our clergy, 
not even our bishops, cardinals and popes; for you will 
find that when any of these die, it is a custom of the 
Church that masses be said for the repose of their 
souls. We would not say masses for any we believe to 
be in heaven, because there surely is repose for every 
soul; neither would we say masses for them if we 
believed them to be in eternal hell, for masses could 
not avail them there. We might remark, however, that 
we do not teach that many go to the eternal hell. It 
is our teaching that only incorrigible heretics— persons 
who have had a full knowledge of Catholic doctrines 
and who have wilfully and deliberately opposed them 
—these alone meet the awful, hopeless fate. 

MILLIONS TO PURGATORY 

"The dead in general, according to our teaching, 
pass immediately to Purgatory, which is, as the name 



indicates, a place of purgation from sin, a place of penances, 

sorrows, woes, anguish indeed, but not hopeless. 

The period of confinement here may be centuries or 

thousands of years, according to the deserts of the individual 

and the alleviations granted. If you would 

know more particularly the Catholic teaching on this 

subject, we refer you to the writings of one of our 

great Catholics, the noted poet Dante, a loyal Catholic, 

at one time an Abbot, who died in a monastery with 

the full rights of the Church. Dante's poem, "Inferno," 

graphically describes the tortures of Purgatory, 

as we understand the matter. You can procure at almost 

any library an illustrated copy of this great Catholic 

poem. Dore, the artist, was also a prominent 

Catholic and he portrayed Dante's poem vividly and 

truthfully. The illustrations show the torments of 

Purgatory vividly— how the demons chase some until 

they leap over precipices into boiling water. They ply 

others with fiery darts. Others are burned with heads 

downward; others with feet downward in pits. Some 

are bitten by serpents. Still others are frozen, etc. We 

advise that you see Dante's work, "Inferno," because it 

gives our Catholic view of the proper answer to your 

question, Where are the dead? The vast majority are 

in Purgatory. The billions of the heathens are there; 

because ignorance does not save, does not qualify for 

the heavenly condition. All who enter heaven must 

previously have been fitted and prepared in a manner 

impossible to the heathen. Millions of Protestants are 

there. They could not enter heaven, except through 

the portals of the Catholic Church; neither would God 

deem them worthy of eternal hell, because their rejection 

of Catholicism was due to the confession of 

faith under which they were born and environed. 

Nearly all Catholics go to Purgatory also, because, 

notwithstanding the good offices of our Church, our 

holy water, confessions, masses, holy candles, consecrated 

burying ground, etc., nevertheless, not having 

attained to saintship of character, they would be excluded 

from heaven until the distressing experiences 

of Purgatory would prepare their hearts for heaven. 

We hold, however, that for the reason stated, Catholics 

will not need to remain as long in Purgatory as 

will the Protestants and heathen." 

We can thank our Catholic friends for so kind 
a statement of their case. We will not ask them where 
their Purgatory is, nor how they obtain the details of 
information respecting it, because such questions might 
offend them, and we have no desire to offend. We 
merely wish for their ripest, clearest, maturest thought 
respecting our question. We regret to say that the 
answer is not all that we might have hoped for in 
clearness and reasonableness and Scripturalness. Our 
hearts are heavy with the thought that our poor race, 
by reason of original sin, is already, as the Apostle 
says, a "groaning creation," and the present life of a 



few years is full of trouble. It is saddening, discouraging 
to all of us to think that when present trials and 
difficulties are past, of being obliged, even for centuries 
(not to mention eternity), to have such awful 
experiences as Dante portrays, even though those centuries 

R4550 : page 21 

of anguish would purge us and fit us for the 
Divine presence of heavenly glory. It may seem 
strange to some theologians, but it is nevertheless 
true, that the answer of Catholicism to our question 
is not much better than the answer of heathendom. 
Neither our heads nor our hearts are yet satisfied. 
It cannot be wrong to look further for something more 
satisfactory. 

THE PROTESTANT ANSWER TO OUR QUESTION 

I class myself as a Protestant without thereby 
meaning any disrespect to anybody else. I assume 
that the majority of my audience are Protestants. I 
remind you that many of us in times past have been 
inclined to boast a little of Protestant "breadth of 
mind," "intelligence," "education," etc. May we not 
reasonably expect from Protestants a clear, logical, 
satisfactory answer to our question? Having found 
all the other answers unsatisfactory, and having now 
come to the one-twelfth portion of our race which has 
had most advantage every way, we might reasonably 
expect to find in its answer the quintescence of wisdom 
and proof from every quarter and from every 
age. But what do we find, dear friends? With 
shame I say it, We find the very reverse! We find that 
the voice of Protestantism as a whole (barring numerically 
insignificant denominations) giving the most 
absurd answer to my question that could be conceived 
—an answer which is put to shame by the Catholics, 
the heathen and the agnostics. Is not this marvelous? 
Can this be? It is written, "Faithful are the wounds 

R4551 : page 21 

of a friend." Bear with me, therefore, while I expose 
to you the weaknesses of our position as Protestants; 
not with a view to our vexation and shame, but with 
the thought that our intelligent investigation of the 
subject can be turned to our advantage and enable us 
to know the Truth and to lift the true, Divine standards 
before the people, to the intent that we and all 
may come to clearer views of our Heavenly Father's 
character, purposes and future dealings with our race. 

Permit me as gently as possible to touch this sore 
spot. The removal of the bandages and the cleansing 
of the sore may cause us pain, but the investigation 
should be helpful, nevertheless. We got our name 



Protestants from the fact that our intelligent and well-meaning 

forefathers, who were Catholics, thought that 

they discovered inconsistencies and unscripturalness 

in Catholic doctrines in which they had been reared. 

They protested against these, and hence came the 

name Protestants. We cannot defend all that they 

did to their enemies nor all that their enemies did to 

them. 

One of their points of protest was that our forefathers 
could find nothing of Purgatory anywhere on 
earth, nor any declaration respecting it in the Bible. 
With a simplicity that is certainly marvelous to us, 
they concluded that they would merely pick up their 
views of Purgatory and throw them away forever. 
This left them heaven and hell, into one of which, 
they said, every member of the race must go at death 
and there spend his eternity. Quite evidently these 
well-meaning forefathers of ours were not as long-headed, 
far-sighted and logical as we might have expected 
them to be, when they did not perceive the 
difficulty into which they were walking. Rather we 
should say, perhaps, that they did see something of 
the difficulty, but viewed matters differently from what 
we do. The theory of Calvin and Knox prevailed at 
that time amongst Protestants and led each denomination 
to hope that it was God's "elect" and that it would 
constitute the "little flock" who would go to heaven, 
while all the remainder of mankind would be consigned 
to an eternity of hellish torture. 

No longer does either Catholic or Protestant pray, 
"God bless me and my wife, 
My son John and his wife, 
Us four and no more." 

Both Catholics and Protestants, looking back to 
that period which we often term the "dark ages," 
have reason to give thanks to God for the anointing 
of the eyes of our understanding, which enables us, we 
believe, to think more logically than our forefathers. 
Even those of us reared under the doctrine of predestination 
have lost the idea that the heathen were passed 
by because they were predestinated to damnation; instead 
those who accepted the Westminster confession 
of faith are to-day the most zealous in the preaching 
of the Gospel amongst the heathen by missionary effort. 
We are glad of this. It is a sign that our hearts 
are in truer and nobler condition, even though our 
heads have not yet gotten into proper adjustment 
with our hearts; and we still look at crooked doctrines 
and endeavor to imagine them altogether straight. 

Theoretically Protestant doctrines stand with the 
Bible and with Catholics and declare that heaven is a 
place of perfection; that there can be no change to 
any who enter there; hence that all trial, all refinement, 
all chiseling, all polishing of character must be accomplished 
in advance of an entrance into the abode of 
the saints. In a word, we agree that only the saints 



will ever enter there, the "pure in heart," the "over-comers," 

the "little flock," who now walk in the footsteps 

of Jesus. What about the remainder of mankind? 

Ah! there is the difficulty. Our larger hearts 

will not consent that all except the saints must spend 

an eternity of torture, though this is the logic of our 

creeds. Our hearts protest, saying that three-fourths 

of humanity to-day are heathen and that fully that 

proportion of humanity altogether have never heard 

of God and the terms of salvation. 

THE BEST OF PEOPLE PERPLEXED 

Our creeds perplex us; for, as our hearts will not 
permit us to think of these poor creatures going to an 
eternity of misery, neither will our heads permit us to 
say that they are fit for heaven. Indeed it would be 
at variance not only with the Scripture, but also with 
reason itself, to suppose heaven with three-fourths of 
its inhabitants unregenerate in every sense of the word. 
Our forefathers merely spoiled things for us when 
they threw away Purgatory and kept the remainder 
of the arrangement. If we must object to Purgatory 
as being unscriptural, must we not equally object to 
the eternal torment of all the families of the earth as 
being unscriptural, especially when the Bible declares 
that "all the families of the earth shall be blessed" 
through Christ— blessed with a knowledge of the Truth 
and opportunity to come into heart harmony with God 
and attain everlasting life through Christ. I believe 
that it is necessary to press this point of the unreasonableness 
of the eternal torment doctrine. Nevertheless, 
I will remind you of what our prominent Protestant 
theories are on the subject: 

(1) The Calvinistic thought is that Divine Wisdom 

R4551 : page 22 

and Power planned for mankind in advance- 
knew of the fall of man in advance, and prepared therefor 
by the creating of a great place called hell and the 
manning of it with fire-proof devils for the torment of 
the race— all except the "little flock," the "elect." Love 
and justice were left out of this calculation; (2) The 
other prominent Protestant theory, the "Arminian," 
held to-day probably by the majority, insists that both 
Love and Justice created the world and arranged the 
torment, and that wisdom and power were not consulted; 
hence that God has gotten into difficulty, while 
endeavoring to do justly and lovingly by his creatures; 
because lacking in power to render the needed aid. The 
entire difficulty, dear friends, is that, in our reasoning 
on the subject, we have merely asked the opinions of 
men and have not sought the Word of the Lord. 

I shall surprise you, I feel sure, when I bring to 
your attention now the clear, plain, reasonable, just, 



loving and wise program of our Heavenly Father. It 
has been so long overlooked, so long buried under the 
rubbish of human tradition of the "dark ages" that to-day 
"Truth is stranger than fiction." Well did our 
Lord through the prophet declare: 

"As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are 
my ways higher than your ways, and my plans higher 
than your plans."— Isa. 55:9. 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES? 

All of the foregoing theories, be it noticed, are 
based upon the assumption that death does not mean 
death— that to die is to become more alive than before 
death. In Eden it was God who declared to our first 
parents, "Ye shall surely die." It was Satan who declared, 
"Ye shall not surely die." Notice that the 
heathens, as well as the Christians, have accepted 
Satan's lie and correspondingly rejected God's Truth. 
Do they not all agree with the serpent's statement, "Ye 
shall not surely die"? Do they not all claim that the 
dead are alive— much more alive than before they died? 
This, dear friends, has been our common point of mistake. 
We have followed the wrong teacher; the one 
of whom our Lord said, "He abode not in the Truth," 
and that he is the father of lies.— John 8:44. 

These false doctrines have prevailed amongst the 
heathen for many, many centuries, but they gained an 
ascendancy in the Church of Christ during the "dark 
ages" and had much to do with producing the darkness 
thereof. If our forefathers had believed God's 
testimony, "Thou shalt surely die," there would have 
been no room for the introduction of prayers for the 
dead, masses for their sins, frightful thoughts respecting 
their torture. The Scriptures agree from first to 
last that "the dead know not anything" (Eccl. 9:5) and 
that "their sons come to honor and they know it not; 
they come to dishonor and they perceive it not of 
them." (Job 14:21.) It is the Scriptures that tell us 
where the dead are and their condition; that they are 
experiencing neither joy nor sorrow, pleasure nor suffering; 
that they will have no knowledge of anything 
done under the sun until their awakening in the Resurrection. 
I remind you of the wise man's words, "Do 
with thy might what thy hand findeth to do, for there 
is neither wisdom nor knowledge nor device in (sheol) 
the grave, whither thou goest." (Eccl. 9:10.) I remind 
you that both in the Old Testament and in the 
New Testament it is written of both the good and the 
bad that they fell asleep in death. I remind you that 
the Apostle speaks of those who "Sleep in Jesus," and 
of those who have "fallen asleep in Christ;" who, he 
declares, are perished, if there be no resurrection of the 
dead. Could they perish in heaven or in Purgatory or 
in a hell of torment? Assuredly no one so teaches. 
They are already in a perished condition in the tomb; 



and the perishing would be absolute, complete, unless 
a resurrection be provided for their deliverance from 
the power of death. Hence we read, "God so loved the 
world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth on him should not perish, but have 
eternal life." 

In a word, then, the Bible teaching is that man was 
made superior to all the brute creation— in the image 
and likeness of his Creator; that he possessed life in 
a perfect degree in Eden and might have retained it 
by full obedience. But in his trial, his testing, he failed 
and came under the death sentence. "In the day 
that thou eatest thereof, dying thou shalt die." (Gen. 2:17.) 
There the dying began, which, after nine hundred 
and thirty years, brought father Adam to the 
tomb and involved all of his children in his weaknesses 
and death sentence. He died in the very day, which 

R4552 : page 22 

the Apostle Peter explains was not a twenty-four day, 
but a thousand year day, saying, "One day is with the 
Lord as a thousand years." (2 Pet. 3:8.) During six 
of these great days the death sentence has brought 
man down in some respects to the level of the brute 
and left him without hope of future life, except 
as God might take compassion upon him and bring him 
some relief. This was hinted at in the statement that 
"The Seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's 
head." It was yet further elaborated to Abraham, saying, 
"In thee and in thy Seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed."-Gen. 28:14. 

But not until four of the great thousand-year days 
had passed did God send forth his Son to redeem the 
race, by paying father Adam's penalty, by dying, "The 
just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God." 
(I Pet. 3:18.) As a result of that redemptive work accomplished 
at Calvary there is to be "a resurrection of 
the dead, both of the just and of the unjust"— a recovery 
from the death sentence, from the prison-house, the 
tomb. 

DEATH, NOT TORMENT, THE PENALTY 

Note well the mistake made in assuming eternal 
torment the wages of original sin, when the Scriptures 
explicitly declare that "The wages of sin is death"— 
not eternal torment. (Rom. 6:23.) We search the 
Genesis account of man's fall and the sentence imposed, 
but find no suggestion of a future punishment, 
but merely of a death penalty. Repeating it the second 
time the Lord said, "Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt 
thou return." (Gen. 3:19.) But he said not a word 
respecting devils, fire and torment. How, then, did the 
Adversary deceive our fathers during the "dark ages" 
with his errors, which the Apostle styles "doctrines of 



devils"? Note the fact that none of the prophecies 
mention any other than a death penalty for sin. Note 
that the New Testament likewise declares the same. 
St. Paul, who wrote more than one-half of the New 
Testament, and who assures us that he did "not shun 
to declare the whole counsel of God" (Acts 20:27), 
says not a word about torment. On the contrary, discussing 
this very matter of sin and its penalty, he says, 
"Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, 

R4552 : page 23 

and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, 
for that all have sinned." (Rom. 5:12.) Note that it 
was not eternal torment that passed upon one man nor 
upon all men, but death. If some one suggests that 
death would not be a sufficient penalty for sin, all we 
would need to do would be to point him to the facts 
and thus prove his suggestions illogical. For the sin 
of disobedience Adam lost his paradisaic home— lost 
eternal life and Divine fellowship, and instead got 
sickness, pain, sorrow, death. Additionally all of his 
posterity, reasonably estimated at twenty thousand millions, 
disinherited so far as the blessings are concerned, 
have inherited weaknesses, mental, moral and physical, 
and are, as the Apostle declares, "A groaning creation." 
-Rom. 8:22. 

GOD'S PENALTY A JUST ONE 

Let no one think the death penalty unjust and too 
severe. God could have blotted out Adam, the sinner, 
thus fulfilling the sentence. He could have blotted out 
the race instantly. But would we have preferred that? 
Assuredly not. Life is sweet, even amidst pain and 
suffering. Besides it is the Divine purpose that present 
trials and experiences shall prove useful as disciplines; 
to prepare us for a wiser course than father 
Adam took, when we shall be privileged to have a 
further individual trial. Our race would have been 
without hope of future existence, just as agnosticism 
claims, had it not been for Divine compassion and the 
work of redemption. 

Notice again why our Lord died for our redemption 
and see in that another evidence of the penalty. 
If the penalty against us had been eternal torment, 
our redemption from it would have cost our Lord that 
price. He would have been obliged to suffer eternal 
torment, the just for the unjust. But eternal torment 
was not the penalty; hence Jesus did not pay that penalty 
for us. Death was the penalty and hence "Christ 
died for our sins." "By the grace of God he tasted 
death for every man." Whoever could pay Adam's 
penalty could settle with Divine Justice for the sins of 
the whole world, because Adam alone had been tried 
—Adam alone had been condemned. We, his children, 



were involved through him. Behold the wisdom and 
the economy of our Creator! The Scriptures assure 
us that he condemned the whole world for one man's 
disobedience, in order that he might have mercy upon 
all through the obedience of another— Christ. We were 
condemned to death without our consent or knowledge. 
We were redeemed from death without our consent 
or knowledge. 

Some one may inquire, "Are we, therefore, without 
responsibility? Will there be no individual penalty 
upon us for individual wrong doings"? We answer, 
"A just recompense of reward" will be meted 
out to all. But our eternal destiny can be settled only 
by ourselves, by our individual acceptance or rejection 
of the grace of God. The Scriptures clearly inform 
us that every sin, in proportion to its wilfulness, 
brings a measure of degradation which involves 
"stripes," chastisements, corrections to regain the lost 
standing. Thus the more mean and more wicked a 
man or woman may be, the greater will be his or her 
disadvantage in the resurrection time, and the more 
he will then have to overcome to get back to all that 
was lost in Adam and redeemed by Christ. 

"AND THE DEAD CAME FORTH" 

At his first advent our Lord's miracles foreshadowed 
the great work which he, with his glorified 
Church, will accomplish for the world during the Millennium 
—then all the sick, lame, blind and dead will 
be revived and, if obedient, will be brought ultimately 
to full perfection. The disobedient will be destroyed 
in the Second Death. The most notable miracle which 
our Lord performed was the awakening of Lazarus, 
his friend. Jesus was gone several days when Lazarus 
took sick and, of course, knew about the matter. 
Nevertheless Martha and Mary sent him a special message, 
saying, "Lord, behold he whom thou lovest is 
sick." (John 11:3.) They knew of Jesus' power to 
heal, even by the word of his mouth. They had faith 
that if he could help strangers, he would surely be glad 
to assist his friend. But Jesus remained where he was 
and allowed Lazarus to die and a rude shock to come 
to the dear sisters. Then he said to his disciples, "Our 
friend Lazarus sleepeth." (John 11:11.) Then, coming 
down to their comprehension, he added, "Lazarus 
is dead; and I am glad for your sakes that I was not 
there. "-John 11:14,15. 

He was glad to let his friend fall asleep in death, 
because it would provide a special opportunity for a 
special miracle. Then, with his disciples, he began 
the three-days' journey to Bethany. We cannot blame 
the sorrowing sisters that they felt hurt that the Messiah 
should apparently neglect their interests. They 
knew that He had the power to relieve them. Martha's 
gentle reproof was, "Lord, if thou hadst been here, 



my brother had not died. Jesus said unto her, thy 

brother shall rise again. Martha saith unto Him, I 

know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the 

last day." (John 21:23,24.) Notice that our Lord 

did not say, "Thy brother is not dead; thy brother is 

more alive than he ever was; he is in heaven or in 

purgatory." Nothing of the kind! Purgatory had not 

yet been invented, and he knew nothing of it. And 

as for heaven, our Lord's testimony is, in our text, 

"No man hath ascended into heaven, but he that came 

down from heaven." Martha was also well informed. 

The errors of the dark ages had not yet supplanted the 

truth. Her hope for her brother was the Scriptural 

one; that he would rise in the resurrection, in the last 

day, the Millennial Day, the seventh of the great thousand-year 

days from creation. 

Our Lord explained that the power of resurrection 
was vested in himself, that He was there with her, and 
could give relief to them without waiting. Martha 
told our Lord that it was too late; that putrefaction 
had set in by this time. But Jesus insisted on seeing 
the tomb and when he arrived at it, He said, "Lazarus, 
come forth." And we read, "He that was dead came 
forth." (John 1 1:43,44.) Mark well that it was not 
the living that came forth, but that Lazarus was really 
dead. Mark well that he was not called from heaven 
nor from purgatory. 

"ALL THAT ARE IN THEIR GRAVES" 

What Jesus did for Lazarus he intimated He 
would ultimately do for Adam and his entire race. 
Note His words: "The hour is coming, in the which 
all that are in the graves shall hear His voice, and 
shall come forth." (John 5:28,29.) Does this astonish 
us? If so, the reason is not far to seek. It 
is because we have gotten so far away from the teachings 
of the Bible— so fully immersed in the "doctrines 
of devils," so fully to believe in the serpent's lie, "Ye 
shall not surely die"— so blinded to the Lord's declaration, 

R4552 : page 24 

"Ye shall surely die," and "The wages of sin is 
death." 

The remainder of John 5:29 explains that there 
will be two general classes of the dead to come forth. 
The first, those who have had their trial and who have 
passed it successfully; the second, all the remainder of 
mankind who have thus far failed to have divine approval. 
The approved will come forth from the tomb 
unto a resurrection of life— perfection. The disapproved 
will come forth unto a resurrection of judgment 
(see Revised Version). The coming forth is one 
thing. The resurrection is another. The Apostle explains 
that they will come forth, "every man in his own 



order." (I Cor. 15:23.) On thus being awakened the 
privilege will be theirs of rising, up, up, up out of present 
degradation, mental, moral, physical, to the glorious 
perfection which father Adam enjoyed in the image 

R4553 : page 24 

and likeness of his Creator. The uplifting or resurrection 

work St. Peter refers to as the "Restitution 

of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of 

all his holy prophets since the world began."— 

Acts 3:21. 

NOT UNIVERSALISM EITHER 

Nor does this mean universal everlasting life, for 
the Scriptures declare that such as refuse to profit by 
the glorious opportunities of the Millennium; such as 
refuse to be uplifted to perfection, shall be destroyed 
from amongst the people in the Second Death— "They 
shall be as though they had not been." (Obad. 16.) I 
remind you again of our Lord's teaching on this subject. 
He entered the synagogue at Capernaum and, 
being asked to read the lesson, He chose Isaiah, the 
sixty-first chapter, and read respecting Himself and 
His work— that a part of it would be "to open the 
prison doors and set at liberty the captives." We are 
well aware that our Lord did not open any of the literal 
prisons, such as John the Baptist was confined in. 
He made no effort to succor him. The prison-house 
which Christ will open is the great prison-house, the 
tomb, which now holds approximately twenty thousand 
millions of our race. At his second advent our 
Lord will open this great prison-house and allow all the 
prisoners to come forth, just as truly as he did in the 
example— in the case of Lazarus. Nor will he call 
them from heaven, purgatory and hell, but, just as He 
declared, "Lazarus, come forth," "all that are in their 
graves shall hear His voice and come forth." 

WHERE ARE THE DEAD? 

My dear friends, you had before your minds the 
answers to our question from the highest to the lowest 
earthly authorities. None of them was satisfactory. 
Now you have heard the testimony of God's Word— 
the Divine declaration as to "Where are the dead?" 
Harkening to the voice from heaven we are assured 
that they are really dead and that all their hopes as 
respects the future are centered, first, upon the redemptive 
work of our Lord Jesus, accomplished at Calvary, 
and, secondly, upon the work of resurrection which, 
at His second advent, He is to accomplish for those 
whom He redeemed. If perchance you have a shade 
of disappointment as respects a saintly brother or sister, 
father or mother or child, who you hoped was already 



in heaven, then as a consolation look at the 

other side of the question— behold how many of your 

loved ones, kith and kin, friends and foes and neighbors, 

according to your theory and all the prevalent 

theories, have been suffering untellable woe since their 

death and would be suffering similarly for long centuries 

to come— consider the relief of mind and heart 

you get from the knowledge of the Truth; that they 

are not alive anywhere, but simply dead, or more poetically, 

they are "Asleep in Jesus," in the sense that He 

is their Redeemer, in whom all their hopes of a future 

awakening reside. 

PRESENT YOUR BODIES SACRIFICES 

Just a closing word! Our subject would lack a 
proper finish if we did not explain Scripturally why 
God has delayed the world's blessing, the resurrection, 
nearly two thousand years since the death of Jesus. 
The reason is such a glorious one! It must appeal to 
every true Christian heart and make it glad. It is this: 

God purposed the selection of the Church before 
the blessing of resurrection should go to the world. 
This Church is called sometimes "the Body of Christ, 
which is the Church," of which Jesus is the Head. 
Again it is styled "the Bride— the Lamb's Wife." Ever 
since Pentecost the Heavenly Father has been drawing 
believers to Jesus' side. After having been justified 
through faith in the precious blood, they have been invited 
to become Jesus' disciples, his followers, to walk 
in his steps, to lay down their lives in the Father's 
service, as Jesus did, and to develop in their hearts the 
fruits and graces of the holy Spirit to such a degree 
that they might be called "Copies of God's dear Son." 

The promise to these is not the resurrection of restitution 
promised to the world during the Millennium. 
On the contrary, these have a "heavenly calling." After 
their consecration they are begotten of the holy 
Spirit and then instructed in the school of Christ and 
submitted to trials and disciplines in various ways, for 
the purpose of chiseling and polishing their characters 
as New Creatures. These are a "little flock," gathered 
one here and one there; "saints" from all denominations 
and from outside of all denominations, for "the 
Lord knoweth them that are His." When the predestined 
number of the "elect" shall have been selected 
and polished the present age will end. Our Lord will 
come in second advent glory and power. His Elect 
Bride will constitute the First Resurrection class, from 
earthly to heavenly nature, "changed in a moment," 
for "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of 
God."-ICor. 15:50. 

Then will come the holy, invisible Millennial 
Kingdom and the binding of Satan and the destruction 
of his unholy, invisible kingdom, and the setting 
loose of agencies for the enlightening and uplifting of 



the whole race. 

To those who are already the Lord's consecrated 
saints, I say, Lift up your heads and realize more 
fully than ever before the glorious fulness of the heavenly 
calling, of which you have been made partakers. 
To others who have the hearing ear and appreciate 
this high calling we say, permit the love of God, and 
of Christ to constrain you and become disciples indeed 
of Jesus, laying aside every weight and every besetting 
sin, and entering the race and pressing with vigor 
to its end and crown of glory! 



R4553 : page 25 
WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES CONCERNING HELL? 



"To the Law and to the Testimony; If they speak not according 
to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them."— Isa. 8:20. 

A CORRECT understanding of this subject has 
become almost a necessity to Christian steadfastness. 
For centuries it has been the teaching 
of "orthodoxy," of all shades, that God, before 
creating man, had created a great abyss of fire 
and terrors, capable of containing all the billions of the 
human family which he purposed to bring into being; 
that this abyss he had named "hell;" and that all of the 
promises and threatenings of the Bible were designed 
to deter as many as possible (a "little flock") from such 
wrong-doing as would make this awful place their 
perpetual home. 

As knowledge increases and superstitions fade, 
this monstrous view of the divine arrangement and 
character is losing its force; and thinking people cannot 
but disbelieve the legend, which used to be illustrated 
on the church walls in the highest degree of art 
and realism, samples of which are still to be seen in 
Europe. Some now claim that the place is literal, but 
the fire symbolic, etc., etc., while others repudiate the 
doctrine of "hell" in every sense and degree. While 
glad to see superstitions fall, and truer ideas of the 
great, and wise, and just, and loving Creator prevail, 
we are alarmed to notice that the tendency with all 
who abandon this long-revered doctrine is toward 
doubt, skepticism, infidelity. 

Why should this be the case, when the mind is 
merely being delivered from an error,— do you ask? 
Because Christian people have so long been taught 
that the foundation for this awful blasphemy against 
God's character and government is deep-laid, and 
firmly fixed, in the Word of God— the Bible— and, 
consequently, to whatever degree that belief in "hell" 



is shaken, to that extent their faith in the Bible, as the 
revelation of the true God, is shaken also;— so that 
those who have dropped their belief in a "hell," of some 
kind of endless torment, are often open infidels, and 
scoffers at God's Word. 

Guided by the Lord's providence to a realization 
that the Bible has been slandered, as well as its divine 
Author, and that, rightly understood, it teaches nothing 
on this subject derogatory to God's character nor 
to an intelligent reason, we will attempt to lay bare 
the Scripture teaching on this subject, that thereby 
faith in God and his Word may be re-established, in 
the hearts of his people, on a better, a reasonable 
foundation. Indeed, it is our opinion that whoever 
shall hereby find that his false view rested upon human 
misconceptions and misinterpretations, will, at the 
same time, learn to trust hereafter less to his own and 
other men's imaginings, and, by faith, to grasp more 
firmly the Word of God, which is able to make wise 
unto salvation. 

That the advocates of the doctrine of eternal torment 
have little or no faith in it is very manifest from 
the fact that it has no power over their course of action. 
While all the denominations of Christendom 
sustain the doctrine that eternal torment and endless, 
hopeless despair will constitute the punishment of the 
wicked, they are mostly quite at ease in allowing the 
wicked to take their course, while they pursue the 
even tenor of their way. Chiming bells and pealing 
organs, artistic choirs, and costly edifices, and upholstered 
pews, and polished oratory which more and 
more avoid any reference to this alarming theme, 
afford rest and entertainment to fashionable congregations 
that gather on the Lord's day and are known 
to the world as churches of Christ and representatives 
of his doctrines. But they seem little concerned about 
the eternal welfare of the multitudes, or even of themselves 
and their own families, though one would naturally 
presume that with such awful possibilities in view 
they would be almost frantic in their efforts to rescue 
the perishing. 

The plain inference is that they do not believe it. 
The only class of people that to any degree show their 
faith in it by their works is the Salvation Army; and 
these are the subjects of ridicule from almost all other 
Christians, because they are somewhat consistent with 
their belief. Yet their peculiar, and often absurd, 
methods, so strikingly in contrast with those of the 
Lord of whom it was written, "He shall not cry, nor lift 
up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street" (Isa. 42:2), 
are very mild compared with what might be 
expected if they were fully convinced of the doctrine. 
We cannot imagine how sincere believers of this terrible 
doctrine go from day to day about the ordinary 
affairs of life, or meet quietly in elegance every Sunday 
to hear an essay from the pulpit on the peculiar 



subjects often advertised. Could they do so while 
really believing all the time that fellow mortals are 
dying at the rate of one hundred a minute, and 
entering 

"That lone land of deep despair," where 
"No God regards their bitter prayer"? 

If they really believed this few saints could complacently 
sit there and think of those hurrying every 
moment into that awful state described by that good, 
well-meaning, but greatly deluded man, Isaac Watts 
(whose own heart was immeasurably warmer and 
larger than that he ascribed to the great Jehovah), 
when he wrote the hymn— 

"Tempests of angry fire shall roll 

To blast the rebel worm, 
And beat upon the naked soul 

In one eternal storm." 

People often become frantic with grief when 
friends have been caught in some terrible catastrophe, 
as a fire, or a wreck, though they know they will 
soon be relieved by death; yet they pretend to believe 
that God is less loving than themselves, and that he 
can look with indifference, if not with delight, at billions 
of his creatures enduring an eternity of torture 
far more terrible, which he prepares for them and prevents 
any escape from forever. Not only so, but they 
expect that they will get literally into Abraham's bosom, 
and will then look across the gulf and see and hear 
the agonies of the multitudes (some of whom they now 
love and weep over); and they imagine that they will 
be so changed, and become so like their present idea 
of God, so hardened against all pity, and so barren of 
love and sympathy, that they will delight in such a 
God and in such a plan. 

It is wonderful that otherwise sensible men and 
women, who love their fellows, and who establish hospitals, 
orphanages, asylums, and societies for the prevention 
of cruelty even to the brute creation, are so 
unbalanced mentally that they can believe and subscribe 

R4553 : page 26 

to such a doctrine, and yet be so indifferent about 
investigating its authority! 

Only one exception can we think of— those who 
hold the ultra-Calvinistic doctrine; who believe that 
God has decreed it thus, that all the efforts they 
could put forth could not alter the result with a single 
person; and that all the prayers they could offer would 
not change one iota of the awful plan they believe 
God has marked out for his and their eternal pleasure. 
These indeed could sit still, so far as effort for their 



fellows is concerned: but why sing the praises of such 
a scheme for the damnation of their neighbors whom 
God has told them to love as themselves? 

Why not rather begin to doubt this "doctrine of 
devils," this blasphemy against the great God, hatched 
in the "dark ages," when a crafty priesthood taught 
that it is right to do evil that good may result? 

The doctrine of eternal torment was undoubtedly 
introduced by Papacy to induce pagans to join her 
and support her system. It flourished at the same 
time that "bull fights" and gladiatorial contests were 
the public amusements most enjoyed; when the Crusades 
were called "holy wars," and when men and 
women were called "heretics" and were often slaughtered 
for thinking or speaking contrary to the teachings 
of the Papacy; at a time when the sun of gospel 
truth was obscure; when the Word of God had fallen 
into disuse and was prohibited to be read by any but 
the clergy, whose love of their neighbors was often 
shown in torturing "heretics" to induce them to recant 
and deny their faith and their Bibles— to save 
them, if possible, they explained, from the more awful 
future of "heretics,"— eternal torture. They did not 
borrow this doctrine from the heathen, for no heathen 
people in the world have a doctrine so cruel, so fiendish 
and so unjust. Find it, whoever can, and show 
it up in all its blackness, that, if possible, it may be 
shown that the essence of barbarism, malice, hate and 
ungodliness has not been exclusively appropriated by 
those whom God has most highly favored with light 
from every quarter, and to whom he has committed 
the only oracle— his Word. Oh! the shame and confusion 
that will cover the faces of many, even good 
men, who verily thought that they did God service 
while propagating this blasphemous doctrine, when 
they awake in the resurrection, to learn of the love 
and justice of God, and when they come to know that 
the Bible does not teach this God-dishonoring, love-extinguishing, 
truth-beclouding, saint-hindering, sinner-hardening, 
"damnable heresy" of eternal torment. 
-2 Pet. 2:1. 

But we repeat that, in the light and moral development 
of this day, sensible people do not believe this 
doctrine. However, since they think that the Bible 
teaches it, every step they progress in real intelligence 
and brotherly kindness, which hinders belief in eternal 
torment, is in most cases a step away from God's 
Word, which is falsely accused of being the authority 
for this teaching. Hence the second crop of evil 
fruit, which the devil's engraftment of this error is producing, 
is skepticism. The intelligent, honest thinkers 
are thus driven from the Bible into vain philosophies 
and sciences, falsely so-called, and into infidelity. Nor 
do the "worldly" really believe this doctrine, nor is it 
a restraint to crime, for convicts and the lower classes 
are the firmest believers in it. 



But, says one, Has not the error done some good? 
Have not many been brought into the churches by the 
preaching of this doctrine in the past? 

No error, we answer, ever did real good, but always 
harm. Those whom error brings into a church, 
and whom the truth would not move, are an injury 
to the church. The thousands terrorized, but not at 
heart converted, which this doctrine forced into Papacy, 
and which swelled her numbers and her wealth, 
diluted what little truth was held before, and mingled 
it with their unholy sentiments and errors so that, to 
meet the changed condition of things, the "clergy" 
found it needful to add error to error, and resorted to 
methods, forms, etc., not taught in the Scriptures and 
useless to the truly converted whom the truth controls. 
Among these were pictures, images, beads, vestments, 
candles, grand cathedrals, altars, etc., to help the unconverted 
heathen to a form of godliness more nearly 
corresponding to their former heathen worship, but 
lacking all the power of vital godliness. 

The heathen were not benefited, for they were still 
heathen in God's sight, but deluded into aping what 
they did not understand or do from the heart. They 
were added "tares" to choke the "wheat," without being 
profited themselves. The Lord tells who sowed 
the seed of this enormous crop. (Matt. 13:39). The 
same is true of those who assume the name "Christian" 
to-day, who are not really at heart converted 
by the truth, but merely frightened by the error, or 
allured by promised earthly advantages of a social or 
business kind. Such add nothing to the true Church; 
by their ideas and manners they become stumbling 
blocks to the truly consecrated, and by their inability 
to digest the truth, the real food of the saints, they 
lead even the few true pastors to defraud the true 
"sheep" in order to satisfy the demands of these 
"goats" for something pleasing to their unconverted 
tastes. No: in no way has this error accomplished 
good except in the sense that God is able to make 
even the wrath of man to praise him. So also he will 
overrule this evil thing eventually to serve his purposes. 
When by and by all men (during the Millennium) 
shall come to see through this great deception by 
which Satan has blinded the world to God's true character, 
it will perhaps awaken in them a warmer, 
stronger love for God. 

Seeing, then, the unreasonableness of man's view, 
let us lay aside human opinions and theories and come 
to the Word of God, the only authority on the subject, 
remembering that 

"God is His own interpreter, and He will make it plain." 

"HELL," AS AN ENGLISH WORD. 



In the first place bear in mind that the Old Testament 
Scriptures were written in the Hebrew language, 
and the New Testament in the Greek. The word 
"hell" is an English word sometimes selected by the 
translators of the English Bible to express the sense 
of the Hebrew word sheol and the Greek words hades, 
tartaroo and gehenna,— sometimes rendered "grave" 
and "pit." 

The word "hell" in old English usage, before 
Papal theologians picked it up and gave it a new and 
special significance to suit their own purposes, simply 
meant to conceal, to hide, to cover; hence the concealed, 

R4553 : page 27 

hidden or covered place. In old English literature 
records may be found of the helling of potatoes 
—putting potatoes into pits; and of the helling of a 
house— covering or thatching it. The word hell was 
therefore properly used synonymously with the words 
"grave" and "pit," to translate the words sheol and 
hades as signifying the secret or hidden condition 
of death. However, the same spirit which was willing 
to twist the word to terrorize the ignorant is willing 
still to perpetuate the error;— presumably saying— "Let 
us do evil that good may follow." 

If the translators of the Revised Version Bible 
had been thoroughly disentangled from the Papal 
error, and thoroughly honest, they would have done 
more to help the English student than merely to substitute 
the Hebrew word sheol and the Greek word 
hades as they have done. They should have translated 
the words. But they were evidently afraid to tell 
the truth, and ashamed to tell the lie; and so gave us 
sheol and hades untranslated, and permitted the inference 
that these words mean the same as the word 
"hell" has become perverted to mean. Their course, 
while it for a time shields themselves, dishonors God 
and the Bible, which the common people still suppose 
teaches a "hell" of torment in the words sheol 
and hades. Yet anyone can see that if it was proper 
to translate the word sheol thirty-one times "grave" 
and three times "pit," it could not have been improper 
to so translate it in every other instance. 

A peculiarity to be observed in comparing these 
cases, as we will do shortly, is that in those texts where 
the torment idea would be an absurdity the translators 
of the King James version have used the words 
"grave" or "pit"; while in all other cases they have 
used the word "hell;" and the reader, long schooled 
in the Papal idea of torment, reads the word "hell" 
and thinks of it as signifying a place of torment, instead 
of the grave, the hidden or covered place or condition. 
For example, compare Job 14:13 with Psa. 86:13. 
The former reads,— "Oh, that thou wouldst 



hide me in the grave [sheol] etc.," while the latter 
reads,— "Thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest 
hell [sheol]." The Hebrew word being the same in 
both cases, there is no reason why the same word 
"grave" should not be used in both. But how absurd 
it would have been for Job to pray to God to 
hide him in a hell of eternal torture! The English 
reader would have asked questions and the secret 
would have gotten out speedily. 

While the translators of the Reformation times 
are somewhat excusable for their mental bias in this 
matter, as they were just breaking away from the old 
Papal system, our modern translators, specially those 
of the recent Revised Version, are not entitled to any 
such consideration. Theological professors and pastors 
of congregations consider that they are justified 
in following the course of the revisers in not explaining 
the meaning of either the Hebrew or Greek words 
sheol or hades and by their use of the words they also 
give their confiding flocks to understand that a place 
of torture, a lake of fire, is meant. While attributing 
to the ignorant only the best of motives, it is manifestly 
only duplicity and cowardice which induces educated 
men, who know the truth on this subject, to prefer 
to continue to teach the error inferentially. 

But not all ministers know of the errors of the 
translators and deliberately cover and hide those errors 
from the people. Many, indeed, do not know of 
them, having merely accepted, without investigation, 
the theories of their seminary professors. It is the 
professors and learned ones who are most blameworthy. 
These have kept back the truth about "hell" 
for several reasons. First, there is evidently a sort 
of understanding or etiquette among them, that if they 
wish to maintain their standing in the "profession" they 
"must not tell tales out of school;" i.e., they must 
not divulge professional secrets to the "common people," 
the "laity." Second, they all fear that to let it 
be known that they have been teaching an unscriptural 
doctrine for years would break down the popular respect 
and reverence for the "clergy," the denominations 
and the theological schools, and unsettle confidence 
in their wisdom. And, oh, how much depends 
upon confidence and reverence for men, when God's 
Word is so generally ignored! Third, they know that 
many of the members of their sects are not constrained 
by "the love of Christ" (2 Cor. 5:14), but merely by 
the fear of hell, and they see clearly, therefore, that 
to let the truth be known now would soon cut loose 
the names and the dollars of many in their flocks; and 
this, to those who "desire to make a fair show in the 
flesh" (Gal. 6:12) would seem to be a great calamity. 

But what will be the judgment of God, whose 
character and plan are traduced by the blasphemous 
doctrine which these untranslated words help to support? 
Will he commend these unfaithful servants? 



Will he justify their course? Will the Chief Shepherd 
call these his beloved friends, and make known to them 
his further plans (John 15:15) that they may misrepresent 
them also to preserve their own dignity and 
reverence? Will he continue to send forth "things 
new and old," "meat in due season," to the household 
of faith, by the hand of the unfaithful servants? No, 
such shall not continue to be his mouthpieces or to 
shepherd his flock. (Ezek. 34:9,10.) He will choose 
instead, as at the first advent, from among the laity— 
"the common people"— mouthpieces, and will give 
them words which none of the chief priests shall be 
able to gainsay or resist. (Luke 21:15.) And, as foretold, 
"the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and 
the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." 
-Isa. 29:9-19. 

"HELL" IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 



The word "hell" occurs thirty-one times in the 
Old Testament, and in every instance it is sheol in the 
Hebrew. It does not mean a lake of fire and brimstone, 
nor anything at all resembling that thought: 
not in the slightest degree! Quite the reverse: instead 
of a place of blazing fire it is described in the context 
as a state of "darkness" (Job 10:21); instead of a place 
where shrieks and groans are heard, it is described in 
the context as a place of "silence" (Psa. 115:17); instead 
of representing in any sense pain and suffering, 
or remorse, the context describes it as a place or condition 
of forgetfulness. (Psa. 88:11,12.) "There is no 
work, nor device, nor knowledge, in the grave [sheol] 
whither thou goest."— Eccles. 9:10. 

The meaning of sheol is "the hidden state," as 
applied to man's condition in death, in and beyond 
which all is hidden, except to the eye of faith; hence, 

R4553 : page 28 

by proper and close association, the word was often 
used in the sense of grave— the tomb, the hidden 
place, or place beyond which only those who have the 
enlightened eye of the understanding can see resurrection, 
restitution of being. And be it particularly 
noted that this identical word sheol is translated 
"grave" thirty-one times and "pit" three times in our 
common version by the same translators— more times 
than it is translated "hell"; and twice, where it is translated 
"hell," it seemed so absurd, according to the present 
accepted meaning of the English word "hell," that 
scholars have felt it necessary to explain in the margin 
of modern Bibles, that it means grave. (Isa. 14:9 and 
Jonah 2:2.) In the latter case, the hidden state, or 
grave, was the belly of the fish in which Jonah was 



buried alive, and from which he cried to God. 

ALL TEXTS IN WHICH "SHEOL" IS TRANSLATED 
"HELL." 

(1) Amos 9:2.— "Though they dig into hell, thence 
shall mine hand take them." [A figurative expression; 
but certainly pits of the earth are the only hells men 
can dig into.] 

(2) Psa. 16:10.— "Thou will not leave my soul in 
hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see 
corruption." [This refers to our Lord's three days 
in the tomb. -Acts 2:31; 3:15.] 

(3, 4) Psa. 18:5 and 2 Sam. 22:6-margin.-"The 
cords of hell compassed me about." [A figure in 
which trouble is represented as hastening one to the 
tomb.] 

(5) Psa. 55:15.— "Let them go down quick into 
hell"— margin, "the grave." 

(6) Psa. 9:17.— "The wicked shall be turned into 
hell, and all the nations that forget God." This text 
will be treated later, under a separate heading. 

(7) Psa. 86:13.— "Thou hast delivered my soul 
from the lowest hell"— margin, "the grave." 

(8) Psa. 116:3.— "The sorrows of death compassed 
me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me." [Sickness 
and trouble are the figurative hands of the grave 

to grasp us.] 

(9) Psa. 139:8.— "If I make my bed in hell, behold, 
thou art there." [God's power is unlimited; even 
over those in the tomb he can and will exert it and 
bring forth all that are in the graves.— John 5:28.] 

(10) Deut. 32:22.— "For a fire is kindled in mine 
anger, and shall burn into the lowest hell." [A figurative 
representation of the destruction, the utter ruin, 

of Israel as a nation— "wrath to the uttermost," as 
the Apostle called it, God's anger burning that nation 
to the "lowest deep," as Leeser here translates the 
word sheol.— I Thes. 2:16.] 

(11) Job 11:8.— "It [God's wisdom] is as high as 
heaven; what canst thou do? deeper than hell [than 
any pit]; what canst thou know?" 

(12) Job 26:6. -"Hell [the tomb] is naked before 
him, and destruction hath no covering." 

(13) Prov. 5:5.— "Her feet go down to death; 

her steps take hold on hell [i.e., lead to the grave]." 

(14) Prov. 7:27.— "Her house is the way to hell 
[the grave], going down to the chambers of death." 

(15) Prov. 9:18. -"He knoweth not that the dead 

are there, and that her guests are in the depths of hell." 
[Here the harlot's guests are represented as dead, diseased 
or dying, and many of the victims of sensuality 
in premature graves from diseases which also hurry 
off their posterity to the tomb.] 

(16) Prov. 15:11.— "Hell and destruction are before 
the Lord." [Here the grave is associated with 



destruction and not with a life of torment] 

(17) Prov. 15:24.-"The path of life (leadeth) 

upward for the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.' 
[This illustrates the hope of resurrection from 
the tomb.] 

(18) Prov. 23:14. --"Thou shalt beat him with the 
rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell" [i.e., wise 
correction will save a child from vicious ways which 
lead to premature death, and may also possibly prepare 
him to escape the "Second Death"]. 

(19) Prov. 27:20.— "Hell [the grave] and destruction 
are never full: so the eyes of man are never 
satisfied." 

(20) Isa. 5:14.— "Therefore hell hath enlarged 
herself and opened her mouth without measure." [Here 
the grave is a symbol of destruction.] 

(21, 22) Isa. 14:9, 15. -"Hell [margin, grave] 
from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy 
coming. "..."Thou shalt be brought down to hell" 
[the grave— so rendered in verse 11.] 

(23) Isa. 57:9.— "And didst debase thyself even 
unto hell." [Here figurative of deep degradation.] 

(24, 25) Ezek. 31:15-17. -"In the day when he 
went down to the grave,... I made the nations to 
shake at the sound of his fall, when I cast him down 
to hell with them that descend into the pit.... 
They also went down into hell with him, unto them 
that be slain with the sword." [Figurative and prophetic 
description of the fall of Babylon into destruction, 
silence, the grave.] 

(26) Ezek. 32:21.— "The strong among the mighty 
shall speak to him out of the midst of hell with them 
that help him." [A continuation of the same figure 
representing Egypt's overthrow as a nation to join 
Babylon in destruction— buried.] 

(27) Ezek. 32:27. -"And they shall not lie with 

the mighty that are fallen of the uncircumcised, which 
are gone down to hell with their weapons of war: and 
they have laid their swords under their heads; but 
their iniquities shall be upon their bones, though they 
were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living." 
[The grave is the only "hell" where fallen ones 
are buried and lie with their weapons of war under 
their heads.] 

(28) Hab. 2:5.— "Who enlargeth his desire as hell 
[the grave] and as death, and cannot be satisfied." 

(29) Jonah 2:1,2.— "Then Jonah prayed unto the 
Lord his God, out of the fish's belly, and said, I cried 
by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he 
heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou 
heardest my voice." [The belly of the fish was for 

a time his grave— see margin.] 

(30, 31) Isa. 28:15-18.— "Because ye have said, 
We have made a covenant with death, and with hell 
[the grave] are we at agreement; when the overflowing 
scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto 



us, for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood 
have we hid ourselves: Therefore, saith the Lord, 
...Your covenant with death shall be disannulled, 
and your agreement with hell [the grave] shall not 
stand." [God thus declares that the present prevalent 

R4553 : page 29 

idea, by which death and the grave are represented 
as friends, rather than enemies, shall cease; and men 
shall learn that death is the wages of sin, and that 
it is in Satan's power (Rom. 6:23; Heb. 2:14) and 
not an angel sent by God.] 

ALL OTHER TEXTS WHERE "SHEOL" OCCURS-- 
RENDERED "GRAVE" AND "PIT." 



Gen. 37:35.— "I will go down into the grave unto 
my son." 

Gen. 42:38.— "Then shall ye bring down my gray 
hairs with sorrow to the grave." [See also the same 
expression in 44:29,31. The translators did not like 
to send God's servant, Jacob, to hell simply because 
his sons were evil."] 

I Sam. 2:6.— "The Lord killeth, and maketh alive: 
he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up." 

I Kings 2:6,9.— "Let not his hoar head go down 
to the grave with peace. ...His hoar head bring thou 
down to the grave with blood." 

Job 7:9.— "He that goeth down to the grave." 

Job 14:13.— "Oh, that thou wouldst hide me in 
the grave, that thou wouldst keep me secret until thy 
wrath be past, that thou wouldst appoint me a set 
time, and remember me [resurrect me]!" 

Job 17:13.— "If I wait, the grave is mine house: 
I have made my bed in the darkness." [Job waits for 
resurrection— "in the morning."] 

Job 17:16.— "They shall go down to the bars 
of the pit [grave], when our rest together is in the 
dust." 

Job 21:13.— "They spend their days in mirth, and 
in a moment go down to the grave." 

Job 24: 19,20.— "Drought and heat consume the 
snow waters: so doth the grave those which have 
sinned." [All have sinned, hence "Death passed upon 
all men," and all go down to the grave. But all have 
been redeemed by "the precious blood of Christ"; 
hence all shall be awakened and come forth again in 
God's due time— "in the morning," Rom. 5:12,18,19.] 

Psa. 6:5.— "In death there is no remembrance of 
thee; in the grave who shall give thee thanks?" 

Psa. 30:3.— "O Lord, thou hast brought up my 
soul from the grave: thou hast kept me alive, that I 
should not go down to the pit." [This passage expresses 



gratitude for recovery from danger of death.] 

Psa. 31:17.— "Let the wicked be ashamed; let 
them be silent in the grave." 

Psa. 49:14,15, margin.— "Like sheep they are laid 
in the grave: death shall feed on them; and the upright 
[the saints— Dan. 7:27] shall have dominion over 
them in the morning [the Millennial morning]; and 
their beauty shall consume, the grave being an habitation 
to every one of them. But God will redeem my 
soul from the power of the grave." 

Psa. 88:3.— "My life draweth nigh unto the grave." 

Psa. 89:48.— "Shall he deliver his soul from the 
hand of the grave?" 

Psa. 141:7.— "Our bones are scattered at the 
grave's mouth." 

Prov. 1:12.— "Let us swallow them up alive as 
the grave: and whole, as those that go down into the 
pit" [i.e., as of an earthquake, as in Num. 16:30-33]. 

Prov. 30:15,16.— "Four things say not, it is 
enough: the grave," etc. 

Eccl. 9:10.— "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, 
do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, 
nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither 
thou goest." 

Song of Solomon 8:6.— "Jealousy is cruel as the 
grave." 

Isa. 14:11.— "Thy pomp is brought down to the 
grave." 

Isa. 38:10.— "I shall go to the gates of the grave: 
I am deprived of the residue of my years." 

Isa. 38:18.— "The grave cannot praise thee, death 
cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit 
cannot hope for thy truth." 

Num. 16:30-33.— "If.. .they go down quick 
into the pit, then shall ye understand. ...The ground 
clave asunder that was under them, and the earth 
opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and their 
houses, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, 
and all their goods. They and all that appertained to 
them went down alive into the pit, and the earth 
closed upon them: and they perished from among the 
congregation." 

Ezek. 31:15.— "In the day when he went down 
to the grave." 

Hosea 13:14.— "I will ransom them from the 
power of the grave; I will redeem them from death. 
O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be 
thy destruction. Repentance shall be hid from mine 
eyes." [The Lord did not ransom any from a place 
of fire and torment, for there is no such place; but he 
did ransom all mankind from the grave, from death, 
the penalty brought upon all by Adam's sin, as this 
verse declares.] 

The above list includes every instance of the use 
of the English word "hell" and the Hebrew word sheol 
in the Old Testament. From this examination it must 



be evident to all readers that God's revelations for 
four thousand years contain not a single hint of a 
"hell," such as the word is now understood to signify. 

"HELL" IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



In the New Testament, the Greek word hades 
corresponds exactly to the Hebrew word sheol. As 
proof see the quotations of the Apostles from the Old 
Testament, in which they render it hades. For instance, 
Acts 2:27, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in 
hades," is a quotation from Psa. 16:10, "Thou wilt 
not leave my soul in sheol." And in I Cor. 15:54,55, 
"Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where 
is thy sting? O grave [hades], where is thy victory?" 
is an allusion to Isa. 25:8, "He will swallow up death 
in victory," and to Hos. 13:14, "O death, I will be 
thy plagues; O sheol, I will be thy destruction." 

"HELL" FROM THE GREEK WORD "HADES." 



Matt. 11:23.— "And thou, Capernaum, which art 
exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell," 
Luke 10:15: "Shall be thrust down to hell." 
[In privileges of knowledge and opportunity the city 
was highly favored, or, figuratively, "exalted unto 
heaven;" but because of misuse of God's favors, 
it would be debased, or, figuratively, cast down to 
hades, overthrown, destroyed. It is now so thoroughly 
buried in oblivion, that even the site where 

R4553 : page 30 

it stood is a matter of dispute. Capernaum is certainly 
destroyed, thrust down to hades.] 

Luke 16:23.— "In hell he lifted up his eyes, being 
in torments." [A parabolic figure explained further 
along, under a separate heading.] 

Rev. 6:8.— "And behold a pale horse: and his 
name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed 
with him." [Symbol of destruction or the grave.] 

Matt. 16: 18.— "Upon this rock I will build my 
church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against 
it." [Although bitter and relentless persecution, even 
unto death, should afflict the Church during the Gospel 
age, it should never prevail to her utter extermination; 
and eventually, by her resurrection, accomplished 
by her Lord, the Church will prevail over 
hades— the tomb.] 

CHRIST IN "HELL" (HADES) AND RESURRECTED 
FROM "HELL" (HADES).- 



ACTS 2:1,14,22-31. 



"And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, 
...Peter. ..lifted up his voice and said,. ..Ye 
men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, 
a man approved of God among you, ...being delivered 
by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge 
of God ['He was delivered for our offenses'], ye have 
taken and by wicked hands have crucified and slain: 
whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pains 
[or bands] of death, because it was not possible that 
he should be holden of it [for the Word of Jehovah 
had previously declared his resurrection]; for David 
speaketh concerning him [personating or speaking for 
him], 'I [Christ] foresaw the Lord [Jehovah] always 
before my face; for he is on my right hand, that I 
should not be moved. Therefore did my heart rejoice, 
and my tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shall 
rest in hope, because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell 
[hades, the tomb, the state of death], neither wilt thou 
suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. Thou [Jehovah] 
hast made known to me [Christ] the ways of 
life.'" Here our Lord, as personified by the prophet 
David, expresses his faith in Jehovah's promise of 
a resurrection and in the full and glorious accomplishment 
of Jehovah's plan through him, and rejoices 
in the prospect. 

Peter then proceeds, saying— "Men and brethren, 
let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, 
that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher is 
with us unto this day [so that this prophecy could not 
have referred to himself personally; for David's soul 
was left in "hell"— [hades, the tomb, the state of death 
—and his flesh did see corruption]: Therefore being 
a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an 
oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins according to 
the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne; 
he, seeing this before [prophetically], spake of the resurrection 
of Christ [out of "hell"— hades, the tomb- 
to which he must go for our offenses], that his soul 
was not left in hell [hades— the death state], neither 
his flesh did see corruption." Thus Peter presents a 
strong, logical argument, based on the words of the 
prophet David— showing first, that Christ, who was 
delivered by God for our offenses, went to "hell," the 
grave, the condition of death, destruction (Psa. 16:10;) 
and, second, that according to promise he had been 
delivered from hell, the grave, death, destruction 
by a resurrection— a raising up to life; being created 
again, the same identical being, yet more glorious 
and exalted even to "the express image of the Father's 
person." (Heb. 1:3.) And now "this same Jesus" 
(Acts 2:36), in his subsequent revelation to the 
Church, declares— 



Rev. 1:18.— "I am he that liveth and was dead, 
and, behold, I am alive forevermore, Amen; and have 
the keys of hell [hades, the grave] and of death." 

Amen! Amen! our hearts respond; for in his resurrection 
we see the glorious outcome of the whole 
plan of Jehovah to be accomplished through the power 
of the Resurrected One who now holds the keys of 
the tomb and of death and in due time will release 
all the prisoners who are, therefore, called the "prisoners 
of hope." (Zech. 9:12; Luke 4:18.) No craft 
or cunning can by any possible device wrest these 
Scriptures entire and pervert them to the support of 
that monstrous and blasphemous Papal tradition of 
eternal torment. Had that been our penalty, Christ, 
to be our vicarious sacrifice, must still, and to all 
eternity, endure such torment, which no one will 
claim. But death was our penalty, and "Christ died 
for our sins," and "also for the sins of the whole 
world."-I Cor. 15:3; I John 2:2. 

Rev. 20:13,14— "And the sea gave up the dead 
which were in it; and death and hell [the grave] delivered 
up the dead which were in them: and they were 
judged, every man, according to their works. And 
death and hell [the grave] were cast into the lake of 
fire: this is the Second Death." [The lake of fire is the 
symbol of final and everlasting destruction. Death 
and hell [the grave] both go into it. There shall be 
no more death; "the last enemy that shall be destroyed 
is death."-I Cor. 15:26; Rev. 21:4.] 

OTHER OCCURRENCES OF THE WORD 
"HELL." 



Having examined the word sheol, the only word 
in the Old Testament rendered "hell," and the word 
hades, most frequently in the New Testament rendered 
"hell" we now notice every remaining instance 
in Scripture of the English word "hell." In the New 
Testament two other words are rendered "hell;" 
namely, gehenna and tartaroo, which we will consider 
in the order named. 

"GEHENNA" RENDERED "HELL." 



This word occurs in the following passages— in 
all twelve times:-Matt. 5:22,29,30; 10:28; 18:9; 23:15,33; 
Mark 9:43-47; Luke 12:5; Jas. 3:6. It is the 
Grecian mode of spelling the Hebrew words which 
are translated "Valley of Hinnom." This valley lay 
just outside the city of Jerusalem, and served the purpose 
of sewer and garbage burner to that city. The 
offal, garbage, etc., were emptied there, and fires were 



kept continually burning to consume utterly all things 
deposited therein, brimstone being added to assist 
combustion and insure complete destruction. But 
no living thing was ever permitted to be cast into 
Gehenna. The Jews were not allowed to torture any 
creature. 

When we consider that in the people of Israel 
God was giving us object lessons illustrating his dealings 
and plans, present and future, we should expect 

R4553 : page 31 

that this Valley of Hinnom, of Gehenna, would also 
play its part in illustrating things future. We know 
that Israel's priesthood and temple illustrated the Royal 
Priesthood, the Christian Church as it will be, the 
true temple of God; and we know that their chief city 
was a figure of the New Jerusalem, the seat of kingdom 
power and center of authority— the city (government) 
of the Great King, Immanuel. We remember, 
too, that Christ's government is represented in the 
book of Revelation (Rev. 21:10-27) under the figure 
of a city— the New Jerusalem. There, after describing 
the class permitted to enter the privileges and 
blessings of that Kingdom— the honorable and glorious, 
and all who have right to the trees of life— we find 
it also declared that there shall not enter into it anything 
that defileth, or that worketh abomination, or 
maketh a lie; but only such as the Lamb shall write 
as worthy of life. This city, which thus will represent 
the entire saved world in the end of the Millennium, 
was typified in the earthly city, Jerusalem; and the 
defiling, the abominable, etc., the class unworthy of 
life everlasting, who do not enter in, were represented 
by the refuse and the filthy, lifeless carcasses cast 
into Gehenna outside the city,— whose utter destruction 
was thus symbolized— the Second Death. Accordingly, 
we find it stated that those not found worthy 
of life are to be cast into the "lake of fire" (Rev. 20:15) 
—fire here, as everywhere, being used as a 
symbol of destruction, and the symbol, lake of fire, 
being drawn from this same Gehenna, or Valley of 
Hinnom. 

Therefore, while Gehenna served a useful purpose 
to the city of Jerusalem as a place for garbage burning, 
it, like the city itself, was typical, and illustrated 
the future dealings of God in refusing and committing 
to destruction all the impure elements, thus preventing 
them from defiling the holy city, the New Jerusalem, 
after the trial of the Millennial age of judgment 
shall have fully proved them and separated with unerring 
accuracy the "sheep" from the "goats." 

So, then, Gehenna was a type or illustration of 
the Second Death— final and complete destruction, 
from which there can be no recovery; for after that, 
"there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins," but only 



"fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries." 
-Heb. 10:26. 

Let us remember that Israel, for the purpose of 
being used as types of God's future dealing with the 
race, was typically treated as though the ransom had 
been given before they left Egypt, though only a typical 
lamb had been slain. When Jerusalem was built, 
and the Temple— representative of the true temple, the 
Church, and the true kingdom as it will be established 
by Christ in the Millennium— that people typified the 
world in the Millennial age. Their priests represented 
the glorified Royal Priesthood, and their Law and its 
demands of perfect obedience represented the law and 
conditions under the New Covenant, to be brought 
into operation for the blessing of all the obedient, and 
for the condemnation of all who, when granted fullest 
opportunity, will not heartily submit to the righteous 
ruling and laws of the Great King. 

Seeing then, that Israel's polity, condition, etc., 
prefigured those of the world in the coming age, how 
appropriate that we should find the Valley or abyss, 
Gehenna, a figure of the Second Death, the utter destruction 
in the coming age of all that is unworthy of 
preservation; and how aptly, too, is the symbol, "lake 
of fire burning with brimstone" (Rev. 19:20), drawn 
from this same Gehenna, or Valley of Hinnom, burning 
continually with brimstone. The expression, 
"burning with brimstone," adds force to the symbol, 
"fire," to express the utter and irrevocable destructiveness 
of the Second Death; for burning brimstone is 
the most deadly agent known. How reasonable, too, 
to expect that Israel would have courts and judges 
resembling or prefiguring the judgments of the next 
age; and that the sentence of those (figurative) courts 
of that (figurative) people under those (figurative) 
laws to that (figurative) abyss, outside that (figurative) 
city, would largely correspond to the (real) sentences 
of the (real) court and judges in the next age. 
If these points are kept in mind, they will greatly assist 
us in understanding the words of our Lord in reference 
to Gehenna; for though the literal valley just at 
hand was named and referred to, yet his words carry 
with them lessons concerning the future age and the 
antitypical Gehenna— the Second Death. 

SHALL BE IN DANGER OF GEHENNA. 
MATTHEW 5:21,22. 

"Ye have heard that it was said by them of old 
time, 'Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill 
shall be amenable to the judges:' but I say unto you, 
that whosoever is angry with his brother without a 
cause shall [future— under the regulations of the real 
Kingdom] be amenable to the judges; and whosoever 
shall say to his brother, 'Raca [villain] shall be in danger 
of the high council; but whosoever shall say, 



'Thou fool,' shall be in danger of hell [Gehenna] fire." 

To understand these references to council and 
judges and Gehenna, all should know something of 
Jewish regulations. The "Court of Judges" consisted 
of seven men (or twenty-three,— the number is in 
dispute), who had power to judge some classes of 
crimes. The High Council, or Sanhedrin, consisted of 
seventy-one men of recognized learning and ability. 
This constituted the highest court of the Jews, and its 
supervision was over the gravest offenses. The most 
serious sentence was death; but certain very obnoxious 
criminals were subjected to an indignity after 
death, being refused burial and cast with the carcasses 
of dogs, the city refuse, etc., into Gehenna, there to 
be consumed. The object of this burning in Gehenna 
was to make the crime and the criminal detestable in 
the eyes of the people, and signified that the culprit 
was a hopeless case. It must be remembered that 
Israel hoped for a resurrection from the tomb, and 
hence they were particular in caring for the corpses 
of their dead. Not realizing fully God's power, they 
apparently thought he needed their assistance to that 
extent. (Exod. 13:19; Heb. 11:22; Acts 7:15,16.) 
Hence the destruction of the body in Gehenna after 
death (figuratively) implied the loss of hope of future 
life by a resurrection. Thus to such Gehenna represented 
the Second Death in the same figurative way 
that they as a people represented or illustrated a future 
order of things under the New Covenant. 

Notice that our Lord, in the above words, 
pointed out to them that their construction of the 
Law, severe though it was, was far below the real import 

R4553 : page 32 

of that Law, as it shall be interpreted under the 
real Kingdom and Judges, which theirs only typified. 
He shows that the command of their Law, "Thou 
shalt not kill," reached much farther than they supposed; 
that malicious anger and vituperation "shall 
be" considered a violation of God's Law, under the 
New Covenant; and that such as, under the favorable 
conditions of that new age, will not reform so thoroughly 
as to fully observe God's Law will be counted 
worthy of that which the Gehenna near them typified 
—the Second Death. However, the strict severity 
of that Law will be enforced only in proportion as the 
discipline, advantages and assistance of that age, enabling 
each to comply with its laws, shall be 
disregarded. 
The same thought is continued in 

MATTHEW 5:22-30. 



"Ye have heard," etc., "but I say unto you. ..it 
is better for thee to lose one of thy members, than that 
thy whole body should be cast into Gehenna." 

Here again the operation of God's Law under 
the New Covenant is contrasted with its operation 
under the Old or Jewish Covenant, and the lesson of 
self-control is urged by the statement that it is far 
more profitable that men should refuse to gratify depraved 
desires (though they be dear to them as a right 
eye, and apparently indispensable as a right hand) 
than that they should gratify these, and lose, in the 
Second Death, the future life provided through the 
atonement for all who will return to perfection, holiness 
and God. 

These expressions of our Lord not only serve to 
show us the perfection (Rom. 7:12) of God's Law, 
and how fully it will be defined and enforced in the 
Millennium, but they served as a lesson to the Jews 
also, who previously saw through Moses' commands 
only the crude exterior of the Law of God. Since 
they found it difficult in their fallen state to keep inviolate 
even the surface significance of the Law, they 
must now see the impossibility of their keeping the 
finer meaning of the Law revealed by Christ. Had 
they understood and received his teaching fully, they 
would have cried out, Alas! if God judges us thus, 
by the very thoughts and intents of the heart, we are 
all unclean, all undone, and can hope for naught but 
condemnation to Gehenna (to utter destruction, as 
brute beasts). They would have cried, "Show us a 
greater priesthood than that of Aaron, a High Priest 
and Teacher able fully to appreciate the Law, and 
able fully to appreciate and sympathize with our fallen 
state and inherited weaknesses, and let him offer for 
us 'better sacrifices,' and apply to us the needed 
greater forgiveness of sin, and let him as a great physician 
heal us and restore us, so that we can obey the 
perfect Law of God from our hearts." Then they 
would have found Christ. 

But this lesson they did not learn, for the ears 
of their understanding were "dull of hearing;" hence 
they knew not that God had already prepared the 
very priest and sacrifice and teacher and physician 
they needed, who in due time redeemed those under 
the typical Law, as well as all not under it, and who 
also "in due time," shortly, will begin his restoring 
work— restoring sight to the blind eyes of their understanding, 
and hearing to their deaf ears. Then the 
"vail shall be taken away"— the vail of ignorance, 
pride and human wisdom which Satan now uses to 
blind the world to God's true law and true plan of 
salvation in Christ. 

And not only did our Lord's teaching here show 
the Law of the New Covenant, and teach the Jew a 
lesson, but it is of benefit to the Gospel Church also. 
In proportion as we learn the exactness of God's 



Law, and what would constitute perfection under its 

requirements, we see that our Redeemer was perfect, 

and that we, totally unable to commend ourselves to 

God as keepers of that Law, can find acceptance with 

the Father only in the merit of our Redeemer, while 

none can be of that "Body," covered by the robe of his 

righteousness, except the consecrated who endeavor 

to do only those things well pleasing to God, which 

includes the avoidance of sin to the extent of ability. 

Yet their acceptability with God rests not in their perfection, 

but upon the perfection of Christ, so long as 

they abide in him. These, nevertheless, are benefited 

by a clear insight into the perfect Law of God, even 

though they are not dependent on the perfect keeping 

of it. They delight to do God's will to the extent of 

their ability, and the better they know his perfect Law, 

the better they are able to rule themselves and to conform 

to it. So, then, to us also the Lord's words have 

a lesson of value. 

The point, however, to be specially noticed here 
is that Gehenna, which the Jews knew, and of which 
our Lord spoke to them, was not a lake of fire to be 
kept burning to all eternity, into which all would be 
cast who get "angry with a brother" and call him a 
"fool." No; the Jews gathered no such extreme idea 
from the Lord's words. The eternal torment theory 
was unknown to them. It had no place in their theology, 
as will be shown. It is a comparatively modern 
invention, coming down, as we have shown, from 
Papacy— the great apostasy. The point is that Gehenna 
symbolizes the Second Death— utter, complete 
and everlasting destruction. This is clearly shown 
by its being contrasted with life as its opposite. "It 
is better for thee to enter into life halt, or maimed, 
than otherwise to be cast into Gehenna." It is better 
that you should deny yourselves sinful gratifications 
than that you should lose all future life, and perish in 
the Second Death. 

ABLE TO DESTROY BOTH SOUL AND BODY IN 
GEHENNA. 
MATTHEW 10:28; LUKE 12:5. 



"Fear not them which kill the body, but are not 
able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able 
to destroy both soul and body in hell [Gehenna]." See 
also another account of the same discourse by 
Luke-12:4,5. 

Here our Lord pointed out to his followers the 
great cause they had for courage and bravery under 
the most trying circumstances. They were to expect 
persecution, and to have all manner of evil spoken 
against them falsely, for his sake, and for the sake of 
the "good tidings" of which he made them the ministers 



and heralds; yea, the time would come, that whosoever 

would kill them would think that he did God 

a service. Their consolation or reward for this was 

R4553 : page 33 

to be received, not in the present life, but in the life 
to come. They were assured, and they believed, that 
he had come to give his life a ransom for many, and 
that all in their graves must in consequence, in due 
time, hear the Deliverer's voice and come forth, either 
to reward (if their trial had been passed in this life 
successfully), future trial, or judgment, as must be the 
case with the great majority who do not, in this present 
life, come to the necessary knowledge and opportunity 
essential to a complete trial. 

Under present conditions men are able to kill our 
bodies, but nothing that they can do will affect our 
future being (soul),* which God has promised shall 
be revived or restored by his power in the resurrection 
day— the Millennial age. Our revived souls will have 
new bodies (spiritual or natural— "to each 'seed' his 
own [kind of] body"), and these none will have liberty 
to kill. God alone has power to destroy utterly— soul 
and body. He alone, therefore, should be feared, and 
the opposition of men even to the death is not to be 
feared, if thereby we gain divine approval. Our 
Lord's bidding then is, Fear not them which can 
terminate the present (dying) life in these poor, dying 
bodies. Care little for it, its food, its clothing, its 
pleasures, in comparison with that future existence or 
being which God has provided for you, and which, if 
secured, may be your portion forever. Fear not the 
threats, or looks, or acts of men, whose power can 
extend no farther than the present existence; who 
can harm and kill these bodies, but can do no more. 
Rather have respect and deference to God, with whom 
are the issues of life everlasting— fear him who is able 
to destroy in Gehenna, the Second Death, both the 
present dying existence and all hope of future 
existence. 

UNDYING WORMS AND QUENCHLESS FIRES. 
MATTHEW 18:8,9; MARK 9:43-48. 



Here it is conclusively shown that Gehenna as a 
figure represented the Second Death— the utter destruction 
which must ensue in the case of all who, 
after having fully received the opportunities of a future 
being or existence through our Lord's sacrifice, 
prove themselves unworthy of God's gift, and refuse to 
accept it, by refusing obedience to his just requirements. 
For it does not say that God will preserve soul or body 
in Gehenna, but that in it he can and will "destroy" 



both. Thus we are taught that any who are condemned 
to the Second Death are hopelessly and forever 
blotted out of existence. 

[Since these two passages refer to the same discourse, 
we quote from Mark— remarking that verses 44 and 46, 
and part of 45, are not found in the oldest 
Greek MSS., though verse 48, which reads the same, 
is in all manuscripts. We quote the text as found 
in these ancient and reliable MSS.] "If thy hand 
offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter 
into life maimed, than having two hands to go into 
Gehenna, into the fire that never shall be quenched. 
And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for 
thee to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be 
cast into Gehenna. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck 
it out: it is better for thee to enter into the Kingdom 
of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast 
into Gehenna, where the worm dies not and the fire 
is not quenched." 

After reading the above, all must agree with the 
prophet that our Lord opened his mouth in figures 
and obscure sayings. (Psa. 78:2; Matt. 13:35.) No 
one for a moment supposes that our Lord advised the 
people to mutilate their bodies by cutting off their 
limbs, or gouging out their eyes. Nor does he mean 
us to understand that the injuries and disfigurements 
of the present life will continue beyond the grave, 
when we shall "enter into life." The Jews, whom the 
Lord addressed, having no conception of a place of 
everlasting torment, and who knew the word Gehenna 
to refer to the valley outside their city, which was not 
a place of torment, nor a place where any living 
thing was cast, but a place for the utter destruction 
of whatever might be cast into it, recognizing the 
Lord's expression regarding limbs and eyes to be 
figurative, knew that Gehenna also was used in the 
same figurative sense, to symbolize utter destruction. 

The Lord meant simply this: The future life, 
which God has provided for redeemed man, is of inestimable 
value, and it will richly pay you to make any 
sacrifice to receive and enjoy that life. Should it 
even cost an eye, a hand or a foot, so that to all 
eternity you would be obliged to endure the loss of 
these, yet life would be cheap at even such a cost. 
That would be better far than to retain your members 
and lose all in Gehenna. Doubtless, too, the hearers 
drew the lesson as applicable to all the affairs of life, 
and understood the Master to mean that it would 
richly repay them to deny themselves many comforts, 
pleasures and tastes, dear to them as a right 
hand, precious as an eye, and serviceable as a foot, 
rather than by gratification to forfeit the life to come 
and be utterly destroyed in Gehenna— the Second 
Death. 

But what about the undying worms and the unquenchable 
fire? 



We answer, In the literal Gehenna, which is the 
basis of our Lord's illustration, the bodies of animals, 
etc., frequently fell upon ledges of rocks and not into 
the fire kept burning below. Thus exposed, these 
would breed worms and be destroyed by them, as 
completely and as surely as those which burned. No 
one was allowed to disturb the contents of this valley; 
hence the worm and the fire together completed the 
work of destruction— the fire was not quenched and 
the worms died not. This would not imply a never-ending 
fire, nor everlasting worms. The thought is 
that the worms did not die off and leave the carcasses 
there, but continued and completed the work of destruction. 
So with the fire: it was not quenched, it 
burned on until all was consumed. Just so if a house 
were ablaze and the fire could not be controlled or 
quenched, but burned until the building was destroyed, 
we might properly call such an "unquenchable 
fire." 

Our Lord wished to impress the thought of the 
completeness and finality of the Second Death, symbolized 
in Gehenna. All who go into the Second 
Death will be thoroughly and completely and forever 
destroyed; no ransom will ever again be given for any 
(Rom. 6:9); for none worthy of life will be cast into 
the Second Death, or lake of fire, but only those who 



*We will supply free on application a tract on "What is the Soul? 

R4553 : page 34 

love unrighteousness after coming to the knowledge 
of the truth. 

Not only in the above instances is the Second 
Death pointedly illustrated by Gehenna, but it is evident 
that the same Teacher used the same figure to 
represent the same thing in the symbols of Revelation, 
—though there it is not called Gehenna, but a "lake 
of fire." 

The same valley was once before used as a basis 
of a discourse by the Prophet Isaiah. (Isa. 66:24.) 
Though he gives it no name, he describes it; and all 
should notice that he speaks, not as some with false 
ideas might expect, of billions alive in flames and torture, 
but of the carcasses of those who transgressed 
against the Lord, who are thus represented as utterly 
destroyed in the Second Death. 

The two preceding verses show the time when 
this prophecy will be fulfilled, and it is in perfect 
harmony with the symbols of Revelation: it appertains 
to the new dispensation, the Millennium, the "new 
heavens and new earth" condition of things. Then 
all the righteous will see the justice as well as the wisdom 
of the utter destruction of the incorrigible, wilful 



enemies of righteousness, as it is written: "They shall 
be an abhorring unto all flesh." 

MATTHEW 23:15,33. 

The class here addressed was not the heathen who 
had no knowledge of the truth, nor the lowest and 
most ignorant of the Jewish nation, but the Scribes 
and Pharisees, outwardly the most religious, and the 
leaders and teachers of the people. To these our 
Lord said, "How can ye escape the judgment of Gehenna?" 
These men were hypocritical; they were 
not true to their convictions. Abundant testimony of 
the truth had been borne to them, but they refused to 
accept it, and endeavored to counteract its influence 
and to discourage the people from accepting it. And 
in thus resisting the holy spirit of light and truth, they 
were hardening their hearts against the very agency 
which God designed for their blessing. Hence they 
were wickedly resisting his grace, and such a course, 
if pursued, must eventually end in condemnation to 
the Second Death, Gehenna. Every step in the direction 
of wilful blindness and opposition to the truth 
makes return more difficult, and makes the wrongdoer 
more and more of the character which God abhors, 
and which the Second Death is intended to 
utterly destroy. The Scribes and Pharisees were 
progressing rapidly in that course: hence the warning 
inquiry of our Lord, "How can ye escape?" etc. The 
sense is this,— Although you boast of your piety, you 
will surely be destroyed in Gehenna, unless you change 
your course. 

SET ON FIRE OF GEHENNA. 
JAMES 3:6. 

"So [important] is the tongue among our members, 
that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on 
fire the course of nature, and [or when] it is set on 
fire of Gehenna." 

Here, in strong, symbolic language, the Apostle 
points out the great and bad influence of an evil tongue 
—a tongue set on fire (figuratively) by Gehenna (figuratively). 
For a tongue to be set on fire of Gehenna 
signifies that it is set going in evil by a perverse disposition, 
self-willed, selfish, hateful, malicious, the sort 
of disposition which, in spite of knowledge and opportunity, 
unless controlled and reformed, will be 
counted worthy to be destroyed— the class for whom 
the "Second Death," the real "lake of fire," the real 
Gehenna, is intended. One in that attitude may by 
his tongue kindle a great fire, a destructive disturbance, 
which, wherever it has contact, will work evil in 
the entire course of nature. A few malicious words 
often arouse all the evil passions of the speaker, engender 
the same in others and react upon the first. 



And continuance in such an evil course finally corrupts 
the entire man, and brings him under sentence 
as utterly unworthy of life. 

"TARTAROO" RENDERED "HELL." 



The Greek word tartaroo occurs but once in the 
Scriptures, and is translated hell. It is found in 2 Pet. 2:4, 
which reads thus: 

"God spared not the angels who sinned, but cast 
[them] down to hell [tartaroo], and delivered them 
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto 
judgment." 

Having examined all other words rendered "hell," 
in the Bible, and all the texts in which they occur, we 
conclude the examination with this text, which is the 
only one in which the word tartaroo occurs. In the 
above quotation, all the words shown in Italic type 
are translated from the one Greek word tartaroo. 
Evidently the translators were at a loss to know how 
to translate the word, but concluded they knew where 
the evil angels ought to be, and so they made bold 
to put them into "hell," though it took six words to 
twist the idea into the shape they had pre-determined 
it must take. 

The word tartaroo, used by Peter, very closely 
resembles tartarus, a word used in Grecian mythology 
as the name for a dark abyss or prison. But tartaroo 
seems to refer more to an act than to a place. The 
fall of the angels who sinned was from honor and 
dignity, into dishonor and condemnation, and the 
thought seems to be— "God spared not the angels 
who sinned, but degraded them, and delivered them 
into chains of darkness." 

This certainly agrees with the facts known to 
us through other Scriptures; for these fallen spirits 
frequented the earth in the days of our Lord and the 
apostles. Hence they were not down in some place, 
but "down" in the sense of being degraded from former 
honor and liberty, and restrained under darkness, 
as by a chain. Whenever these fallen spirits, in 
spiritualistic seances, manifest their powers through 
mediums, pretending to be certain dead human beings, 
they must always do their work in the dark, because 
darkness is the chain by which they are bound until 
the great Millennial day of judgment. Whether this 
implies that in the immediate future they will be able 
to materialize in daylight is difficult to determine. If 
so, it would greatly increase Satan's power to blind 
and deceive for a short season— until the Sun of 
Righteousness has fully risen and Satan is fully 
bound. 

Thus we close our investigation of the Bible use 



R4553 : page 35 

of the word "hell." Thank God, we find no such place 
of everlasting torture as the creeds and hymn-books, 
and many pulpits erroneously teach. Yet we have 
found a "hell," sheol, hades, to which all our race were 
condemned on account of Adam's sin, and from which 
all are redeemed by our Lord's death; and that "hell" 
is the tomb— the death condition. And we find 
another "hell" (Gehenna— the Second Death— utter 
destruction) brought to our attention as the final 
penalty upon all who, after being redeemed and 
brought to the full knowledge of the truth, and to 
full ability to obey it, shall yet choose death by choosing 
a course of opposition to God and righteousness. 
And our hearts say, Amen! True and righteous are 
thy ways, thou King of nations! Who shall not venerate 
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? For thou 
art entirely holy. And all nations shall come and 
worship before thee, because thy righteous dealings 
are made manifest— Rev. 15:3,4. 

PARABLE OF THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS. 
LUKE 16:19-31. 

The great difficulty with many in reading this 
Scripture is that, though they regard it as a parable, 
they reason on it and draw conclusions from it as 
though it were a literal statement. To regard it as a 
literal statement involves several absurdities; for instance, 
that the rich man went to "hell" because he had 
enjoyed many earthly blessings and gave nothing but 
crumbs to Lazarus. Not a word is said about his 
wickedness. Again, Lazarus was blessed, not because 
he was a sincere child of God, full of faith and trust, 
not because he was good, but simply because he was 
poor and sick. If this be interpreted literally, the 
only logical lesson to be drawn from it is, that unless 
we are poor beggars full of sores, we will never enter 
into future bliss; and that if now we wear any fine 
linen and purple, and have plenty to eat every day, 
we are sure of future torment. Again, the coveted 
place of favor is "Abraham's bosom;" and if the whole 
statement be literal, the bosom must also be literal, 
and it surely would not hold very many of earth's millions 
of sick and poor. 

But why consider absurdities? As a parable, it 
is easy of interpretation. In a parable the thing said 
is never the thing meant. We know this from our 
Lord's own explanations of his parables. When he 
said "wheat," he meant "children of the kingdom;" 
when he said "tares," he meant "the children of the 
devil;" when he said "reapers" his servants were to be 
understood, etc. (Matt. 13.) The same classes were 
represented by different symbols in different parables. 
Thus the "wheat" of one parable correspond 



to the "faithful servants," and the "wise virgins" of 
others. So, in this parable, the "rich man" represents 
a class, and "Lazarus" represents another class. 

In attempting to expound a parable such as this, 
an explanation of which the Lord does not furnish 
us, modesty in expressing our opinion regarding it 
is certainly appropriate. We therefore offer the following 
explanation without any attempt to force our 
views upon the reader, except so far as his own truth-enlightened 
judgment may commend them as in accord 
with God's Word and plan. To our understanding, 
Abraham represented God, and the "rich man" represented 
the Jewish nation. At the time of the utterance 
of the parable, and for a long time previous, the 
Jews had "fared sumptuously every day"— being the 
especial recipients of God's favors. As Paul says: 
"What advantage, then, hath the Jew? Much every 
way: chiefly, because to them were committed the 
oracles of God [Law and Prophecy]." The promises 
to Abraham and David and their organization as a 
typical Kingdom of God invested that people with 
royalty, as represented by the rich man's "purple." 
The typical sacrifices of the Law constituted them, in 
a typical sense, a holy (righteous) nation, represented 
by the rich man's "fine linen,"— symbolic of righteousness. 
-Rev. 19:8. 

Lazarus represented the outcasts from divine 
favor under the Law, who, sin-sick, hungered and 
thirsted after righteousness. "Publicans and sinners" 
of Israel, seeking a better life, and truth-hungry 
Gentiles who were "feeling after God" constituted 
the Lazarus class. These, at the time of the utterance 
of this parable, were entirely destitute of those 
special divine blessings which Israel enjoyed. They 
lay at the gate of the rich man. No rich promises of 
royalty were theirs; not even typically were they 
cleansed; but, in moral sickness, pollution and sin, 
they were companions of "dogs." Dogs were regarded 
as detestable creatures in those days, and the typically 
clean Jew called the outsiders "heathen" and "dogs," 
and would never eat with them, nor marry, nor have 
any dealings with them.— John 4:9. 

As to how these ate of the "crumbs" of divine 
favor which fell from Israel's table of bounties, the 
Lord's words to the Syro-Phenician woman give us 
a key. He said to this Gentile woman— "It is not 
meet [proper] to take the children's [Israelites'] bread 
and to cast it to dogs [Gentiles];" and she answered, 
"Truth, Lord, but the dogs eat of the crumbs that 
fall from their master's table." (Matt. 15:26,27.) 
Jesus healed her daughter, thus giving the desired 
crumb of favor. 

But there came a great dispensational change in 
Israel's history when as a nation they rejected and 
crucified the Son of God. Then their typical righteousness 
ceased— then the promise of royalty ceased 



to be theirs, and the kingdom was taken from them 
to be given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof 
—the Gospel Church, "a holy nation, a peculiar people." 
(Titus 2:14; I Pet. 2:7,9; Matt. 21:43.) Thus 
the "rich man" died to all these special advantages, 
and soon he (the Jewish nation) found himself in a 
cast-off condition,— in tribulation and affliction. In 
such condition that nation has suffered from that day 
to this. 

Lazarus also died: the condition of the humble 
Gentiles and the God-seeking "outcasts" of Israel 
underwent a great change, being carried by the angels 
(messengers— apostles, etc.) to Abraham's bosom. 
Abraham is represented as the father of the faithful, 
and receives all the children of faith, who are thus 
recognized as the heirs of all the promises made to 
Abraham; for the children of the flesh are not the 
children of God, "but the children of the promise are 
counted for the seed" (children of Abraham); "which 
seed is Christ;"— and "if ye be Christ's, then are ye 
[believers] Abraham's seed [children], and heirs according 
to the [Abrahamic] promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

Yes, the termination of the condition of things 

R4553 : page 36 

then existing was well illustrated by the figure, death 
—the dissolution of the Jewish polity and the withdrawal 
of the favors which Israel had so long enjoyed. 
There they were cast off and have since been 
shown "no favor," while the poor Gentiles, who before 
had been "aliens from the commonwealth [the 
polity] of Israel and strangers from the covenant of 
promise [up to this time given to Israel only] having 
no hope and without God in the world," were then 
"made nigh by the blood of Christ" and reconciled to 
God.-Eph. 2:12,13. 

To the symbolisms of death and burial used 
to illustrate the dissolution of Israel and their burial 
or hiding among the other nations, our Lord added 
a further figure— "In hell [hades, the grave] he lifted 
up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham 
afar off," etc. The dead cannot lift up their eyes, nor 
see either near or far, nor converse; for it is distinctly 
stated, "There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 
nor wisdom, in the grave;" and the dead are 
described as those who "go down into silence." 
(Eccl. 9:10; Psa. 115:17.) But the Lord wished to 
show that great sufferings or "torments" would be 
added to the Jews as a nation after their national dissolution 
and burial amongst the other peoples dead 
in trespasses and sins; and that they would plead in 
vain for release and comfort at the hand of the formerly 
despised Lazarus class. 

And history has borne out this parabolic prophecy. 
For eighteen hundred years the Jews have 



not only been in distress of mind over their casting 
out from the favor of God and the loss of their temple 
and other necessaries to the offering of their sacrifices, 
but they have been relentlessly persecuted by 
all classes, including professed Christians. It was 
from the latter that the Jews have expected mercy, 
as expressed in the parable— "Send Lazarus, that he 
may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my 
tongue;" but the great gulf fixed between them 
hinders that. Nevertheless, God still recognizes the 
relationship established in his covenant with them, 
and addresses them as children of the covenant. 
(Verse 25.) These "torments" have been the penalties 
attached to the violation of their covenant, and 
were as certain to be visited upon them as the blessings 
promised for obedience.— See Lev. 26. 

The "great gulf fixed" represents the wide difference 
between the Gospel Church and the Jew— the 
former enjoying free grace, joy, comfort and peace, 
as true sons of God, and the latter holding to the Law, 
which condemns and torments. Prejudice, pride and 
error, from the Jewish side, form the bulwarks of 
this gulf which hinder the Jew from coming into the 
condition of true sons of God by accepting Christ and 
the gospel of his grace. The bulwark of this gulf 
which hinders true sons of God from going to the 
Jew— under the bondage of the Law— is their knowledge 
that by the deeds of the Law none can be justified 
before God, and that if any man keep the Law 
(put himself under it to try to commend himself to 
God by reason of obedience to it), Christ shall profit 
him nothing. (Gal. 5:2-4.) So, then, we who are 
of the Lazarus class should not attempt to mix the 
Law and the Gospel, knowing that they cannot be 
mixed, and that we can do no good to those who still 
cling to the Law and reject the sacrifice for sins 
given by our Lord. And they, not seeing the change 
of dispensation which took place, argue that to deny 
the Law as the power to save would be to deny all 
the past history of their race, and to deny all of 
God's special dealings with the "fathers," (promises 
and dealings which through pride and selfishness they 
failed rightly to apprehend and use); hence they cannot 
come over to the bosom of Abraham, into the true 
rest and peace— the portion of all the true children 
of faith. -John 8:39; Rom. 4:16; Gal. 3:29. 

True, a few Jews probably came into the Christian 
faith all the way down the Gospel age, but so few 
as to be ignored in a parable which represented the 
Jewish people as a whole. As at the first, Dives represented 
the orthodox Jews, and not the "outcasts of 
Israel," so down to the close of the parable he continues 
to represent a similar class, and hence does not 
represent such Jews as have renounced the Law Covenant 
and embraced the New Covenant or such as have 
become infidels. 



The plea of the "rich man" for the sending of 
"Lazarus" to his five brethren we interpret as follows: 

The people of Judea, at the time of our Lord's 
utterance of this parable, were repeatedly referred to 
as "Israel," "the lost sheep of the house of Israel," 
"cities of Israel," etc., because all of the tribes were 
represented there; but actually the majority of the 
people were of the two tribes, Judah and Benjamin, 
but few of the ten tribes having returned from Babylon 
under Cyrus' general permission. If the nation 
of the Jews (chiefly two tribes) were represented in 
the one "rich man," it would be a harmony of numbers 
to understand the "five brethren" to represent the ten 
tribes chiefly scattered abroad. The request relative 
to them was doubtless introduced to show that all 
special favor of God ceased to all Israel (the ten 
tribes, as well as to the two more directly addressed). 
It seems to us evident that Israel only was meant, for 
no other nation than Israel had "Moses and the 
prophets" as instructors. (Verse 29.) The majority 
of the ten tribes had so far disregarded Moses and the 
prophets that they did not return to the land of promise, 
but preferred to dwell among idolaters; and hence 
it would be useless to attempt further communication 
with them, even by one from the dead— the figuratively 
dead, but now figuratively risen, Lazarus class, 
-Eph. 2:5. 

Though the parable mentions no bridging of this 
"great gulf," other portions of Scripture indicate that 
it was to be "fixed" only throughout the Gospel age, 
and that at its close the "rich man," having received 
the measurement of punishment for his sins,* will 
walk out of his fiery troubles over the bridge of God's 
promises yet unfulfilled to that nation. 

Though for centuries the Jews have been bitterly 
persecuted by pagans, Mohammedans and professed 
Christians, they are now gradually rising to political 
freedom and influence; and although much of "Jacob's 
trouble" is just at hand, yet as a people they will be 
very prominent among the nations in the beginning 
of the Millennium. The "vail" (2 Cor. 3:13-16) of 
prejudice still exists, but it will be gradually taken 
away as the light of the Millennial morning dawns; 



*See Isa. 40:1,2, margin; Rom. 11:27-31, and DAWN-STUDIES, 
Vol. II., page 227. 

R4553 : page 37 

nor should we be surprised to hear of great awakenings 
among the Jews, and many coming to acknowledge 
Christ. They will thus leave their hadean state 
(national death) and torment, and come, the first of 
the nations, to be blessed by the true seed of Abraham, 



which is Christ, Head and Body. Their bulwark of 
race prejudice and pride is falling in some places, and 
the humble, the poor in spirit, are beginning already 
to look upon him whom they have pierced, and to 
inquire, Is not this the Christ? And as they look 
the Lord pours upon them the spirit of favor and 
supplication. (Zech. 12:10.) Therefore, "Speak ye 
comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her 
appointed time is accomplished."— Isa. 40:1,2, margin. 

In a word, this parable seems to teach precisely 
what Paul explained in Rom. 11:19-32. Because of 
unbelief the natural branches were broken off, and 
the wild branches grafted into the Abrahamic root-promise. 
The parable leaves the Jews in their trouble, 
and does not refer to their final restoration to 
favor— doubtless because it was not pertinent to 
the feature of the subject treated; but Paul assures us 
that when the fulness of the Gentiles— the full number 
from among the Gentiles necessary to make up the 
Bride of Christ— is come in, "they [natural Israel] shall 
obtain mercy through your [the Church's] mercy." He 
assures us that this is God's covenant with fleshly 
Israel (who lost the higher, spiritual promises, but 
are still the possessors of certain earthly promises), 
to become the chief nation of earth, etc. In proof of 
this statement, he quotes from the prophets, saying: 
"The deliverer shall come out of Zion [the glorified 
Church], and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob 
[the fleshly seed]." "As concerning the Gospel [high 
calling], they are enemies [cast off] for your sakes; 
but as touching the election, they are beloved for the 
fathers' sakes." "For God hath concluded them all in 
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. O the 
depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge 
of God!"-Rom. 11:26-33. 



page 37 

PARABLE OF THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS. 



"These shall go away into everlasting punishment, 
but the righteous into life eternal."— Matt. 25:31-46. 

WHILE the Scriptures, as we have shown, do not 
teach the blasphemous doctrine of everlasting 
torment, they do most emphatically teach the everlasting 
punishment of the wicked, the class represented in 
the parable as "goats." Let us examine the parable, 
and then the sentence pronounced at its close. 
It has been truly said that "Order is Heaven's 
first law;" yet few, we think, have realized how emphatically 
this is true. In glancing back over the 



plan of the ages, there is nothing which gives such 
conclusive evidence of a Divine Director as the order 
observed in all its parts. 

God has had definite and stated times and seasons 
for every part of his work; and in the end of each of 
these seasons there has been a finishing up of its 
work and a clearing off of the rubbish, preparatory 
to the beginning of the new work of the dispensation 
to follow. Thus in the end of the Jewish age order 
is observed— a harvesting and complete separation of 
the "wheat" class from the "chaff," and an entire rejection 
of the latter class from God's favor. With the few 
judged worthy in the end of that age, a new age— the 
Gospel age— began. And now we find ourselves amidst 
the closing scenes, the "harvest," of this age: the 
"wheat" and the "tares," which have grown together 
during this age, are being separated. With the former 
class, of which our Lord Jesus is the Head, a new 
age is about to be inaugurated, and these "wheat" are 
to reign as kings and priests in that new dispensation, 
while the "tare" element is judged as utterly unworthy 
of that favor. 

While observing this order with reference to the 
Jewish age and the one just closing, our Lord informs 
us through the parable under consideration that the 
same order will be observed with reference to the age 
to follow this Gospel age. 

The harvest of the Jewish age was likened to the 
separation of wheat from chaff; the harvest of this age 
to the separation of wheat from tares; and the harvest 
of the Millennial age to the separation of sheep from 
goats. 

That the parable of the sheep and the goats 
refers to the Millennial age is clearly indicated in 
verses 31 and 32— "When the son of man shall come 
in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then 
shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, and before 
him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate 
them one from another, as a shepherd divideth 
his sheep from the goats." As in the present age 
every act of those on trial (the Church) goes to make 
a part of that character which, in due time, will determine 
the final decision of the Judge in our case, so 
will it be with the world (the "nations") in the age to 
come. As in the present age the trial of the majority 
of the individual members of the Church ends, and 
the decision of their case is reached, long before the 
end of the age (2 Tim. 4:7,8), so under the Millennial 
reign the decision of some individual cases will be 
reached long before the end of the age (Isa. 65:20); 
but in each age there is a "harvest" or general separating 
time in the end of the age. 

In the dawn of the Millennial age, after the "time 
of trouble," there will be a gathering of the living 
nations before Christ, and, in their appointed time and 
order, the dead of all nations shall be called to appear 



before the judgment seat of Christ— not to receive 

an immediate sentence, but to receive a fair and impartial, 

individual trial (Ezek. 18:2-4,19,20) under 

the most favorable circumstances, the result of which 

trial will be a final sentence, as worthy or unworthy 

of everlasting life.* 

The scene of this parable, therefore, is laid after 
the time of trouble, when the nations shall have been 
subdued, Satan bound (Rev. 20:1,2) and the authority 
of Christ's kingdom established. Ere this, the Bride 
of Christ (the overcoming Church) will have been 
seated with him in his throne of spiritual power and 
will have taken part in executing the judgments of the 



*See DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. I., Chapter VIII. 

page 38 

great day of wrath. Then the Son of man and his 
Bride, the glorified Church, will be revealed and be 
seen by men, with the eyes of their understanding and 
shall "shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their 
Father. "-Matt. 13:43. 

Here is the New Jerusalem as John saw it (Rev. 21), 
"that holy city [symbol of government]. ..coming 
down from God out of heaven." During the time 
of trouble it will be coming down, and before the end 
of it, it will have touched the earth. This is the stone 
cut out of the mountains without hands (but by the 
power of God), and it will then have become a great 
mountain (kingdom), filling the whole earth (Dan. 2:35), 
its coming having broken to pieces the evil kingdoms 
of the prince of darkness.— Dan. 2:34,35. 

Here is that glorious city (government), prepared 
as a bride adorned for her husband (Rev. 21:2), and 
early in the dawn of the Millennium the nations will 
begin to walk in the light of it. (Verse 24.) These 
may bring their glory and honor into it, but "there 
shall in no wise enter into it [or become a part of it] 
anything that defileth," etc. (Verse 27.) Here, from 
the midst of the throne, proceeds a pure river of water 
of life (truth unmixed with error), and the Spirit and 
the Bride say, Come, and take it freely. (Rev. 22:17.) 
Here begins the world's probation, the world's great 
judgment day— a thousand years.* 

But even in this favored time of blessing and 
healing of the nations, when Satan is bound, evil 
restrained, mankind in process of release from the 
grasp of death, and when the knowledge of the Lord 
fills the earth, two classes will be developed, which our 
Lord here likens to sheep and goats. These, he tells 
us, he will separate. The sheep class— those who are 
meek, teachable and willing to be led, shall, during 
the Millennial age, be gathered at the Judge's 



right hand— symbol of his approval and favor; but 
the goat class, self-willed and stubborn, always climbing 
on the rocks— seeking prominence and approval 
among men— and feeding on miserable refuse, while 
the sheep graze in the rich pastures of the truth furnished 
by the Good Shepherd— these are gathered to 
the Judge's left hand, the opposite of the position of 
favor— as subjects of his disfavor and condemnation. 

This work of separating sheep and goats will require 
all of the Millennial age for its accomplishment. 
During that age, each individual, as he comes gradually 
to a knowledge of God and his will, takes his place 
at the right hand of favor or the left hand of disfavor, 
according as he improves or misimproves the opportunities 
of that golden age. By the end of that age, 
all the world of mankind will have arranged themselves, 
as shown in the parable, into two classes. 

The end of that age will be the end of the world's 
trial or judgment, and then final disposition will be 
made of the two classes. The reward of this "sheep" 
class will be granted them because, during the age of 
trial and discipline, they cultivated and manifested the 
beautiful character of love, which Paul describes as 
the fulfilling of the Law of God. (Rom. 13:10.) They 
will have manifested it to each other in their times of 
sorest need; and what they will have done for one 
another the Lord will count as done unto him, counting 
them all as his brethren— children of God, though 
they will be of the human nature, while he is of the 
divine. 

The condemnation of the "goat" class is shown 
to be for the lack of this spirit of love. Under the 
same favorable circumstances as the "sheep," they 
wilfully resist the moulding influence of the Lord's 
discipline, and harden their hearts. The goodness 
of God does not lead them to true repentance, but, 
like Pharaoh, they take advantage of his goodness and 
do evil. The "goats," who will not have developed 
the element of love, the law of God's being and Kingdom, 
will be counted unworthy of everlasting life, and 
will be destroyed; while the "sheep," who will have 
developed God-likeness (love), and who will have exhibited 
it in their characters, are to be installed as the 
subordinate rulers of earth for future ages. 

In the end of the Millennial age, in the final adjustment 
of human affairs, Christ thus addresses his 
sheep: "Come, ye blessed,. ..inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of the world." 

It is manifest the "sheep" here addressed, at the 
close of the Millennium, are not the sheep of the Gospel 
age, the Gospel Church, but those "other sheep" 
to whom the Lord referred in John 10:16. And the 
kingdom prepared for them in the divine plan, from 
the foundation of the world, is not the kingdom prepared 
for the Gospel Church. The Church will receive 
her kingdom at the beginning of the Millennium; 



but this is the kingdom prepared for the "sheep" of the 

Millennial age. Their kingdom will be the dominion 

of earth which was originally given to Adam, but 

which was lost through sin, and which is again to be 

restored when man is brought to perfection, and so 

made fit to receive and enjoy it. That dominion will 

not be a dominion of some of the race over others, but 

a joint dominion, in which every man will be a king, 

and all will have equal rights and privileges in appropriating 

and enjoying every earthly good. It will be 

a sovereign people— a great and grand republic on a 

basis of perfect righteousness, wherein the rights of 

every man will be conserved; because the golden rule 

will be inscribed on every heart, and every man will 

love his neighbor as himself. The dominion of all 

will be over the whole earth, and all its rich and 

bountiful stores of blessing. (Gen. 1:28; Psa. 8:5-8.) 

The kingdom of the world, to be given to the perfected 

and worthy ones of the redeemed race at the close of 

the Millennium, is clearly distinguished from all others 

by being called the kingdom prepared for them "from 

the foundation of the world," the earth having been 

made to be the everlasting home and kingdom of perfect 

men. But the kingdom bestowed upon Christ, 

of which the Church, his "Bride," becomes joint-heir, 

is a spiritual kingdom, "far above angels, principalities 

and powers," and it also shall "have no end"— 

Christ's Millennial Kingdom, which will end, being 

merely a beginning of Christ's power and rule. (I Cor. 15:25-28.) 

This endless heavenly, spiritual kingdom 

was prepared long before the earth was founded— its 

inception being recognized in Christ, "the beginning 

of the creation of God." It was intended for Christ 

Jesus, the First Begotten; but even the Church, his 

Bride, and joint-heir, was chosen or designed also, in 

him, before the foundation of the world.— Eph. 1:4. 

The kingdom or rule of earth, is the kingdom 
that has been in preparation for mankind from the 
foundation of the world. It was expedient that man 
should suffer six thousand years under the dominion 
of evil, to learn its inevitable results of misery and 
death, in order by contrast to prove the justice, wisdom 
and goodness of God's law of love. Then it will 



*See DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. I., Chapter VIII. "The Day 
of Judgment." 

page 39 

require the seventh thousand-year, under the reign 
of Christ, to restore him from ruin and death, to the 
perfect condition, thereby fitting him to "inherit the 
kingdom prepared for him from the foundation of the 
world." 



That kingdom, in which all will be kings, will be 
one grand, universal republic, whose stability and 
blessed influence will be assured by the perfection of 
its every citizen, a result now much desired, but an 
impossibility because of sin. The kingdom of Christ 
during the Millennium will be, on the contrary, a theocracy, 
which will rule the world (during the period of 
its imperfection and restoration) without regard to its 
consent or approval. 

The brethren of the Gospel Church are not the 
only "brethren" of Christ. All who at that time will 
have been restored to perfection will be recognized as 
sons of God— sons in the same sense that Adam was a 
son of God (Luke 3:38— human sons. And all of 
God's sons, whether on the human, the angelic or the 
divine plane, are brethren. Our Lord's love for these, 
his human brethren, is here expressed. As the world 
now has the opportunity to minister to those who are 
shortly to be the divine sons of God, and brethren of 
Christ, so they will have abundant opportunity during 
the age to come to minister to (each other) the human 
brethren. 

The dead nations when again brought into existence 
will need food, raiment and shelter. However 
great may have been their possessions in this life, 
death will have brought all to a common level: the 
infant and the man of mature years, the millionaire 
and the pauper, the learned and the unlearned, the 
cultured and the ignorant and degraded: all will have 
an abundant opportunity for the exercise of benevolence, 
and thus they will be privileged to be co-workers 
with God. We are here reminded of the illustration 
given in the case of Lazarus: Jesus only awakened 
him from death, and then were the rejoicing friends 
permitted to loose him from his grave clothes and to 
clothe and feed him. 

Further, these are said to be "sick and in prison" 
(more properly, under ward or watch). The grave is 
the great prison where the millions of humanity have 
been held in unconscious captivity; but when released 
from the grave, the restoration to perfection is not to 
be an instantaneous work. Being not yet perfect, 
they may properly be termed sick, and under ward; 
not dead, neither are they yet perfected in life: and 
any condition between those two may be properly 
symbolized by sickness. And they will continue to be 
under watch or ward until made well— physically, 
mentally and morally perfect. During that time there 
will be abundant opportunity for mutual helpfulness, 
sympathy, instruction and encouragement and 
any failure to assist will mark a lack of the Lord's 
spirit of love. 

Since all mankind will not be raised at once, but 
gradually, during the thousand years, each new group 
will find an army of helpers in those who will have preceded 
it. The love and benevolence which men will 



then show to each other (the brethren of Christ) the 
King will count as shown to him. No great deeds 
are assigned as the ground for the honors and favors 
conferred upon the righteous: they will have simply 
come into harmony with God's law of love and proved 
it by their works. "Love is the fulfilling of the law" 
(Rom. 13:10), and "God is love." So, when man 
is restored again to the image of God— "very good"— 
man also will be a living expression of love. 

"Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world," does not signify a rule independent 
of the divine law and supremacy: for although 
God gave earth's dominion to man at first, and designs 
restoring it to him when he has prepared him for 
the great trust, we are not to suppose that God intends 
man to rule it, otherwise than as under, or in harmony 
with, his supreme law. "Thy will be done in earth as 
in heaven," must forever be the principle of government. 
Man thenceforth will rule his dominion in harmony 
with the law of heaven— delighting continually 
to do his will in whose favor is life, and at whose 
"right hand [condition of favor] there are pleasures 
forevermore." (Psa. 16:11.) Oh! who would not say, 
"Haste ye along, ages of glory!" and give glory and 
honor to him whose loving plans are blossoming 
into such fulness of blessing? 

Let us now examine the message to those on the 
left— "Depart from me, ye cursed" (condemned)— 
condemned as unfit vessels for the glory and honor of 
life, who would not yield to the moulding and shaping 
influences of divine love. When these, "brethren," 
were hungry and thirsty, or naked, sick, and in 
prison, ye ministered not to their necessities, thus 
continually proving yourselves out of harmony with 
the heavenly city (Kingdom); for "there shall in no 
case enter into it anything that defileth." The decision 
or sentence regarding this class is— "Depart 
from me into everlasting fire [symbol of destruction], 
prepared for the devil and his angels." Elsewhere 
(Heb. 2:14) we read without symbol that Christ "will 
destroy. ..him that had the power of death, that is, 
the devil." 

"And these [the "goats"] shall go away into everlasting 
[Greek, aionios— lasting] punishment, but the 
righteous into life eternal [Greek, aionios— lasting.]" 
The punishment will be as lasting as the reward. Both 
will be everlasting. 



page 39 

EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT. 



THE EVERLASTINGNESS of the punishment 
being thus established, only one point is left open 
for discussion; namely, the nature of the punishment. 
Take your Concordance and search out what saith the 
great Judge regarding the punishment of wilful sinners 
who despise and reject all his blessed provisions for 
them through Christ. What do you find? Does God 
there say— All sinners shall live in torture forever? 
No; we find not a single text where life in any condition 
is promised to that class. 

God's declarations assure us that ultimately he 
will have a clean universe, free from the blight of sin 
and sinners,— because "All the wicked will he destroy." 
-Psa. 145:20. 

But while we do not find one verse of the Bible 
saying that this class can have life in torment, or in 
any other condition, we do find numerous passages 
teaching the reverse. Of these we give a few merely 
as samples— "The wages of sin is death" (Rom. 6:23.) 
"The soul that sinneth, it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4,20.) 

page 40 

"The wicked shall perish." (Psa. 37:20.) "Yet a little 
while and the wicked shall not be." (Psa. 37:10.) 
Thus God has told us plainly the nature of the everlasting 
punishment of the wicked— that it will be 
death, destruction. 

The false ideas of God's plan of dealing with the 
incorrigible, taught ever since the great "falling away," 
which culminated in Papacy, and instilled into our 
minds from childhood, are alone responsible for the 
view generally held, that the everlasting punishment 
provided for wilful sinners is a life of torment. This 
view is held, notwithstanding the many clear statements 
of God's Word that their punishment is to be 
death. Here Paul states very explicitly what the punishment 
is to be. Speaking of the same Millennial Day, 
and of the same class, who, despite all the favorable 
opportunities and the fulness of knowledge then, will 
not come into harmony with Christ, and hence will 
"know not God," in the true sense and "obey not," 
he says— "Who shall be punished." Ah, yes! but how 
punished? He tells us how: They "shall be punished 
with everlasting destruction" [a destruction from which 
there shall be no recovery, no redemption or resurrection 
— Heb. 10:26-29] from the presence of the Lord 
and from the glory of his power." (2 Thes. 1:9.) This 
destruction is represented in the parable as the everlasting 
"fire" prepared for the devil and his angels: 
it is "the lake of fire and brimstone," which is the 
Second death (Rev. 20:14), into which the "goat" 
class of this parable are sent— Matt. 25:41. 

Thus the meaning and reasonableness of this 
statement concerning everlasting punishment are 
readily seen when looked at from the correct standpoint. 



The fire of the parable, by which the punishment 
(destruction) is to be accomplished, will not be 
literal fire, for the "fire" is as much a symbol as the 
"sheep" and "goats" are symbols. Fire here, as elsewhere, 
symbolizes destruction, and not in any sense 
preservation. 

We might well leave this subject here, and consider 
that we have fully shown that the everlasting 
punishment of the "goat" class will be destruction; but 
we direct attention to one other point which clinches 
the truth upon this subject. We refer to the Greek 
word kolasin, translated "punishment," in verse 46. 
This word has not in it the remotest idea of torment. 
Its primary signification is to cut off, or prune, or lop 
off, as in the pruning of trees; and a secondary meaning 
is to restrain. The wicked will be everlastingly 
restrained, cut off from life in the Second death. Illustrations 
of the use of kolasin can easily be had from 
Greek classical writings. The Greek word for "torment" 
is basinos, a word totally unrelated to the word 
kolasin. 

Kolasin, the word used in Matt. 25:46, occurs in 
but one other place in the Bible, viz., I John 4:18, 
where it is improperly rendered "torment" in the common 
version, whereas it should read, "Fear hath restraint." 
Those who possess a copy of Young's Analytical 
Concordance will see from it (page 995) that the 
definition of the word kolasin is "pruning, restraining, 
restraint." And the author of the Emphatic Diaglott, 
after translating kolasin in Matt. 25:46 by the words 
"cutting off," says in a foot note: 

"The common version and many modern ones 
render kolasin aionion 'everlasting punishment,' conveying 
the idea, as generally interpreted, of basinos, 
torment. Kolasin in its various forms occurs in only 
three other places in the New Testament: Acts 4:21; 
2 Pet. 2:9; I John 4:18. It is derived from kolazoo, 
which signifies, 1. To cut off; as lopping off branches 
of trees, to prune. 2. To restrain, to repress. The 
Greeks write— 'The charioteer restrains [kalazei] his 
fiery steeds.' 3. To chastize, to punish. To cut off 
an individual from life, or from society, or even to restrain, 
is esteemed as a punishment; hence has arisen 
this third or metaphorical use of the word. The 
primary signification has been adopted [in the Diaglott], 
because it agrees better with the second member 
of the sentence, thus preserving the force and 
beauty of the antithesis. The righteous go to life, the 
wicked to the cutting off from life, death.— 
2Thes. 1:9." 

Now consider carefully the text, and note the 
antithesis, the contrast, shown between the reward of 
the "sheep" and the reward of the "goats," which the 
correct idea of kolasin gives— the one class goes into 
everlasting life, while the other is everlastingly cut off 
from life— forever restrained in death. And this exactly 



agrees with what the Scriptures everywhere else declare 
concerning the wages or penalty of wilful sin. 

Consider for a moment the words of verse 41: 
"Depart from me, ye cursed [once redeemed by Christ 
from the Adamic curse or condemnation to death, but 
now condemned or cursed, as worthy of the Second 
death, by the One who redeemed them from the first 
curse], into everlasting fire [symbol of everlasting destruction, 
prepared for the devil and his messengers 
[servants]." 

Remember that this is the final sentence at the 
close of the final trial— at the close of the Millennium; 
and that none will then be servants of Satan ignorantly 
or unwillingly, as so many now are; for the great 
Deliverer, Christ, will remove outside temptations, and 
provide assistance toward self-improvement, which 
will enable all who will to overcome inherent weaknesses 
and to attain perfection. These "goats," who 
love evil and serve Satan, are the messengers ("angels") 
of Satan. For these and Satan, and for no 
others, God has prepared Second death— the everlasting 
destruction. Fire will come from God out of 
heaven and consume them. Consuming fire and devouring 
fire all can appreciate, unless their eyes are 
holden by false doctrine and prejudice. No one ever 
knew of a preserving fire; and as fire never preserves, 
but always consumes, God uses it as a symbol of 
utter destruction.— Rev. 20:9. 

"THE LAKE OF FIRE AND BRIMSTONE 
WHICH IS THE SECOND DEATH." 

-REV. 19:20; 20:10,14,15; 21:8.- 

"The lake of fire and brimstone" is several times 
mentioned in the book of Revelation, which all Christians 
admit to be a book of symbols. However, they 
generally think and speak of this particular symbol 
as a literal statement giving strong support to the torment 
doctrine, notwithstanding the fact that the symbol 
is clearly defined as meaning the Second death: 
"And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. 
This is the Second Death," etc. (Rev. 20:14.) It is 
sometimes spoken of as "a lake of fire burning with 
brimstone" (Rev. 19:20), the element brimstone being 

page 41 

mentioned to intensify the symbol of destruction, the 
Second death: burning brimstone being one of the 
most deadly elements known. It is destructive to all 
forms of life. 

The symbolism of this lake of fire is further shown 
by the fact that the symbolic "beast" and the symbolic 
"false prophet," and death and hell [hades], as well as 
the devil and his followers, are destroyed in it— Rev. 19:20; 



20:10,14,15; 21:8. 

This destruction or death is called the Second 
death in contradistinction to the First or Adamic 
death, and not to signify that everything which goes 
into it dies a second time. For instance, death (the 
first or Adamic death), and hades, the grave, are to be 
cast into it;— this work will require the entire Millennium 
to accomplish it; and in no sense will they ever 
have been destroyed before. So also "the devil," "the 
beast," and "the false prophet," will never have been 
destroyed before. 

From the first, or Adamic death, a resurrection 
has been provided. All that are in their graves shall 
therefore come forth. The Revelator prophetically 
declares: "The sea gave up the dead which were in 
it, and death and hell [hades, the grave] gave up the 
dead which were in them. ...And I saw the dead, 
small and great, stand before God, and the books were 
opened." (Rev. 20:13,12.) It was in view of God's 
plan for redeeming the race from Adamic death that in 
both the Old and New Testaments it is called a "sleep." 
In Israel's history of the good and the wicked it is repeatedly 
stated that they "slept with their fathers." 
The Apostles used the same symbol, and our Lord 
also. But no such symbol is used in reference to the 
Second death. On the contrary, the strongest figures 
of total and utter destruction are used to symbolize 
it; viz., "fire and brimstone;" because that will be a 
destruction from which there will be no recovery. 

Blessed thought! the Adamic death (which claimed 
the whole race for the sin of their progenitor) shall be 
forever swallowed up, and shall cease in this Second 
death into which it is to be cast by the great Redeemer 
who bought the whole world with the sacrifice of 
himself. Thus God tells us through the Prophet, "I 
will ransom them from the power of the grave [sheol]. 
I will redeem them from death.... O grave [sheol] 
I will be thy destruction." (Hos. 13:14.) The first 
or Adamic death shall no longer have liberty or power 
over men, as it has had for the past six thousand years; 
no longer shall any die for Adam's sin. (Rom. 5:12; 
Jer. 31:29,30; Ezek. 18:2.) Thenceforth the New 
Covenant, sealed with the precious blood, shall be in 
force, and only wilful transgressions will be counted 
as sin and punished with the wages of sin— death— 
the Second Death. Thus will the Adamic death be cast 
into and swallowed up by the Second Death. 

And hades and sheol— the dark, secret condition, 
the grave, which in the present time speaks to us of a 
hope of future life by God's resurrection power in 
Christ— shall be no more; for the Second Death will 
devour no being fit for life— none for whom there 
remains a shadow of hope, but such only as, by the 
unerring Judge, have been fully, impartially and individually 
found worthy of destruction. And Satan, 
that lying tempter who deceived and ruined the race 



and who, with persistent energy and cunning, has 
sought continually to thwart the purpose of God for 
our salvation through Christ, and with him all who 
are of his spirit, "his angels," shall be destroyed, and 
shall never awake from death to trouble the world 
again. Here he is said to be cast into "the lake of 
fire,"— the Second Death; and Paul in Heb. 2:14, referring 
to the same thing, calls it destruction— "that he 
might destroy death, and him that hath the power 
of death, that is the devil." And "the beast and the 
false prophet," the great false systems which have 
long oppressed and misled nominal Christendom, shall 
never escape from it. These systems are said to be 
cast "alive" (that is, while they are still organized and 
operative) into the lake of fire burning with brimstone. 
-Rev. 19:20. 

The great time of trouble, the Lord's judgment, 
which will utterly destroy these systems, will undoubtedly 
cause great social, financial and religious difficulty 
and pain to all those identified with these deceived 
and deceiving systems, before they are utterly destroyed. 
These systems will be cast in, destroyed, at 
the beginning of the Millennium, while Satan's destruction 
is reserved until its close, when all the 
"goats" shall have been separated from the "sheep," 
and they shall perish with Satan in the Second death, 
as "his angels," messengers or servants. None of 
those abominable characters among men, who, knowing 
the truth, yet love unrighteousness— none of "the 
fearful and unbelieving"— those who will not trust 
God after all the manifestations of his grace afforded 
during the Millennial reign of Christ; nor the 
abominable, who, at heart are murderers and whoremongers 
and sorcerers and idolaters and liars: none 
of these shall escape from the Second Death, to defile 
the earth again. All such, after a full and abundant 
opportunity for reformation, will be judged unworthy 
of life, and will be forever cut off in the Second death, 
symbolized by the lake of fire and brimstone. 

Several prophetic pen pictures of the Millennial 
age and its work, in chapters 20 and 2 1 of Revelation, 
clearly show the object and result of that age of trial, 
in harmony with the remainder of the Scriptures already 
noted. 

Chapter 20, verses 2,4,11, with verses 1,2,10,11 of chapter 21, 
show the beginning of that Age of 
Judgment, and the restraining of blinding errors and 
misleading systems. The "beast" and the "false 
prophet" are the chief symbols, and represent the organizations 
or systems of error which, together, constitute 
"Babylon." This judgment against the 
"thrones" of the present time, and against "the beast 
and the false prophet" systems follows speedily upon 
the introduction of this Millennial judgment reign. The 
thrones of the present dominion of earth will be "cast 
down," and the dominion transferred to the great 



Prophet, Priest, King and Judge, "whose right it is." 
(Compare Dan. 7:14,22; Ezek. 21:27.) Then the 
systems of error will be speedily judged worthy of 
destruction, "the lake of fire," "the Second Death."— 
Rev. 19:20. 

Thus the second destruction (or death) begins 
quite early in the new judgment: it begins with the 
false systems symbolized by the beast, false prophet, 
etc., but it will not reach the world of mankind, as 
individuals, until they have first had full trial, with full 
opportunity to choose life and live forever. Chapters 20:12,13, 
and 21:3-7, indicate the blessed, favorable 

page 42 

trial in which all, both dead and living (except 
the Church, who, with Jesus Christ, are kings, priests, 
joint-heirs and judges), will be brought to a full 
knowledge of the truth, relieved from sorrow and pain, 
and freed from every blinding error and prejudice, 
and tried "according to their works." 

The grand outcome of that trial will be a clean 
universe. As the Revelator expresses it, "Every creature 
which is in heaven and on the earth. ..heard I 
saying, Blessing and honor and glory and power be 
unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the 
Lamb forever." But this result will be accomplished 
in harmony with all God's dealings past and present, 
which have always recognized man's freedom of will 
to choose good or evil, life or death. 

We cannot doubt then that in the close of the 
Millennial age, God will again for a "little season" permit 
evil to triumph, in order thereby to test his creatures 
(who will by that time have become thoroughly 
acquainted with both good and evil, and the consequence 
of each, and will have had his justice and love 
fully demonstrated to them), that those who finally 
prefer and choose evil may be cut off— destroyed. 
Thus God will for all eternity remove all who do not 
love righteousness and hate iniquity. 

We read, regarding that testing, that Satan will 
endeavor to lead astray all mankind, whose numbers 
will then be as the sand of the sea for multitude; but 
that many of them will follow Satan's evil example and 
choose evil and disobedience, with past experience 
before them, and unhampered by present weaknesses 
and blinding influences, we need not suppose. However, 
when God does not tell us either the number or 
the proportion of those to be found worthy of life, and 
those to be judged worthy of death (the Second 
Death), we may not dogmatize. Of one thing we may 
be confident, God willeth not the death of the wicked, 
but would that all should turn to him and live; and no 
one will be destroyed in that "lake of fire and brimstone" 
(figurative of utter destruction,— Gehenna) who 
is worthy of life, whose living longer would be a blessing 



to himself or to others in harmony with 
righteousness. 

Utter and hopeless destruction is intended only 
for wilful evil doers, who, like Satan, in pride of 
heart and rebellion against God, will love and do evil 
notwithstanding the manifestations of God's disapproval, 
and notwithstanding their experience with its 
penalties. Seemingly the goodness and love of God 
in the provision of a ransom, a restitution, and another 
opportunity of life for man, instead of leading all to an 
abhorrence of sin, will lead some to suppose that God 
is too loving to cut them off in the Second Death, or 
that if he did so he would give them other, and 
yet other future opportunities. Building thus upon a 
supposed weakness in the divine character, these may 
be led to try to take advantage of the grace (favor) 
of God, as a license for wilful sin. But they 
shall go no further, for their folly shall be made manifest. 
Their utter destruction will prove to the righteous 
the harmony and perfect balance of Justice, 
Wisdom, Love and Power in the Divine Ruler. 

REVELATION 21:8. 

The true character of the goat class is portrayed. 
The fearful and unbelieving [who will not trust God], 
the abominable, murderers [brother-haters], whore-mongers, 
sorcerers, idolaters [such as misappropriate 
and misuse divine favors, who give to self or any other 
creature or thing that service and honor which belong 
to God], and all "liars"— "whosoever loveth and maketh 
a lie" [in a word, all who do not love the truth and 
seek it, and at any cost defend and hold it] "shall have 
their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone 
[Gehenna, symbol of utter destruction], which is 
the Second Death." Such company would be repulsive 
to any honest, upright being. It is hard to tolerate 
them now, when we can sympathize with them, 
knowing that such dispositions are now in great measure 
the result of inherited weakness of the flesh. We 
are moved to a measure of sympathy by the remembrance 
that in our own cases, often, when we would 
do good evil is present with us. But in the close of 
the Millennial judgment, when the Lord, the righteous 
Judge, shall have given every advantage and opportunity 
of knowledge and ability, this class will be an abhorrence 
and detestation to all who are in harmony 
with the King of Glory. And the righteous will be 
glad when, the trial being ended, the gift of life of 
which these shall have proved themselves unworthy, 
shall be taken from them, and when the corrupters of 
the earth, and all their work and influence, shall be 
destroyed. 

THE DEVIL, THE BEAST AND THE FALSE 
PROPHET TORMENTED. 



Rev. 20:9 tells of the destruction of those individuals 
who join with Satan in the last rebellion; and 
verse 15 tells of that same destruction in other words, 
using the symbol "lake of fire." They are devoured 
or consumed in fire. This being the case, the torment 
of verse 10 cannot refer to these human beings who 
are consumed, destroyed. Hence the question narrows 
down to this, Will Satan and a false prophet and 
a beast be tortured forever? and does this verse so 
teach? 

We answer in God's own words, "All the wicked 
will he destroy." Concerning Satan, the arch enemy 
of God and man, God expressly advises us that he will 
be destroyed, and not preserved in any sense or condition. 
-Heb. 2:14. 

The beast and false prophet systems, which during 
the Gospel age have deceived and led astray, will be 
cast into a great, consuming trouble in the close of this 
Gospel age. The torment of those systems will be 
aionion, i. e., lasting. It will continue as long as they 
last, until they are utterly consumed. So also the system 
of error, which will suddenly manifest itself at the 
end of the Millennial age and lead the "goats" to destruction, 
will be consumed. (Rev. 20:7-10.) That 
deceiving system (not specified as to kind, but merely 
called Satan, after its instigator) will be cast into the 
same sort of trouble and destruction, in the end of the 
Millennial age, as the beast and false prophet systems 
are now being cast into it, in the end of the Gospel age. 

Rev. 19:3, speaking of one of these systems, says: 
"Her smoke rose up forever and ever." That is to 
say, the remembrance ("smoke") of the destruction of 
these systems of deception and error will be lasting, 
the lesson will never be forgotten— as smoke, which 
continues to ascend after a destructive fire, is testimony 
that the fire has done its work.— See also Isa. 34:8-10. 

Of Rev. 14:9-1 1 we remark, incidentally, that all 
will at once concede that if a literal worshiping of a 

page 43 

beast and image were meant in verse 9, then few, if 
any, in civilized lands are liable to the penalty of verse 1 1 ; 
and if the beast and his image and worship and 
wine and cup are symbols, so also are the torments 
and smoke and fire and brimstone. 

The casting of death and the grave into utter destruction, 
the Second death, during the Millennial age, 
is a part of the utter destruction which will include 
every improper, injurious and useless thing. (Isa. 11:9; 
Psa. 101:5-8.) The Second death, the sentence 
of that individual trial, will be final: it will never be 
destroyed. And let all the lovers of righteousness say, 
Amen; for to destroy the Second Death, to remove the 
sentence of that just and impartial trial, would be to let 



loose again not only Satan, but all who love and practice 
wrong and deception, and who dishonor the Lord 
with their evil institutions— to oppose, offend and endeavor 
to overthrow those who love and desire to serve 
him and enjoy his favor. We rejoice that there is 
no danger of this, but that divine justice unites with 
divine wisdom, love and power, to bring in everlasting 
righteousness on a permanent basis. 

TURNED INTO HELL. 



"The wicked shall be turned into hell, and the nations 
that forget God. "-Psa. 9:17. 

This statement of the Lord recorded by the 
Psalmist we find without any qualification whatever, 
and we must accept it as a positive fact. If the claims 
of "Orthodoxy" respecting hell were true, this would 
be, indeed, a fearful message. 

But let us substitute the true meaning of the word 
sheol, and our text will read: "The wicked shall be 
turned into the condition of death, and all the nations 
that forget God." This we believe; but next, who are 
the wicked? In one sense all men are wicked, in that 
all are violators of God's law; but in the fullest sense 
the wicked are those who, with full knowledge of the 
exceeding sinfulness of sin, and the remedy provided 
for their recovery from its baneful effects, wilfully 
persist in sin. 

As yet few— only consecrated believers— have 
come to a true knowledge of God. The world knows 
him not, and the nations cannot forget God until they 
are first brought to a knowledge of him. The consecrated 
have been enlightened, led of the Spirit through 
faith to understand the deep and hidden things of God, 
which reveal the glory of God's character, but which, 
though expressed in his Word, appear only as foolishness 
to the world. 

As we have hitherto seen, this will not be so in the 
age to come, for then "The earth shall be full of the 
knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea." 
(Isa. 11:9.) Much that we now receive by faith will 
then be demonstrated to the world. When he who has 
ransomed man from the power of the grave (Hos. 13:14) 
begins to gather his purchased possessions back 
from the prison-house of death (Isa. 61:1), when the 
sleepers are awakened under the genial rays of the 
Sun of Righteousness, they will not be slow to realize 
the truth of the hitherto seemingly idle tale, that "Jesus 
Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 
man." 

We have also seen that the gradual ascent of the 
King's Highway of Holiness in that age will be possible 
to all, and comparatively easy, because all the 
stones— stumbling-blocks, errors, etc.— will have been 



gathered out, and straight paths made for their feet. 
It is in that age that this text applies. Those who 
ignore the favoring circumstances of that age, and will 
not be obedient to the righteous Judge or Ruler- 
Christ— will truly be the wicked. And every loyal 
subject of the Kingdom of God will approve the 
righteous judgment which turns such an one again 
into sheol— the condition of death. Such an one 
would be unworthy of life; and, were he permitted to 
live, his life would be a curse to himself and to the 
rest of mankind, and a blemish on the work of God. 

This will be the Second Death, from which there 
will be no resurrection. Having been ransomed from 
the grave (sheol) by the sacrifice of Christ, if they die 
again on account of their own sin, "there remaineth 
no more sacrifice for sin." (Heb. 10:26.) "Christ 
dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over 
him." (Rom. 6:9.) The Second Death should be 
dreaded and shunned by all, since it is to be the end of 
existence to all those deemed unworthy of life. But 
in it there can be no suffering. Like Adamic death, it 
is the extinction of life. 

It is because through sin mankind had become 
subject to death (sheol, hades) that Christ Jesus came 
to deliver us and save us from death. (I John 3:8; 
Heb. 2:14.) Death is a cessation of existence, the absence 
of life. There is no difference between the conditions 
in the Adamic and Second deaths, but there is 
hope of a release from the first, while from the second 
there will be no release, no return to life. The first 
death sentence passed upon all on account of Adam's 
sin, while the Second Death can be incurred only by 
wilful, individual sin. 

That the application of our text belongs to the 
coming age is evident, for both saints and sinners go 
into sheol or hades now. This Scripture indicates that, 
in the time when it applies, only the wicked shall go 
there. And the nations that forget God must be nations 
that have known him, else they could not forget 
him; and never yet have the nations been brought to 
that knowledge, nor will they be until the coming 
time, when the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth, and none shall need to say unto his neighbor, 
Know thou the Lord, for all shall know him, from 
the least to the greatest of them.— Isa. 1 1:9; Jer. 31:34. 

The Hebrew word goi, rendered "nations" in this 
verse, is elsewhere used by the same writer and rendered 
"heathen," "Gentiles" and "people." The thought 
seems to be,— any who do not become God's covenant 
people, even though they be not openly wicked. The 
nations (Gentiles, all who under that full knowledge 
do not become Israelites indeed) who are forgetful 
or negligent of God's favors enjoyed, and of their 
duties and obligations to him, shall share the fate of 
the wilfully "wicked," and be cast into the Second 
Death. 



In further proof of this, we find that the Hebrew 
word shub, which in our text is translated "turned," 
signifies turned back, as to a previous place or condition. 
Those referred to in this text either have been 
in sheol or are liable to enter it, but being redeemed by 
the precious blood of Christ, will be brought out of 
sheol. If then they are wicked, they, and all who forget 
God, shall be turned back or returned to sheol. 

page 44 

DID THE JEWS BELIEVE IN EVERLASTING 
TORMENT? 



Noting that we teach that the doctrine of everlasting 
torment was engrafted upon the doctrines of the 
Christian Church during the period of the apostasy, 
the great falling away which culminated in Papacy, 
some have inquired whether it does not seem, according 
to the works of Josephus, that this doctrine was 
firmly held by the Jews; and, if so, they ask, does it not 
seem evident that the early Christians, being largely 
converts from Judaism, brought this doctrine with 
them, in the very outstart of Christianity? 

We answer, No; the doctrine of everlasting torment 
sprang naturally from the doctrine of human 
immortality, which as a philosophic question was first 
promulgated in anything like the present form by the 
Platonic school of Grecian philosophy. These first 
affirmed that each man contained a fragment of deity, 
and that this would prevent him from ever dying. This 
foundation laid, it was as easy to describe a place for 
evil-doers as for well-doers. But to the credit of those 
heathen philosophers be it recorded that they failed 
to develop, or at least to manifest, that depth of degradation 
from benevolence and reason and pity, necessary 
to paint, by word and pen and brush, such 
details of horrors and agonies as were soon incorporated 
into their doctrine, and a belief thereof declared 
"necessary to salvation" in the professed church of 
Christ. 

To appreciate the case, it is necessary to remember 
that, when the Christian Church was established, 
Greece stood at the head of intelligence and civilization. 
Alexander the Great had conquered the world, 
and had spread respect for Greece everywhere; and 
though, from a military point of view, Rome had taken 
her place, it was otherwise in literature. For centuries, 
Grecian philosophers and philosophies led the intellectual 
world, and impregnated and affected everything. 
It became customary for philosophers and 
teachers of other theories to claim that their systems 
and theories were nearly the same as those of the Grecians, 
and to endeavor to remove differences between 



their old theories and the popular Grecian views. And 
some sought to make capital by claiming that their 
system embraced all the good points of Platonism with 
others which Plato did not see. 

Of this class were the teachers in the Christian 
Church in the second, third and fourth centuries. Conceding 
the popularly accepted correctness of the philosophers, 
they claimed that the same good features 
of philosophy were found in Christ's teachings, and 
that he was one of the greatest philosophers, etc. Thus 
a blending of Platonism and Christianity took place. 
This became the more pronounced as kings and emperors 
began to scrutinize religious teachings, and to 
favor those most likely to awe the people and make 
them law-abiding. While heathen teachers were 
truckling to such imperial scrutiny, and teaching an 
everlasting punishment for those who violated the 
laws of the emperors (who ruled as divinely appointed), 
we cannot suppose otherwise than that the ambitious 
characters in the church at that time, who were seeking 
to displace heathenism and to become the dominant 
religious power instead, would make prominent 
such doctrines as would in the eyes of the emperors 
seem to have an equal hold upon the fears and prejudices 
of the people. And what could be more to 
the purpose than the doctrine of the endless torment 
of the refractory? 

The same motives evidently operated with Josephus 
when writing concerning the belief of the Jews. 
His works should be read as apologies for Judaism, 
and as efforts to exalt that nation in the eyes of Rome 
and the world. It should be remembered that the 
Jews had the reputation of being a very rebellious 
people, very unwilling to be ruled even by the Caesars. 
They were hoping, in harmony with God's promises, 
to become the chief nation. Many rebellious outbreaks 
had occurred among them, and their peculiar 
religion, different from all others, came in for its share 
of blame for favoring too much the spirit of liberty. 

Josephus had an object in writing his two principal 
works, "Antiquities" and "Wars of the Jews." 
He wrote them in the Greek language while living at 
Rome, where he was the friend and guest successively 
of the Roman emperors Vespasian, Titus and Domitian, 
and where he was in constant contact with the 
Grecian philosophers. These books were written for 
the purpose of showing off the Jewish people, their 
courage, laws, ethics, etc., to the best advantage before 
the Grecian philosophers and Roman dignitaries. This 
object is covertly admitted in his preface to his "Antiquities," 
in which he says: 

"I have undertaken the present work as thinking 
it will appear to all the Greeks worthy of their study. 
...Those that read my book may wonder that my discourse 
of laws and historical facts contains so much of 
philosophy. ...However, those that have a mind 



to know the reasons of everything may find here a 
very curious philosophical theory." 

In a word, as a shrewd man who himself had 
become imbued with the spirit of the Grecian philosophers 
then prevailing, Josephus drew from the Law 
and the Prophets, and from the traditions of the elders 
and the theories of the various sects of the Jews, all he 
could find that in the most remote degree would tend 
to show:— 

First, that the Jewish religion was not far behind 
popular Grecian philosophy; but that somewhat analogous 
theories had been drawn from Moses' Law, and 
held by some Jews, long before the Grecian philosophers 
broached them. 

Secondly, that it was not their religious ideas 
which made the Jews as a people hard to control or 
"rebellious," as all liberty-lovers were esteemed by the 
Caesars. Hence he attempts to prove, at a time when 
virtue was esteemed to consist mainly in submission, 
that Moses' Law "taught first of all that God is the 
Father and Lord of all things, and bestows a happy life 
upon those that follow him, but plunges such as do 
not walk in the paths of virtue into inevitable miseries." 
And it is in support of this idea, and for such 
purposes, evidently, that Josephus, after saying: 
"There are three philosophical sects among the Jews; 
first, the Pharisees; second, the Sadducees, and third, 
the Essenes," proceeds to give an account of their 
three theories; especially detailing any features which 
resembled Grecian philosophy. And because the 
last and least, the Essenes, most resembled the doctrines 
of the Stoics and leading Grecian theories, 
Josephus devotes nearly ten times as much space 
to their views as to the views of both Sadducees 

page 45 

and Pharisees combined. And yet the Essenes 
were so insignificant a sect that the New Testament 
does not even mention them, while Josephus 
himself admits they were few. Whatever views they 
held, therefore, on any subject, cannot be claimed as 
having Jewish sanction, when the vast majority of 
Jews held contrary opinions. The very fact that our 
Lord and the apostles did not refer to them is good 
evidence that the Essenes' philosophy by no means 
represented the Jewish ideas. This small sect probably 
grew up later and probably absorbed from 
Grecian philosophy its ideas concerning immortality 
and the everlasting torment of the non-virtuous. 
It should be remembered that Josephus 
was not born until three years after our Lord's 
crucifixion, and that he published his "Wars" A.D. 75 
and "Antiquities" A.D. 93— at a time when he and 
other Jews, like all the rest of the world, were eagerly 
swallowing Grecian philosophy and science falsely so 



called, against which Paul warned the church.— Col. 2:8; 
I Tim. 6:20. 

Josephus directed special attention to the Essenes 
because it suited his object to do so. He admits that the 
Sadducees, next to the largest body of Jewish people, 
did not believe in human immortality. And of the Pharisees' 
views he makes a blind statement, calculated to 
mislead, as follows: "They also believe that souls have 
an immortal vigor in them [This might be understood 
to mean that the Pharisees did not believe as the Sadducees 
that death ended all existence, but believed in 
a vigor or life beyond the grave— by a resurrection 
of the dead], and that under the earth there will be rewards 
and punishments, according as they have lived 
virtuously or viciously in this life; and that the latter 
are to be detained in an everlasting prison [death— not 
torture], but that the former [the virtuous] shall have 
power to revive and live again." 

Is it not apparent that Josephus has whittled and 
stretched the views of the Pharisees, as much as his 
elastic conscience would allow, to show a harmony 
between them and the philosophies of Greece? Paul, 
who had been a Pharisee, contradicts Josephus. While 
Josephus says they believed "that only the virtuous 
would revive and live again [Does not this imply 
a resurrection, and imply also that the others would 
not live again, but remain dead, in the great prison 
—the tomb?]" Paul, on the contrary, says: "I have 
hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, 
that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of 
the just and unjust."— Acts 24:15. 

We have no hesitancy about accepting the testimony 
of the inspired Apostle Paul, not only in regard 
to what the Jews believed, but also as to what he and the 
early Church believed; and we repeat, that the theory 
of the everlasting torment of the wicked, based upon 
the theory that the human soul cannot die, is contrary 
to both the Old and the New Testament teachings, 
and was introduced among Jews and Christians 
by Grecian Philosophers. Thank God for the purer 
philosophy of the Scriptures, which teaches that the 
death of the soul (being) is the penalty of sin (Ezek. 18:20); 
that all souls condemned through Adam's sin 
were redeemed by Christ's soul (Isa. 53:10); and that 
only for wilful, individual sin will any die the Second 
Death— an everlasting punishment, but not an everlasting 
torment. 

CHOOSE LIFE THAT YE MAY LIVE. 



"I have set before thee this day life and good, 
death and evil." "I have set before thee life and 
death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that 
both thou and thy seed may live."— Deut. 30:15,19. 



We come now to the consideration of other Scripture 
statements in harmony with the conclusions set 
forth in the preceding articles. 

The words here quoted are from Moses to Israel. 
To appreciate them we must remember that Israel 
as a people, and all their covenants, sacrifices, etc., had 
a typical significance. 

God knew that they could not obtain life by keeping 
the Law, no matter how much they would choose 
to do so, because they, like all others of the fallen race, 
were weak, depraved through the effect of the "sour 
grape" of sin which Adam had eaten, and which his 
children had continued to eat. (Jer. 31:29.) Thus, 
as Paul declares, the Law given to Israel could not 
give them life because of the weaknesses or depravity 
of their fallen nature. -Rom. 8:3; Heb. 7:19; 10:1-10. 

Nevertheless, God foresaw a benefit to them from 
even an unsuccessful attempt to live perfectly; namely, 
that it would develop them, as well as show them the 
need of the better sacrifice (the ransom which our Lord 
Jesus gave) and a greater deliverer than Moses. And 
with all this their trial furnished a pattern or shadow 
of the individual trial insured to the whole world 
(which Israel typified) and secured by the better sacrifices 
for sin, which were there prefigured, to be accomplished 
by the great prophet of whom Moses was 
but a type. 

Thus seeing that the trial for life or death presented 
to Israel was but typical of the individual trial 
of the whole world, and its issues of life and death (of 
eternal life or the Second Death), may help some to see 
that the great thousand-year-day of trial, of which our 
Lord Jesus has been appointed the Judge, contains the 
two issues, life and death. All will then be called upon 
to decide, under that most favorable opportunity, for 
righteousness and life or sin and death, and a choice 
must be made. And, although there will be rewards 
and "stripes" according to the deeds of the present 
life, as well as according to their conduct under that 
trial (John 3:19; Matt. 10:42; Matt. 11:20-24), the 
verdict in the end will be in harmony with the choice 
expressed by the conduct of each during that age of 
trial. 

The second trial, its sentence and its result, are 
also shown in the words of Moses quoted by Peter 
(Acts 3:22,23): "A Prophet shall the Lord your God 
raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me. 
Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall 
say unto you. And it shall come to pass that every 
soul [being] which will not hear [obey] that Prophet 
[and thus choose life] shall be destroyed from among 
the people." In few words this calls attention to the 
world's great trial, yet future. It shows the great 
Prophet or Teacher raised up by God to give a new 
judgment or trial to the condemned race which he has 
redeemed from the condemnation which came upon 



it through its progenitor, Adam. It shows, too, the 
conditions of eternal life to be righteous obedience, 
and that with the close of that trial some will be 

page 46 

judged worthy of that life, and some worthy of destruction 
—the Second Death. 

Our Lord Jesus, having redeemed all by his perfect 
and precious sacrifice, is the Head of this great 
Prophet; and during the Gospel age God has been selecting 
the members of his Body, who, with Christ 
Jesus, shall be God's agents in judging the world. 
Together they will be that Great Prophet or Teacher 
promised. "Do ye not know that the saints shall judge 
the world?"— I Cor. 6:2. 

The first trial was of mankind only, and hence 
its penalty or curse, the first death, was only upon 
man. But the second trial is to be much more comprehensive. 
It will not only be the trial of fallen and 
imperfect mankind, but it will include every other 
thing and principle and being out of harmony with 
Jehovah. "God will bring every work into judgment, 
with every secret thing." 

The "judgment to come" will include the judgment 
to condemnation of all false systems— civil, 
social and religious. These will be judged, condemned 
and banished early in the Millennial day, the light 
of truth causing them to come into disrepute and 
therefore to pass away. This judgment comes first, in 
order that the trial of man may proceed unhindered 
by error, prejudice, etc. It will also include the trial of 
"the angels which sinned"— those angels "which kept 
not their first estate" of purity and obedience to God. 
Thus it is written by the Apostle of the members of the 
Body of the great Prophet and High Priest, who is 
to be Judge of all— "Know ye not that the saints shall 
judge angels?"— I Cor. 6:3. 

This being the case, the condemnation of the 
Millennial trial (destruction, Second Death) will cover 
a wider range of offenders than the penalty or curse 
for the sin of Adam, which "passed upon all men." 
In a word, the destruction at the close of the trial will 
be the utter destruction of every being and every 
thing which will not glorify God and be of use and 
blessing to his general creation. 



page 46 

FORGIVABLE AND UNPARDONABLE SINS. 



IN THE preceding pages we briefly show the extreme penalty 



for wilful sin. Adam's penalty, which involved his 
entire race, was of this sort; and only as the result of 
Christ's death as our ransom from that penalty of that wilful 
sin, is any forgiveness of it or subsequent sins possible. 

Forgivable sins are those which result from weaknesses 
incurred through that one Adamic sin which Christ settled 
once for all. They are such as are not wilful, but are committed 
through ignorance or weaknesses of the flesh. God 
stands pledged to forgive all such sins upon our repentance, 
in the name and merit of Christ's sacrifice. 

Unpardonable sins, sins which cannot be forgiven, are 
such as are wilfully done. As the penalty of the first wilful 
sin was death— extinction of being— so death is the penalty of 
every wilful sin against full knowledge and ability to choose 
and to do the right. This is called Second Death, in distinction 
from the first or Adamic penalty, from which Christ's 
ransom sacrifice will release all mankind. 

The "sin unto [Second] Death," for the forgiveness of 
which the Apostle declares it is useless to pray (I John 5:16), 
is not only a wilful sin but a sin against clear knowledge; a 
sin for which no adequate excuse can be found. Because it 
is a sin against clear knowledge, or enlightenment in holiness; 
it is called the "sin against the Holy Spirit" (Matt. 12:31,32), 
for which there is no forgiveness. 

But there are other partly-wilful sins, which are, therefore, 
partially unpardonable. In such the temptations within 
and without (all of which are directly or indirectly results of 
the fall) have a share;— the will consenting under the pressure 
of the temptation or because of the weakness. The Lord 
alone knows how to properly estimate our responsibilities and 
guilt in such cases. But to the true child of God there is but 
one proper course to take;— repentance and an appeal for 
mercy in the name and merit of Christ, the great sacrifice for 
sin. The Lord will forgive such a penitent, in the sense of 
restoring him to his favor; but he will be made to suffer 
"stripes" (Luke 12:47,48) for the sin, in proportion as God 
sees it to have been wilfully committed. 

Not infrequently a conscientious person realizes that he 
has committed sin, and that it had some wilfulness in it. He 
properly feels condemned, guilty before God; realizing his 
own guilt, and forgetting the fountain for sin and uncleanness, 
opened by God for our weak, fallen race, he falls into 
a state of sadness, believing that he has committed the sin 
unto death. Such wander in deserts drear, until they find the 
cleansing fountain. Let such remember, however, that the very 
facts of their sorrow for sin and their desire to return to divine 
favor are proofs that they have not committed the sin 
unto death; for the Apostle declares that those who commit 
sin of this sort cannot be renewed unto repentance. (Heb. 6:6.) 
Penitents, then, may always feel confident that their 
sins were in part, at least, results of the fall, and hence not 
unto death, but requiring forgiveness and stripes. 

Such is the wonderful provision of God, through Christ, 
for the acceptance of every soul which, forsaking sin and the 
love of it, seeks righteousness and life through him who is 
the Way, as well as the Truth and the Life. Thus all, whether 



naturally stronger or weaker, have an equal opportunity to 

gain everlasting life as well as to gain the great prize of joint-heirship 

with Christ. 

FUTURE RETRIBUTION. 



While the Scriptures teach that the present Gospel age is 
the Church's Judgment-day or period of trial, and that the 
world's Judgment-day or time of trial will be the Millennial 
age, it is, nevertheless, a reasonable question to ask,— To what 
extent will those who are not of the consecrated Church be 
held responsible, in the Millennial age, for their misdeeds, of 
cruelty, dishonesty and immorality, of the present time? And 
to what extent will those of the same class then be rewarded 
for present efforts to live moral and benevolent lives? 

These are important questions, especially to the world; 
and well would it be for them if they could realize their importance 
and profit thereby. They are important also to the 
Church, because of our interest in the world, and because of 

page 47 

our desire to understand and teach correctly our Father's 
plans. 

We have learned that the sacrifice of Christ secures for 
all mankind, however vile, an awakening from death, and the 
privilege of thereafter coming to perfection, and, if they will, 
of living forever. "There shall be a resurrection of the dead, 
both of the just and the unjust." (Acts 24:15.) The object 
of their being again brought into existence will be to give 
them a favorable opportunity to secure everlasting life, on the 
conditions which God requires— obedience to his righteous 
will. We have no intimation whatever in the Scriptures that, 
when awakened, the moral condition of men will have changed, 
but we have much, in both reason and revelation, to show 
that as they went into death weak and depraved so they will 
come out of it. As there is "no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 
nor wisdom in the grave" (Eccl. 9:10), they will have 
learned nothing; and since they were sinners and unworthy of 
life and divine favor when they died, they will still be unworthy; 
and as they have received neither full rewards nor 
full punishments for the deeds of the present life, it is evident 
that just such a time of awakening as God has promised 
during the Millennium is necessary;— for rewarding, and punishing, 
and giving to all mankind the opportunity for eternal 
life secured by Christ's great ransom-sacrifice. 

While, strictly speaking, the world is not now on trial: 
that is, the present is not the time for its full and complete 
trial, yet men are not now, nor have they ever been, entirely 
without light and ability, for the use of which they are accountable. 
In the darkest days of the world's history, and in 
the deepest degradation of savage life, there has always been 
at least a measure of the light of conscience pointing more or 
less directly to righteousness and virtue. That the deeds of 



the present life have much to do with the future, Paul taught 
very clearly when, before Felix, he reasoned of justice and 
self-government, in view of the judgment to come, so that 
Felix trembled.— Acts 24:25, Diaglott translation. 

At the first advent of our Lord, an increased measure 
of light came to men, and to that extent increased their responsibility, 
as he said: "This is the condemnation, that light 
is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than 
light, because their deeds were evil." (John 3:19.) For those 
evil deeds committed against the light possessed, whether of 
conscience or of revelation, men will have to give an account, 
and will receive, in their day of judgment, a just recompense 
of reward. And, likewise, to the extent of their effort to live 
righteously: they will receive their reward in the day of trial. 
-Matt. 10:42. 

If men would consider what even reason discerns, that a 
time of reckoning, of judgment, is coming, that God will not 
forever permit evil to triumph, and that in some way he will 
punish evil-doers, it would undoubtedly save them many sorrows 
and chastisements in the age to come. Said the Prophet, 
"Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from 
the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, 
Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?" (Isaiah 29:15.) Behold, 
"The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding 
the evil and the good" (Prov. 15:3); and "God shall bring 
every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether 
it be good, or whether it be evil." (Eccl. 12:14.) He "will 
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make 
manifest the counsels of the hearts."— I Cor. 4:5. 

The age of Christ's reign will be a time of just judgment; 
and though it will be an age of golden opportunities 
to all, it will be a time of severe discipline, trial and punishment 
to many. That the judgment will be fair and impartial, 
and with due consideration for the circumstances and 
the opportunities of each individual, is also assured— by the 
character of the Judge (the Christ— John 5:22; I Cor. 6:2), 
by his perfect knowledge, by his unwavering justice and 
goodness, by his divine power and by his great love as shown 
in his sacrifice to redeem men from death, that they might 
enjoy the privilege of this favorable, individual trial. 

The varied circumstances and opportunities of men, in 
this and past ages, indicate that a just judgment will recognize 
differences in the degree of individual responsibility, 
which will also necessitate differences in the Lord's future 
dealings with them. And this reasonable deduction we find 
clearly confirmed by the Scriptures. The Judge has been, 
and still is, taking minute cognizance of men's actions and 
words (Prov. 5:21), although they have been entirely unaware 
of it; and he declares that "Every idle ["pernicious," 
injurious or malicious] word that men shall speak, they shall 
give account thereof in the day of judgment" (Matt. 12:36); 
and that even a cup of cold water, given to one of his little 
ones, because he is Christ's, shall in nowise lose its reward. 
(Matt. 10:42.) The context shows that the "pernicious" 
words to which Jesus referred were words of wilful 
and malicious opposition spoken against manifest light. 



(Matt. 12:24,31,32.) He also affirmed that it would be more 
tolerable for Tyre, Sidon and Sodom in the day of judgment 
than for Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, which 
had misimproved greater advantages of light and 
opportunity. --Matt. 11:20-24. 

In the very nature of things, we can see that the punishments 
of that age will be in proportion to past guilt. Every 
sin indulged, and every evil propensity cultivated, hardens 
the heart and makes the way back to purity and virtue more 
difficult. Consequently, sins wilfully indulged now, will require 
punishment and discipline in the age to come; and 
the more deeply the soul is dyed in willing sin, the more 
severe will be the measures required to correct it. As a 
wise parent would punish a wayward child, so Christ will 
punish the wicked for their good. 

His punishments will always be administered injustice, 
tempered with mercy, and relieved by his approval and reward 
to those who are rightly exercised thereby. And it 
will only be when punishments, instructions and encouragements 
fail; in short, when love and mercy have done all that 
wisdom can approve (which is all that could be asked), that 
any will meet the final punishment which his case demands— 
the Second Death. 

None of the world will meet that penalty until they have 
first had all the blessed opportunities of the age to come. 
And while this is true of the world, the same principle applies 
now to the consecrated children of God in this our judgment 
(trial) day. We now receive God's favors (through faith), 
while the world will receive them in the next age, viz., instruction, 
assistance, encouragement, discipline and punishment. 
"For what son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? 
But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, 
then are ye bastards and not sons." Therefore, when we receive 
grievous chastisement, we should accept it as from a 
loving Father for our correction, not forgetting "the exhortation 
which speaketh unto us as unto children, My son, 
despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when 
thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord loveth he 
chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth."— 
Heb. 12:4-13. 

How just and equal are God's ways! Read carefully the 
rules of the coming age.— Jer. 31:29-34 and Ezek. 18:20-32. 

page 48 

They prove to us, beyond the possibility of a doubt, the sincerity 

and reality of all his professions of love to men: "As 

I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death 

of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and 

live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye 

die?"-Ezek. 33:11. 

All who in this life repent of sin, and, as the term repentance 
implies, begin and continue the work of reformation 
to the best of their ability, will form character which will 
be a benefit to them in the age to come; when awakened in 
the resurrection age, they will be to that extent advanced 



towards perfection, and their progress will be more rapid and 
easy; while with others it will be more slow, tedious and difficult. 
This is implied in the words of our Lord (John 5:29,30 
— Diaglott): "The hour is coming in the which all that 
are in their graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; 
they that have done good unto the resurrection of life [those 
whose trial is past, and who were judged worthy of life, will 
be raised perfect— the faithful of past ages to perfect human 
life, the overcomers of the gospel age to perfect life as divine 
beings], and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection 
of judgment."— These are awakened to judgment— to receive 
a course of discipline and correction— as the necessary means 
for their perfecting, or, otherwise, their condemnation to the 
Second Death. 

The man who, in this life, by fraud and injustice, accumulated 
and hoarded great wealth, which was scattered 
to the winds when he was laid in the dust, will doubtless 
awake to lament his loss, and bewail his poverty and his 
utter inability under the new order of things to repeat unlawful 
measures to accumulate a fortune. With many it will 
be a severe chastisement and a bitter experience to overcome 
the propensities to avarice, selfishness, pride, ambition and 
idleness, fostered and pampered for years in the present life. 
Occasionally we see an illustration of this form of punishment 
now, when a man of great wealth suddenly loses all, 
and the haughty spirit of himself and family must fall. 

We are told (Dan. 12:2) that some shall awake to shame 
and age-lasting contempt. And who can doubt that, when 
every secret thing is brought into judgment (Eccl. 12: 14), 
and the dark side of many a character that now stands measurably 
approved among men is then made known, many a 
face will blush and hide itself in confusion? When the man 
who steals is required to refund the stolen property to its 
rightful owner, with the addition of twenty per cent, interest, 
and the man who deceives, falsely accuses or otherwise 
wrongs his neighbor, is required to acknowledge his crimes 
and so far as possible to repair damages, on peril of an eternal 
loss of life, will not this be retributive justice? Note the 
clear statement of this in God's typical dealings with Israel, 
whom he made to represent the world.— I Cor. 10:11; Lev. 6:1-7. 
See also "Tabernacle Shadows," page 99. 

As we are thus permitted to look into the perfect plan of 
God, how forcibly we are reminded of his word through the 
prophet Isaiah, "Judgment also will I lay to the line, and 
righteousness to the plummet." (Isa. 28:17.) We also see the 
wholesome influence of such discipline. Parents, in disciplining 
their children, realize the imperative necessity of making 
their punishments proportionate to the character of the 
offences; and so in God's government: great punishments 
following great offences are not greater than is necessary 
to establish justice and to effect great moral reforms. 

Seeing that the Lord will thus equitably adjust human 
affairs in his own due time, we can afford to endure hardness 
for the present, and resist evil with good, even at the cost of 
present disadvantages. Therefore, "Recompense to no man 
evil for evil." "Let this mind be in you, which was also in 



Christ Jesus our Lord."-Rom. 12:17-19; Phil. 2:5. 

The present order of things will not always continue: a 
time of reckoning is coming. The just Judge of all the earth 
says, "Vengeance is mine, I will repay"; and the Apostle 
Peter adds, "The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly 
out of temptation and to reserve the unjust unto the day of 
judgment to be punished." (2 Pet. 2:9.) And, as we have 
seen, those punishments will be adapted to the nature of the 
offences, and the benevolent object in view— man's permanent 
establishment in righteousness. 

Other Scriptures corroborative of this view of future 
rewards and punishments are as follows: 2 Sam. 3:39; Matt. 16:27; 
I Pet. 3:12; Psa. 19:11; 91:8; Prov. 1 1:18; Isa. 40:10; 
49:4; Matt. 5:12; 10:41,42; Luke 6:35; Rev. 22:12; 
Rom. 14:11,12. 

LET HONESTY AND TRUTH PREVAIL 



Having demonstrated that neither the Bible nor reason 
offers the slightest support to the doctrine that eternal torment 
is the penalty for sin, we note the fact that the various 
church creeds, and confessions, and hymn-books, and theological 
treatises, are its only supports; and that under the 
increasing light of our day, and the consequent emancipation 
of reason, belief in this horrible, fiendish doctrine of the 
dark ages is fast dying out. But alas! this is not because 
Christian people generally are zealous for the truth of God's 
Word and for his character, and willing to destroy their grim 
creed-idols. Ah no! they still bow before their admitted 
falsities; they still pledge themselves to their defense, and 
spend time and money for their support, though at heart 
ashamed of them, and privately denying them. 

The general influence of all this is, to cause the honest-hearted 
of the world to despise Christianity and the Bible; 
and to make hypocrites and semi-infidels of nominal Christians. 
Because the nominal church clings to this old blasphemy, 
and falsely presents its own error as the teaching of 
the Bible, the Word of God, though still nominally reverenced, 
is being practically repudiated. Thus the Bible, the 
great anchor of truth and liberty, is being cut loose from, 
by the very ones who, if not deceived regarding its teachings, 
would be held and blessed by it. 

The general effect, not far distant, will be, first open infidelity, 
then anarchy. For much, very much of this, lukewarm 
Christians, both in pulpits and pews, who know or 
ought to know better, are responsible. Many such are willing 
to compromise the truth, to slander God's character, and 
to stultify and deceive themselves, for the sake of peace, or 
ease, or present earthly advantage. And any minister, who, 
by uttering a word for an unpopular truth, will risk the loss 
of his stipend and his reputation for being "established" in 
the bog of error, is considered a bold man, even though he 
ignominiously withhold his name from his published protests. 

If professed Christians would be honest with themselves 



and true to God, they would soon learn that "their fear 

toward God is taught by the precepts of men." (Isa. 29:13.) 

If all would decide to let God be true, though it should prove 

every man a liar (Rom. 3:4), and show all human creeds to 

be imperfect and misleading, there would be a great creed-smashing 

work done very shortly. Then the Bible would be 

studied and appreciated as never before; and its testimony 

that the wages of sin is death (extinction), would be recognized 

as a "just recompense of reward." 



We have given foregoing but a mere suggestion of the light 
now shining in "due season" for the "household of faith." We 
invite correspondence from all who "hunger and thirst after right." 
We have free tracts, and books to loan to the poor in spirit 
who are poor also in purse. See page 2. 



page 49 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI FEBRUARY 1 No. 3 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

The Great Priest Will Mediate 51 

Will Ancient Worthies Need a Mediator? 52 

Passover Lamb and the World's Sin 53 

The Second Adam and Eve 54 

The Prophet of Galilee 54 

The Teacher and the Lesson 55 

Perfect as Your Father Is Perfect 57 

Hypocrisy a Foe to Godliness 58 

Forgiveness Versus Malice 59 

World's Mediator Our Advocate 60 

Following a Suggestion Successfully 61 

Delivered From the Fowler 61 

Infidel Objection Answered 61 

Some Interesting Letters 62 

page 50 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



R4562 : page 50 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION 

In the interest of readers in the uttermost parts of the 
earth, we note the fact that the time for the celebration of 
the Memorial Supper this year will be the evening of Friday, 
April 22, after six o'clock, which marks the beginning of the 
14th day of the Month Nisan according to Jewish reckoning. 
That night corresponds to the one on which our Lord was 
betrayed. The following day corresponds to the date of his 
crucifixion, and Sunday, April 24, beginning at 6 P.M., on the 

R4563 : page 50 

23d, will be the first day of the Jewish Passover week. 

We refer our readers to the Sixth Volume of the Scripture 
Studies, Chapter XL, entitled "The Passover of the New 
Creation." There we have endeavored to set forth this subject 
in detail. We hope that all of God's dear people who 
trust in the merit of the precious blood of Christ for justification 
will celebrate this Memorial of the great Sacrifice of our 
Lord. And let us not forget that it also memorializes the 
consecration to death of all the members of the Body of 
Christ. "If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him." 
"If we be dead with him, we shall also reign with him." 
"This cup is the New Testament in my blood. ".."Drink ye 
all of it "-Luke 22: 20; I Cor. 11:25; Mark 10:38. 

page 50 

BIBLE STUDY HELPS, CLOTH AND LEATHER 

These are same as in the latest WATCH TOWER Bibles. 
Cloth, 50c; leather, $1.25. 

FOUR SPECIAL SERVICES SUNDAYS-JAN. 16, 23, 30 
AND FEB. 6-BROOKLYN ACADEMY OF MUSIC 

(Lafayette Avenue and St. Felix Street.) 



CHURCH FEDERATION-COUNTING THE COST 

Jan. 16, 3.00 p.m.— Topic: "What Congregationalists, 
Methodists and Presbyterians Must Surrender." 

Jan. 23, 3.00 p.m.— Topic: "What Baptists, Disciples 
and Adventists Must Surrender." 



Jan. 30, 3.00 p.m.— Topic: "What Episcopalians, Catholics 
and Lutherans Must Surrender." 

Feb. 6, 3.00 p.m.— Topic: "The Church Militant's Surrender 
to the Church Triumphant." 

Because of its large seating capacity, these will be held 
in the Academy of Music instead of the Brooklyn Tabernacle. 
However, a testimony meeting will be held at 10:00 
a.m. each of these Sundays in the Tabernacle, and a plain 
luncheon will be served at noon, also in the evening at 6:00 
p.m., preceding a question meeting at 7:30 p.m. 

An opportunity for Baptism will be arranged for the 
evening of Jan. 23. 



NORFOLK, VA., FEB. 13 
WILMINGTON, N.C., FEB. 14 
CHARLESTON, S.C., FEB. 15 

SAVANNAH, GA., FEB. 16 
JACKSONVILLE, FLA., FEB. 17 
CUMBERLAND, MD., FEB. 27 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., MARCH 6. 



MID-WINTER SOUTHERN CONVENTION AT 
TAMPA, FLA., FEB. 18-21 

In response to requests for another Southern Convention, 
arrangements have been made for sessions to be held in 
Tampa during the time of the "Panama Canal Celebration." 

The rates are favorable: From anywhere in the United 
States, one and one-third fare for the round trip, and from 
Florida points, one fare plus 75 cents for the round trip. 

Reasonable rates for meals and lodging may be arranged 
for by addressing Mr. D. R. Akin, 2824 Elmore St., Tampa, 
Fla. 



R4553 : page 51 

THE GREAT PRIEST WILL MEDIATE 

A PRIEST in the only true sense is a mediator between 

God and fallen creatures, to restore and 

establish harmony on a legal basis. I inquire then, 

Is not Jesus the Priest to the Church and 

would not this imply that he is the Church's Mediator, 

to restore and establish harmony on a legal basis?" 

We answer, No. After we have become members of the 
Church we are New Creatures, to whom old things have 
passed away and all things have become new and against 
whom there is no condemnation. The New Creatures are 
not to be restored. It is not true that we were New Creatures 
at first and fell from that condition and are to be restored 



to it. We fell as human creatures, and as such we are never 
to be "restored to harmony with God on a legal basis." Such 
restitution God has provided for the world during the Millennium, 
but not for the Church. As New Creatures we are 
members of the Priest who is to thus restore the world— our 
Lord is the Head and we are his "members." The picture 
of the future is that of Melchisedec's— a priest upon his 
throne. 

When we read, "Consider Jesus, the High Priest of our 
profession," the meaning is, the Chief Priest of our kind or 
order of priests. We are to consider him as our example, 
that, as his members, we may present our sacrifices as he, our 
Forerunner, presented him. As a priest in receiving us as 
members of his own Body, the Church, his attitude toward 
us would necessarily be as different as is the relationship 
into which we are received. Jesus received the Apostles on 
account of their faith and consecration before he died for 
their sins and before he "appeared in the presence of God 
for us" to make atonement for their sins and ours and to 
secure for them and for us the evidence of reconciliation to 
the Father— the holy Spirit begetting. He has appeared for 
all of the same class— not as Mediator, but as an Advocate 
applying his blood on our behalf because of our faith and 
obedience. 

HE IS ADVOCATE FOR ALL WHO OBEY HIM 

"I notice that you make a clear distinction between the 
Church and the world in the matter of sin-atonement— proving 
(I believe Scripturally), that our Lord has thus far made 
atonement to Justice only on behalf of consecrated believers, 
and that atonement will not be made for the sins of the 
world until the end of this Gospel Age, when the great 
Priest will present the merit of his ransom sacrifice on behalf 
of the world, as it is now appropriated to the Church: only 
that now it is granted to the Church as a basis for sacrifice 
unto death of the flesh and all of its earthly rights, whereas 
the appropriation of the future to the world will be unto life 
and actual restitution. 

"I notice also your presentation that the drawing of the 
world will be during the Millennial Age, and by the great 

R4554 : page 51 

Messiah under the New Covenant arrangements and that the 
calling of believers during this Gospel Age is not by the 
Son but by the Father, and not under the New Covenant, 
but under the Abrahamic Covenant. I agree that the Scriptures 
you cite uphold your position. 

"I note also your claim that those drawn by the Father 
during the Gospel Age are of a different character from the 
world in general and that this accounts for God's special 
dealing with them— their justification by faith and the offer 
to them of a share in the sacrifice of Messiah and a share in 
the glories of his Millennial Kingdom. But here I am somewhat 
perplexed and hence the following question. 



"But how can we harmonize this presentation with the 
statement of the Apostle? After speaking of the world in 
general he seems to declare that we who have received Christ 
were once in the same ungodly condition. His words are, 
'Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of 
this world, according to the Prince of the power of the air, 
the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience: 
Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past 
in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh 
and of the mind; and were by nature the children of wrath, 
even as others.' (Eph. 2:2,3.) If the world needs a Mediator 
why not also the Church?" 

It is quite true that all of Adam's children shared in his 
fall and became "by nature children of wrath." Yet there is 
a difference amongst these "children of wrath." While they 
are all imperfect and unable to commend themselves to God 
by good works, so as to merit eternal life and Divine favor, 
nevertheless some of them have good hearts, good intentions, 
and secretly if not openly long for righteousness and fellowship 
Divine. As, for instance, St. Paul describes his condition 
as a Jew, and presumably the condition of other Jews, 
when he says: "With the mind I myself serve the Law of 
God. ...For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh), 
dwelleth no good thing." (Rom. 7:25,18.) His mind assented 
that the Divine requirement is "just and holy and 
good," and he desired to live up to that glorious standard 
and to be worthy of eternal life. But his flesh inherited imperfections, 
which hindered him from fulfilling the desires 
of his mind and keeping the Divine Law. Hence his cry, 
"O wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me from 
this dead body?" He recognized his flesh as imperfect and 
under the Divine Law sentenced to death; but his mind was 
perfect, was loyal to God. If he could only get rid of the 
imperfect body and have a new body, then indeed he could 
and would live up to the Divine standard and gain eternal 
life according to the Law. Oh, who would deliver him? 

Then he thanks God that deliverance from the sin-condemned 
body has been provided through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. This is a faithful illustration of all those who are 
now accepted by the Lord under this Gospel call as antitypical 
priests and Levites. We were all "children of wrath, 
even as others," outwardly, but having turned from sin, 
Christ was revealed to our eye of faith as our Redeemer and 
we accepted him and his cross by faith and were accepted by 
the Father. We were first of all drawn, influenced, by a 

R4554 : page 52 

desire for God and for his righteousness and a distaste for 

sin. In God's providence we were next directed to Jesus 

as the world's Redeemer and informed that, although the time 

for the world's salvation is not yet, we are in the time of 

the gathering of the elect Church as "his members," his 

Bride, and that if we desire forgiveness of sins and reconciliation 

towards God we should accept his terms and present 

our bodies living sacrifices, and receive the begetting of his 



Spirit, then be educated in the School of Christ and tested 
as to our loyalty to righteousness and afterward be received 
to glory and join t-heirship in the great Kingdom of Messiah, 
through which blessing, salvation, restitution is coming to all 
mankind. 

The Scriptures do not teach that all of the "called" class 
were born in this condition of preferring righteousness to 
sin, born "feeling after God;" but they do intimate that not until 
we reach that position, whether old or young, were we ready 
properly to receive the gift of God— the forgiveness of sins 
and acceptance to probationary membership in the Body of 
Christ. These need no Mediatorial Kingdom to subdue them 
and gradually during a thousand years bring them to perfection 
and readiness to be introduced to the Father. The 
Father has made for them a special, peculiar arrangement of 
faith-justification as instead of actual-justification or restitution. 
As soon as they accept by faith the fact of their redemption 
and then sacrifice the redeemed rights to earthly 
life, that soon they are acceptable to God and acknowledged 
as his children by the holy Spirit which he imparts. 

Before their justification on the basis of their sacrifice 
of earthly nature, they had the desire for righteousness 
pleasing to God, and when they accepted his arrangements 
through the merit of Christ they were instantly begotten as 
sons and needed no mediation, either before or after, but 
merely that their Redeemer, Elder Brother, Bridegroom in 
Glory, should act for them as their Advocate. "We have an 
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous," who 
appears for us and makes good out of his own merit for all 
of our unintentional imperfections and short-comings.— 
I John 2:1. 

ABRAHAM'S JUSTIFICATION AND OURS 

"Abraham was justified by faith without a mediator, as 
you have pointed out. We, the Church, also, as you point 
out, are justified by faith and not by a covenant nor by a 
mediator. Yet evidently there is some difference, because 
Abraham had not the privileges which we enjoy. Kindly 
explain the difference between his justification and ours." 

We answer that Abraham was justified by his faith to 
fellowship with God, and his faith would have justified him 
to complete restitution privileges, had he lived, under the 
privileges of the Millennium— or to faith-restitution with sacrificing 
privileges had he lived after instead of before our 
Lord died for our sins and provided justification to life for 
believers. The death of Christ is the basis of all reconciliation 
to God by actual restitution during the Millennium or by 
faith-restitution for sacrificing now. Faith so justified Abraham 
and the entire class of ancient worthies that, as soon 
as the antitypical Atonement Day shall have ended and the 
Millennial morning of blessing shall be ushered in under the 
New Covenant, those Ancient Worthies will come forth from 
the tomb perfect— justified— restored fully, right and in harmony 
with God. "They had this testimony, that they pleased 
God"— they were justified to perfect human conditions by 



their faith in the promises, but the basis of those promises 
was the sacrifice of Christ (Head and Body); hence they 
could not get the blessing promised to them until the completion 
of the sufferings of Christ, until the end of this 
Gospel Age, the close of this antitypical Day of Atonement. 
This is the Apostle's testimony, "God having provided some 
better thing for us (as members of the great Priest, Mediator 
and King) that they without us should not be made perfect." 
-Heb. 11:40. 

We are favored in that we live since the ransom-sacrifice 
was laid down at Calvary, and since its merit was applied 
at Pentecost on behalf of the household of faith. On this 
account our justification by faith enables us, by God's grace, 
not only to have earthly, restitution rights reckoned to us, 
but also furnishes us the opportunity of sacrificing those 
earthly rights and thereby of participating in the sufferings of 
Christ and of the glories which shall follow.— I Pet. 1:5-1 1. 

WILL THE ANCIENT WORTHIES NEED A MEDIATOR? 

"I assent to the reasonableness of your position that 
there is a difference between the standing of the Church and 
the world in the sight of God— that we 'were children of 
wrath,' but, by God's grace, are such no longer, and that the 
world are still 'children of wrath.' I assent that 'the whole 
world lieth in the Wicked one' and that this is proof positive 
that they have not been 'reconciled to God,' and that the 
Redeemer has not applied his merit on their behalf. I assent 
that, only we who have escaped the condemnation that is still 
in the world are of the class for whom the great High Priest 
has already made propitiation— satisfaction. I agree that the 
satisfaction for the sins of the world and the inauguration 
of the New Covenant between God and Israel at the hands 
of the Mediator, the glorified Christ of many members, will 
come to pass after this sacrificing age shall have closed. 
I agree, also, that there was a difference between believers 
and unbelievers, even before the grace of God was applied to 
the former: that is to say, I agree that God's grace is applied 
to no one who is in a rebellious attitude of heart, but only to 
those who, either by birth or through trials and disciplines 
have come to the condition of contrition for sin and a desire 
for reconciliation to God. 

"But here comes my question: I can see how such, desiring 
in their hearts reconciliation and affiliation would need 
no mediator; and I can see how the world of mankind in the 
Millennial Age will nearly all need a mediator's interference 
—chastisements and rewards, to bring them up to restitution. 
But will there not be some of mankind who will then at 
heart desire righteousness and fellowship with God, even 
as we now do? In other words, Does God during this 
Gospel Age find and draw and accept by the holy Spirit every 
individual of Adam's race desirous of turning from sin and 
having fellowship with God? Will there be some of this 
class living at the Second Advent or, like the Ancient 
Worthies, awakened from the dead? And if there will be 
some of this class, will Christ act as a Mediator for them, 



as well as for the rebellious? Or will Messiah be a Mediator 

R4555 : page 52 

for some and an Advocate for others, or how will it be?" 

We reply: Your difficulty is that you think of a mediator 
as acting between God and the sinners as individuals. This 
is the wrong thought. Lay firm hold of the Scriptural 
proposition that a mediator has to do only with a covenant 
and that the Covenant deals with a nation or people and not 
with its individuals. God will not make New Covenants with 
each member of Adam's race and have Messiah mediate 
thousands of millions of covenants. The correct thought is 
very different. When the great High Priest shall have finished 
his offerings, first for his own members and house, 
and then for all the people, he will present the merit of his 
sacrifice on the world's behalf, redeeming the world (according 
to the original intention), as more than eighteen 
centuries ago he redeemed or bought the Church, the household 
of faith. 

He will then be the owner of the world and prepared to 
deal with them and to effect restitution for as many of them 
as will obey him. (Acts 3:23.) As a means to this end, he 
will mediate for Israel the New Covenant, as a substitute for 
their old one, restoring that nation to the place of honor as 
the favored nation, Abraham's natural seed, through whom 
the blessings of redemption will extend to all nations. That 
New Covenant will not be made with rebellious sinners, however. 
God's Covenant will be with the Mediator for Israel, 
guaranteeing forgiveness and reconciliation to all of Abraham's 
natural seed who will exercise the faith and the 
obedience of Abraham. The work of the Mediator with 
Israel (and the world of mankind, who to be blest must become 
Israelites indeed) during the Millennium, will be their 
instruction, enlightenment and uplifting out of sin and 
death, out of ignorance and superstition, out of depravity and 
unbelief up to human perfection; so that, at the end of the 

R4555 : page 53 

Millennium, all of Abraham's seed, all of his faith and 
obedience, will have reached human perfection and be ready 
for the Mediator to deliver them over to the Father, that 
God may be all in all— the unwilling and rebellious, after due 
trial, being cut off during the Millennium in the Second 
Death. 

In God's providence the Ancient Worthies already have 
demonstrated their loyalty to God and their worthiness to 
come forth unto a "better resurrection"— a resurrection to 
human perfection. This will be under the New Covenant 
arrangements and under the Mediator of that New Covenant. 
They will receive their blessing under it the same as the 
remainder of the world. The whole world can be regenerated 
only by the Second Adam. They can receive eternal 
life in no other way. With some this regeneration will result 
in a gradual work of restitution to perfection; but in the 



Ancient Worthies, because of previous developments in faith 
and obedience it will mean an instantaneous restitution. They, 
like the remainder of the world, receiving restitution life 
through the merit of Christ's death, are Scripturally styled 
the children of Christ and he their Father or Life-Giver. 
"He shall be called the Everlasting Father." (Isa. 9:6.) 
Thus we read, "Instead of thy fathers (Abraham, Isaac, 
Jacob and all the prophets) shall be thy children, whom thou 
mayestmake princes in all the earth."— Psa. 45:16. 

Here, then, we see the order of the future, dating from 
the end of this Age and the completion of the Mediator Priest 
and King. Our Lord and his Church, the an ti typical Isaac 
and his Bride, the antitypical Melchisedec, Priest upon his 
Throne, will inaugurate his reign of righteousness in the 
great time of trouble and shaking with which this Age will 
terminate. The Ancient Worthies, as the firstborn of his children, 
receiving the perfection of restitution and its privileges, 
will be made "princes in all the earth." To them and under 
their control will rally, first of all, the house of Israel and 
Judah, as they begin to see taking shape the earthly Kingdom 
for which they have so long waited. To these will gradually 
come restitution privileges— health and prosperity. The 
world, still weak and awe-struck, as the result of the time of 
trouble, will begin to take notice to Israel's rising again to 
national life, and will notice the blessings bestowed upon 
them. "Many people shall say, Come, let us go up to the 
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: and 
he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: 
for out of Zion (the spiritual Kingdom) shall go forth the 
Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem (the earthly 
Kingdom in the control of the 'princes')."— Isa. 2:3. 

The Millennial blessings will be conferred only upon the 
willing and obedient, but the knowledge of righteousness, of 
Truth, will fill the whole earth. Both Jews and Gentiles 
will be required to approach the faith and obedience of Abraham 
and ultimately become "Israelites indeed in whom is no 
guile." Only such as shall be thus obedient will receive the 
full blessing of that time and attain perfection. All others 
will be cut off in the Second Death. The Law of the New 
Covenant will be the same perfect one that was the basis 
of the Mosaic Covenant. The difference will be that the 
Priest will be of a higher order— a kingly priest after the 
order of Melchizedec. He will have as a basis for forgiveness 
of sins and restitution the merit of his "better sacrifices" 
of this Gospel Age— this antitypical Day of Atonement. 

As the ancient worthies will attain perfection immediately 
under the New Covenant and be granted a share in 
the Kingdom, similarly all, in proportion as they shall understand 
and come into accord with the Kingdom conditions, 
may proportionately to their sincerity and zeal make progress 
and the more quickly reach perfection. Perfected, they will 
be kings in the sense that Adam was a king endued with 
the powers of perfect manhood over beasts, fowl, fish, etc. 
(Psa. 8:5-8.) And these earthly kings shall become more or 
less associated with the "princes" in the dominion of earth 
—they shall bring their honor and glory into the New Jerusalem. 



-Rev. 21:24,26. 

"THE CUP WHICH MY FATHER POURED" 

"I have noted your reference to the communion cup 
which our Lord tendered to his disciples, saying, 'Drink ye all 
of it; for this is my blood of the New Testament (Covenant) 
shed for many for the remission of sins. But I say unto 
you that I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the 
vine until that day when I drink it new with you in my 
Father's Kingdom. '-Matt. 26:27-29. 

"I note that you consider that our Lord referred to this 
same cup in Matt. 20:22, when he answered James and John 
that their only hope of sitting with him in his throne lay in 
their partaking of his cup and sharing in his baptism— into 
death. I wish to inquire whether or not this should be considered 
the uniform interpretation of the 'cup' in the Scriptures. 
In some places it had seemed to me to refer to joy, pleasure, 
rather than to suffering. For instance, in Psalms 23:5 
we read, 'My cup runneth over.' And again, in Psalm 116:13, 
I will take the cup of salvation.' Neither of these, it 
seems to me, apply to the cup of Christ's sufferings. Do they?" 

Yes, we reply. The cup in each of these instances is 
the same. Psalm 23 is a prophetic one which represents 
Christ and the Church— their experiences throughout this 
Gospel Age. Surely our Lord's cup of suffering overflowed. 
And surely it has been the same overflowing cup which he 
has presented to his faithful followers throughout this Age. 
It represents sorrows unto death. However, prophetically 
our Lord and his followers are represented as rejoicing in 
this cup of fellowship in the sufferings of Christ, because 
of the glorious results. Our Lord said respecting it, "I delight 
to do thy will, O God." And again, "The cup which 
my Father hath poured for me, shall I not drink it?" 

In Psalm 116:13 this cup of death is represented as a 
cup of salvation, because only thereby can our salvation and 
the world's be attained. Both Christ and his followers have 
rejoiced in their tribulations, not counting their lives dear 
unto them, that they might win the great prize. Notice the 
context: "I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the 
name of the Lord (for needed aid.) I will pay my vows 
unto the Lord. ..precious in the sight of the Lord is the 
death of his saints." The Vow of Christ and his members 
is faithfulness unto death— the drinking of the cup. The 
promised reward is the crown of glory in the Kingdom. This 
is represented as another cup of the future. Only those who 
join with the Master in drinking his "Cup of the New Testament" 
or New Covenant will share with him by participation 
in the cup of joy and glory, which the Father will 
pour for the faithful at the end of this Age— at the close 
of this antitypical Day of Atonement and its sacrifices. 

THE PASSOVER LAMB AND THE WORLD'S SIN 

"You have called attention to the fact that the passover 
lamb spared only the firstborn of the Israelites and that the 



antitypical meaning of this would be that our Lord Jesus as 
the Lamb of God which 'taketh away the sin of the world' 
would spare or pass over only the Church of the firstborn 
ones in this Gospel Age, the antitype of the passover night. 
This being true, how shall we understand John's statement 
that the Lamb of God taketh away the sins of the world?" 
Our answer is that only the Church of the firstborn, the 
household of faith, the consecrated, are spared or passed 
over through Divine mercy, through the merit of Christ's 
sacrifice, during this Gospel Age. Nevertheless the divine 
plan does not end with the deliverance of "the Church of 
the firstborn whose names are written in heaven" and who 
shall share with Christ in "his resurrection"— the first, or 
chief resurrection. The appropriation of the merit of Christ 
first to the Church is merely an incidental feature of the 
Divine Plan. Soon the Church shall have shared by the 

R4556 : page 53 

privilege now granted to believers of becoming dead with 
Christ to the earthly interests and alive as New Creatures 
by the first resurrection. Then the merit of the blood of 
Christ, the slain Lamb, will be applied to the world of mankind 
to legally "take away the sin of the world." When applied 
it will immediately satisfy Justice on the world's behalf 
and turn over the world to the Redeemer for restitution 
blessings. Then the Lamb of God and the Church, "the 
Bride, the Lamb's wife," will prosecute the work of actually 
taking away the sin of the world during the Millennium. 



R4556 : page 54 

THE SECOND ADAM AND EVE 

SOME make the mistake of supposing the Scriptures 

to teach that when Adam sinned and 

God's condemnation passed upon him and all of 

his race, it was necessary for Jesus to become 

"the second Adam" as a perfect man that as the Second 

Adam he might give his life a ransom-price for the first 

Adam, thus redeeming him and incidentally all of his 

posterity. 

On this foundation, which we will show to be thoroughly 
unscriptural, they proceed to say: THE WATCH TOWER 
and DAWN STUDIES must therefore be in error in claiming 
that our Lord applied the value of his sacrifice first to the 
Church and that afterward he will apply it to all the people. 
They argue that the application of the atoning blood must 
first have been for Adam and that the Church and all others 
merely share Adam's redemption. 

The trouble with their position is that the foundation of 
it is wholly wrong and hence all built thereon is proportionately 
wrong and misleading. 

Adam truly was the first man, but our Lord, as "the 



man Christ Jesus," was not the Second Adam, and did not 
do the work of the Second Adam. The first Adam was the 
father or life-giver to his race, Eve being associated in the 
generating; but the result was a dying race. The plan of 
God proposes that the Second Adam shall in relation to 
Adam take his place as the father or life-giver to a race of 
human beings who shall possess the earth and enjoy it. Not 
as Redeemer, but as father or life-giver to our race does 
our Lord correspond to Adam— as the Second Adam. 

Our Lord is Scripturally referred to as already the Second 
Adam, not because he has already given life to Adam's 
race, but because he will do so in due time;— just as he was 
called the Savior when a babe— prophetically foretelling his 
future work. 

Our Lord will be the Second Adam or second father or 
life-giver to Adam's race during the Millennium. He waits 
until the Church, his Bride, as the Second Eve, shall be with 
him in glory and honor and power in the Kingdom. Adam 
the first generated no children until first Eve had been taken 
from his side. The Second Adam will generate no children 
until the Church, the Second Eve, shall have been perfected 
and presented to him as his joint-heir and help-mate in the 
Kingdom and its work of regeneration. 

Note our Lord's words on this point: The Apostles asked 
him What shall we have as a reward for leaving all and 
taking up our cross and following thee? (Matt. 19:27,28.) 
"Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, that ye which 
have followed me, in the regeneration [time] when the Son 
of Man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit 
upon twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel." 
Who can doubt from these plain words that the times of 
regeneration are the same which St. Peter styles the "times 
of restitution," the times or years of the Millennium, the 
times of "resurrection by judgment."— Acts 3:19-21; 
John 5:29. R.V. 

Why does our Redeemer wait before beginning the regeneration 
of Adam's race, before assuming the office of 
father to Adam's children— the world in general? 

There are several reasons:— 

I. It is in the Divine order that he wait for the Bride 
promised by the Father, drawn by the Father, called by the 
Father and justified by the Father through the blood of 
Jesus. Not a single member of Adam's race (aside from 

the household of faith of this Gospel Age) will be regenerated 
or given perfect human life until after the "Bride of 
Christ" has been united to him at his second coming. Even 
of the Ancient Worthies it was written, "They without us 
shall not be made perfect."— Heb. 11:39,40. 

II. The world could not be regenerated until the Redeemer 
first applies his merit, his ransom-price, "for all the 

people." And that cannot be done until the Church's deliverance; 
because that merit or ransom-price is now in use 
justifying by faith the specially "called" ones of this Gospel 
Age. 

"THE SECOND MAN IS THE LORD" 



These words of the Apostle amply explain the case: "The 
first man was of the earth, earthy; the second man is the 
Lord from heaven. Like the earthy one [Adam] are [will be 
in the resurrection] the earthy ones. Like the heavenly One 
[Christ] are [will be in the resurrection] the heavenly ones" 
—the New Creation. "As we [the Church] have borne the 
image of the earthy one [Adam], we shall also bear the 
image of the heavenly One" [Christ]. "And so it is written, 
The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam 
was made a life-giving spirit."— I Cor. 15:45-49. 

That our Redeemer is not our father or the giver of our 
spiritual life is evident both from reason and Scripture. Our 
Lord left his pre-human spirit-nature and its glory and all 
when he became a man; he did not give that spirit nature to 
us or to others, but merely was transferred or transformed 
to a lower nature (human) for the suffering of death. His 
earthly life rights, guaranteed by his obedience to God's Law, 
he gave to the Father without appropriating the merit to any 
until he applied them "on our behalf." 

It was our Lord's human life and restitution rights 
which he applied "for us," giving us by faith those rights, 
as a loan, as it were; because he gave them to us only on 
condition that we would not keep those earthly rights, but 
would follow his example and sacrifice them, that God, under 
the same promise, might deal with us as with him— rewarding 
the sacrifice with the new, the spirit nature. Only by sacrificing 
can any now obtain eternal life. As our Lord said: 
He that saveth his life shall lose it; but whosoever will lose 
his life for my sake shall save it— eternally.— Luke 9:24. 

We lose our lives for Christ's sake in the sense that we 
sacrifice present interests and life itself in order that we may 
be members of the Christ— the world's Prophet, Priest, King, 
Mediator— his member, his Bride and joint-heir as the Seed 
of Abraham, the Second Adam through whom the world will 
soon have opportunity for regeneration on the earthly plane. 

Thus our Lord as the giver of restitution life to the 
world by virtue of his own merit, the merit of his ransom 
sacrifice, will become "The Everlasting Father." Of even 
the Patriarchs it is written, "Instead of thy fathers [they] 
shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make princes over 
all the earth."-Isa. 9:6; Psa. 45:16. 



R4556 : page 54 

THE PROPHET OF GALILEE 

-MATTHEW 4: 12-25. -JANUARY 16.- 

Golden Text:— "The people which sat in 
darkness saw a great light."— V. 16. 

PALESTINE at the First Advent consisted of four 
provinces. Judea was the principal one, with Samaria 



to the north and Perea to the east and Galilee 
further north, beyond Samaria. While Jesus 
preached in Judea and did some mighty works there and 
in Perea, his principal ministry was in Galilee; so much so 
that he and his disciples were known as Galileans. Although 
born in Bethlehem, he was reared in Nazareth, "that he might 
be called a Nazarene"— that he might not have the honor of 
the "City of David," but the odium of "a mean city." Compare 
Luke 23:5,6,49,55. Thus the vast majority of our 
Lord's miracles and teachings were to the Galileans. And 
his principal ministries in Judea were in connection with his 
annual visits to the Passover and the Feast of Tabernacles. 
As for Samaria, its people were Gentiles with an admixture 
of Jewish blood. Jesus warned his disciples not to preach 
in that province, saying, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, 
and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not; but 
go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." (Matt. 10:5,6.) 
The Galileans, disesteemed by the Judeans as inferior 
members of their race, the expression, "Can any 
good thing come out of Nazareth?" applied to all Galilee. 
That the light of the Gospel should first shine in Galilee 
was intimated through Isaiah's prophecy, "The people 
which sat in darkness saw a great light; and to them which 
sat in the region of the shadows of death a light sprang up." 

R4557 : page 55 

The prophet mentions the boundaries of Zebulon and Naphtali, 
two of the twelve tribes of Israel, on the Sea of Galilee. 
The word Galilee signifies circle; hence the prophecy implied 
that this land would be encircled by the Gentiles. And so it 
was; the Samaritans to its south cutting it off from Judea. 
Its people, thus separated from the great religious center of 
their day, were in greater darkness than their brethren, in 
the very shadow of the death-darkness that was upon the 
Gentiles. Nevertheless on this very account they were more 
amenable to the teachings of Jesus than were many of their 
more religious, more enlightened and more priest-ridden 
brethren of Judea. 

The great light which flared forth in Capernaum, Bethsaida, 
Chorazin and Nazareth, the chief cities of Galilee, exalted 
these places to heaven figuratively, in the sense of bestowing 
so great honor and privilege upon them. But they 
were in turn cast down to hades, the grave, because they received 
not the message. (Matt. 11:20-24.) The light shined 
in darkness and blessed and gathered some, "the elect," and 
passed onward to bless and gather others, as it has continued 
to do throughout this Gospel Age. The time for the still 
greater enlightenment of the whole world is yet future. In 
the Millennial morning the Redeemer and his elect Church 
(Malachi 4:2) will shine forth as the Sun of Righteousness 
with healing in its beams for the enlightenment and blessing 
of Israel and the whole world of mankind— including the 
millions who have gone down to the darkness of hades, the 
grave. 



THE KINGDOM IS AT HAND 

The Galilean Jews, in close contact with the Gentiles, 
could readily see the need of the long-promised Kingdom of 
God, and they were more ready to give heed to it than the 
Judean-Jews. The latter, in contact with the showy formalism 
of the temple service and an earthly priest with gorgeous 
garments and a magnificent temple more grand than that of 
Solomon, were less inclined to hearken to the offer of a 
spiritual kingdom. To the latter the outward and showy 
prosperity of their system was a delusion and a snare which 
hindered them from seeing. Thus it has always been. The 
message of God's grace finds some of its most earnest friends 
amongst the poor and despised. Moreover Capernaum was 
more closely in touch with the Gentile world— its good and its 
evil— than was Jerusalem. 

The Kingdom of Heaven was at hand in the sense that 
Jesus was present to make a formal tender of the Kingdom 
to Abraham's natural seed. When they rejected the King 
they rejected the Kingdom. He nevertheless blessed all who 
accepted him and as pre-intended and promised they became 
the nucleus of his spiritual Kingdom, to complete the number 
of which consecrated believers from the Gentiles have 
since been "called." In a word, God's arrangement is first 
to elect a spiritual class, a "Royal Priesthood," to be associated 
with Jesus in his Kingdom and then at the end of this 
age to establish that spiritual Kingdom in power and great 
glory and to bless Israel with the great light and opportunity, 
and through her to bless all the families of the earth. 

Peter and Andrew, James and John, fishermen, were invited 
by the great Prophet to be his followers, to be associated 
with him in his work of calling the "elect" and, if faithful, 
subsequently to sit with him in his throne as part of the 
"elect." They left all to follow him. These were his terms, 
"If any man will be my disciple, let him deny himself and 
take up his cross and follow me." The Lord does not open 
the door of opportunity to all of his disciples throughout this 
Gospel Age to become prominent ministers of the Truth after 
this manner. Yet he accepts none as his disciples except those 
who forsake all to follow him. In their hearts they must 
give up all else. They have the spirit of discipleship and self-sacrifice, 
and would gladly forsake all actually if the door 
of opportunity opened to them. 

The preaching of Jesus was that of his apostles also— 
"the Gospel (good news) of the Kingdom." To his apostles 
he gave the same power over disease that he himself exercised 
—even to the casting out of demons. These miracles 
were merely to attract attention to the Prophet and his message. 
It was not the intention to heal all the sick, nor to 
awaken all the dead. But those miracles manifested forth 
beforehand the glorious blessings which the Kingdom, when 
established, will exercise amongst men.— John 2:11. 

Thus the fame of Jesus spread. The sick were brought 
to him and healed, and amongst his followers were to be 
found devout men from every province of Palestine. Truly 
the benighted Galileans were blessed in the great light which 



shone in their midst. But it tested them as Truth, Light, 
always does. The few children of the light were manifested 
and separated from the children of the darkness, the children 
of disobedience. And similarly we of today, living in the 
great light now shining as an arc-light upon the Word of 
God, have increased responsibilities and are taking our stand 
either as children of Light and its advocates, or as children 
of darkness in opposing it. 



R4557 : page 55 

THE TEACHER AND THE LESSON 

--MATTHEW 5:1-16.-JANUARY 23.- 

Golden Text:— "Blessed are the pure in 
heart; for they shall see God."— V. 8. 

NEVER man spake like this man," said the common 

people, who heard him gladly. And this is the 

testimony of the humble-minded since. Not all 

have heard; not all can hear; but only, as 

the Scriptures declare, "He that hath an ear let him hear." 

The ear of faith is the special favor of God to those who 

are of a meek, honest heart, desiring Truth and righteousness. 

To such the Lord's words apply, "Blessed are your 

eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear." The masses 

see not, hear not, neither do they understand the grace of 

God, because, as St. Paul explains, Satan has blinded them 

through ignorance, superstition, etc.— 2 Cor. 4:4. 

How glad we should be to know that the report which 
once reached us, that the Bible teaches that all these sin-blinded 
ones are to suffer torment eternally, is untrue— that 
such is not the teaching of the Bible! How glad we should 
be for the assurances of the Bible that, after the gathering 
of the Elect Church and the establishment of the Millennial 
Kingdom of Christ, for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come; 
thy will be done on earth as in heaven," then "all the blind 
eyes shall be opened and all the deaf ears be unstopped," 
so that "the knowledge of the glory of God shall fill the whole 
earth" and enlighten every man. How glad we should be 
of the promise that in and through the Spiritual Seed of 
Abraham (Christ and the Church, Gal. 3:29), "all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed" with an opportunity of return 
to harmony with God, and of everlasting life! 

Our study pictures Jesus surrounded by his disciples, 
teaching them, that in turn they might teach us and all who 
throughout this Gospel Age would have the hearing ear. 
The lessons of this sermon on the Mount are wonderful for 
their simplicity and sublimity. Our Lord's first message was, 
Repent and get ready for the Kingdom. To those who accepted 
that message he now gave additional blessed lessons. 

(1) The pure in spirit, the humble of mind, the meek, 
the gentle, the teachable, these would be of the class acceptable 



to God as participators with Messiah in his Kingdom. 
Without such meekness they would not be prepared to learn 
of him, and not learning they would not be proper characters 
nor be prepared in due time to be the teachers of the 
World. 

(2) They should not expect that becoming his disciples 
would lift them out of trials, difficulties, sorrows, tears, but, 
on the contrary, must learn that such experiences would be 
overruled for their good, would serve to test their faithfulness 
and trust, so that those who will be worthy of a place 

in the Kingdom might expect to pass through considerable 
sorrow and mourning. They were to understand that if 
they should gain the Kingdom through much tribulation, they 
would there find in its glories and blessings comforts and 
joys which would more than compensate for every tear and 
every sorrow endured as soldiers of the Cross and followers 
of the Lamb. 

R4557 : page 56 

(3) To be his disciples and to share with him in the 
Millennial Kingdom, they must be meek, gentle— not bold, 
grasping, ferocious, self-willed, getting the best of the earth 
and of everybody in it. Rather they must cultivate the spirit 
of meekness; they must learn not only not to fight and contend 
for the best of earthly things, but even to submit to injustice 

in the interest of the coming Kingdom and their 
opportunity to be its heralds and to exemplify the spirit of 
the Great King and of all who would be heirs of life eternal. 
These in the present time may lose houses and lands and the 
love of parents and children and friends, because of their 
loyalty to the words and doctrines of Jesus, but eventually 
they will have a great reward. They with their Lord will 
inherit the earth. All the earthly privileges, rights and 
blessings secured by our Lord through his sacrifice he will 
in the end of this Age share with his Church; and they with 
him, as kings and priests during the Millennium, will dispense 
to the world of mankind the earth and its bounties. 
More than this, the heavenly Kingdom which they will receive 
will be fully empowered to bring to pass all the restitution 
blessings promised by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
—restoring mankind to original perfection, plus knowledge, 
and bringing the whole earth to be again a Paradise 
of God and world-wide Eden.— Acts 3:19-21. 

(4) Jesus would have his disciples understand that 
righteousness and Truth are scarce commodities at the present 

R4558 : page 56 

time amongst men— that the world is full of error and 

sin and unrighteousness. His disciples, by reason of enlightenment, 

will discern between good and evil, righteousness 

and sin. And they must so love Truth, righteousness, as to 

hunger and thirst for it. To such, spiritual food will be 

granted. Truth will be dispensed to them as "meat in due 

season." Nevertheless, because their longings infinite for 



righteousness are circumscribed by imperfections of the flesh 
in the present time, they will not attain full satisfaction until 
they shall experience their resurrection "change." "When 
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part 
shall be done away." (I Cor. 13:10.) "I shall be satisfied 
when I awake with thy likeness."— Psa. 17:15. 

(5) The followers of Jesus who would share with him 

in his Kingdom will need to be very merciful. As the kings 
and priests of the Millennial Kingdom they will have to deal 
with the poor, groaning creation, uplifting the willing and 
obedient out of their sinful and degraded death condition- 
up to righteousness, perfection, eternal life. Only the merciful 
of heart could be properly entrusted with such a work. 
(I Cor. 6:2.) This lesson, therefore, all the followers of 
Jesus must learn— to be merciful. 

Their first lesson must be concerning their own imperfection 
and their own need of Divine mercy. This lesson 
needs to be continually impressed until it becomes a fixed 
element of character— loving-kindness. Hence our Lord's 
declaration, "If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither 
will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses." 
Again he tells us to pray, "Forgive us our trespasses as we 
forgive those who trespass against us." Consecrated believers, 
with all their past sins forgiven, unwillingly trespass 
against the perfect Law of God by word or thought or act 
daily, because they have the treasure of the new mind in 
the imperfect earthen vessel. These trespasses should be daily 
acknowledged and forgiveness asked for them through our 
great Redeemer-Advocate. But to impress upon us as a part 
of our character this essential element of mercy, the Lord 
declines to forgive our trespasses against his law, unless we 
exercise this spirit toward our fellow-men. "Blessed are the 
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy," and thus be enabled 
to make their calling and election sure— to a place and a 
share with their Redeemer in his Kingdom. 

(6) Those who will share the Kingdom with Jesus will 
be "changed" from human nature to spirit nature in the 
resurrection, and see God— see him who is invisible to human 
eyes. (John 1:18.) Only the "pure in heart" shall have 

this blessing. No man can help the fact that he was "born 
in sin and shapen in iniquity." (Psa. 51:5.) But God has 
graciously arranged that the merit of Christ's sacrifice shall 
compensate for the weaknesses and blemishes of the followers 
of Jesus. Hence, these will not be judged of the Lord 
according to the flesh and its blemishes, but will be judged 
according to the purity of the heart, the mind, the intention, 
the will. Nothing less than purity of will could be satisfactory 
to God. Any consent to sin, any sympathy with it or 
intentionally yielding to it would indicate heart impurity and, 
unless abandoned, would lead to Second Death. 

(7) All who will be heirs with Jesus in his Millennial 
Kingdom will with him be called "sons of God," "sons of the 
Highest" under Jesus their Elder Brother. But only such 
can hold this title as attain that attitude of mind in which 
they "seek peace and pursue it"; and such to the extent of 

their opportunity would, therefore, rejoice, "to be peacemakers," 



not mischief-makers, not strife-breeders, not lawless, 

as the Apostle expresses it, but "subject to the powers that 

be," recognizing that God has all the power necessary for 

the subjection of the whole world, and that if he permits 

injustice and wrong, it will be for a time and for a purpose. 

We are not called upon now to rectify the affairs of 

the world, but to learn obedience and sacrifice and be prepared 

for sharing in the Kingdom rule of righteousness in 

God's "due time." 

(8) Those who would inherit the Kingdom of heaven as 
joint-heirs with Jesus must love and serve righteousness to 

such an extent that a blind and unrighteous world will misunderstand 

them and persecute them on this account. By 

enduring such persecutions faithfully, calmly, rejoicingly, they 

attest to God that they possess characters which are copies 

of that of his Son our Lord. 

(9) St. Peter tells us that if any man suffers as an evil-doer 
the penalty for his misdeeds, he should be ashamed, 

but if he suffers as a Christian for his fidelity to Christ and 

his doctrines, let him glorify God on this behalf— let him be 

thankful for the opportunity, for on all such rests the spirit 

of honor and the Spirit of God. The Galilean Prophet emphasized 

this same thought; as many spoke evil of him, the 

King, similarly many would speak evil of all who would 

seek to follow closely in his footsteps. As they reproached 

and reviled him, so would they do to his followers. As they 

spoke evil of him, so would they do of his followers. And 

all this he would have them receive as evidence or proof of 

their faithfulness and of God's acceptance of them. These 

trials would evidence that God found them worthy of shaping 

and polishing for his service, whereas others without such 

persecutions would have every reason to doubt that they 

were in preparation for the Kingdom. Such should rejoice 

and be very glad. They should realize that there will be different 

grades of honor and dignity in the Kingdom and that 

the more they suffer for righteousness sake, the higher and 

greater will be their reward. 

(10) Christ's followers were to be "the salt of the earth" 
—exerting an influence and power amongst men of a preservative 
kind, delaying, if not arresting, degrading tendencies 

toward putrefaction and death. They should remember, 
however, that salt would be of no more value than sand if it 
were to lose its saltness. 

(11) Jesus was the great light which came into the world, 
and his followers were to be lights or candles also. "As he 
was, so are we in this world"— light-bearers. The Church 
is not of the world. As Jesus said, "Ye are not of the 

world." Yet the Church is the light of the world. Each individual 
Christian should let his light shine before men, and 
the Church as a whole is to be like a city on a hill which 
cannot be hidden. As a lamp would do no good if covered 
with a bushel, but its light would become extinguished, so 
also with the Church individually and collectively. If light 
does not shine out it will soon die out. All that are in and 
of the household of faith should be able to see the shining 
of the spirit-light in every member of the true Church, "the 



Church, which is his Body." Individually and collectively the 
Church should let its light shine before men that many 
might see their good works, their likeness of character to the 
Lord, and glorify the Heavenly Father. Surely these are 
important lessons from the Great Teacher. 



R4558 : page 57 

PERFECT AS YOUR FATHER IS PERFECT 

--MATTHEW 5:19-36,38-48.-JANUARY 30.- 

Golden Text:— "Be ye therefore perfect, even as 
your Father which is in heaven is perfect."— V. 48. 

SINCE the Lord's followers have fallen flesh it is not 
possible for them to be perfect as God is perfect— 
except in heart, in intention. But this good heart 
intention is not sufficient to prove us worthy of a 
share with Christ as his "elect" to the glories of his Kingdom. 
Our profession of pure heart and God-likeness must 
be tested. It must be demonstrated and developed to the 
point of fixity of character. It must stand tests of temptation. 
It must endure faithfulness under stress. Hence those 
accepted as disciples of Christ are required to be faithful 
under very trying circumstances. 

The Jews had gradually lost sight of the Divine Law and 
had filled their minds with certain traditions which were 
more or less contrary to the Law. The Great Teacher, ignoring 
the Rabbis, might have been thought by some to be 
setting aside the Law, but he assured them, to the contrary, 
that he was merely setting aside human traditions and seeking 
to establish the Law and make it the more manifest. The 
people regarded the Scribes and Pharisees as very religious 
and holy. But Jesus assured them that they must have 
greater holiness or they would never enter the Kingdom of 
Heaven. 

Tradition quoted the Law, "Thou shalt not kill," and 
then added, "Whosoever shall kill will be in danger of the 
judgment"— in danger of trial and punishment by the appointed 
judges. But Jesus taught a still more rigid application, 
namely, that anger against a brother (in the heart, 
unexpressed) would mean a murderous condition of mind, 
which would be reprehensible in God's sight, even though 
the murder might never be actually committed. More than 
this, he reprehended unkind remarks, as, rakah, signifying 
"blockhead," and "thou fool," as meaning still worse, a moral 
degenerate. Our Lord declared that such expressions indicated 
wrong conditions of heart, which might ultimately 
bring the individual before the Sanhedrin, or, possibly, eventually 
lead him on into the Second Death, symbolized by 
Gehenna. 

Hell fire in this study is literally Gehenna fire. It refers 



R4559 : page 57 

to fires kept burning in the Valley of Hinnom (Gehenna) 
for the destruction of offal and the prevention of contagion. 
Into this fire the carcasses of malicious evil-doers might be 
thrown for destruction. It thus symbolized the Second Death. 
-Rev. 20:14. 

According to the Galilean Prophet it would be useless for 
anyone to approach God's altar with a sacrificial gift while 
his heart contained any enmity against another. Hence any 
of Christ's disciples before offering a gift to the Lord should 
search their hearts and purge them from enmity, knowing 
that otherwise their sacrifices and praises would be vain. 

The advice of verses 25,26 is sound. If there is an obligation 
against us we should settle and discharge it as quickly 
as possible. It was an important lesson for all Jews to learn 
that their Law Covenant, which they supposed was their 
friend and assistant, was really their Adversary and condemned 
them all. Because of imperfection of flesh, they 
were unable to keep the Law and could not have its approval, 
and hence had its condemnation. The proper course for all 
who recognized this was to seek as good a settlement with the 
Law as possible, confessing their imperfection. 

Those who heeded our Lord's advice, realized their imperfect 
condition and cried for help and found forgiveness in 
Jesus through his sacrifice. Thus, by faith, these were permitted 
to come into God's favor and blessing at Pentecost. 
But the Pharisees, hypocritically claiming to keep the Law 
perfectly, did not come to terms with it and confess their sins 
repentantly, and did not accept Jesus, and did not obtain the 
Pentecostal blessing. On the contrary all of that Jewish nation 
who rejected Jesus stumbled into prison nationally, 
and wrath came upon that people to the uttermost. 
And until all things written in the Law and 
the prophets concerning them shall be fulfilled, they shall not 
come out of that prison-house. They said, "His blood be 
upon us and upon our children," and they are held condemned 
of their Law. It will require all of the Millennial Age for 
them to profit by the opportunities of the Millennium, to rise 
up out of sin and death conditions. By the end of the Millennium 
through the Lord's grace they will have "paid the 
uttermost farthing" and then the willing and obedient shall 
get free. Every Jew who would get free from that Law 
obligation could have done so only by confessing his shortcomings 
and inability and by accepting a share in the sacrifice 
of Christ. Only the few agreed with the Law-adversary. 
-John 1:12. 

"EYE FOR EYE-TOOTH FOR TOOTH" 

The Mosaic Law laid down the Divine principle which 
the Judges of Israel were to follow, "an eye for an eye," 
the exaction of strict justice. The people had applied this 
to their individual relationships unwarrantedly, with the result 
that it cultivated hardness of heart, an exacting disposition, 
pitiless, merciless. Our Lord's teachings showed the error 



of this and pointed to the more excellent way— love. Although 
the Heavenly Father had made the Law, he had also 
prepared to show mercy and did show it in sending his Son 
into the world to be the Redeemer of sinners, that they might 
not perish, but have eternal life through obedience to the 
Savior. How much more proper was it that fellow-sufferers, 
both imperfect, should be lenient, tender-hearted toward 
each other. Mark the Lord's words, I say unto you that 
by requiring an eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth, in exacting 
justice of your imperfect fellows, you are encouraging 
an improper spirit in your own hearts. 

(1) If your enemy smite you on the cheek turn to him 
the other one— not literally, but in your heart, mentally. Do 
not retaliate in kind. That our Lord did not mean this 
literally, is demonstrated by the fact that when on trial he 
was smitten but did not ask to be smitten again. Figuratively 
he turned the other cheek, but not literally. 

(2) If any man sue us at the Law and legally get possession 
of our property we are to feel no grudge against him, 

but are to render up willingly all that the Court might decree, 
more rather than less. We are to be law-abiding to the 
extreme. 

(3) If conscripted for Government service after the 
manner of ancient times and compelled to carry a burden 
for a mile, the Lord's followers were not to be too close or 
exacting, but evidence their good will by doing a little more, 
rendering help for another mile if necessary or expedient, 
rather than grumble and shirk legal exactions. 

(4) The Lord's followers are to cultivate generosity. As 
the Heavenly Father is always giving and never asking, so 
all his children should have this character-likeness, and be 
ready to give something to anyone in need. This need not 
necessarily mean extravagant gifts, nor all that the petitioner 
would desire. Judgment, discretion, is to be used. But the 
desire to give, to help, should by all means be cultivated in 
his own heart by every follower of Jesus. And from him 
who would borrow of them they should not turn away. They 
should, on the contrary, do good and lend, hoping for no 
similar favor in return. The Lord's people might not thus 
amass as much money as others, but they would be pleasing 
and honoring their Heavenly Father, and laying up treasure 
in heaven, and getting their own hearts into that condition 
which God could approve and bless in the Kingdom. 

"BLESS THEM THAT CURSE YOU" 

Tradition taught that neighbors should be loved and 
enemies be hated; but the Great Teacher said that enemies 
also should be loved and blessed, even though they returned 
persecution and injury. It was this new and high order of 
teaching which marked our Redeemer's utterances as different 
from all others. 

The cultivation of this spirit of love for enemies, as well 
as for friends, would mark the followers of Jesus as children 
of God, as having the Heavenly Father's Spirit— disposition. 
He sends the sunshine on sinners and on saints. And the rain 



comes down for the just and for the unjust. It is difficult to 
estimate the amount of harm done to our minds by the traditions 
of the "Dark Ages" respecting God's intention to torment 
eternally his enemies— all except the elect. Thank God 

R4559 : page 58 

that we find that these teachings are not from his Book! 
They made our forefathers heretic-burners. 

Admittedly love is a glorious quality and God-like quality. 
But if it extend only to those who love in return, how 
would it be worthy of any special reward? Do not the heathen, 
yea, all men, love after this fashion? And if we are 
courteous merely to those who are courteous to us, wherein 
are we superior to Gentiles and sinners? 

The followers of Jesus, the pupils in his school, are to 
take the highest standard of excellence for their pattern,— 
their loving Creator. They are to strive for perfection such 
as his. They are to attain it in their hearts, and, so far as 
possible, outwork it in every thought and word and deed of 
their fallen flesh. 



R4559 : page 58 

HYPOCRISY A FOE TO GODLINESS 

-MATT. 6:1-15. -FEBRUARY 6.- 

Golden Text:— "Take heed that ye do not your righteousness 
before men to be seen of them."— V. 1. 

PERHAPS no other sin was as roundly and thoroughly 

denounced by the Great Teacher as was 

the sin of hypocrisy. Its meanness is recognized 

and acknowledged, even by those who practice 

it. It is falsehood and deceit, the very opposites of righteousness 

and Truth. No matter what forms, ceremonies and 

garbs the hypocrite may wrap himself up in he cannot deceive 

God. Ere long he is sure to disclose his deformity 

to his fellow-men, also. So surely as one is dishonest, hypocritical, 

he is unworthy of the Truth— not one of the kind 

whom the Lord is now "drawing" and "calling" to membership 

in the Body of Christ, the elect Church. The hypocritical, 

therefore, cannot see the Truth, cannot comprehend it. 

They live on the plane of dishonesty and, in that sense of 

the word, are unrighteous or impure and unworthy of the 

Truth. 

This does not signify, however, that all hypocrites are 
worthy of Second Death— extinction. It merely means that 
they are not worthy of a place with those now called to be 
joint-heirs with Christ in his Millennial Kingdom. Thank 
God, all that came down to us from the dark ages respecting 
eternal torment as the Divine provision for all who would 
not be of the little flock was falsehood— blasphemous misrepresentation 



of the God of Love and Justice. The Millennial 

Kingdom is for the very purpose of dealing with those who 

are hypocritical and otherwise degenerate. Under its restraints, 

corrections, rewards and punishments many of them 

"will learn righteousness," as the Scriptures assure us. 

(Isa. 26:9.) Only the finally incorrigible will be destroyed 

in the Second Death. 

To-day's Study illustrates various forms of hypocrisy 
and condemns them all: 

(1) The doing of righteous acts before men to be seen 
of them, while pretending to do these for righteousness' 
sake, to be in harmony with the Divine will. Such will have 
no reward from God, though they may or may not get the 
reward they seek, namely, human praise from those whom 
they deceive. The alms and other righteous acts which God 
would approve are the unostentatious— not done for human 
praise, but from principle, from love for God and his righteousness, 

R4560 : page 58 

and love or sympathy for fellow-men. So quietly 

should this be done that even those close to us in life might 

only by accident discover our unselfish generosity. 

(2) Hypocrisy may take the form of religion— pretended 
piety, worship, praise, church attendance, "chief seats," the 
amen corner, etc. It delights in religious garbs which say 
ostentatiously, My coat or bonnet or collar or tie will tell 

you that I am specially holy. Praying in the streets has become 
unfashionable, except for our Salvation Army friends. 
We should not be understood to mean that all who dress 
peculiarly, who go to church, who pray in public, etc., are 
hypocritical! God forbid! Nor do we understand this to 
have been the teaching of the Son of God. He taught rather 
that these supposed manifestations of holiness might be used 
hypocritically. His warnings were not that we should undertake 
to correct those who are addicted to these condemned 
practices, but that we should see to it in our own hearts 
and lives, and all of our own religious sentiments, that they 
are sincere— to God and not to men. He who does such 
things for outward effect upon his fellow-men should know 
that his hypocrisy is distinctly known of the Lord, even when 
not recognized by his fellowmen. He should know that so 
far from receiving a blessing he goes the more deeply into 
Divine disfavor. 

True prayer should be to the Lord— never to the public. 
Individual prayer is specially commended by our Lord. Family 
prayer is also Scripturally proper. Prayer in the Church 
is proper, because supposedly amongst those who constitute 
the family of the Lord— this is not public prayer in the proper 
sense of that term. 

The prayers of God's people should be simple, earnest, 
heart-felt. They need not be long. Repetitions are useless. 
The Heavenly Father knoweth better than we what things 
we have need of. He waits to be gracious— waits to be 
asked for blessings. In so doing he cultivates in his people 
a proper spirit of appreciation of their needs and longing 



desires for the good things he is willing to give— to the intent 
that they may be blessings in the highest sense and 
degree. 

THE SAMPLE PRAYER 

What is generally styled "the model prayer" was given 
merely as an example. We are to pray after that manner, 
but not necessarily in those words. The order of the prayer 
is beautiful. How properly it opens by addressing "Our 
Father in heaven" and by expressing desire that the great 
name of God be hallowed, revered, honored, by all, and 
therefore by the petitioner also. It proceeds to express a 
desire that the Divine will may be accomplished on earth as 
in heaven and the confidence that this can come about only 
through the establishment of God's Kingdom— by Messiah's 
Millennial reign of righteousness, which will be enforced for 
the blessing and uplifting of mankind and the bringing of 
all the willing from sin and death conditions to life 
everlasting. 

Thus the chief thing, the glory of God and the outworking 
of the Divine Plan, should be the most prominent things 
in our hearts as we approach the Throne of Grace. Then 
we may remember our own physical needs and ask for the 
bread of life. It is not for us to specify the spiritual or 
temporal food, but to petition the Giver of all good, in the 
spirit of submission to the Divine arrangements, whatever 
they may be. 

We have not the wisdom which would warrant us in 
specifying, particularizing our wants; rather the proper spiritual 
child delights in the Father's will and providence in 
all things: 

"Back of the loaf is the snowy flour 

And back of the flour the mill; 
And back of the mill is the wheat and shower 

And the sun and the Father's will." 

When told to pray, "Forgive us our trespasses," we are 
not to understand thereby Original Sin. That great transgression 
committed by our father Adam, which involved himself 
and all of his posterity in the sentence of death, cannot 
be forgiven upon request. For its cancellation God has already 
arranged— the death of Christ, "the Just for the 
unjust." 

But we trespass through imperfection and temptation, 
contrary to our better intentions and wishes. These sins 
require acknowledgment and forgiveness. Divine mercy is 
pleased to remit the guilt of all unintentional sins and to 
reckon them as covered with the precious blood as part of 
Original Sin. The Lord waits to be thus gracious, but, 
desiring our blessing and development, he requires that we 
shall be similarly forgiving toward those with whom we 
have to do. "But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, 
neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." (Matt. 6:15.) 
What an incentive to sympathy, generosity and forgiveness 



is here! 

R4560 : page 59 

FORGIVENESS VERSUS MALICE 

"Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's 
sake hath forgiven you."— Eph. 4:32. 

A FORGIVING spirit is a part of the spirit of love, a 

part of God's Spirit, the holy Spirit or disposition— 

the spirit of the truth— inculcated by God's Word. 

It is thus the opposite or contrary of the spirit 

of malice, which is a part of the evil spirit or disposition 

common among men in their fallen condition— the spirit or 

disposition of the world. 

A forgiving spirit is kindred to the spirit of love, joy, 
peace, meekness, patience, brotherly-kindness, godliness. A 
malicious spirit is related to anger, back-biting, slander, 
wrath, jealousy, hatred and all the works of the (fallen) flesh 
and the devil. 

Recognizing these two spirits in the light of God's Word, 
his people must surely desire and seek more and more to 
cultivate the forgiving disposition— a spirit of readiness or 
willingness to forgive, which would rather that the transgressor 
would penitently turn from his evil way to the way 
of righteousness, and which would take pleasure in receiving 
him back into fellowship again under such conditions. 

However, on this as upon every question, extreme and 
unscriptural views are sometimes entertained. Some feel 
that the most extreme view conceivable must be the right 
one, because of their desire to get as far away as possible 
from the unforgiving or malicious spirit. In consequence, 
some are continually chiding themselves for not being able 
to forgive those who have not repented, who have not asked 
forgiveness nor brought forth fruits (evidences) indicating 
repentance. 

This comes of the fall. Human judgments have become 
defective, so that it sometimes perplexes us to know how and 
where to draw the lines upon our own hearts and conduct. 
But here God comes to our rescue. He knows: his mind or 
judgment and not our own imperfect judgments, therefore, 
must be our guide or criterion; and his Word expresses to 
us his mind (spirit or disposition) on this and every subject. 
If we accept and use it, instead of our own imperfect 
judgments, we are said to have "the spirit of a sound mind." 

Let us study and adopt as our own the spirit of God's 
sound mind on this subject of forgiveness, casting aside as 
erroneous whatever our own depraved judgments may have 
previously accepted. This will be following the instructions 
of the text at the head of this article, and we will learn to 
forgive even as God forgives. 

(1) Our spirit or disposition to forgive any one should 
be of the heart, prompted by the spirit of love and brotherly 



kindness. It should not be a forgiveness forced out of us 
by importunity, nor by the appeals of many, nor by pity for 
the wrong doers' sufferings or sorrow. It should be there 
pent up in our hearts, ready to pour forth upon the offender 
as soon as he repents and gives reasonable evidence of his 
sincerity. God waits to be gracious, desires to pardon sinners; 
and such must be our attitude toward those who trespass 
against us. But God always waits for repentance, and never 
grants his pardon to those who are unrepentant, nor receives 
them into fellowship as friends. 

True, he loved us while we were yet sinners (John 3:16; 
Rom. 5:8), and he does good even to the unthankful, giving 
sunshine and rain and food to all; but that is a pitying love, 
not a fellowship love, not a communing love: it is the sympathetic 
love of a benefactor. And we are to have this pity-love 
also, even to our enemies. We are to love our enemies, 
and do good to them that persecute us; but with us, as with 
God, this can be no more than pity-love: it cannot be fellowship-love, 
"for what fellowship hath righteousness with 
unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness?" 
Nevertheless, while we can have no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness, but must rather reprove 
them (Eph. 5:11), we can still have that benevolence of heart 
which would not permit even an enemy to perish with hunger. 
"Therefore, if thine enemy hunger, feed him," etc. In so 
doing we are but imitating our Heavenly Father, who is merciful 
even to the unthankful and despiteful. 

(2) God's readiness or quickness to forgive and receive 
into fellowship depends upon the amount of light and favor 
sinned against. To the ignorant, who know not of his character, 
he sends his children as ambassadors— evangelists, colporteurs, 
etc.— to tell them of his love and his willingness 
to forgive their sins through Christ. But in proportion as 
any have tasted of the good Word of God and been made 
partakers of the holy Spirit, etc., and have sinned wilfully 
against light and knowledge (Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-31), in that 
same proportion God is slow to forgive, and will not receive 
such back into fellowship, except they bring forth works proving 
their professed repentance to be sincere. And God assures 
us that there is a degree of wilful sin, against full light 
and ability, that he will never forgive— "There is a sin unto 
death; I do not say that ye shall pray for it." — I John 5: 16. 

In this, also, we should copy our Father in heaven. We 
should be very ready to forgive the blunders and errors of 
either natural or spiritual childhood, and to all the weak and 
inexperienced, even before they ask, we should manifest our 
willingness to forgive. And with all who trespass against us, 
our willingness to forgive should be proportionate to the 
ignorance and lack of wilfulness and malice on the part of 
the transgressor. Whenever malice, wilfulness and knowledge 
have been factors in the transgression, it is our duty 
to be proportionately slow to forgive and to require proportionately 
longer and stronger proofs of repentance. 

But this is as far as we may go. Although we may be 
able to decide what would be a sin unto death against God 
(I John 5:16), we may not decide that any transgression 



against us is unforgivable; against us there are to be no unpardonable 

sins. Our imperfect knowledge, as well as our 

imperfect judgments, forbids such a decision. Hence our 

Lord said, "If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; 

and if he repent, forgive him. And if he trespass against 

thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn 

again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shalt forgive him." 

Peter said, "Lord how oft shall my brother sin against me 

and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus saith unto him, 

I say not unto thee, Until seven times, but, Until seventy 

times seven. "--Luke 17:3,4; Matt. 18:21,22. 

From these Scriptures it is evident that some of God's 
people make the mistake of forgiving transgressors before 
they repent. It is as much the Lord's command that we 
rebuke the transgressor, and that we do not forgive until he 
turns again and repents, as it is his command that we do 
forgive, from the heart, when he does turn and repent. And 
if he trespass seventy times seven times he should be rebuked 
as often (either by word or conduct or both), and should 
repent in words and turn in conduct just as often. 

To require less than this is to disobey our Teacher's instructions 
and to do injury to the transgressor by giving him 
lax ideas as to his duty. A lack of strict justice, in this respect, 
on the part of God's people has often injured their 
children, whereas a proper exercise of justice with forgiveness 
on proper grounds would have helped those children the 
better to understand God's dealings, and would guard them 
against expecting his favor except upon full repentance; and 
also against tempting divine mercy by sinning against 
knowledge. 

But while some need to correct their hearts and conduct 
as above, more, probably, need to guard against an unforgiving 
spirit. Such should remember that Christ Jesus by the 
grace of God tasted death for every man— paid the price of 
every man's natural or inherited imperfection— and consider 
that if God can accept that ransom-price as the full satisfaction 
for all except wilful sins or the wilful portions of sins, 
then we can and should do so also; and all who have God's 
spirit or disposition will hold wrong-doers responsible for 
only their wilful share in sins and be ready to forgive and 
pass over quickly whatever is of Adamic depravity and truly 
repented of and thereafter shunned. 

Let such remember the words, "If we confess our sins, 
God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse 
us from all unrighteousness"; and consider that we who accept 
our Lord Jesus' sacrifice, as being for the sins of the 
whole world, must also, if we would be faithful and just, 
forgive those who trespass against us, if they confess and 
repent, because Jesus paid all of their debts, to us as well 
as to God. 

R4560 : page 60 

Justice, therefore, demands of all who trust in the merit 
of Christ's sacrifice as the ground of their own forgiveness, 
that they recognize the same precious blood as the covering 



of all Adamic ignorance and weaknesses. And the Lord assures 

us that unless we forgive those who trespass against 

us (when they repent), neither will he forgive us when we 

repent. 

Moreover, our forgiveness must be from the heart (Matt. 18:35) 
—not a lip forgiveness and a heart hatred. The forgiven 
one may be held at a distance for a time to prove the 
sincerity of his repentance; but just as soon as we have good 
cause to believe him sincere we must be prompt and hearty 
in our forgiveness— as a heart with a forgiving spirit or desire 
will always be glad to do. The length of time we may 
hold aloof from the erring one must be measured by our 
willingness to have our Heavenly Father hold aloof from 
us when we trespass against him: this is the Divine rule of 
the Lord's prayer. But, even then, although fully and heartily 
forgiven, we may not put such a one into a place of the 
same responsibility as the one from which he fell until we 
have seen a stronger and truer character developed in him. 
And this would not imply a lack of full forgiveness, but 
merely a proper caution— not only for our own protection, 
but also for the good of the one who transgressed and his 
protection from too strong a temptation of the same kind. 

We find no mention in the Scriptures of forgiving on 
God's part without the requirement of repentance. The passage 
which reads, "Father, forgive them, they know not what 
they do" (Luke 23:34), might be considered to refer to a 
pardon without repentance; but these words are not found in 
the oldest Greek MSS.— the Sinaitic and Vatican. 

A passage frequently misunderstood is: 

"If thou comest to the altar, and there rememberest 
that thy brother hath aught against thee, leave there thy 
gift and first go and be reconciled to [or make amends to] 
thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift."— Matt. 5:23,24. 

It should be noted that the one addressed is not the 
brother trespassed against, but the trespassing brother. He 
must leave the offering of his gift or prayer, until he has 
made amends to his brother for the wrong he is conscious of 
having done him, in word or deed. Not until then will his 
offering be acceptable to God. 



R4560 : page 60 

THE WORLD'S MEDIATOR OUR ADVOCATE 

I HAVE noticed with interest the discrimination you make 
between a mediator and an advocate— that believers of 
this Gospel Age, called to be members of the Body of 
Christ, the Mediator, have an Advocate and need one; 
because, although as New Creatures they are accepted of God, 
nevertheless having the new nature in the imperfect "earthen 
vessel," they cannot deal directly with the Father; even as a 
good citizen, approved in an earthly court, is not permitted 
by law to approach the Court directly, but only through an 
Advocate or attorney. I appreciate this distinction. I see 



how incongruous it would be for us New Creatures to be 
under a mediator. And I agree that THE WATCH TOWER 
has rightly defined these distinctions; that our Lord Jesus is 
the Advocate for the Church and the Mediator for the world. 
I agree, too, that his Mediatorial Kingdom is not yet established 
—that it belongs to the Millennial Age. I agree, also, 
that while our Lord is now the Mediator of the New Covenant, 
he is thus spoken of prophetically, because this is the 
great work to which he was appointed and because by his 
death he has become a "surety" (Heb. 7:22) for the full 
carrying out of the Divine promise of a New Covenant of 
blessing for Israel and the world. 

I note my difficulty. It seems to me that the Church, 
"the household of faith," needs no Mediator now, since we 
have become New Creatures; but did we not need a Mediator 
before we could become New Creatures? It seems to me 
that our Lord Jesus must have acted as Mediator for us, 
at least momentarily, while we accepted justification and made 
our consecration. If this is not the correct thought, please 
render me the necessary assistance out of my perplexity. 

WE REPLY:— Your difficulty is merely one of terms and 
not one of facts. It is a fact that believers needed the application 
of the Lord's merit, the "ransom-price," to be 

applied on their behalf— as a covering for their human imperfections 
and a basis for their becoming joint-sacrificers 
with Christ. This fact which your mind has grasped thoroughly 
should never be relinquished. It is the foundation of 
all proper faith. But you have attached a wrong label or 
name to that fact and need to take it off, and instead to 
attach the Scriptural label or name. It is as our Advocate 
that our Lord justified us, and not as our Mediator, because 
the term Advocate applies to our Lord only as our representative 
before the Father, justified by faith in his blood 
and sanctified through our consecration to be dead with him, 
he appeared before the Father as our Advocate: we were 
accepted and begotten of the holy Spirit as New Creatures, 
his "members." Our Lord continues as our Advocate. He 
is not the world's Advocate. 

As for the word Mediator, it is indeed a glorious name 
and title possessed by our Lord, but it is not the proper label 
or name to be associated with his service in our justification. 
It is not Scripturally applicable to the Church at all, except 
that we are associates with the Mediator of the New Covenant 
as "his members" in the sufferings of this present time, and as 
joint-heirs with him in the glorious prospects of the Millennium. 
It will help us greatly to remember that while 
the word mediator is very loosely used in general conversation 
to-day it is quite particularly and carefully and exclusively 
used in the Bible— only in connection with a Covenant. 
Messiah (Head and Body) is the Mediator of the New 
Covenant, as Moses was the Mediator of the Law Covenant. 
(Acts 3:22,23.) No other mediator than these is known in the 
Scriptures, whatever may be the usage of our language. 

By what term, then, should we speak of our justification 
and of him whose sacrifice justifies the Church? We should 
use the Scriptural term redeemer. Jesus is the Church's Redeemer, 



for "He bought us with his own precious blood"; 

R4561 : page 60 

"Ye were redeemed, not with corruptible things, ...but 
with the precious blood of Christ." Our Lord will be the 
world's Mediator in due time. But he is as yet only the 
Church's Redeemer, as he is now only the Church's Advocate; 
because he has not yet made application of his merit on the 
world's behalf. 

Are some surprised to note these clear Scriptural distinctions 
of terms? Let us reflect that the Lord has given us 
many blessed opportunities for the study of his Word not 
possessed by our forefathers. Hence we ought to see and 
appreciate more distinctly than they. We ought to be able 
to "rightly divide the Word of Truth" better than they. If 
some of our dear readers had the thought that they had 
studied the Scriptures so carefully that there could be nothing 
more to learn therefrom, let them confess that God's Book is 
wonderful, a mine of precious treasure. Its exactness 
in various features is marvelous. But this very exactness 
is proof of its Divine inspiration, as the ability to see this 
exactness is an evidence to us that we are guided by the 
holy Spirit which wrote the Book; even as it is written, "The 
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, 
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.' 
The natural mind is disposed to reject, criticise and 
to call this "hair-splitting": It lacks in discrimination, or 
else is willing to turn and twist the Word of God to make 
it suit a theory. In either case there is blindness. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR MARCH 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered: (1) 332; (2) 293; (3) 60; (4) 66; (5) 
313; (6) 146; (7) 52; (8) 4; (9) 5; (10) 162; (11) 
79; (12) 222; (13) 291; (14) 209; (15) 130; (16) 
279; (17) 93; (18) 325; (19) 144; (20) 113; (21) 
210; (22) 229; (23) 12; (24) 95; (25) 62; (26) 105; 
(27) 273; (28) 246; (29) 153; (30) 24; (31) 315. 



R4561 : page 61 

FOLLOWING A SUGGESTION SUCCESSFULLY 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have just received a letter from a Sister in the South 
and thought that an extract from it would be interesting to 
you, and possibly offer a suggestion to other WATCH TOWER 



readers. The Sister writes:— 

"In THE WATCH TOWER of November 1st the suggestion 
is offered that those who cannot sell DAWN-STUDIES regularly 
might 'do a good follow-up work by selling the HEAVENLY 
MANNA." After thinking prayerfully over the matter I decided, 
the Lord helping me, that I would make an effort 
along this line. I made the start to-day, working three hours 
and canvassing twenty people. The result was that I took 
orders for ten books and found two people already interested 
in the Truth, one-half of my time being spent with these 
friends, namely, two Sisters who have a Brother in the 
Truth in N.C. These Sisters have but recently moved to 
Columbia and were wondering if there were any people residing 
here of their Brother's faith. You may easily imagine 
how happy it made me to find these friends. One of them 
had been reading but recently and is becoming much 
interested. 

"My motive at first in doing this work was to help our 
finances, which are low at present; nevertheless, down deep 
in my heart was a longing desire to do something to awaken 
the zeal which was in danger of being smothered by the 
daily trials to which I have been subjected of late; for 
really spiritual help and nourishment are what I stand in 
need of more than money. Accordingly, I prayed to the 
Lord that, if I had taken the right step, he would encourage 
me this first day, for it was just as hard for me to start out 
now as when I sold my first DAWN. I feel that he has indeed 
done so, for the meeting of those two interested ones was 
well worth the effort I had made." 



R4561 : page 61 

DELIVERED FROM THE FOWLER 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



Please let me add my testimony to the many others sent 
you at this time. My feeble words cannot express my heart's 
joy, because of the great light that has come to me through 
the knowledge of "Present Truth." 

The little tract from your pen that by accident fell into 
my hands many years ago accomplished its mission well. 
Under the Spirit's power God used that little messenger as 
an index-finger to point to the proof of its strange and new 
statements concerning the meaning of many things in the 
Bible. You said, prove everything by the Word of God. I 
did so, found your words to be truth then, and the eyes of 
my understanding were opened. 

The key to the great storehouse of God's Truth was in 
my hand, and gradually, step by step, I have been guided by 
your Spirit-inspired pen, which has continually pointed to 
God's Word as the only proof test of its statements, until 
my heart has become established in the Truth, and each day 
I am becoming more and more free. More and more is the 



light shining, and with joyful anticipation, faith points a 
little farther on unto the perfect day. 

May our Father still make you his blessed instrument to 
show forth his light upon his fast-revealing Truth, and still 
use your lips as his mouthpiece to guide those who otherwise 
could not understand. And may the ink-horn at your 
side never fail to supply the pen which will send the message 
of love and light to the thousands who cannot hear your 
voice, nor look upon your Spirit-illumined countenance. But 
it is not your work. Let God be praised for his wonderful 
work, which he has brought through his chosen servant and 
watchman, and may you still, as in the past, be sustained and 
comforted by him who will never leave, never forsake.— Job 8:19,20; 
Ps. 84, 19;Heb. 12:27. 

And may you be among those who cannot be shaken, but 
one to whom the verse— Ps. 37:6— will most fully apply, is 
my fervent prayer. 

Nov. 17 was my 70th birthday anniversary, and how 
blessedly true is the text that is written in the HEAVENLY 
MANNA for that date. Faithful pastors and teachers, who 
have watched for my soul as they who must give an account. 
Surely I have been delivered from the subtle snare of the 
Fowler. Praise the Lord for his loving, unmerited kindness 
to me. 

Yours in hope to anchor in the harbor, 

MRS.M. A. SMITH. 

DEAR SISTER SMITH:- 

I have pleasure in acknowledging your kind letter of the 
22nd inst, being deeply appreciative of the loving interest, 
sympathy and fellowship expressed in it. 

Truly, in the wonderful Mystical Body of Christ, and 
of which by God's grace we are individually members, if one 
member suffer all suffer. Then, too, we are each built up by 
the means of the strength that each band, joint and ligament 
supplies, until we all come to the full stature of men in Christ. 
Our consolation is that the Lord knoweth them that are his, 
and that all things are working together for good to his 
elect ones. In our present trials let us take heed to ourselves 
that we ever remain in the faith, knowing that he who has 
called us is faithful, who will also do it. 

Very sincerely your brother and co-laborer in the 
Kingdom, 

C. T. RUSSELL. 



R4561 : page 61 

INFIDEL OBJECTION ANSWERED 

The following was sent by Brother Fisher recently to a 
secular journal:— 
MR. EDITOR, DEAR SIR:- 

Infidels and unbelievers in the accuracy of the Bible love 
to prove that the grand old Book is wrong. Don't you think 



they would be benefited more by an equal amount of time and 
thought to prove it right? 

For example, one of the favorite objections to the Bible 
is the longevity of the people before the Flood, under the 
favorable climatic conditions of those days and their nearness 
to the perfection of the first couple, created, as they were, 
"in the image and likeness of God." 

It is solemnly affirmed by infidel scientists, both orally 
and in writing, that the only rational understanding of those 
long lives is that at that ancient day they reckoned time differently, 
calling a lunar month a year. Recently my attention 
was called to internal evidence in the account itself, which 
shows that our wise friends have got to find another reason. 

If the antediluvians called a lunar month a year, then, 
of course, Adam, for example, lived 930 months, or about 
80 years— an age that agrees with modern experience. 

This seems rational, but the Sacred Record furnishes 
other data that involve a most irrational and absurd conclusion, 
if we are to act upon the lunar month theory. 

It is that the antediluvians had children at an unbelievably 
tender age. Of Adam the record runs: "Adam lived 
one hundred and thirty years and begat a son." (Gen. 5:3.) 
According to the lunar month hypothesis he had his first baby 
at the tender age of eleven. Some of the other patriarchs 
were even more precocious; for example:— Seth, 9 years 
old; Enos, 7; Cainan, 6; Mahalaleel, 5; Jared, 13; Enoch, 5; 

R4562 : page 61 

Lamech, 15; Methuselah, 15; Noah, 41; Shem, 8; Arphaxad, 
4; Salah, 2-1/2; Eber, 3-1/2; Peleg, 2-1/2; Terah, 6; Abraham, 7; 
Isaac, 5. 

After this the modern era of ages is admittedly in force. 

Now, then, where are the infidels and infidel higher 
critics going to begin to throw the account out? They cannot 
believe in the lunar month theory. The only thing left is 
to throw the whole thing out of court, which many have done. 
I think the account is true, and trustworthy as it stands. 
What do you think about it, Mr. Editor? Yours truly, 

G. H. F. 



R4562 : page 62 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER IN THE LORD:- 

May I ask you whether you understand that there is any 
time or circumstance under which, during the present time 
(S.S. 1:2— "Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; 
for thy love is better than wine"), "kisses of the mouth" can 
have any fuller meaning than full heart recognition of the 
exceeding great and precious promises and their application 
to one's self, and by heart appreciation thus to recognize the 
presence of our dearly loved espoused Bridegroom? 



In other words, is there any time or circumstance when 
you understand that there could be any recognition of a personal 
presence? Or should we fear such experience as one 
of the many forms and ways Satan will take to "deceive, if 
possible, the very elect"? transforming himself into an angel 
of light. While a personal answer will be appreciated, from 
the experience I hear some are having, it seems as if an 
answer through THE TOWER, and that soon, may save some 
from a snare of the Adversary. With thanksgiving to God, 
I am, 

Your brother by grace, 

J. C. EDWARDS. 

IN REPLY 

I am quite agreed that the figurative expressions of 
Solomon's Song should not be allowed to exercise fanciful 
impressions upon our minds. There would be great danger 
of putting one's self into a mental attitude which would be 
susceptible to adverse spirit influences— from the fallen angels. 
God has in these last times spoken to us by his Son in the 
record of his teaching and through his specially appointed 
apostles. Upon the exceeding great and precious promises 
which these set before us our hearts may freely feast. And 
in these we should find an abundance of spiritual nutriment, 
refreshment, and not invite or desire any physical or sensuous 
manifestations of our Heavenly Bridegroom's love and care. 
Thanks, dear Brother, for the kind words of loving cheer 
and sympathy. I am glad to note your firmness and clearness 
in the Truth. 

Very truly your brother and servant in the Lord. 



ALLEGHENY, PA., NOV. 25, 1909. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In view of the flood of "Open Letters" by some ex-members 
of the New York Ecclesia, would it not be well to answer 
them in THE TOWER? Of course, your main article in the 
November 15 WATCH TOWER is a masterly reply to the Open 
Letter. Although not so declaring itself, the TOWER readers 
in general may not recognize it to be a response. And indeed 
I do not know whether you so intended it or not. 

Its first exception to your (our) faith and teaching 
charges you with now presenting what the DAWN and TOWER 
do not teach— a subtle way of inferring that according to 
your presentation Jesus was not "a ransom for all" mankind. 
They misrepresent you as teaching that the Church is a part 
of the ransom price. 

Truly no weapon formed against the Lord's cause will 
prosper. The Lord will take care of the ultimate results. 

The opposition further infers that your teaching is the 
"abomination that maketh desolate." What will they do 
with Daniel's prophesy— "from the time of the abomination 
that maketh desolate, there shall be 1,335 days" (years)? 



Evidently they are prepared to set aside the Scripture 
Chronology as well as the Truth they were professed to love 
and serve. 

Closing article I. they graciously accredit you as having 
been "helpful" to them in a study of the Divine 
Word, inferring, however, that they dug out of the 
Bible, truth not received from your instruction. Well 
do they know they never discovered Scripture knowledge 
on God's plan that did not emanate from the 
DAWN and TOWER presentations. 

In their article II. do they not agree with you (with us) 
that Jesus is our Advocate, though they did not always do 
so? Or, do they profess to hold to the position that they 
are still enemies of God and God, at enmity with them, thus 
necessitating the constant service of a Mediator or go-between? 
Are they proud of this animosity? We rejoice that 
Jesus is our Advocate. 

Article III. of the "Open Letter" has been thoroughly 
covered by your masterful reply in Nov. 15 WATCH TOWER. 
The opposing faction deals in isolated verses where you treat 
the subject in its entirety and you do so forcefully, logically, 
conclusively. Truly God is with you. 

Article IV. starts out with a deliberate misstatement (to 
be charitable)— falsehood (to be exact). It declares that 
you "set forth the view that you alone are 'that servant' of 
Matt. 24:45-47; Luke 12:42-44;" whereas your claim re 
"that servant" was for THE WATCH TOWER. 

According to the position taken by the advocates of the 
"Open Letter" no sister could possibly come in for a "special 
blessing" at the hands of our Lord. Rather a discouraging 
doctrine for the sisters, surely! It tends to make discrimination 
between the males and females of the faith, 
"once delivered to the saints." I wonder that all the sisters 
do not at once see the force of that argument. 

Article V. of the "Open Letter" stands powerfully against 
the argument of the opposing faction. In it they admit that 
only 17 out of 300 Bible students in Brooklyn Tabernacle 
were in favor of a certain character of Bible study. Did 
they expect that the 300 should have given way to the 17? 
Or, do they hold that the 17 are smarter than the 300 and 
know best what the Lord approves? 

Here let me remind you how the "Berean Bible Studies" 
started in Allegheny. I was appointed the leader. You 
merely suggested that I introduce this form of Bible 
study to the class. I did so, and after the seventh 
lesson you went on the platform and reminded the 
congregation that they now knew what the Berean Study is, 
as compared with Bible study in other ways. You told them 
of the favorable reports you had of the Berean Study, its increase 
of attendance, and that you now desired an expression 
from the Church as to its desire respecting future Bible 
Studies. Eleven hands were held up in favor of the Bible 
Study by books and chapters, four hands went up in favor of 
Bible Study by the selection of a verse or topic. Upwards 
of 250 hands were then extended in favor of the Berean 
method of study. I made note of all this at the time. 



Now, dear Brother, I know not what method you pursued 
at the Brooklyn Tabernacle assembly, but am convinced 
that you did about the same as with the Allegheny congregation. 
The 17 objectors should at once have surrendered 
to the voice of God as expressed by the majority. It implied 
that God was pleased to have Berean Study, in which way 
every class studies systematically and has your assistance in 
arriving at conclusions. Only the wilful and heady would 
want to do otherwise. 

[Seeing that some "Independents" were becoming confused, 
and manifesting an ungracious spirit, we recommended 
that for the next six months all meetings should be Berean 
Bible Studies, which had proven so helpful to many, and 
gave widest latitude for all and on almost every Bible topic. 
The vote was almost unanimous; about 300 in favor of 
Berean Studies, and 7 (not 17) against— by record.— EDITOR.] 

Experience doubtless has taught us that, although people 
have had Bibles and studied them throughout the past, they 
have failed to get much good, but by studying in the Berean 
way they gain much knowledge of God's plan and principles of 
righteousness and know full well that the Berean studies are 
most helpful. 

The opposing friends will have to get up a better argument 
than that set forth in their "Open Letter" if they shall deceive 
the Lord's little ones. Only those not really of us will 
be turned aside by their clamor and commotion on spiritual 
lines. 

God help you, Brother, to stand fast in the true faith, the 
faith "once delivered to the saints." Nobly have you espoused 
God's truth to the hearing ones. If some presume to hurry 
along ahead of light as it becomes due they will be as much 
(if not more) in the dark than they who stay behind. 

Continue to remember me at the throne of heavenly grace. 
Be not dismayed by the shafts of the enemy. 

Your brother in Christ our Redeemer and Advocate. 
J. A. BOHNET. 



page 63 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES (V)* 

Man for Whom Atonement Was Made. 

MARCH 6. 

How did the curse make necessary an atonement for sin— 
a sin-offering? -SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. V., Study XIV. 

(1) What is implied in the statement of Revelation 22:3, 
"And there shall be no more curse"? 

(2) Is it generally admitted that there is a curse or 
blight upon mankind and upon his earthly inheritance or 



home such as the Creator did not impose upon the holy 
angels? Is it more reasonable to suppose that this accursed 
condition resulted from an imperfection of the Creator's 
work or that it is a penalty for man's disobedience? Which 
theory is sustained by the Scriptures? Quote the Scriptures. 

(3) Does any theory fit better to the facts as we know 

them than the presentation given us in the Bible on the subject 
of the curse, the cause of its infliction and the period 
of its continuance and the time and cause of its removal? 
P. 405. 

(4) What is the ordinary theory respecting the curse 

and wherein is it wrong and contrary to the Bible teaching? 

(5) Does the Scriptural account imply such a moral 
responsibility as should belong to a perfect man made in 
the image of his Creator or does it imply a low degree of 
moral perception akin to that of the brute? Give the philosophy 
of this subject. Pp. 406, 407. 

(6) Does not the fact that Adam was placed on trial 
before the great Judge of the Universe imply that he was 
perfect and therefore fit for trial and responsible for his curse 
as a penalty for his sin? P. 407, last par. 

Does God's proposal for the judgment of the Church 
during this Gospel Age necessitate an Advocate for each 
accepted son of God? And does the judgment of the world 
during the Millennial Age under a Mediator imply that they 
will be dealt with as a whole and not be introduced to the 
Father as sons until the end of the Millennium, when the 
Mediatorial office shall cease? 

(7) Does not the provision that the Church now needs 
an Advocate and that a Mediator is being provided for the 
world's judgment day corroborate the thought that there is 
a curse or Divine condemnation upon every member of the 
human family through sin? P. 408, par. 1. 

(8) Does this curse affect mankind physically only? 
Does it also affect his mentality and his morality? Give an 
explanation. Cite Scriptures. P. 408, last par.; P. 409. 

(9) In what Scripture is the curse upon our race spoken 
of as the wrath of God? P. 410, par. 1. 

(10) How long has this wrath been upon the race 

and how much longer will it continue? If it will come to 
an end, what will be the process? P. 410, par. 1. 

(11) Is there also a special day of wrath mentioned in 
the Bible? In what sense is it particularly different from 
the remainder of the 6,000 years of Divine wrath and 
why? P. 410, par. 1. 

(12) What distinction do the Scriptures draw between 
the Church and the world as respects this subject of wrath? 
Are Christians still "children of wrath"? Or did the wrath 
of God pass from them? If so, on what conditions. 

P. 410, par. 2. 

(13) Do Christians experience trouble in the same degree 
as the world or have they offsetting circumstances and 
conditions which ameliorate their sorrows and distress and 
dis-ease? What is the process by which they get into this 
eased condition and free from the Divine "curse" or "wrath"? 
Quote and explain six Scriptures. P. 411, par. 1. 



MARCH 13. 

(14) What is God's verdict or curse against sin? If 

it is a death sentence, why does he delay the execution of 
it? P. 411, last par. 

(15) What were the circumstances which brought on 
the curse and were there any ameliorating circumstances? 
P. 412, par. 1. 

(16) Admitting that the penalty that God is executing 
against mankind is a just one, would it have been possible for 
him to deal with sin otherwise than as he did? P. 412, last par. 

(17) Explain how God could have dealt with sin and 
sinners differently and state whether or not the Plan he is 
pursuing has special advantages over any other one. P. 413. 

(18) Admitting that a more moderate course could have 
been pursued by the Almighty in dealing with sin, but that 

the Plan adopted was the wisest, shall we suppose that disadvantage 
shall be permitted to come to mankind in any sense 
or degree? P. 414, par. 1. 

(19) Has God limited the operation of his grace to this 
Gospel Age or is there to be a further development during 
the Millennium? P. 414, par. 2. 

(20) Of the Millennial conditions we read that "Every 
knee must bow and every tongue confess to the glory of God." 
Shall we understand this to mean that there obedience will be 
entirely compulsory? Or shall we understand that, while 
compulsory lessons will prevail for a time, nevertheless eventually 
the test will be along the line of heart, the human 

will— either for life everlasting or death eternal? Quote a 
Scripture relating to the Millennial Age which so teaches. 
P. 415, par. 1. 

(21) Viewed as a whole, how does the Divine Plan 
appeal to us? As kind or unkind, just or unjust, loving or 
loveless? P. 415, par. 2; P. 416. 

MARCH 20. 

(22) In what sense did the nation of Israel have a Second 
Trial for life under their Law Covenant? P. 417, par. 1. 

(23) Did Israel receive a blessing under the Law Covenant 
or an additional curse or sentence of death? And will 

their experiences prove permanently injurious to them? 
P. 417, par. 1. 

(24) We read that Christ was made a curse for Israel, 
because it is written, "Cursed is everyone that hangeth on a 
tree." In what way did our Lord's death apply to Israelites 
differently from what it applied to the remainder of mankind? 
P. 417, par. 1. 

(25) What is the necessity for reconciliation between 
God and man? And what does it secure to the reconciled? 
P. 417, par. 2. 

(26) Give an explanation of the philosophy of the matter 
—of the fall, and the redemption, the Restitution and just 
how they are related. P. 417, par. 2. 

(27) At what time did God's wisdom see man's condition 



and how did he provide the aid needed? And was there 
any other power which could have served his purpose or any 
other agency by which it could be accomplished? P. 418. 

(28) What are the three parts of the Divine program as 

God is carrying it out? Explain these and associate them. P. 419. 

(29) For what proportion of the human family has the 
Atonement been arranged? And who alone of humanity will 
fail to profit by its provisions? P. 419, last par. 

(30) What is meant by the testimony, "In due time"? 

(I Tim. 2:6). And what may we expect as to the numbers of 
the saved? P. 420. 

MARCH 27. 

(31) What is meant by the Atonement between God and 
man? And what is necessary before it could be accomplished 
for any member of the human family? Explain the matter. 

P. 421. 

(32) Was the penalty against sin a just one? And how 
may we judge of justice or injustice on the part of the great 
Creator, seeing that he is so great and we are so little? Contrast 
the penalty of sin from the Scriptural standpoint— the 

death penalty with the erroneous popular theory of eternal 
torment and explain the errors of the latter and the reasons 
of the former. P. 422, par. 1. 

(33) How can the sacrifice of one be made the offset 
for the sins of many? P. 422, par. 2. 

(34) Since none who received his life from father Adam 
had an unimpaired life we may see that none could ransom or 
redeem his brother or brethren. But could not a holy angel, 

free from condemnation, have laid down his life as the redemption 
price for man's life? If not, why not? P. 422, par. 3. 

(35) If, then, a spirit being, in order to become man's 
redeemer, would need to exchange his nature for an earthly 
nature, upon what basis did the Father determine who 
might become man's redeemer and obtain the glorious reward 
proper for the service? P. 423. 

(36) What priority of right did our Lord as the Logos 

or Word of God have over others in respect to this special 
opportunity to become man's redeemer? P. 424. 

(37) Was it a spirit being that God offered or sacrificed 
for man's sin? P. 424, par. 2. 

(38) Did our Lord's sin-offering begin when he, as a 
spirit being, the Logos, accepted the Divine proposition to 
become man's Redeemer, or when did the sin-offering begin 
and where did it end? Cite the Scriptures. P. 425, 426. 

(39) When did our Lord's presentation of himself 
begin? And when was the corresponding price offered and 
accepted and the acceptance fully manifested? P. 426, last par. 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Published in foreign languages as follows: in German, five 
volumes; in Swedish, Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in Greek, three vols.; in French, two 
vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish and Italian, one vol. each; 
bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the same; 
in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 65 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI FEBRUARY 15 No. 4 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Reports from the Society's Foreign Branches 67 

British Branch 67 

Swedish Branch 69 

French and Italian Branch 70 

Danish Branch 71 

Jamaican Branch 71 

Volunteer Work Extraordinary 72 

Worthy and Unworthy Ambition 72 

The Golden Rule 73 

The Discipleship Defined 74 

Mid-Winter Conventions 75 

The New Covenant Harmony with God 76 

The Memorial Celebration 79 

He Shall Sit as a Refiner (Poem) 79 

Itinerary for Bro. Russell's Mid-Winter 

Southern Tour 79 

page 66 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



"OVERLAND MONTHLY" FOR 1910. 

The OVERLAND MONTHLY of San Francisco, Cal, is a 
magazine of generally good tone. During the past year it 
has published a series of articles from the pen of the 
Editor of THE WATCH TOWER, entitled, "The Divine Program." 
This series concludes with the January issue, but 
will be followed by another series entitled "God's Chosen 
People." Special clubbing rates have been made by which 
THE WATCH TOWER, the PEOPLES PULPIT and the OVERLAND 
MONTHLY will be supplied in combination for $1.90 
in the United States. Extra postage outside the United 
States would make the price $3.00. Those who have already 
paid for one or more of these, may still have the 
advantage of the clubbing rate by remitting to us the 
difference. 



SERMONS IN BROOKLYN EAGLE. 

The Brooklyn Eagle published Brother Russell's sermon 
of Feb. 6 on the 7th. It is a high-class paper. If 
you have use for extra copies order samples of the Eagle. 
If you would like to get it every Monday provided it contained 
Pastor Russell's sermon, say so when you order the 
extras. The price for the Monday paper is $1 per year. 
Write at once! Let the publishers see how wide an interest 
there is-IN EVERY STATE. 



R4563 : page 67 

1909-REPORTS FROM THE SOCIETY'S 
FOREIGN BRANCHES -1909 

THE brethren in charge of the foreign 

branches made their reports in due season, 

but we were unavoidably prevented from 

printing them until now. We are sure that 

they will be of deep interest to all WATCH 

TOWER readers. We have nothing in a 

concrete form to present respecting developments 

in Africa and India. However, 

matters in those lands are progressing as 

satisfactorily as could be expected. Of 

course, opposition is encountered everywhere, but not 

from the worldly. As it was the Scribes and Pharisees 

who opposed the Gospel message eighteen centuries ago, 

so similar classes oppose the Gospel of the Kingdom now. 



As then the rulers were "grieved that he taught the 
people," so it is now. There seems to be little objection to 
the various forms of error, Christian Science, Higher 
Criticism, Evolution, etc., but the moment the Truth is 
presented anger and opposition are aroused. This seems 
to prove our theory that the Adversary himself is exciting 
and driving our deluded opponents to envy, malice, 
hatred, strife, slander, evil-speaking and insinuations, 
which are his methods. Would that all of God's consecrated 
people could realize this! What a change it 
would speedily effect— even those blinded by error would 
then be saved from being used as Satan's tools! 

The reading of the reports following will certainly 
prove a great encouragement to all who love the Lord and 
who delight to note the prosperity of the Truth. Of 
course, to those that walk no longer with us the effect 
will be the reverse. Things once despised they now love; 
things which they once loved they now despise. The 
reports show that the sifting work is in progress all over 
the harvest field. This is just what we should expect. 
While our hearts ache for the dear friends who have left 
us, the fact that they so speedily lose not only the Truth, 
but its spirit of love, reconciles us the more quickly to the 
situation and shows us that their condition of heart, which 
we did not suspect, but of which the Lord well knew, must 
have been behind their rejection by him and the taking 
from them the light of Present Truth. The evidences 
from every quarter are that many more are coming into 
the Truth than are leaving it. And apparently those now 
coming in have been under the Lord's supervising care 
and in another department of the School of Christ for 
some time. Now as their eyes are open to the harvest 
message they feed upon it rapaciously. So successfully 
do they assimilate the Truth that sometimes a six -months' 
beginner may be able to correct even a leader who has 
been in the Truth for ten or twenty years, but who has 
neglected reading. We cannot too strongly urge the fact 
that our vessels are leaky and require frequent spirit 
renewings. We are glad to note from letters received 
that the number of those reading twelve pages of 
the "Dawn-Studies" each day is increasing. We believe 
this to be one of the very best methods of Bible study- 
putting on the whole armor of God, fortifying heart and 
head. We learned with pleasure that during our absence, on 
New Year's Day, nearly all the members of the Bethel 
family resolved to follow this method and so to accomplish 
the reading of the entire six volumes of "Scriptural 
Studies" during the year 1910. 

REPORT OF BRITISH BRANCH 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have pleasure in sending once again the British 
yearly report of books sold and work accomplished in this 
part of the Harvest Field. The year has not been specially 
notable in any of the various features of the harvesting, 



but you will see that the general activities have been kept 
up and the results betoken increase of interest. You will 
know that trade in these countries has not been very brisk, 
and you would partially expect, if not a decrease in the sale 
of STUDIES, not any notable increase. We have indeed to 
report a slight decrease in the circulation of the cloth-bound 
Vol. I, but there has been a considerable increase 
in the output of the cheaper issue. Our total, as shown on 
sheet No. 1, is 46,926 STUDIES and DAWNS and other 
books, amounting in all to 61,225 books and booklets. 

The Tract work has gone on well. If our brethren 
find it hard to sell books they find it easy to give out 
tracts. These have been circulated to the extent of 
2,369,000, at the rate of nearly 50,000 per week. The 
newer form— the PEOPLES PULPIT— is very popular both 
with the brethren and with those who look for our tracts; 
and the No. 3, "Where Are the Dead?" has brought forth 
many inquiries. People will read a paper when they will 
not read a tract. Then the small inset picture of yourself 
on the first page has done good by letting people see we 
are not associated with "Dowieism," which many have believed 
was the case. The inquiries and the results show 
that there are many waiting to hear some satisfying 
news of the love of God; and regularly we are getting 
evidences of the blessing which the STUDIES are bringing 
to the people. It has been a surprise to me that there has 
not been a large increase in the sales of these books, for 
surely in this country the Lord must have many who fear 
him. I believe there is a large number of the class who 
have been associated with religious work, an intelligent 
middle-class, who have as yet hardly been touched with the 

R4563 : page 68 

books, and I cannot but think many of these will come to 
the Lord through the Harvest work. There seems no 
chance of newspaper work here in the meantime, but 
surely the heavy tract work must to some extent correspond 
with the newspaper work of the States. 

I regret that there is as yet no further information 
to send you about a central meeting hall for London. 
No doubt we could have a choice of several places if we 
were in for buying property; but we are waiting upon the 
Lord, as I know you are. The British friends look forward 
with eagerness to your return, desiring it as soon as 
it can be arranged. The year has brought us trials, sorrows, 
disappointments, but the joy of Harvest is surely 
ours, and the many evidences of the Father's favor have 
been especially sweet. The work goes on, and the 
prospects are good at present. We want to use all our opportunities 
for witnessing to the Truth and to the Kingdom 
before the end comes. In humbleness of mind we 
pray the Lord to keep us and to keep all his own, and we 
pray especially for you, dear brother, that in the multitude 
of your labors you may be kept. With much love from 
the household and from all the brethren, I am 



Your brother and fellow-servant, J. HEMERY. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Number of DAWNS and STUDIES (in various 

bindings) 46,926 

Number of booklets and other books 14,300 

TRACTS DISTRIBUTED 

Various tracts (including 304,000 No. 80 of 

last year vol. matter) 836,000 

PEOPLES PULPIT No. 3 1,533,000 

Total number of tract pages 40,669,800 

Letters and cards received 11,735 

Letters and cards sent out 10,405 

REPORT OF AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We are pleased to send along herewith the usual 
Annual Statement; we could have hoped to have a better 
account to render, but under the circumstances we are 
thankful that it is what it is through the faithful efforts 
of the colporteurs and zealous and earnest friends. 

You will notice that we wind up the year as has always 
been the case since the Branch started, with an increased 
debt to Brooklyn. This increase shows a little more than 
usual on account of including the amount of fares of 
Brother and Sister Henninges back to Buffalo. We should 
have liked to see Australasia somewhat more, if not entirely, 
self-supporting, and possibly many of the friends 
have not realized their privilege of co-operation in this 
way. 

There remains little of Australasia that has not been 
colporteured, only a few isolated places; but we trust 
that a second going over the territory will prove even 
better in results as to the finding of "wheat," and just 
as easy for the Colporteurs to make their way. We are 
glad that the Lord has put it in the hearts of our Brother 
and Sister Richardson to stay in these parts notwithstanding 
that it has meant so much of self-sacrifice for them 
to do so; and we hope that others may come forward in 
this the eleventh hour to enter the joys of the Harvest 
work. We have now five other laborers in this privileged 
service, Brother and Sister Thompson having left 

R4564 : page 68 

for home by way of Ceylon, India and England. 

The Volunteer work shows a bit less output than 
previously; but the outlook for the ensuing year is better, 
and able and willing ones are now getting systematically 
to work. One dear elderly Brother comes in regularly for 
his weekly supply, his face always beaming with joy at 
the privileges which he has of being able to put out 



1,000 to 1,200 PEOPLES PULPITS per week. Throughout 
Australasia the work goes forward and new interest continually 
comes to light of some who are rejoicing in the 
very truths from which others have turned aside. It is 
as though those who have become upset over the Vow 
and become blinded as regards the Covenants and the 
Church's high calling have made room for others to "take 
their crowns." The great lesson appears to be "Take 
heed"— "Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest 
he fall." 

Of course, as was anticipated, Bro. H. carried the 
bulk of the Melbourne class with him. He had such a 
hold upon them that there was small opportunity for assisting 
them to the truth on the points at issue. He also did 
what he could to prevent their reading the TOWERS, so 
that some TOWERS received from America were simply readdressed 
to this office unopened (only two or three). 
Some whom I had not seen for two years and had left 
at that time in good fellowship— nothing having passed 
between us in the meantime— wanted to pass us on the 
street as though we were poison. 

We have tried to take advantage of any opportunity 
that any would give us of helping them, and the Lord 
has been pleased to bless our efforts in this way so that 
some have been regained. When we started here there were 
about twelve with us; now we have usually about twenty-five 
at our Sunday evening meeting— but probably not 
more than twenty are thoroughly established in the Truth. 
Bro. H., I think, still holds about eighty or so, but 
many of them are not readers to any extent and have 
been drawn to his meetings rather by his "eloquence" 
than by the Truth. Some of them do not even acknowledge 
the "parousia," and one who happened to come in 
yesterday had still the thought that man has an immortal 
soul. I do not think that Bro. H. is making any progress, 
as I have not heard of any that he has gained, while we 
can count a few, say about ten, around Melbourne, besides 
more in other parts. Though our numbers remain low, it 
is not because there have not been additions, but on account 
of so many going out of the city, either to go into 
the Colporteur work or for private reasons. All the same, 
we are not discouraged and do not want to accomplish 
more than the Lord is willing for us to do; only we do not 
wish to leave a stone unturned to the end that we may 
gather every grain of "wheat" in the vicinity. 

We are contemplating more Pilgrim work, but of 
course the distances are great and the little companies are 
far between. Brother Nicholson has just returned from a 
trip to South Australia, where he enjoyed the privilege of 
blessed meetings with the friends in Adelaide and other 
points. Brother Nelson is making preparations for a trip 
to Tasmania and New Zealand, coming around by New 
South Wales. 

We would think it good for you to draw the attention 
of the Australian friends to this part of the work, especially 
if you think one or the other of us should be out 



most of the time. The friends here have not responded 
to the invitation in the May TOWER regarding Pilgrim 
trips, thinking, we suppose, that the matter referred 
to America only. 
Yours in the privileged service of our Redeemer, 

R. E. B. NICHOLSON and EDWARD NELSON. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Publications circulated:— 
Copies of STUDIES 11,356 

" " Vol. I in WATCH TOWER form 970 

" "Booklets 1,251 

R4564 : page 69 

Copies of Free Tracts and WATCH TOWERS 90,602 

These represent Tract Pages 1,906,096 

Letters and Cards received 1,696 

" despatched 2,970 

TRACT FUND EXPENDITURE 

L. s. d. 

Deficit from 1908 750 12 7 

Tracts, postage, freight in and out, rent, 
gas, etc., Pilgrim work, meetings and 
other expenses, etc 310 12 8 

Ll,061 5 3 
Subscriptions to THE WATCH TOWER and 
contributions L91 7 8 

Deficit L969 17 7 

REPORT OF SWEDISH BRANCH 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

By the Lord's grace and favor we have again passed 
another year in his blessed communion and service, and it 
is once more my much appreciated privilege to send you 
an annual report from this part of the field. 

As we expected at the beginning of the past year we 
have, during the same, seen greater victories for the 
Truth than in any other twelve-months period up to the 
present, and the prospects just now are more encouraging 
than ever, a fact that seems to indicate that this is the 
Lord's time to gather the last of his jewels, and, by his 
own methods, to finish their preparation for the coming 
"Glory, Honor and Immortality." We have also had the 
most abundant proofs that even the multitude begin to 
listen with joy to the "good tidings" and wish to hear 
of God's true character and plan. The doors of opportunity 
are open wider than at any time before and inspire 
us to pray the Lord of the Harvest to send more 
able and willing laborers to this end of the large field. 



In spite of the bad economic circumstances which the 
Swedish people, and many of the Truth friends also, have 
been in for the last four months, because of the great 
conflicts here between employees and employers, we are 
able to report a considerable increase in the circulation of 
DAWN-STUDIES as well as in other directions. We have 
sold over 2,000 more books and nearly 5,000 more booklets, 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS, etc., than last year. About 
ten regular Colporteurs have been at work during the 
year; they are all very thankful to the Lord for the 
privilege of spreading his message abroad. Of late six 
or seven new ones have come into the work— one of these 
is a dear Brother in Finland who, no doubt, is a chosen 
instrument in the Lord's hand to serve his people in that 
country. This Brother came in contact with the Truth 
only five months ago, but his love for the Lord and his 
zeal for Present Truth are very great. A few days ago 
he visited Orebro in order to symbolize his consecration 
and to confer with us about the work and prospect for the 
Truth in his native country. Another Brother also in 
that land seems now to intend to sell his farm and go out 
as a Colporteur there. 

The number of subscribers to the Swedish WATCH 
TOWER has increased only by a little more than 200, but 
we have received many proofs, by letters, etc., that it 
is much appreciated and a great help to its readers in general. 
A good many new subscribers for next year are 
expected. We have also published a new edition of 10,000 
copies of "About Hell," an edition of 9,000 copies of 
"About Spiritism," an edition of 5,000 copies of a new 
hymn book containing 166 very good hymns for use at 
our meetings, and besides this eight different tracts, or 
parts of the Swedish PEOPLES PULPIT-about two millions 
altogether. 

Our efforts to have the tracts distributed with the 
newspapers as supplements have not led to any result, but 
still we have sent out nearly twice as much "Volunteer" 
matter as in the preceding year, and the friends in general 
seem more and more to appreciate the opportunities 
of service offered to them through the Society's generous 
arrangements in this matter. As an example I will 
mention how a Brother living in a little place at a distance 
from here has of late begun to systematically send out the 
tracts to all small villages and parts of the country where 
the Colporteurs and usual tract distributers have not 
been. He puts a four-fold tract into one of our envelopes, 
stamps it at his own expense, and sends it out 
according to the directory. Several orders for the first 
volume have already arrived at the office from remote 
places as a result of this Brother's work. 

The Pilgrim work has been greatly extended, as the 
following report will show. Five Swedish Brethren have 
taken part in this service during the year, and the Lord 
has richly blessed their efforts to edify the friends, 
and also the many meetings held for the public in nearly 
all parts of the country. One general convention has been 



held in Orebro, when the Truth friends in attendance, 
numbering about 350, had the privilege of partaking of 
the spiritual feast the Lord spread before us by you as his 
mouthpiece. We also held about ten local two-days' 
conventions at different places, all of which were blessed 
of the Lord to the encouraging of his people. 

The amount of the donations to the Tract Fund is not 
quite as high as last year's total, but still the sum is 
very good in view of the poverty of most of the friends 
in Sweden. And then we must consider that a large part 
of their savings has been used to rent halls for meeting, 
the advertising of public meetings, etc., which is not included 
in the report. 

Hearty expressions of love and thankfulness for the 
faithful service you, Brother Russell, as the Lord's special 
servant at the present time, have rendered to the 
blessing and help of his people even in these lands, have 
been made in numerous letters received here from different 
parts. It is but proper for me to convey all this love 
and thankfulness to you. Please find enclosed a further 
list of two hundred and two Swedish Brethren and Sisters 
who have voluntarily taken the "Vow" and ask us to send 
you notice of it. 

R4565 : page 69 

We start the New Year with brighter prospects before 
us than ever, and we pledge our faithful services to the 
Lord and to the Society and pray that we, by his grace, 
may remain steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the 
work of the Lord, even unto death. 

Yours in him, AUG. LUNDBORG. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Work accomplished through the Swedish Branch, from 
Dec. 1, 1908, until Dec. 1, 1909: 

Copies of DAWN-STUDIES circulated 7,261 

Various booklets, TABERNACLE SHADOWS, Spiritism, 

etc 11,211 

Number of subscribers to the Swedish WATCH 

TOWER 1,580 

Old sets Swedish TOWER, cloth-bound and 

unbound 427 

Bibles sold 110 

Volunteer Tracts and sample TOWERS 567,104 

Expressed in usual form of Tract pages 7,156,224 

Number of meetings held 788 

R4565 : page 70 

Number of miles traveled in preaching tours 31,141 

Letters and cards received 2,518 

Letters and cards sent out 1,988 

Parcels by mail and by railroad sent out from 



this office 14,251 

FINANCIAL SUMMARY 
Expenditures. 

Pilgrim, Convention and other 

meetings kr. 3,919.56 $1,045.22 

For translation, printing, paper, 

etc 12,111.32 3,229.69 

Freight and postage 1,681.17 448.31 

Office expenses, rent, light, heat, 

etc 2,983.52 795.60 

Total kr. 20,695.57 $5,518.82 

Receipts. 

Voluntary donations to the Tract 

Fund kr. 4,407.17 $1,175.24 

Swedish TOWER subscriptions 1,919.77 511.94 

Books sold, etc 8,179.31 2,181.15 

Total kr. 14,506.25 $3,868.33 

Deficit, 1909 kr. 6,189.32 $1,650.49 

REPORT OF FRENCH AND ITALIAN WORK 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Enclosed you will find my account for the year 1909. 
I received your kind letter of the 29th of October and 
shall follow your instructions regarding the publishing 
of the French tracts in new form, having them to appear 
henceforth as PEOPLES PULPIT. 

Doubtless by this time you have heard of the sifting 
work which is in progress in this country, as well as in 
the United States. A special meeting was held by the 
friends at Berne on the 7th of November. Here matters 
were discussed with considerable animation and some 
were to some extent in opposition to the harvest work 
and some were more clearly illuminated respecting 
doctrinal points. I am sorry to say that most of the 
Thun and Berne classes prefer to go their own way. I am 
sorry, too, to have to advise that the "Aussicht" has taken 
a stand on the wrong side of the controversy. 

We see that we are drawing near to the end. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, King and Master, 
A. WEBER. 

FINANCIAL SUMMARY 
Receipts. 

Received from sale of French and English 
DAWNS 157 frs. 

Received as subscriptions for English and 
French TOWERS 603 " 

Voluntary donations 610 " 



Draft from Brooklyn, April 7 1,200 " 

October 15 596 " 

Total 3,166 frs. 

Disbursements. 

For French TOWERS (2,000 monthly) 1,150 frs. 

110,000 Volunteer tracts 565 " 

Postage and customs 540 " 

90,000 Italian free tracts 342 " 

Rent, car fare, post cards, etc 889 " 

Total 3,486 frs. 

Deficit 320 frs. 

REPORT OF GERMAN BRANCH 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

With gratitude toward God and our dear Redeemer 
we look back upon another year of service in his cause. 
We feel that a good deal has been accomplished, though 
we could wish the results were greater. But we comfort 
ourselves with the Apostle's exhortation, "Inasmuch as 
ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord." We 
certainly feel drawn closer to him for having been engaged 
in his service, and we know of a good many 
others who have been richly blessed. 

The German WATCH TOWER list now exceeds 3,000 
subscribers, and certainly quite a number more readers. 
We are encouraged by this increase of interest. Many 
of the dear friends have patiently co-labored variously 
in the "preaching" of the glorious Gospel of Christ and 
the Kingdom. In the distribution of tracts mentioned 
below they have had a large share, likewise in getting 
their friends and neighbors to read the STUDIES and 
booklets. Thus, with the few Colporteurs, who are able 
to remain in the field, we can rejoice in noting the totals of 

LITERATURE DISTRIBUTED, SOLD AND FREE 

Vol. I, STUDIES 5,450 

Vol. II-VI STUDIES 2,168 

Vol. I, TOWER form 1,350 

Vol. I Hollandish 349 

Total 9,317 

Booklets 9,274 

Copies of monthly German TOWER 38,214 

Sample copies 91,700 

Ditto stated in tract pages 4,585,000 

4,800,000 tracts-pages 48,000,000 

Total free literature in tract pages 52,585,000 

Letters and cards received 5,131 



Answers sent out 2,265 

Of the total of $10,000 expended for printing and circulating 
the above mentioned tracts, and for all other 
expenses and Pilgrim work, the contributions of Germany 
and Austria amount to $2,340. 

The new year promises to be still more favorable. We 
anticipate that with PEOPLES PULPIT in German we shall 
hear of much new interest. The "people" are being 
waked up ! We are sure that these plain, simple truths 
concerning the good tidings and the Kingdom will convince 
many. Of course, we find that our opponents are 
angered. Some of them, we know, must admit that our 
presentations are reasonable and Scriptural, but they fear 
to "let the people know." Others are proclaiming the setting 
up of the Kingdom in 1915 without giving the source 
of their information or the proofs. However, we think 
it is a good sign that the Truth is making some impressions. 

Just a word about the siftings of this year. Some, indeed, 
have gone out from amongst us here in Germany, 
too, and they are using the very same arguments as are 
in English— they are busy translating. So we see that the 
Adversary seems to have great liberties just now. Indeed, 
we see signs of still greater activities on his part. 
But we know that the Lord is on our part, and that the 
Truth will fully sanctify (separate to himself) those who 
appreciate the "mystery" of the Kingdom, of the Church, 
and who are giving all diligence in Faith and Patience 
and Love. The Vow assists us in watching and praying. 

I am glad to say that quite a number of the German 
friends have reported that they took the Vow, and to me 

R4565 : page 71 

it is a source of strength, not only to be amongst those 
who have thus formed a special prayer circle, but to know 
that on such a basis of faith and prayer we cannot be 
deceived so far as the teaching of the Word is concerned. 
We are determined by his grace to "stand fast in the liberty 
wherewith Christ has made us free" and not to be 
entangled again in any yoke of bondage of error and 
schism and confusion— Babylon. 

Praying the Lord's blessing upon you and your co-laborers 
everywhere, all the true Israel of God, I remain 
with love from us all, 

Your brother in Christ our Lord, O. A. KOETITZ. 

FINANCIAL REPORT 
Expenditures. 

For DAWNS and Booklets, German TOWER, 

Mdse., etc Mks. 8,203.50 

For Pilgrim work " 3,823.90 

For tracts " 29,463.21 

Total Mks. 41,490.61 



Receipts. 

German contributions Mks. 9,841.89 

From Brooklyn ($7,674.81) " 31,648.72 

REPORT OF WORK IN DENMARK 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is due to the fact that the Lord graciously heard our 
prayers, and sent out some efficient laborers in the Colporteur 
field, that we are now able to send a report from this 
country of some little work done in the past year in the 
way of spreading the good tidings concerning the Kingdom. 

R4566 : page 71 

We trust that at the same time a work of grace has 
been going on in the hearts. 
Yours in the Master's service, CARL LUTTICHAU. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Output of DAWN-STUDIES at cost price 5,501 

Output of various booklets at cost price 2,295 



Total 7,796 

Tracts, free, about 53,892 

Letters and cards received 1,057 

Letters and cards sent out 737 

Parcels sent out 974 

REPORT OF JAMAICAN BRANCH 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The blessing of the Lord which maketh rich continues 
to flow upon us in Jamaica. The year which has 
just closed has brought us more of his favors than previous 
ones, as we should have expected; but these have come 
to us in ways a little different from those of any other 
year when viewed as a whole. It has been peculiarly a 
year of difficulties and drawbacks and disappointments 
and hardness, changing the course of many of our best 
endeavors. 

The Colporteurs have come in for the largest share of 
these trials, which have tested their faith and patience to 
the limit. Although that part of the service began under 
very auspicious circumstances, it was not long before the 
Lord of the Harvest began to show them how great things 
they must suffer for his name. Those who engaged as 
Regulars were only two less than last year, but some of 
these had to leave the field altogether and were nigh unto 
death because of their zeal for the work; others, through 
unavoidable causes, could not return as they expected; 
and only a few, perhaps not more than a half dozen, were 



able to continue for any considerable length of time. 

One other thing which contributed much to the difficulty 
was the strenuous opposition from the shepherds 
"out of the way." As careful as some were to avoid 
them, they often returned to the field with scores of volumes 
for delivery and found it impossible to deliver them 
because some shepherd had learned of it and poisoned the 
minds of all who had given orders. The work is done 
in the country parts, where one person's business is 
everybody's business. 

The Pilgrim Service surpassed all others in the amount 
of work done, not because we tried to make it so, but because 
the circumstances would not have it otherwise. 
And we have found in our little territory that when one 
or two branches of the service expand unusually, there 
is a corresponding contraction in some of the others, 
which apparently cannot be avoided. 

If this is the Lord's method, we accept it as ours and 
will continue to thank him for the least privilege of serving 
him and his dear people. 

We are pleased at the great number of those whom 
outside circumstances, as well as the life of the Truth 
people, have made ready to investigate "this way." Some 
have received a genuine and lasting impression; but alas! 
others have gone out from us because they ceased to be 
of us. 

Costa Rica and Barbados have received much spiritual 
profit through the ministrations of the two Pilgrim 
Brethren sent to them; and we hope that we shall soon 
be able to find servants among them, qualified to dispense 
the Truth to the edification of those classes and relieve 
those Pilgrims for service elsewhere. 

The spiritual condition of the Brethren everywhere is 
good, even while the whip of small cords in the hand of 
the Chief Reaper is doing its work of manifesting the true 
and the false. 

The "Covenants" and the "Vow" have not been stumbling-blocks 
to us because we are not sufficiently educated 
for that, but the Lord is using other means to test our 
loyalty to him. He has shown us some favors recently, 
which make us confident that the coming year will bring 
us greater opportunities than ever for expanding all 
branches of the work, and rendering more efficient 
service. 

We remember you daily in our prayers, and thank you 
for your assurances in word and deed that you have a 
genuine interest in our welfare. 

Your fellow-servant, J. A. BROWNE. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Number of Pilgrims 11 

Number of Pilgrim visits 81 

Public meetings held 14 

Semi-private meetings held 850 

Number of miles traveled 2,490 



Number of Colporteurs 24 

Total output of DAWNS 3,650 

Total output of booklets 1,065 

Total number of tracts distributed 17,000 

Letters and cards received 1,286 

Letters and cards sent out 950 

FINANCIAL STATEMENT 

L s. d. 

Pilgrim service 234 17 6-1/2 

Freight, postage, etc 19 3 8 

Current expense, sundries, etc 136 16 7-1/2 



Total expense L390 17 10 

Voluntary contributions L131 14 11 



Deficit for 1909, supplied from Brooklyn L259 2 1 1 



R4566 : page 72 

VOLUNTEER WORK EXTRAORDINARY 

The four Christian Mass-Meetings recently held in the 
Brooklyn Academy of Music for the consideration of 
what the leading Christian denominations would be 
obliged to surrender in favor of Church Federation, required 
widespread advertising. Newspapers and billboards 
and window-cards were extensively used; but the 
Volunteer work was specially effective. It was the most 
systematic and successful of which we have knowledge. 
We must describe it for the encouragement of Volunteers 
everywhere: 

Think of it-more than 300,000 copies of PEOPLES 
PULPIT were distributed carefully in one week, and the 
second week brought the total up to 530,000! These contained 
two sermons each, besides the back-page advertisement 
of the Mass-Meetings. Thus more than a million 
sermons were put into the hands of intelligent people, 
many of whom do not usually attend Church services. 
And if each paper reached five persons (which is the 
usual newspaper claim), then five million sermons were 
delivered in two weeks by the Brooklyn and vicinity 
Tabernacle Congregation. Thank God for such privileges ! 

(1) The city was districted and each of the congregations 
which could do so served its own district. 

(2) Managers of factories were approached in a 
pleasant and dignified manner by specially selected Sisters. 
They were presented with P.P. and asked if the 
employees might be served at time of dismission, and how 
many, at what hour, and the number of exits. Later, these 
were served by Volunteers supplied with P.P. in plenty. 

(3) The managers of large department stores were 
similarly approached re employees. These gladly attended 



to the distribution themselves, with thanks! 

(4) Large restaurants and hotels also accepted supplies 
and gave them to their patrons. 

(5) Of course, the house-to-house distribution was 
the great work, and it included the serving of the large 
office buildings. This was a delicate matter, as ordinary 
circularizing is not allowed. But our P.P. are not circulars. 
Some of the brightest of the Sisters were assigned 

this work, and they did it well. 

(6) It is needless to say that the Colporteurs of 
Brooklyn and vicinity were amongst the most active of 
the Volunteers. 

(7) What has been done can be done again— not 

only here, but in every city and village. Surely the Volunteers 
get the very cream of the blessing. 

(8) How many can afford to miss so glorious an 
opportunity for serving the Lord, the Truth and the 
Brethren? 

(9) Elect your Volunteer Captains and Lieutenants 

at once and advise us how many copies of this year's Volunteer 
papers (PEOPLES PULPIT) you can and will use- 
wasting none. Give full shipping directions. We supply 
PEOPLES PULPIT free of charge— prepaying freight. Respond 
quickly that we may know how many millions to 
print. 



R4566 : page 72 

WORTHY AND UNWORTHY AMBITION 

-MATTHEW 6:19-34.~FEBRUARY 13.- 

Golden Text:— "Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and 
his righteousness and all these things shall be added 
unto you." 

THE Great Teacher taught no extravagance. 
He was energetic in the Father's business 
and taught his followers to be "not slothful 
in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the 
Lord." Nevertheless his teaching in this 
lesson is that our energies are not to take 
the selfish form of laying up earthly treasures: 
We are to lay up heavenly treasures 
instead. Notwithstanding the reference to 

R4567 : page 72 

moth and rust and thieves despoiling earthly 
treasures, we understand his teaching rather on a higher 
plane, though the principle is a broad one. All will admit 
that it would be folly to lay up clothing or food far in advance 
of need, except under very peculiar circumstances. 
But gold might be treasured, or money in the bank, or 



bonds, or stocks, or farm added to farm, and house to 
house, and the same principle would be involved. 

Although no moth could touch the bank account, nor 
rust injure the gold, and no thieves could steal the title 
to the property, the principle is the same. Treasures of 
every kind may lose their value— do lose their value to 
us, when we die, if not before. Death, corruption, touches 
everything earthly under present conditions, no matter 
how careful or thoughtful the provision. "Naked came 
we into the world, and naked must we leave it." (Job. 1:21.) 
Intelligent people are generally agreed that God 
has provided a future life beyond the tomb, attainable 
in the resurrection morning. And the Scriptures teach 
that the degree of our blessing then will stand related 
to our use of the present life. It is this point that the 
Great Teacher emphasized in the study of today. All 
intelligent minds assent to the reasonableness of this. 

Let us not take the extreme view entertained by some; 
let us not suppose that the Master taught that people 
might not make reasonable provision for their own comfort, 
and that they might not be dependent upon charity 
in old age. Let us not suppose that he meant that parents 
should be neglectful of their duties toward dependent 
members of their family. The Bible distinctly teaches 
that "he who provides not for his own is worse than an 
unbeliever." The proper thought, then is that it is right 
to economize and, as St. Paul expresses it, "to lay by in 
store" for our own future needs or that we may have 
to lend to others, in need. God's people are to be frugal, 
to avoid debts, to be "forehanded," and with some reserve 
of capital. 

But earthly things are not to be the treasures of their 
souls, but merely their servants, conveniences— always 
ready for use, for every emergency, freely, whole-heartedly. 
He who follows this course will rarely have large 
earthly wealth. Only by making wealth a treasure and 
setting upon it inordinate desire can one become miserly 
or very rich. Setting the affections on things above 
would signify so loose a handling of worldly riches as 
would hinder the accumulation or preservation of great 
wealth. 

The Master's word is, that whoever sets his affections 
upon earthly treasures will become sordid, selfish, earthly; 
while he who sets his affections upon the things above 
will become correspondingly heavenly, spiritual, blessed, 
generous. We have two eyes and if they be not properly 
adjusted with relationship to each other our vision of 
things will be distorted. Hence we seek to correct such 
a difficulty, that we may get the true view of matters. So 
it is with the eye of our understanding. It has both a 
present and a future outlook, an earthly and a heavenly 
view. It is important that we get these rightly adjusted, 
so that we may see matters in their true light— see the 
great value of the future life in comparison with the present 
one, and correspondingly be guided to the setting of 



R4567 : page 73 

our heart affections there, and in general balancing all 
the interests of life wisely. 

As in the natural body the eyes may become darkened 
or blinded, so it is with our eyes of understanding. And 
if this blindness come upon us after we have once seen 
and enjoyed the Divine promise, our case would be all the 
more pitiable. How great that darkness would be! 

Still another lesson there is for us along the same 
line. The serving of mammon would bless us in the present 
life, but be injurious to our future interests. But the 
service of God would prepare us for future influence. 
And although obedience to God may cost us the loss of 
the pleasures of sin and the loss of some legitimate worldly 
blessing in the present time, nevertheless there is a blessing 
even now to those who are faithful servants of God 
and righteousness. And additionally there is the glorious 
prospect of the future. It is necessary, however, for us 
to choose between the two masters. We cannot serve 
both. We cannot get the rewards of both. As Joshua 
did, so let us determine, "As for me and my house, we 
will serve the Lord." 

The Master urges us to commit all of our interests to 
God and to wholly resolve to be obedient to him, to the 
extent of our ability, and then to realize the Divine care 
which is over all creation to be specially over us, because 
of having come into special relationship to him, in accordance 
with his promises. Such need have no anxiety with 
respect to their earthly affairs, but may trust all their interests 
to their Heavenly Father. Our eternal life is 
worth more than the food and raiment of the present life. 
If wise we will seek the future life at any cost, at any 
sacrifice of the present one. 

As for the ability of our Heavenly Father to care for 
our interests, we should consider the manifestations in 
nature of his power and wisdom and grace, in his provision 
for the fowl of the air and for the lily of the field. 
We should realize that he has equal power to provide for 
our best interests; thus faith should firmly trust him, 
come what may. Suppose we were of small stature, and 
inclined to worry over the matter of increasing our 
height? Then let us realize our own littleness and look 
rather to the Lord for the things respecting the present 
as well as the future life. Let us be diligent in his service, 
leaving all of our present experiences as well as our 
future rewards to his wisdom, love and power. 

Should we suppose that God, who cares for the lilies 
and the birds, would not much more care for us after we 
had become his children through faith in Christ and 
through the consecration of our lives? Let us then cast 
off all anxious care respecting food and raiment and all 
matters pertaining to these which the world in general are 
worried about. To be without worry would not mean to be 
without proper concern and due diligence to find work 
and to do it. But our Father knows better than we 



the things that we really need, and faith is not merely to 
trust him, but to accept what he gives as being for our 
best interests. 

Our chief concern as followers of Christ is to seek 
to attain a share in God's Kingdom with our dear Redeemer 
—a share in the Millennial Kingdom as the Bride 
of Christ, who shall sit with him in his glorious Throne 
for the blessing and uplifting of the world of mankind. 
We have our Master's assurance for it that whoever 
pursues this course will do wisely and that God will look 
out for his earthly interests, for his highest welfare. 
So doing our lives will be crowned with peace and joy 
and rest in the Lord, which in his Word he has promised 
those who trust him. 



R4567 : page 73 

THE GOLDEN RULE 

--MATTHEW 7:1-12.-FEBRUARY 20.- 

Golden Text:— "Therefore, all things whatsoever ye 
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, 
for this is the Law and the Prophets." 

"NEVER man spake like this man." Perhaps 

the nearest teaching to this Golden Rule 

was the maxim attributed to Confucius, 

"Do not do to others what you would not 

have them do to you." This latter is a 

grand teaching, but it is far inferior to the 

former, which is sublime. Christians are 

not to be negative, but positive. They are 

not merely to follow the standards of 

others, but to set standards; they are to 

raise up the Lord's standard before the people. It is not 

for the followers of Jesus to say, "We will endeavor to 

keep within the bonds of human law," but rather, "We will 

live according to the Divine Law, so far as possible. 

We will esteem that human law represents the standard 

of the majority of fallen men and not the Divine 

standard." 

Our Savior tells us that we will be tested along the 
line of our love for God and for our neighbor. God 
through the merit of Christ's sacrifice has provided 
forgiveness for our past sins, and now purposes that as 
his children we shall be taught the lesson of mercy, kindness, 
forgiveness toward others. Hence he tells us that 
only in proportion as we exercise benevolence towards 
others need we expect his benevolence in respect to our 
weaknesses and shortcomings. The principle of justice 
is involved in this. Whoever is kind and forgiving 
towards others demonstrates the possession of love in a 
ruling, dominating degree. And "Love is the fulfilling of 



the Law." Hence these may be treated as though they 
were perfect, because their conduct towards others gives 
evidence that their hearts are right— ruled by love; and 
that the imperfections which cause their trespasses are 
merely weaknesses of the flesh, which may be forgiven, 
because not of the heart. 

From this viewpoint how should Christians judge one 
another as respects motive, intention, etc.? Surely most 
leniently! How should they measure one another's endeavors? 
Surely most generously! How should they 
look upon the blemish in a brother? Would not their 
sympathy cause his defects to seem the smaller in their 
estimation? And would not their own imperfections 
show the more largely to themselves? Surely such would 
be more concerned in removing the beam from their own 
eyes than in assisting the brother to free himself of the 
mote or lesser blemish troubling him. Hence we may suppose 
that the continual fault-finder, who sees great blemishes 
in others and who sees none in himself, is blind to his 
own defects or hypocritical. This is the Master's word. 

We are, nevertheless, to discriminate. Not all are 
brethren in Christ, begotten of the holy Spirit. Of the 
remainder some are more, and some less, brutish. Hence 
in our dealings with various classes of people (v. 6), 
we should avoid presenting the holiest and most precious 
things of our religion to those who are in no condition 
to appreciate or understand them. They would doubtless 

R4568 : page 74 

resent them and do us injury. On the contrary, we 
are to be wise as serpents in the presentation of the 
Truth and harmless as doves. We are to make known 
the riches of God's grace to those who have the hearing 
ear. 

All the consecrated followers of Jesus are to be free 
to come in his name to the Throne of grace to make request 
for the things which they need— the things promised 
in the Word of God to the faithful. We are to 
seek for them and we shall find them. Knocking, we 
shall have Divine blessings unlocked before us. 

Consider how this principle prevails, even amongst 
fallen humanity. Any father asked for a fish, would he 
give instead a serpent? If asked for bread, would he 
give a stone? Surely not! And if so, what shall we say 
in respect to our Heavenly Father? Would he not be all 
the more willing to give to his children who ask him? 
He has indeed given us many blessings without the asking, 
but some of the chiefest of his favors he withholds 
from us until we make requests— because thus he would 
draw us nearer to himself and prepare us the more for 
the blessings he is willing to bestow. 

Elsewhere the Master tells us that the good thing 
which the Father is specially pleased to bestow is his holy 
Spirit. This is the all-important thing, for only as we 
become possessors thereof, only as we attain to the mind, 



the disposition of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
shall we be fit for a place in the glorious Millennial Kingdom 
to which we have been invited. His holy Spirit is 
manifested in us by meekness, gentleness, patience, long 
suffering, brotherly kindness— love. 

The Golden Text of our study is (v. 12), "All things, 
therefore, whatsoever ye would that men should do unto 
you, even so do ye also unto them; for this is the Law 
and the prophets." The whole demand of the Law of God 
is briefly summed up in this Golden Rule. Yet the Christian 
has an additional requirement— the Lord's "New 
Commandment." To attain join t-heirship with the Redeemer 
in his Kingdom we must "love one another" as 
our Redeemer loved us— to the degree of self-sacrifice, 
even unto death. "We ought also to lay down our lives 
for the brethren."— I John 3:16. 

We would be glad, indeed, if all of our readers would 
resolve to follow the Golden Rule in all of life's affairs; 
but we could not hope to have them do so, because we cannot 
hope that they are all fully consecrated to God. 
Nothing short of full devotion to the Lord and instructions 
in the School of Christ will enable a man or a woman 
to live consistently along the lines of this Golden Rule. 
Only by the assisting grace of the Great Teacher can 
this rule obtain, even in the consecrated heart. We urge, 
therefore, that the consecrated shall follow this rule, and 
the "New Commandment," and that others should make 
consecration. 



R4568 : page 74 

TRUE DISCIPLESHIP DEFINED 

-MATTHEW 7:13-29.~FEBRUARY 27.- 

Golden Text:— "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, 
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he 
that doeth the will of my Father 
which is in heaven."— V. 21. 

THE ADVANCE of the world in civilization, 
coupled with a general lowering of Christian 
standards in neglect of the Bible, has 
drawn the civilized world and the nominal 
Church very close together. Never more 
necessary than now are the Master's 
words of this Bible Study, "Enter ye in by 
the narrow gate; for wide is the gate and 
broad is the way that leadeth to destruction 
and many there be that enter thereby; for 
narrow is the gate and straitened the way that leads 
unto life and few there be that find it." 

The teaching of the dark ages handed down to us 
was that the many walking on the broad road are being 



swept by millions into eternal torture. The general revulsion 
from this interpretation of the Bible has shaken 
confidence in the Bible itself and turned many completely 
away from it to a mild form of Universalism— to the hope 
that nearly everybody at death goes immediately to glory, 
regardless of whether he walks in the narrow way of 
discipleship or in the broad, easy way of worldliness. In 
every sense of the word the effect of this misinterpretation 
has been injurious. 

Now we perceive that the Master said not that the 
broad, easy road leads to eternal torture, but to destruction 
—death. Now we see that father Adam by disobedience 
was cut off from fellowship with his Creator 
under death sentence and that his children were all born 
in a sinful and alienated condition and that their perverted 
appetites and the influences bearing upon them 
constitute a broad road of self-gratification down which 
they are speeding to the tomb. 

Our Lord came as the world's Redeemer, but before 
dealing with the race as a whole he selects the Church 
class— disciples. The love and loyalty of these is tested 
by their call to walk contrary to the general tendencies of 
the world— upward along the narrow way, at the end of 
which they are promised eternal life— glory, honor, and 
immortality and association with the Redeemer in his 
great work of the Millennial Kingdom. Then he will 
deal with humanity now going down on the broad road to 
death— recovering them and giving them glorious opportunities 
secured by his sacrifice. 

The present call to discipleship is through the narrow 
gate of full consecration, even unto death, in the footsteps 
of the Master, and few there be who find and willingly 
walk this way. Thank God that the masses of 
humanity on the broad road were redeemed and will yet 
be blessed, though they will miss the great "prize" now 
offered to the "elect," who walk the narrow way. Eventually 
only the wilfully wicked will be destroyed in the 
Second Death. 

The Lord's disciples are to beware of false teachers 
who pretend to be shepherds and wear the cloth, but 
really they are unlike the Great Shepherd. They are self-seekers, 
ravenous, wolfish. They do not lay down their 
lives for the sheep, but feed upon the sheep. 

It is forbidden us to judge the heart. "Judge not, that 
ye be not judged." (Matt. 7:1.) The Master here illustrates 
that we shall judge those professing to be his 
disciples by the general fruits of their lives. Are they 
sharp, thorny, injurious, poisonous, in their influence 
upon others, or are they helpful, strengthening, uplifting? 
As a tree may be known and graded by its fruitage, so 
also may a man be known— and especially such as profess 
discipleship, such as profess to be followers of Christ and 
taught of him. 

Nor will it do to make professions and offer prayers, 
saying, "Lord, Lord." Not all such will enter the Kingdom 
and become joint-heirs with Christ. Only such will 



be acceptable as will do the will of the Father. Not, 
however, that any can live up to the height of the Divine 

R4568 : page 75 

standard in every word and act. But the heart, the will, 
must be right, sincere, true, pure, loyal to God and to 
the principles of his Government. And this being the 
case every shortcoming will be a cause of regret and the 
whole life will gradually become changed, "transformed." 

When at the close of this age the Heavenly King 
shall return, before establishing his Millennial Kingdom 
to deal with the world, he will reckon with his Church 
that he may first reward the faithful with a share in his 
Kingdom. Then, he declares, it will be seen that not a 
few, but many who prophesied or taught in his name and 
did many wonderful works, and even cast out devils, 
will be found unworthy of the Kingdom, because of not 
having developed characters in harmony with the 
Father's Law— the Golden Rule. The King will say to 
such, I do not recognize you and cannot receive you as 
my Elect Bride. Your work on the whole is unacceptable, 
iniquitous, out of harmony with the principles of my 
teaching. Such, instead of entering the glories of the 
Kingdom, will be obliged to pass through tribulations 
with the world, losing their share of the great prize of 
this Gospel Age. 

Whoever is now blessed with the hearing ear, whoever 
now hears the call of discipleship, whoever now accepts 
the call and becomes by consecration a follower of 
Christ, has the opportunity of erecting a faith structure 
which will stand all the storms of life, because built upon 
the Rock. Christ is this Rock of Ages. He is not only 
the great Redeemer, but to those now called, he is the 
great Exemplar, in whose footsteps all shall follow who 
desire to become joint-heirs with him in his Heavenly 
Kingdom. Those who essay to become his disciples and 
who, nevertheless, neglect a careful following of his instructions 
are building false hopes, building upon a 
foundation which will not stand the storms and trials of 
life, which are specially permitted as tests of character 
upon those favored with the call of this Gospel Age. 

The Apostle, describing the testing of the Church 
and the proving of our discipleship, likens the testing to 
a fire, saying (not of the world, but of the Church), 
"Every man's work shall be made manifest; for the day 

R4569 : page 75 

shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and 
the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. 
If any man's work abide which he hath built thereupon, 
he shall receive a reward. If any man's work shall be 
burned, he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be 
saved; yet so as by fire." (I Cor. 3:13-15.) The Apostle 
here describes the testings of those who build upon the 



Rock. Those who build upon the sand will suffer the loss 
of everything and at the beginning of the Millennium will 
be no better off than the world in general. 



R4569 : page 75 

MID-WINTER CONVENTIONS 

OUR trial of Mid-Winter Conventions has 
proven only partly satisfactory. In several 
instances the cold and storms hindered large 
audiences, and on two or three occasions 
delayed our arrival on schedule time. The 
lesson is that hereafter we should not tempt 
Providence, but hold all Southern conventions 
in the winter and Northern conventions 
in the summer. 

However, we are not complaining. On 
the contrary, no doubt the disappointments served to test 
our faith in the Lord's oversight of his work, and our 
submission to his providences. We are to remember how 
our Lord refused to leap from the pinnacle of the Temple, 
because such faith would be tempting Providence. 

The friends everywhere got a reward for their labors 
of love in preparing for the meetings, even when the 
expected results were not attained— so did the speaker. 

The Pittsburg Convention was a success in every 
way. The forenoon session was devoted to the election 
of servants for the Church for 1910; the Editor had been 
re-elected pastor for 1910 on the previous Sunday. The 
Testimony Meeting which followed the election was a 
most interesting one. 

The afternoon session for the public was in the Allegheny 
Opera House, where about 1,000 gave close attention 
—an excellent audience for the cold and unfavorable 
weather and the slippery condition of the streets. 

In the evening Bible House Chapel was crowded beyond 
its capacity. Following a discourse we shook hands 
with the company and took train for Elgin, Ills. 

At Chicago, we were joined by about 100 in two 
special cars. Notwithstanding the cold weather we had 
refreshing there, as also at Rockford and Milwaukee. 

At Indianapolis a Three-Day Convention was attended 
by about 400 from nearby points. Much as we should 
have enjoyed staying to its conclusion we could not, but 
after one day sped on to Columbus, O., and then to 
Brooklyn. At both of those places the results were most 
instructing and seemingly profitable. 

At Richmond, Va., the storm hindered our arrival in 
proper season, but did not hinder about 1,300 hearing a 
public address (by Brother Wright), nor hinder about 
300 of the friends hearing us at the evening session. 

Knoxville, Tenn., then Atlanta, Ga., then Birmingham, 
Ala., and Memphis, Tenn., had interesting meetings; the 



latter two lasted for three days each, being supplied by 
Pilgrims as announced. 

At Fort Smith, Ark., there was also a Three-Day 
Convention— remarkably well attended. Nowhere did the 
friends appear more zealous and enthusiastic. Before 6 
o'clock next morning about 65 were at the depot to bid 
us a final adieu. They sang for us, "God be with you." 
Our next stop was at St. Louis, Mo., where we addressed 
about 250 of the interested from 9 to 10.30 p.m. Quite 
a number accompanied us to the depot. 

The Sunday at Chicago was a grand one, which we 
and many will long remember. We arrived in season to 
give our testimony at the Testimony Meeting of the forenoon. 
The afternoon meeting at the great Auditorium 
was a success. The dear friends had spared neither time 
nor money nor labor to make it a success. About 3,500 
were present. We had excellent attention. Many prayed 
and all hoped that the results would be helpful to some 
and to the honor of our Lord. 

In the evening we had a heart-to-heart talk with the 
interested for nearly two hours more— on the Covenants, 
the Ransom, etc. After it we had a season of handshaking 
and good wishing for each other's future, as the 
dear friends, tired, but happy, went to their homes. The 
meeting, we learned, cost the friends over $800 and many 
days of hard labor in circulating PEOPLES PULPIT, ads., 
window cards, etc. 

At Bloomington, Ills., the meetings were not so large, 
but they were very good and we trust very helpful to 
the friends as well as to some of the public. 

The Dubuque appointment was delayed by the cold 
and storm; but nevertheless we had an hour for the 
interested and fully two hours for the public. The class 
here is small but very intelligent and earnest. We hope 

R4569 : page 76 

that others will be added ere long— "of such as are disposed 
for eternal life." 

The snowstorm delayed our train so that we missed 
our St. Paul-Minneapolis appointment; but the Lord provided 
a substitute in Brother George Draper, and the 
friends had a grand time. Spelling our disappointment 
with an h instead of a d we rejoiced to learn a lesson 
in patience and perseverance, and pressed onward. We 
have promised the dear Minneapolis friends a Sunday 
Convention, if possible, next time and as soon as possible. 

Winnipeg, Manitoba, our next appointment, was 
reached in good time. We were privileged to join in 
the morning Testimony Meeting, which we greatly enjoyed. 
The afternoon meeting for the interested was 
well attended and interesting. Here again we set forth 
and illustrated the various features of the philosophy of 
the Atonement. The evening meeting for the public was 
well attended. Manitoba Hall, said to hold 1,200, was 
crowded— some stood and many were unable to gain 



admittance. The interest was excellent to the close. We 
left for our train while the closing hymn was being sung. 

Hamilton, Ontario, our next appointment, was reached 
in good season. We enjoyed a Social Tea with the 
local class and then gave a public address in the 
Y.M.C.A. Hall to a very attentive audience. After a refreshing 
night's rest we proceeded to our appointment 
for Sunday, January 9, at Toronto, Canada, accompanied 
by about thirty of the friends. 

The Toronto meetings were fine in every sense of the 
word. They began on Saturday, Pilgrim Brother MacMillan 
having preceded, and continued over Monday, 
Pilgrim Brother Hersee serving then. The report is that 
the friends to the number of nearly three hundred gathered 
from all parts of Canada and had a delightful season 
of refreshing. The Sunday forenoon session was for 
the interested. We discussed the philosophy of the Atonement, 
apparently much to the satisfaction of the hearers. 

The afternoon session for the interested was held in 
the Royal Alexandra Theatre. Its capacity, 1,600, was 
overtaxed, hundreds being turned away disappointed. One 
gentleman almost had a row with the police. He had 
been reading the sermon and had come twelve miles from 
the country and wanted to have a chance to stand in the 
rear, where there were already enough for the safety 
rules. He was later quietly located at the rear of the 
stage. The large audience gave splendid attention and we 
hope some good was accomplished. 

We subjoin a letter for two reasons: (1) To show 
that there are evidently some true, ripe grains of wheat 
still in Babylon, and (2) to show that it requires more 
than one meeting and more than one tract to sufficiently 
arouse such to even write for further reading matter- 
so strong is the prejudice and so false the misrepresentation 
of the Truth. 
"DEAR SIR:- "TORONTO, Jan. 12, 1910. 

"It was my joy and privilege to listen to your lecture 
in the Royal Alexandra Theatre on Sunday last. According 
to your invitation I am writing for a copy of your 
printed address on "Hell," and trust same will come to 
hand in safety. 

"From a boy I have taken a heart-interest in Christianity, 
and am seeking day by day to make Christ king 
over my life. My soul seems, naturally, to respond to 
his claims, and, to sum the matter up briefly in Professor 
Drummond's words, I believe that 'To become like Christ 
is the only thing in the world worth craving for; the 
thing before which every ambition of man is folly and 
all lower achievement vain.' 

"And yet, Pastor Russell, there has been all the way 
through the bitter struggle with doubt; books like Paine's 
Age of Reason' having been largely the cause, perhaps. 
Being a profound lover of books, and with an earnest 
desire for truth, naturally, as a boy of eighteen or twenty, 
I came in touch with literature treating the Bible from 
countless viewpoints. And yet, perhaps, over and above 



all this, the Church's doctrine of Eternal Punishment has 
always been one of the main barriers to a whole-hearted 
acquiescence to the message of the New Testament. 

"Is it any wonder, then, think you, if I should appreciate 
beyond telling such an interpretation of the 
Christ message as you give? How it seems to lift the 
burden of gloom, and breathe new hope for the sin-maimed 
victims of heredity and environment, whom the 
Church of old would condemn to a hopeless and terrible 
eternity ! 

"The silence of the present-day Church on this subject 
goes to intimate that it is no longer in the thraldom 
of so terrible a doctrine. 

R4570 : page 76 

"However, Pastor Russell, there are quite a few passages 
in Holy Writ that are hard to understand in the 
light of this newer interpretation. I should be, indeed, 
grateful to you if you could let me have any pamphlets 
treating this subject efficiently; also advise as to any 
books I might procure that would help me to a better 
understanding of that Truth of which Christ is the unique 
centre. 

"I have desired for years past to enter the ministry, 
feeling that that is what I am, perhaps, best fitted for. So 
far— principally through lack of capital— I have not realized 
my desires. However, the way may yet be opened; 
and, if so, I would like to take out into a sin-darkened 
world the Christ evangel in all its completeness; hence 
the need for more light. 

"I may never meet you, Pastor Russell, but I am truly 
thankful for having heard you on two occasions in this 
city. I suppose it will take nothing less than an eternity 
to estimate the vital influence of such a life in the community. 

"Thanking you in anticipation of a reply, with booklets, 
believe me, Sincerely, ." 



R4570 : page 76 

THE NEW COVENANT HARMONY WITH GOD 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The secret of the Lord (the Divine Plan) is (already) 
with (understood by) them that fear (reverence) 
him, and (in addition to this favor) he will (future 
tense— in due time, through "that servant") show them 
his covenant (which, when understood, will order and 
classify all the features of that plan). 

It has been on my mind for some time to write to you 
in regard to the New Covenant, and having been requested 
by several brethren to do so, I gather that possibly 
it is the Lord's will. But first let me express my 
thankfulness to the Lord, and to you as his servant, for 



all the truth that is shining for us clearer every day, 
through THE WATCH TOWER articles. I have particular 
reference to the article in the Nov. 15 TOWER, under the 
caption, "Ransom Points to Be Remembered." To my 
mind the essence, the philosophy and logic of the Sin-Offering 
doctrine is all stated there in a few words, an 
unanswerable argument. Praise the Lord! 
When Vol. 5 was published, I read it and comprehended 

R4570 : page 77 

some of its beauties. Some three years ago you 

requested my opinion of the Swedish translation of 

Vol. 5. I therefore read sections of it critically, comparing 

it with the original. On page 27, Studies (pages 

28 and 29 Dawn), I read something which riveted my 

attention, that had escaped me in previous readings. It 

was this: "When father Adam was perfect, in complete 

harmony with his Creator, and obedient to all his 

commands, a covenant between them was implied, though 

not expressed; the fact that life in its perfection had 

been given Adam. ..and the additional fact that 

...if he would violate his faithfulness to the great 

King, Jehovah, by disobedience, he would forfeit his life 

...—this implied, we say, a covenant or agreement 

on God's part with his creature that his life was everlasting, 

unless he should alter the matter by disobedience, 

and bring upon himself a sentence of death." Thus 

Adam's condition before he fell was a covenant condition. 

To this agrees Hosea 6:7 (margin and Revised Version), 

"They have all like Adam broken the covenant." This 

thought is the key. 

(1) Adam was in covenant relationship with Jehovah, 
Vol. 5, SCRIPTURE STUDIES, page 27 (pages 28 and 29 in 
DAWN). It was not a covenant or agreement in words, 

but an agreement of Adam's whole being with God's law, 
a oneness resulting from the fulfilling of mutual obligations 
—God supplying life and its blessings, Adam rendering 
obedience. 

(2) Adam broke this covenant condition (Hos. 6:7, 
margin and Revised Version). 

(3) God's plan is to restore the race into this oneness, 
this covenant condition, which Adam lost. 

(4) This (future) perfect union or covenant condition 
was foreshadowed in and by an imperfect (typical) 
union or oneness between God and Israel. The Law was 
"a shadow of good things to come." 

(5) The Law Covenant was made on (or during) 
the "third day"— two days being preparatory.— 
Exod. 19:10,11. 

(6) The New (Law) Covenant will be made during 
the Millennial "day"— the Jewish "day"— the Gospel 
"day" being preparatory. 

(7) Moses was the Mediator or "go between" of the 
Law Covenant. He went back and forth between God 
and the people, making known God's terms, and bringing 



back their response. 

(8) The Christ will be the Mediator or "go between" 

of the New (Law) Covenant. He will make known to the 
world God's terms for human sonship and covenant relationship, 
and bring back their response. 

(9) The title of Mediator applied to Moses only while 
the Covenant was being made. Only "at that time" did he 
stand "between" God and Israel as Mediator. (Deut. 5:5.) 
His prominence afterwards in Israel's affairs was 

in great measure due to the imperfect covenant he established, 

which necessitated the repetition of its prominent 

features, renewing the covenant yearly, on the 

atonement day. In these repetitions Aaron represents 

the Mediator in his sacrificing and subsequent blessing 

the people, while Moses represents the Law— Justice— 

which the Mediator satisfies— a different type from that 

of the "third day." (Lev. 9:23.) TABERNACLE SHADOWS, 

page 82, last paragraph, and page 83, first paragraph. 

(10) The Christ will be the Mediator only while he 
(gradually) establishes the New Covenant, but his prominence 
will (like Moses') continue after his mediatorial 

work is ended. He will, for instance, be Jehovah's agent 
in destroying the unworthy ones at the close of the 
Millennial Age, and be highly esteemed to all eternity by 
the restored world. 

(11) The Jews were blessed with a Law Covenant on 
the "third day" and were blessed in it for a whole age (in 
proportion to their faithfulness to it). -Rom. 3:1,2. 

(12) The world will be blessed with a New Covenant 
being gradually made during the Millennial Day, and will 
be blessed in it to all eternity, an "ever"-"lasting" condition 
of perfection and union with God. 

(13) Jeremiah (31:31-33) states that the making of 
the New Covenant consists of a writing of God's law in 
men's hearts. When the law has been fully written, the 
union, not only of their wills, but of their whole being, with 
God will be accomplished— the covenant condition being 
fully attained. 

(14) Before this New Covenant or perfect union between 
God and men can be consummated, a twofold 

work must be done. (1) The "book" must be sprinkled— 
Justice must be satisfied, and (2) the people must be 
sprinkled (cleansed, restored-see WATCH TOWER, 1909, 
page 110, second column, paragraphs 2-4).— Heb. 9:19,20. 

(15) The New Covenant will thus be mediated for a 
thousand years, and consequently will not be in force as a 
finished thing until the end of that time. THE 

WATCH TOWER, 1909, page 1 10, first column, paragraph 
2, expresses this thought thus: "And it is consequently 
after the Gospel Age, when they are pardoned freely for 
Christ's sake, and restored to the condition of sinless 
perfect manhood, that the New covenant comes into 
force." 

(16) God has never entered into covenant relationship 
with any who have not first been both justified and 
consecrated. 



(17) Abraham must be justified (by faith) and consecrated 
(by circumcision) in order to be in covenant 
relationship with Jehovah.— Gen. 7:9-14. 

(18) Israel must leave Egypt (type of the world) and 
be freed from the dominion of Pharaoh (type of Satan 
and sin), and they must be (typically) consecrated,— 
"baptized into Moses" (Vol. I, STUDIES, page 279, 
paragraph 2), before they could enter into a (typical) 
covenant relationship with Jehovah. 

(19) As reckoned justification ceases with the end of 

the Gospel Age (Vol. 6, STUDIES, page 112, paragraph 1), 
the world must be actually justified and consecrated in 
order to enter into covenant relationship with Jehovah. 
Their consecration is the antitypical circumcision on the 
antitypical eighth day. They will prove their full consecration 
by standing the test coming to them in the "little 
season" which is the beginning of the eighth thousand-year 
day. (This thought was expressed by Pilgrim Brother 
Paul Johnson.) 

(20) In the type, females were ignored. Only males 
were received into the Law Covenant, by circumcision, on 
the eighth day. In the antitype, at the end of the seventh 
thousand-year day, the beginning of the eighth thousand-year 
day, only males will be received into the New Covenant 
—restitution having previously lifted them to Adam's 
condition before he was divided into sexes. See TABERNACLE 
SHADOWS, page 101. 

(21) The Law was one thing, and the Covenant based 
upon that Law quite another thing. See WATCH TOWER 
1894, double number (Oct.), treating the Sabbath. The 
Law was the terms, while the Covenant was the condition 
which followed, a condition of oneness and harmony. 
While the Jews were "under" the Law, under obligations 
to keep it, they were not "under" the Covenant, but in it. 

The Scriptures do not speak of any being under any covenant, 
nor do they give that thought, but always in a 

R4570 : page 78 

covenant— under obligations of law in order to be in a 
covenant condition of blessing. 

(22) The English usage of the word mediator forbids 
the thought of mediating a covenant after it has 

been made. To illustrate: Russia and Japan were at war 
with one another. After awhile they were willing to 
consider peace negotiations, but according to international 
customs and rules they could not directly confer 
with one another, but only through a third party, a 

R4571 : page 78 

mediator. Ex-President Roosevelt volunteered this service, 
and by and by peace was concluded. The President 
then stepped back, his mediatorial work was finished. He 
had effected a covenant between the two parties. It would 
be untrue to say that he continues to mediate this covenant 



or agreement all the time it lasts. So with Christ: 
He will not establish the New Covenant at the beginning 
of the Millennial Age and then mediate it afterwards, but 
the New Covenant will be the result of his work. 

(23) The Law Covenant was a failure, as far as giving 
life was concerned, because Moses introduced the 
people in their imperfect condition into covenant condition 
with Jehovah, and, being unable to keep the Law, 

the base of their covenant condition, they were condemned 
to death. 

(24) The New (Law) Covenant will be a success because 
the Christ will make mankind perfect before he 

will introduce them to Jehovah, into covenant condition 

with Him, when they can fully keep that Law upon which 

the New Covenant will be based. If the New (Law) 

Covenant were made with mankind at the beginning of 

the Millennial Age, or at any time during that age, its 

Law, being applied to them when they entered the Covenant, 

would condemn them as the Jews were. And since 

the world will not then have imputed righteousness, they 

will be in a more or less sinful or imperfect condition. 

THE WATCH TOWER, 1909, page 314, column 2, paragraph 

2, expresses this same thought that God cannot enter into 

any covenant with sinners, which corroborates the 

foregoing. 

(25) From the time that Moses killed the animals 
whose blood was used in making the Law Covenant— 
from that time and on he was the mediator of it until 

he had consummated it— he was actually working on the 
first feature of it. 

(26) The opponents of the Truth point us to the 
present tense of Heb. 9:15 and 12:21, etc., and think they 
have an unanswerable argument for their view. But 
allowing the present tense, as we must do, is not that 
very thing the strongest argument against their theory? 
To illustrate: Mr. A. is building a house. From the 

time that the spade is stuck in the ground to excavate 
for the foundation, the actual work having begun, Mr. A. 
can truthfully be said to be building (present tense) his 
house, and may be spoken of as the builder of the house, 
although there is no framework in sight yet. So Christ, 
from the time he took the first actual step towards making 
the New Covenant is engaged in working on it— on its 
first feature, satisfying Justice— laying the foundations 
of the house, so to speak. And since the type was due to 
cease when the first actual work on the New Covenant 
was begun, it follows that no difficulty is encountered in 
saying that the typical significance of the Law (not the 
Law itself) ceased when Christ presented his sacrifice 
at Jordan, thus giving full play to Heb. 10:9. See WATCH 
TOWER Bible comments against this verse. And as Mr. 
A. has no house to live in until he is through with building 
it, so there is no New Covenant for men to be brought 
into as long as the Mediator is not through with his 
work of making it. In other words, Where there is a 
mediator, there is a covenant in progress, but not consummated 



yet, and where there is a covenant consummated 
there is no longer any mediator, his work being 
done. 

(27) As in building a house there are three stages, 

(1) laying the foundation, (2) the actual building of it, 
and (3) the dwelling in it when finished; so the New 
Covenant. (1) One age is consumed in satisfying Justice; 

(2) Another age in the actual making of the covenant 
[bringing of men into line with its provisions— 

EDITOR], and (3) Mankind being in it [in covenant relationship 
with God-EDITOR] to all eternity. What a 
wonderful covenant it must be when it takes two ages to 
make it! 

(28) While the typical significance of the Law Covenant 
ended when the antitypical Mediator came and began 

to work on the New Covenant, the Law Covenant itself 
did not cease, and will not cease as long as Abraham's 
posterity continue to bind themselves to it by being 
circumcised on the eighth day. The condemnation feature 
thus rests upon them yet. 

(29) The opponents accuse us of taking off the wedding 
garment. But on the contrary, they are doing that 

very thing theoretically. If a man, after attaining perfection 
at the close of the Millennial Age, should say, "I 
need a mediator," would he not ignore and deny his perfection? 
He surely would. But the perfection which the 
world will attain to actually at that time is reckoned to 
us now. If we, after being justified, reckoned perfect, 
should say, I need a mediator, would we not ignore and 
deny our reckoned perfection? It surely would seem so. 
With much Christian love, 
Your brother and fellow-servant of Christ, 
D. KIHLGREN. 

REPLYING. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Your letter is much appreciated. I am in very good 
accord with it. Incidentally I might say that although 
the New Covenant will not reach full operation until the 
close of the Millennium, nevertheless the blessings of the 
New Covenant will begin to go into effect as soon as the 
great Mediator shall have applied the merit of his 
sacrifice "for all the people." This blessing will begin 
with the Ancient Worthies, because they already are 
acceptable with the Father. Under the New Covenant 
provisions they will immediately get the blessings of restitution 
to human perfection. They will represent Israel 
and thus the blessings will proceed through Israel to all 
mankind. 

The mediating of the New Covenant with mankind 
during the thousand years of Christ's mediatorial reign 
will mean the gradual bringing of the willing and obedient 
nearer and nearer to the standard of human perfection— 
by the rewards and punishments of that "day of judgment." 
The world will be under the blessed provisions 



and experiences mediated for them by The Christ, but 
will not be individually introduced to the Father— brought 
into covenant relationship with God. At the close of the 
Millennium the perfected world (all rebels being destroyed 
in the Second Death) will be introduced to the 
Father on the covenant terms of full regeneration of both 
mind and body at the hands of the Mediator. Thus it is 
written, "I the Lord will give thee for a covenant of the 
people." (Isa. 42:6.) In other words, while the Covenant 
will not be in a finished or completed condition until the 
end of the Millennium, its blessed provisions for the 
uplift of mankind will operate from the time the Millennial 
reign begins. 
Your brother and servant in the Lord, C. T. R. 



page 79 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION 

In the interest of readers in the uttermost parts of the 
earth, we note the fact that the time for the celebration of 
the Memorial Supper this year will be the evening of 
Friday, April 22, after six o'clock, which marks the beginning 
of the 14th day of the Month Nisan according 
to Jewish reckoning. That night corresponds to the one 
on which our Lord was betrayed. The following day 
corresponds to the date of his crucifixion, and Sunday, 
April 24, beginning at 6 p.m., on the 23d, will be the first 
day of the Jewish Passover week. 

We refer our readers to the Sixth Volume of the 
"Scripture Studies," Chapter XI, entitled "The Passover 
of the New Creation." There we have endeavored to set 
forth this subject in detail. We hope that all of God's 
dear people who trust in the merit of the precious blood 
of Christ for justification will celebrate this Memorial of 
the great Sacrifice of our Lord. And let us not forget 
that it also memorializes the consecration to death of all 
the members of the Body of Christ. "If we suffer with 
him, we shall also reign with him." "If we be dead with 
him, we shall also live with him." "This cup is the New 
Testament in my blood." "Drink ye all of it." "The cup 
that I drink of. "-2 Tim. 2:11,12; Luke 22:20; I Cor. 11:25; 
Matt. 26:27; Mark 10:38; Matt. 20:22. 



R4571 : page 79 

HE SHALL SIT AS A REFINER 

Sometimes as we look on, we gaze in wonder 
Upon the dealings of our gracious God. 

With those whom o'er and o'er his hand afflicted, 
Who pass so often 'neath his chastening rod. 



Pure gold and well refined, to our poor vision 
These loved ones seem; and oft we wonder sore 

Why souls who seem to us each day more saintly 
Should by his hand be chastened more and more. 

But the dear, loving Lord who tries the spirit, 
Sees in them what no human eye can see— 

A further fineness where his gracious dealing 
Has formed the Christ within, in days to be. 

As in a portrait by some cunning artist, 

Which men call perfect— those who praise the skill 
Of him who warms to life dull, senseless canvas, 

Impatient that he labors at it still. 

Labors, because before his inner vision 
There floats an ideal he has not attained, 

And in his heart he holds a steady purpose 
To labor on until that point is gained. 

So with these precious souls. Men see their graces, 
So far exceeding those of common men, 

And wonder why a God of loving kindness 
Should chasten them again and yet again. 

Nor will he stay his hand, though our impatience 
Claim for these souls exemption from the rod, 

Till, polished, perfected, refined, and holy, 

Shines out from them the image of their God. 

Art thou, beloved, one of this tried number? 

Hold still, though furnace fires may hotter grow, 
And when his work in thee is all accomplished, 

The true life "hid with Christ in God" thou'lt know. 
HELEN S. PEPPER 



R4571 : page 79 

ITINERARY FOR BROTHER RUSSELL'S MID-WINTER SOUTHERN TOUR 

Norfolk, Va Feb. 13 N.Y.P.&N.R.R 

Arrive 9:05 a.m Feb. 13 S.A.L.. Depart 8:30 p.m. 

Wilmington, N.C " 14 S.A.L 

Arrive 1:10 p. m " 15 A. C.L.. Depart 6:00 a.m. 

Charleston, S.C " 15 A.C.L 

Arrive 1:15 p. m " 16 " ..Depart 7:15 a.m. 

R4572 : page 79 

Savannah, Ga " 16 " 

Arrive 9:30 a.m " 17 " ..Depart 2:35 a.m. 

Jacksonville, Fla.... " 17 " 

Arrive 7:15 a.m " 17 S.A.L. .Depart 9:30 p.m. 



Tampa, Fla " 18 S.A.L 

Arrive 6:30 a.m " 21 " ..Depart 9:00 p.m. 

page 79 

NORFOLK, VA., SUNDAY, FEB. 13 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting will be held at 
10:30 o'clock in the Royal Theatre, on Granby St., opposite 
College Place. Public Meeting in the Academy of 
Music, Main St., at 3 p.m. Topic: "The Thief in Paradise; 
the Rich Man in Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom." Visiting friends heartily welcome. 

WILMINGTON, N.C., MONDAY, FEB. 14 

Public Meeting at 8 p.m. in Boys' Brigade Armory, 
201 Church St. Subject: "Where are the Dead?" For details 
respecting other meetings address Mr. C. C. Redd, 
618 S. Third St., Wilmington, N.C. 

CHARLESTON, S.C., TUESDAY, FEB. 15 

Meeting for the public at 8 p.m. in German Artillery 
Hall. For particulars relating to other meetings address 
Mr. Will J. Madole, 18 John St., Charleston, S.C. 

SAVANNAH, GA., WEDNESDAY, FEB. 16 

Public Meeting in Guards' Armory, cor. Bull and 
Charlton Sts., at 8 p.m. Subject: "Where are the Dead?" 
For local particulars apply to Mrs. L. E. Robinson, 213 
W. 28th St., Savannah, Ga. 

JACKSONVILLE, FLA., THURSDAY, FEB. 17 

Public Meeting at 7:30 p.m. in Board of Trade Auditorium, 
cor. Main and Adams Sts. Topic: "Thief in 
Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom." Regarding other meetings address Mr. M. L. 
Mcllvaine, Box 232, Jacksonville, Fla. 

MID-WINTER SOUTHERN CONVENTION AT TAMPA, 
FLA., FEBRUARY 18-21 

The railroads grant a special rate of fare and one-third 
for round trip from points outside of Florida; or one fare 
for the round trip in Florida. Purchase Panama Canal Celebration 
excursion tickets. Brother Russell expects to be 
present most of the time, as also several of the Pilgrim 
Brethren. The regular sessions will be held in the Court 
House— the Sunday Public Meeting in the Hippodrome. 

CUMBERLAND, MD., SUNDAY, FEB. 27 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 o'clock. 



Public Meeting at 3 p.m. in the Maryland Theatre, North 
Mechanic St. Subject: "The Thief in Paradise; the Rich 
Man in Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." Discourse 
to the interested at 7:30 p.m. in same theatre. Visiting 
friends heartily welcomed and such as desire arrangements 
made for their entertainment may address Mr. 
C. H. Ward, 21 S. George St., Cumberland, Md. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., SUNDAY, MAR. 6 

Discourse for the public at 3 p.m. in Brooklyn 
Academy of Music. Subject: INFERNO. Services in 
Brooklyn Tabernacle, 10:30 a.m. and 7:30 p.m. 



page 8 1 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI MARCH 1 No. 5 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Views from The Watch Tower 83 

Zionists on to Canaan 83 

What a Wonderful Day is Ours! 84 

King Edward the Storm-Centre 84 

A Great Mountain Melting 85 

Justification by Faith and Actually 85 

God's Grace and God's Reward 88 

Healing All Manner of Diseases 89 

Power Over the Adversary 90 

The Philosophy of the Ransom 91 

Questions on Justification 92 

Justified to Peace 93 

Ancient Worthies Not in the Court 93 

Justified Fully to Human Rights 93 

The Christian's Battle (Poem) 94 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 95 

page 82 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



CROSS AND CROWN PINS 

Gold; beautiful, good and cheap. The cross in red 
enamel, the wreath in green— $1.50. The same without the 
green on wreath, $1.25. In silver enameled wreath and 
cross, 25c; size 3/4 inch. Plain gold without enamel, 1/2 inch, 
$1.15. These are wholesale rates and include postage. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 

New envelopes are now to be had at the same price— 
25 cents per 100, postpaid. These are of excellent paper and 
have half-tone cut of all six volumes of SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
on the front, and cut of the HEAVENLY MANNA on the back. 



SERMONS IN THE NEWSPAPERS 

How about renewing your subscriptions for newspapers 
publishing Brother Russell's sermons? Do your part! Be 
prompt! If a few narrow souls hating the good tidings of 
God's love try to discourage the Editors from publishing the 
sermons; the thousands who are being blest should tell of 
their profit and pleasure and thus encourage the newspaper 
men. Renew through us or direct, as you please. Use part 
of your "Good Hopes" thus if you think proper. You have 
our clubbing rates in the PEOPLES PULPIT— December issue. 



QUESTIONS ON "TABERNACLE SHADOWS" 

We have these printed in cheap form and will supply 
them free to those who have "Tabernacle Shadows" and who 
will request them. 



ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS TO BE ADDRESSED BY 
THE EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL: 

BROOKLYN, N. Y., MARCH 6 



Morning services at 10:30 o'clock in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 
13-17 Hicks street, two blocks from P.R.R. Annex 
Ferry and five minutes' walk from Brooklyn Bridge entrance. 
Question meeting in the same building at 8 o'clock, preceded 
by a half hour's song service. Discourse for the Public at 3 
p.m. in Brooklyn Academy of Music, on Lafayette avenue, St. 
Felix street, and Ashland place. Subject, "Inferno." 

WASHINGTON, D. C, MARCH 13 

Morning and evening sessions, Masonic Temple, Ninth and 
F streets, N.W., 10:30 a.m. Praise, Prayer and Testimony 
meeting. 7:30 p.m. Brother Russell will address the friends. 
Discourse for the Public, National Theater, at 3 p.m. Subject, 
"The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 

ALLENTOWN, PA., MARCH 20 

All meetings in Lyric Theater, 25 North Sixth street. 
Praise, Prayer and Testimony meeting at 10 a.m. Address for 
the interested at 11 a.m. Afternoon service for the Public at 
3 p.m. Subject, "Man's Past, Present and Future." 

BOSTON, MASS., MARCH 27 

Praise, Prayer and Testimony meeting at 10:30 a.m. Evening 
meeting for the interested at 7:30 p.m. Location of morning 
and evening meetings later. Afternoon session for the 
Public in Tremont Temple, Tremont street, between School 
and Broomfield streets, at 3 o'clock. 

BROOKLYN, N. Y., APRIL 3 

Discourse for the Public in Brooklyn Academy of Music 
at 3 p.m. Subject, "Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR APRIL 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered: (1) Vow; (2) 313; (3) 145; (4) 123; 
(5) 9; (6) 114; (7) 284; (8) 273; (9) 278; (10) 
289; (11) 209; (12) 113; (13) 157; (14) 130; (15) 
105; (16) 155; (17) 193; (18) 60; (19) 87; (20) 8; 
(21) 32; (22) 176; (23) 4; (24) 164; (25) 93; (26) 
119; (27) 293; (28) 191; (29) 221; (30) 383; (31) 325. 



R4572 : page 83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 



ZIONISTS ON TO CANAAN 



NEWS from all parts of the civilized world interested 

in Zionism have come face to face 

with the Kingdom question. The reform government 

of Turkey has treated the Jews very 

favorably and proffered them full privileges 

in Palestine, reminding them that Turkey is 

one of the few nations that have not 

persecuted the Jews. This liberal offer 

would have been seized with avidity a short 

time ago, but, with the improvement of prospect, 

some of the leading Zionists are insisting that 

Palestine shall be made a Jewish State with a government 

of its own, but subject to Turkey, after the manner of 

the Balkan States. Scripturally we have reason to believe 

that such a concession will not be granted nor attained 

before 1915— following the close of "the times of 

the Gentiles."— Luke 21:24. 

The Zionist Congress, which closed its session in Hamburg, 
Germany, on the last day of 1909, had this Kingdom 
question as its principal issue. Its President, Dr. Max 
Nordau, threw all the weight of his great influence against 
undertaking any special work in Palestine, until Turkey 
should grant the Jews an autonomous government. We 
quote a portion of his address. He said:— 

"What we desire is to form a nationality within the 
Ottoman State like all the other nationalities in the empire. 
True, we demand the recognition of our nationality; 
there must be no doubt about that. It will be our ambition 
to earn the reputation of being the most loyal, the most 
reliable, and the most useful of the Turkish nationalities, 
to contribute the most zealously to the weal, the progress 
and the power of the empire. 

"But let it be understood that we will do all this solely 
as a nationality, as a Jewish nationality. That is our frank 
reply to certain Turkish utterances. We have been told: 
'Come to Turkey as much as you like. You shall be welcome. 
You will find everything you desire, fertile, cheap, 
possibly free land, security against persecution, all the liberties 
accorded to every citizen of the Ottoman Empire. 
But you must become Turkish subjects, adopt the Turkish 
language, merge with the Turkish people so that you cannot 
be distinguished from other Turks.' 

"In the face of such views we are impelled by pride 
and self-respect to refer to our original programme. On 
this point concessions are impossible. If the Jews want 
to assimilate they can do it nearer home and more cheaply; 
they can do it where they are and save the fare. You are 
Zionists, however, just because you do not wish to disappear 
as Jews. You wish to go to Palestine, the land 
of your fathers, to live and develop there as national Jews. 

"Our ideal is to see a Jewish people in the land of its 
fathers, ennobled by a 2,000-year-old firmness of character, 



respected on account of its honest, cultural work, an instrument 

of wise progress, a champion of justice, an 

apostle and personifier of brotherly love. Of this ideal I 

will not surrender an iota. On this point there can be no 

concession. 

"This ideal I would not exchange for all the treasure in 
the world, let alone for a dividend. If Turkey today opposes 
the realization of my ideal, I must wait. To wait 
long is a misfortune, but no disgrace. Vacillation is a 
disgrace. My ideal is eternal. It embraces every hope. 
To abandon hope is to commit suicide. Therefore, I 
exclaim as loudly as I can: Back to the Basle programme! 
Let us never forget that we aspire to the creation of a 
publicly recognized, legally assured home for our people. 
Let us never forget that we have to cleanse the shield 
of the Jewish people from all the mire with which a hatred 
that has lasted for 2,000 years has begrimed it." 

THE WORK NOT TO BE DELAYED 

Notwithstanding their great respect for their President, 
the Zionist delegates took an opposite view, claiming that 
further delay in the realization of their hopes must not be 
considered— that they must go up at once to possess the 
promised land, availing themselves of the "door" which 
Providence had opened before them. A correspondent 
pictures the sentiment of the Congress as a whole in the 
following graphic language: 

"Long before the Zionist Congress convened there 
seemed to be a feeling pervading every activity connected 
with the Congress that the Zionist movement had reached 
a decided turning point in its progress. Every delegate, 
no matter where he hailed from, appeared to carry with 
him the sub-conscious conviction that unless all the stored-up 
energy and accumulated substance of Zionism is at 
once turned to practical uses in Palestine something might 
be missed. 

"If any single word could aptly characterize the 
mental attitude of the majority of the delegates in that 
respect that word would have been 'impatience.' An 
irresistible desire was noticeable to do things, and to do 
them at once. There seemed to exist the apprehension 
that with the signs of Palestine's awakening before the 
eyes of the world the Zionist movement was not quick 
enough to take advantage of the situation." 

THE DECIDING VOTE 

The test of the question— whether the Zionists would 
accept the dictum of their leader and President and abstain 
from further efforts to reoccupy the land of Canaan, perhaps 
for years, perhaps forever— was decided against him 
by a majority vote. At the close of an all-night session 

R4572 : page 84 



it was resolved that all Zionist capital should be gradually 
transferred to Palestine, making it the only center of its 
financial and industrial operations. In a word, the rank 
and file of the Zionists have outrun their leader. Otherwise 
stated, God's time having come for the rehabilitation 
of Palestine, even the most influential man amongst the 
Jews today was unable to hinder it. Within another year 
great things may be expected in Palestine. When six 
months ago the Turkish reformation threw open the door 
of Palestine, we wondered that there was no apparent 
haste made to enter. Now we see that Dr. Nordau for a 
time was the influential hindrance. We shall expect that 
so broad-minded a man, so able a leader, will join heartily 
with his co-religionists in a movement which is fulfilling 
prophecy and which will proceed and prosper with or 
without his assistance. 

WHAT A WONDERFUL DAY IS OURS! 



Prophecies thousands of years old are fulfilling before 
our eyes. The wilderness is being made to blossom as the 
rose, not only in the arid regions of our far Western 
States, but in the supposed cradle of the human family in 
the land of Mesopotamia, where Abraham lived. The 
power which is accomplishing these things, in fulfillment 
of God's Word, is human. The force behind the energy 
is not spiritual, but financial. The motive is not the 
fulfillment of the Scriptures, but selfishness— the desire 
for wealth. The project of the Turkish Government to 
revive Mesopotamia has already been referred to; nevertheless 
the following account, which is going the rounds 
of the newspapers, will be read with interest: 

TO RESTORE THE GARDEN OF EDEN 

"To restore the Garden of Eden sounds like a bold 
enterprise, yet a plan suggested by Sir William Wilcox, 
the English engineer, who built the Assouan dam, makes 
the project sound entirely feasible. It is Mesopotamia, 
'the land between the rivers' Tigris and Euphrates, with 
which he is dealing, and he purposes to turn the surplus 
waters of the Euphrates into the River Pishon, and to 
carry down the delta a great canal which would not only 
bring back the productiveness of several million acres 
of land, but would guard the region from the overflows 
of the Tigris. It marks a definite step in the world's 
progress that the work of reconstruction should now be 
taken up by the Turkish government, which thereby demonstrates 
its real reform to broader views and more intelligent 
ambitions. 

"To build this canal, which will double the cultivable 
area along the Euphrates, will take three years and cost 
$2,000,000 or less. Supplementing it, Sir William proposes 
a railroad from Bagdad to Damascus, costing 



$1 1,000,000, which would open the way to the Mediterranean, 

the natural commercial outlet of Mesopotamia. 

Such a road seems to be demanded because the irrigation 

scheme will impair the navigability of the river. And 

even before the increased wheat harvests are ready for 

transport there will be freight to carry and passengers 

to convey— Mohammedan pilgrims visiting holy places 

and tourists who will feel, probably, more interest in 

'Arabian Nights country' than in the 'cradle of the race.' 

"There may be some question that the railroad is indispensable, 
though Asiatic enterprises of this kind have 
generally met with astonishing success, and have been 
profitable to the projectors as well as valuable to the 

R4573 : page 84 

territory through which they pass. Of the economic importance 
of the canal there can scarcely be a doubt. The 
transformation wrought in the valley of the Nile can 
probably be duplicated along the Euphrates. Great cities 
may never again arise in that region where the 
archaeologists have long been busy among the ruins of 
historic capitals, but the land may once more become a 
'garden'— not an Eden perhaps, but far removed from 
the desert that later generations have known as the shame 
of its rulers." 

An Englishman, Sir William Wilcox, an engineer of 
the Turkish Board of Public Works, is to have the management 
of this improvement. He suggests that an oasis 
called Harlah, northwest of Bagdad, marks the site of 
the once flourishing Garden of Eden. The Euphrates 
river runs through it, dividing into four arms, corresponding 
to the four rivers of Eden. 

KING EDWARD THE STORM CENTER 



The British House of Lords has very much charged 
up against it— probably more than is strictly true. Doubtless 
amongst the Peers of the Realm are to be found 
noble characters, as well as some debased by wealth and 
idleness. Doubtless as a whole the lords have been slandered 
to a considerable extent. The result has been the 
turning of many of the common people who once reverenced 
them into enemies who now hate them. During 
the recent election time members of Parliament considered 
it unsafe to be out after dark unaccompanied by 
a bodyguard. 

The cry is that the House of Lords should be abolished, 
but it is very doubtful if this can be accomplished 
legally. The next step is an appeal to the King to appoint 
a large number of prominent Britains to the Peerage. 
The thought is that thus the present lords would be 
outweighed in influence, and a vote of the House of 
Lords would more nearly represent the public sentiment 



in all matters of legislation. Should the King do this he 
would, of course, incur to some extent the enmity of the 
lords. Should he decline to do it, he would be considered 
a sympathizer with them and be correspondingly unpopular 
with those who take the more democratic stand. 
Doubtless an evil time for kings and potentates is near at 
hand. Thank God for the glorious prospect that just beyond 
the time of trouble the world will experience the 
dawn of the Millennium ! 

MUCH DEPENDS ON THE VIEWPOINT 



All classes of people seem to be amazed at the increasing 
preparations for war, and these, notwithstanding 
the cry of "Peace! peace!" and the realization on the part 
of all that warfare has become more terrible than ever 
before, by reason of the advancement made in the production 
of destructive explosives and every conceivable 
device for hurling them at opponents. Statesmen seem to 
be impelled by an unseen but dreadful power to almost 
bankrupt their governments in adding battleship to battleship, 
device to device, for the destruction of those 
whom they profess to recognize as fellow-Christians. 
We quote the words of two of Great Britain's most prominent 
men, as follows: 

(1) "It is the deepest reproach upon the present-day 
civilization that preparation for war should be the dominant 
concern of the two most powerful nations of the 

Old World at the close of the first decade of the new 
century. England and Germany are not alone in pouring 
treasure into the construction of armaments at a rate 
never before contemplated. Every great power is compelled 
by their example— all in the interests of peace, forsooth 
—to do likewise. The legislatures of three countries, 
Great Britain, Germany and the United States, 
have been engaged during the past summer in imposing 
great burdens of taxation upon their constituents, 
amounting roughly to $125,000,000 per year in each case. 
National defence has been the impelling cause in every 
instance. There is no sign that the end has been reached. 

(2) "That is a sign which I confess I regard as most 
ominous. For forty years it has been a platitude to say 

R4573 : page 85 

that 'Europe is an armed camp,' and for forty years it 
has been true that all the nations have been facing each 
other armed to the teeth, and that has been in some respects 
a guarantee of peace. Now, what do we see? 
Without any tangible reason we see the nations preparing 
new armaments. They cannot arm any more men on 
land, so they have to seek new armaments upon the sea, 
piling up these enormous preparations as if for some 
great Armageddon— and that in a time of profoundest 



peace. 

A GREAT MOUNTAIN MELTING 



Many of us are watching with keen interest the political 
struggle in progress in Great Britain. An Oxford 
College Professor, travelling in America, declared recently 
that Great Britain is facing a more serious crisis 
than at any time since the civil wars of Cromwell— along 
political lines. He summarizes the situation briefly as 
follows: 

"The great English crisis is the French revolution 
done over in the English way. Here is the real issue: The 
Conservative party stands for a strong, parental, imperial 
and patriotic government, such as exists in Germany; the 
Liberals stand for social reform at home. They want to 
give the poor, down-trodden people a chance. They want 
justice to be given, in a socialistic sense, to the lower 
classes, who have for years been oppressed by landlords 
and capitalists. The question is, which policy is to be 
adopted?" 

The Scriptures, referring to our time, symbolically 
picture the Kingdoms of earth as mountains, and, describing 
our day, tell that some of these mountains will melt 
like wax and flow down to the level of the people, and 
others, retaining their rigidity, will be overwhelmed with 
the tidal wave of social strife and be cast into the midst 
of the sea— into anarchy. (Psa. 46:2.) Russia recently 
melted a little and yielded the Douma to the demands 
of the people. Great Britain and France are now melting 
—yielding to popular demands and, in so doing, preserving 
law and order the longer. 

The melting process will evidently go hard with the 
German Emperor. His conception of the Divine right of 
kings to rule and the Divine mandate to the people to 
obey them will make him slow to yield, even for the 
preservation of his Empire. He desires to rule actually 
and not as a mere figurehead. He has said as much. The 
floods of Socialism are rising about him gradually day 
by day, year by year. Before very long a crisis of some 
kind must be faced in Germany— and in every land, because 
the masses are gradually learning to appreciate 
their power; because superstition respecting the authority 
of kings and priests is waning; because the same selfishness 
which has made the rich keen to watch their interests 
is making the poor keen to turn every precedent, 
theory and law to their own advantage. 

UNGODLINESS AND DISCONTENT 



Below we print a clipping from an unknown paper, 
which gathers its facts from the London Spectator. It 



confirms what we have more than once called attention 
to in these columns, namely, that the spread of 
education and increase of wealth are not tending to make 
humanity happier, holier or more content, but rather the 
reverse. It says: 

FACTS RESPECTING SUICIDES 

"From an article in the Spectator, it is evident that 
suicides are increasing at an alarming rate, especially in 
the larger cities. In fact, the rate has increased within 
the past ten years from fifteen to twenty-one per one 
hundred thousand of population. That is to say, ten years 
ago there were fifteen suicides to every hundred thousand 
of population of the cities, while last year there were 
twenty-one. 

"But there are other features of the suicide statistics 
that are even more interesting than the per cent, of people 
who take their own lives. For instance, according to 
the Spectator article, we find that the average rate for ten 
years was 15.9 per 100,000 for the North Atlantic States; 
23.3 for the North Central States; 14.5 for the Southern 
States; 27.7 for the Western States. 

"An analysis of the statistics also shows that the increase 
is most noticeable with the well-to-do, prosperous 
and better educated classes. There has been no increase 
among the poor, unfortunate and illiterate classes. There 
is also seen to be, frequently, a connection between suicide 
and crime, many of the cases being those of prominent 
people who held responsible positions and who had 
'gone wrong' in one way or another. 

"The greatest number of suicides took place in the 
cities among people who were country bred, showing, to 
some extent, that the excitement or strenuosity of the 
cities was too much for many of those who were attracted 
by the glare." 

"One of the really startling statements made in the 
article is this: 

"A study of any considerable number of individual 
cases of suicide does not confirm the view that real progress 
is being made as the result of modern educational 
methods and the vast increase in material prosperity, 
well-being and comfort, but it leads rather to adverse 
conclusions and the conviction that there is a positive 
increase in the so-called diseases of the will.' 

"Can it be possible that all of our educational efforts, 
and our great accretions of wealth— our better understanding 
and our greater comforts— have not tended to 
prevent self-destruction? Or does the increase in the 
number of persons who commit suicide tend to show that 
we have acquired our knowledge and our wealth at a cost 
greater than human life itself? There are a good many 
questions that one might ask in face of the figures, and 
until a more thorough study is made of the question of 
suicidal mania, and until the human mind is better understood, 
we shall probably have to take it out in asking 



questions." 

R4574 : page 85 

JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH AND ACTUALLY 

THE Lord through the Prophet declared that 

his message would be presented "Line upon 

line and precept upon precept." (Isa. 28:10.) 

Some questions received imply that the important 

subject of Justification is not yet 

fully and clearly grasped by all. Although 

the all-important matter is the keeping of 

the heart, nevertheless it is proper for us to 

utilize every item of knowledge furnished 

us by the Lord, that we may keep our heads 

right, that we may be able to view matters from the 

Divine standpoint. 

A narrow or a broad view of justification may be taken 
and both be true. For instance, we say that "Abraham 
was justified by faith," and say so truly. Yet this implies 
three different steps, two of which were Abraham's and 
one the Lord's. And the latter is not fully accomplished 
yet. God called Abraham to leave Haran and to come 
into the land of Canaan, promising that then he would 
make a Covenant with him. Abraham believed when he 
started from Haran and continued to believe after he had 
come into Canaan. In due time God made the Covenant 
as promised, assuring him that "in his Seed all the families 
of the earth would be blessed." The making of this Covenant 

R4574 : page 86 

implied a fellowship between God and Abraham on 
the basis of his faith-justification. But Abraham at that 
time was not justified to human perfection and life everlasting 
—but to fellowship merely. He needed to go on, 
to demonstrate that he had a strong faith. After many 
years of faith-testing Isaac was born. Abraham had thus 
an evidence of the Lord's favor and that the promise 
would be fulfilled. But still he was not justified to life 
and human perfection. Long years after Isaac's birth 
God put a final test upon Abraham's faith, saying, "Take 
now thy son, thine only son, Isaac, whom thou lovest, and 
get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for 
a burnt-offering upon one of the mountains which I will 
tell thee of."— Gen. 22:2. 

Not until Abraham had shown his absolute heart-loyalty 
could he be counted of God as worthy of a "better 
resurrection" than the remainder of mankind 
—resurrection to human perfection— actual justification, 
actual rightness or righteousness. Even when Abraham's 
tests were all passed satisfactorily he could not still be 
actually justified or made actually perfect; because he 



needed to be redeemed with the precious blood of 
Christ. As a member of Adam's family he was under 
a death sentence which must be annulled before he could 
be actually justified to the perfection of human life. 
Abraham had done his part to the Divine pleasement, 
but he must wait for his perfecting until the great Mediator, 
the Second Adam, Head and Body, would be complete 
and the New Covenant be sealed with Abraham 
and his natural seed, giving them earthly restitution and 
perfection at the hands of their Mediator.— Heb. 1 1:38-40. 

When our Lord Jesus at his First Advent died some 
one might have said, Now Abraham and all the Ancient 
Worthies are justified. But that would not have been 
strictly true. It would have been true only in the sense 
that an unconscious, half-drowned child had been caught 
by its rescuer. An on-looker might shout, Hurrah, the 
child is saved! Yet really the rescuer must get the child 
into the boat and the work of resuscitation must be accomplished 
before the child would be fully saved. 

Even when our Lord Jesus "ascended up on high, 
there to appear in the presence of God for us," and made 
satisfaction for our sins, as did the typical priest, sprinkling 
the blood of Atonement on the Mercy-Seat— even then 
Abraham and the other Ancient Worthies were not saved 
—not actually justified or made actually right— nor legally 
right. Why not? Because the precious blood was not 
then applied on behalf of Abraham and the other Ancient 
Worthies, nor on behalf of the world in general. The 
Apostle declares, "He appeared in the presence of God 
for us." We are not finding fault with those who lump 
matters and in a general way say, "Christ died for the 
whole world." We heartily assent to that. He did die 
for the whole world in the sense that in God's "due time" 
the whole world will have the full benefit of the merit of 
his sacrificial death. Thus again, "He is a propitiation 
(satisfaction) for our sins, and not for ours only, but also 
for the sins of the whole world." His death had as its 
ultimate object not only the cancellation of the Church's 
sins, but also ultimately the cancellation of the sins of 
the whole world. But when he ascended up on high he 
made application "for us" and not for the world. As 
already shown he will make a fresh application of his 
own blood for the sins of the whole world at the close 
of this Gospel Age— this antitypical Day of Atonement. 

Notice how distinctly the Scriptures differentiate between 
the Church class (the "Little Flock" of Under-Priests, 
and the "Great Company" of antitypical Levites) 
and the remainder of mankind. "Ye," "we" and "us" are 
terms Scripturally applied to those "called" during this 
Gospel Age to be sharers with Christ in the high or 
heavenly calling— on the spirit plane like unto the angels. 
These are "not of the world," nor are they styled the 
children of Christ, but "his brethren," of whom he is the 
Elder Brother— Christ's members over whom he is the 
Head— the Bride class, of whom he is the Head or Bridegroom. 
On the contrary, Israel and the whole world 



must get their life, and restitution rights and perfection 
from The Christ, the Mediator. Thus our Lord will be 
the Father or Life-Giver to the world. He is not the 
life-giver to the Church, his Bride, his members. Although 
we were "justified through faith in his blood" we 
never received earthly life and human perfection from 
him actually. We received merely an imputation of 
earthly life-rights for the purpose of permitting us to 
offer ourselves "living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to 
God," that we might become members of the Body of 
Christ, the Mediator, the Priest, the King of glory. "The 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten 
us." Ours is a spirit-begetting similar to that of our 
Lord Jesus and from the same source and for the same 
reason— because of our obedience, even unto sacrifice- 
made acceptable through our great Redeemer's merit. 

Of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob it is written that they 
shall be the children of The Christ; they will receive the 
earthly life and its full restitution privileges directly 
from the Redeemer— "in due time." The world has not 
received life in any sense as yet. Hence the Apostle says, 
"The whole world lieth in the Wicked One." Jesus, the 
appointed Mediator between God and the world of mankind, 
has not yet taken up his work for them. They 
must wait until he shall have finished a preceding work 
"for us"— the gathering of the elect little flock from the 
world as his "members," "his Body," his Church. 

When the time shall come for our Lord to make application 
of his merit on behalf of the world of mankind 
in general— for all not included in the household of faith, 
"us"— Abraham and all the Ancient Worthies will constitute 
the first-fruits on the earthly plane. Their justification 
will be made actual, vital, by a "better resurrection" 
than the remainder of mankind will enjoy. Having 
been approved of the Lord in the past they will be 
granted restitution instantly; whereas the world will 
come up to that plane of actual justification or human 
perfection by the slower processes of the Millennial Age. 
But the Ancient Worthies, like the remainder of mankind, 
reaching human perfection (actual justification) 
will be the children of Messiah. "Instead of thy fathers 
shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make princes in 
all the earth." (Psa. 45:16.) Hearken to the Apostle, 
They without us cannot be made perfect (actually justified 
to life), God having provided a superior thing for 
us first. -Heb. 11:38-40. 

OUR JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH 

As there are three steps to Abraham's actual justification 
—two of these his own and one the Lord's— so 
also in our justification we may see three steps. As 
Abraham heard the call of God to leave his father's 
house, so the household of faith during this Gospel Age is 
called of God to leave the world, to turn aside, to become 
his people under such experiences of joy and sorrow as 



he may see best for them. From the time we took the first 
step (or even as children of those who had taken the 
step of obedience), we were counted justified by faith, 
as Abraham was when he left Haran and entered Canaan. 

R4574 : page 87 

But as he was not yet justified to life, neither were we, 
until after we had come to the point of test and had 
proven faithful. As Abraham's faith was tested in the 
demand that he offer up Isaac as a sacrifice, our faith and 
loyalty were tested when we heard the message, "Present 
your bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God, 
and your reasonable service." 

Our justification by faith holds thus far, but, after 
reasonable time, if we decline to make the sacrifice, it 
demonstrates that our faith was insufficient, that our loyalty 
was insufficient, that we could not attain the glorious 
things to which we had been invited— that we were not 
worthy. Such, the Apostle implies, receive the grace of 
God in vain. After a reasonable time their justification 
to fellowship with God lapses and their peace and joy 
correspondingly diminish. They had an opportunity of 
attaining the great favor or high calling of this Gospel 
Age, but they failed to improve it. Their relationship 
to God thereafter will be the same as that of the remainder 
of mankind. They will be held over to be dealt 
with by the Redeemer under the New Covenant, to be 
blessed by its Mediator under his Mediatorial Kingdom. 

But some who, during the time of the call of this Gospel 
Age, left the world behind and came into relationship 
with God through faith and were "justified by faith," 
were courageous to the degree of presenting their bodies 
living sacrifices, after the Redeemer's example. These, 

R4575 : page 87 

during "the acceptable time," were accepted and got Divine 
evidence in their begetting by the holy Spirit to 
membership in the New Creation— sons of God on the 
spirit plane, as members of Messiah's Body, the Church. 
These did not receive actual justification— they were not 
made actually perfect, yet their rights to human perfection 
all terminated when God accepted their sacrifice. 
Their reckoned justification was vitalized at the moment 
of consecration. By this we mean that at that moment 
God treated them exactly as he would have done had 
they been like Jesus, actually "holy, harmless, undefiled 
and separate from sinners." 

Let us illustrate this matter. Suppose that A , 

as a reward, gave to B a note calling for a New 

York draft for $1,000 at any time before January 1, 1910. 
Let that note represent the justification by faith which 
becomes ours upon believing in Christ and turning from 
the world and from sin. The New York draft in the illustration 
would represent the begetting of the holy Spirit 



to spiritual sonship. As the draft could be secured only 
by the surrender of the note, so the spirit nature will 
become ours only through the surrender of all earthly 
rights— our own and those imputed (not given) to us by 
the Lord. As the note is good only for exchange for New 
York draft, so our justification is good only for the 
purposes designated— to enable us to "present our bodies 
living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God." As the 
note would lose all value if not used before January 1st, 
so our faith -justification will lose all value if not used in 
time. As the note presented in time would secure to the 
holder the New York draft, it signifies that that moment 
it ceased to be a promisory matter of faith and became an 
actuality. The New York draft would represent the begetting 
of the holy Spirit. The later cashing of the draft 
"in due time" at the bank would illustrate the making of 
our calling and election sure by faithfulness even unto 
death, when the coin value of the draft would come fully 
into our possession. 

Whoever, after receiving the New York draft, should 
lose it or destroy it could not go back to the bank and 
claim the original note. So those who have received the 
begetting of the holy Spirit, if they misuse it or lose it 
entirely in the Second Death, can have no claim upon 
the Lord for human restitution. Their full share of 
Christ's merit has already been granted such, and "Christ 
dieth no more." 

We have shown the different features of faith -justification 
and the necessity of a full test of obedience before 
the justified could be acceptable to God, either for 
the "better resurrection" to human perfection of the Ancient 
Worthies, or as the ground or basis of the Church's 
acceptance to the new nature. Next let us notice that if 
our Lord, when he ascended on high, had appeared in the 
presence of God for the whole world instead of merely "for 
us," then the whole world would have been brought into 
relationship to God just as we have been— at once, and 
not at the close of a thousand years of uplifting. Would 
such a cancellation of the world's sins that are past and 
such an introduction of them to the Father as imperfect 
beings have been to their advantage? We answer, No. 
No more would have been advantaged than are advantaged 
now— the comparatively few. 

All of Adam's children are weak, imperfect, and only 
such of these as turn to the Lord with all their hearts 
and exercise faith and obedience could possibly be acceptable 
to him— even through Christ. Consequently, all 
the remainder, thousands of millions, would have been 
unacceptable and their justification through Christ's merit 
from the original sins would merely have put them on 
trial afresh for everlasting life or everlasting death. 
They would have been condemned as enemies of God and 
of righteousness— not merely enemies through wicked 
works of the flesh, which they could not control, but enemies 
at heart, "carnally minded— not subject to the will 
of God." What the world needs is something entirely 



different from what is now, by God's grace, accorded to 
the Church, the household of faith. Blessed are our 
eyes, for they see, and our ears, for they hear, and our 
hearts, for they are desirous of fellowship with God; 
otherwise he would not accept us as living sacrifices and 
justify us through the precious blood and sanctify us 
through our covenant of death. What the world needs 
is just what God has provided for them. 

(1) A strong Kingdom to crush the power of Satan 
and set mankind free from his blinding and enslaving 
influences. 

(2) It needs further the establishment of a Kingdom 
of righteousness to mete out rewards and punishments 
promptly. 

(3) It needs also a merciful high priest, not only 
sympathetic, but backed by a merit then applied on their 
behalf, giving them fully into his control to be uplifted 
mentally, morally and physically. 

(4) In order to comply with the Lord's promise to 
natural Israel, all these blessings of the New Covenant 
must reach the world through Israel as the channel. 

(5) This Mediatorial Kingdom will begin at the close 
of this Gospel Age, when the members of the Body of 
Christ shall all have been found, and all have been glorified. 
The New Covenant will then be inaugurated with 

Israel through the Ancient Worthies. Their sins will 
then be atoned for by the same precious blood which now 
atones for ours. As a result, the Ancient Worthies will 
come forth perfect and to them will gather, not only their 
own Israelitish kindred, but all nations. "This is my 
Covenant with them when I shall take away their sins." 
(Romans 11:27; Jer. 31:33.) Sodom and Samaria and 
all the nations shall be given unto them for daughters, 
but not by their old Law Covenant, but by a New Law 
Covenant— Ezek. 16:60-63. 
Under the new regime of the New Covenant and its 

R4575 : page 88 

Millennial Kingdom (in the hands of the antitypical 
Moses, the Mediator of the New Covenant), the Law will 
go forth from Mt. Zion (Spiritual Israel) and the Word 
of the Lord from Jerusalem (Natural Israel). The result 
will be wonderful blessings— mental, moral and physical 
uplift, freedom from pests, the elimination of disease, 
etc. The start on the highway of holiness will there be 
made and the blessings of the Lord will fill the whole 
earth. Many nations will perceive and take note and desire 
to share those earthly good things with Israel. But 
the New Covenant will be made only with Israel. And 
the only way in which the other nations can receive a 
share of those restitution favors will be by becoming 
Israelites— coming under the laws, regulations and disciplines 
of the New Covenant. The restitution blessings 
will be so attractive that we read, "Many nations shall 
go and say, Come, let us go up to the mountain of the 



Lord's house; he will teach us (as well as the Jews) of 
his ways; and we (like them) will walk in his paths."— 
Isa. 2:3. 

Thus the highway of holiness will be opened up 
through Israel, through the Ancient Worthies, through 
the New Covenant made with them. That highway of 
holiness will lead from imperfection to perfection, justification, 
restitution of all that was lost in Adam and redeemed 
at Calvary. Thus gradually, as the famine drew 
the Egyptians to Joseph for the bread of life, so those 
Millennial conditions will draw all nations to Israel to 
obtain perfection and everlasting life. 

The justification of the Millennial Age will not be a 
faith-justification, but an actual-justification, gradually 
attained under the New Covenant conditions, "Do and 
live;" but also under the merciful provision arranged 
through the Mediator of that New Covenant. During 
that Mediatorial Reign all refusing to come into harmony 
with the Kingdom arrangements will first of all 
fail to receive the special blessings that will then be 
given to the willing and obedient; and, persisting in their 
wrong course, they will ultimately be cut off in the Second 
Death without hope of recovery. With the conclusion 
of the Millennium all mankind will have reached 
the condition of actual justification, or perfection through 
the merit of Christ applied as Mediator of the New 
Covenant through Israel. And all the world of mankind 
then perfected will be Israelites, just as all nationalities 
come to the United States and here become citizens. 
Thus all nations during the Millennium will gradually 
flow to Israel and come under obedience to the New 
Covenant regulations and thus become Israelites indeed 
on the earthly plane. 

When our Lord at the close of his Mediatorial Kingdom 
will deliver over the control to God the Father, he 
will deliver only Israelites— the seed of Abraham; as it is 
written, "I have constituted thee a father of many nations"; 
"Thy seed shall be as the sand of the seashore" 
for multitude. (Hosea 1:10.) Later on that great host 
of Abraham's seed, after having been delivered over to 
the Father perfect and thoroughly able to keep the Divine 
Law (without any allowances), will be tested by the 
liberation of Satan for a little season. The Adversary will 
go up on the breadth of the earth to deceive all— the 
number of all being "as the sand of the seashore." How 
many will prove unfaithful and fall into the snare he will 
be permitted to lay for them is not indicated; but God 
will not fully and completely receive any into eternal life 
without first testing them as respects their loyalty to himself 
and the principles of his righteousness. One of the 
very tests which he puts to the Church in the present 
time— testing us, however, not according to the flesh, but 
according to the spirit, according to the intents of the 
heart— is our obedience to his Word and Providences. 
Only the submissive will pass the inspection. All the 
heady and high-minded and self-willed will surely be rejected. 



"Let us, therefore, humble ourselves under the 
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt us in due time." 
-I Pet. 5:6. 



R4576 : page 88 

GOD'S GRACE AND GOD'S REWARD 

"The grace of God which bringeth salvation hath appeared 
for all men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and 
worldly desires, we should live soberly, righteously and 
godly, in this present world; looking for that blessed hope 
and the glorious revelation of the great God 
and our Saviour Jesus Christ."— Titus 2:11-13. 

GOD'S grace or favor relates primarily to the 

mercy which he purposes to extend to 

Adam and all of his posterity through our 

Lord Jesus Christ. It is grace or favor 

because it is a thing not merited— it is not 

a reward. It has appeared for all men in 

the sense that it has been manifested to 

some and the information has been given 

that ultimately it will be extended to all, 

so that all may have a share in it. It 

bringeth salvation in the sense that the opportunities 

afforded by grace make possible our salvation from sin 

and death conditions. It has many teachings or lessons, 

but one of these is paramount, namely, that in God's sight 

sin is exceedingly sinful and must become so also in our 

sight. It teaches that we should forego the weaknesses, the 

tendencies of the flesh, and should resist them and show 

our preference for righteousness by our zeal in fighting 

against sin. All who will eventually get God's blessing 

and perfection on either the earthly or the heavenly plane 

must come to this standard of loving righteousness and 

hating iniquity, else the blessings of God's grace will not 

continue with them. 

And, contrariwise, when the sinners shall have been 
fully lifted out of their weakness and imperfection and 
fully established in righteousness, grace or favor toward 
them will be at an end; because they will no longer have 
need for it. They will, however, to all eternity, assuredly 
acknowledge with gladness the grace which saved 
them and lifted them to full salvation and accord with the 
Divine Law. 

During this Gospel Age God's grace is manifested in 
a variety of ways, whereas during the Millennial Age 
his grace will be manifested merely through the operation 
of the Millennial Kingdom and its influences. Now, 
God's people have his grace through Christ in the arrangement 
provided for the justification from their sins 
and weaknesses on the basis of obedient faith to the extent 
of ability. To abide in God's grace we must turn 



from sin to serve the Lord. Then we were brought to a 

knowledge of a second step of grace— the privilege of 

using our faith-justification as a basis for sacrificing 

with Christ and becoming partakers of his Divine nature, 

glory and Kingdom. After we had taken 

the step of consecration, a third step of grace was 

opened to us— the begetting of the holy Spirit and the induction 

R4576 : page 89 

into the School of Christ to take his yoke upon 

us and learn of him. Grace still pursued us. After cancelling 

our share of Original Sin and imperfection, grace 

provided also for our continuance in the love of God, 

after we became New Creatures. The "New Creature" 

has need of grace and mercy because it has for its expression 

only the "earthen vessel," which is frail and 

prone to sin, weakness and error. 

The New Creature cannot sin— wilfully— and it never 
had "Original Sin"; but it could be strangled by the old 
nature, if the latter were allowed to revive and regain 
the control. God recognizes the flesh as dead and deals 
only with the New Creature, which never knew sin and 
which never could love sin. Nevertheless the New Creature 
has a responsibility for its earthly tabernacle, the 
body, just as a man has responsibility for the conduct of 
his dog. If he knows the dog to be vicious he must 
muzzle him. If he does not encourage the dog to do mischief, 
he is still responsible for him and liable for his 
depredations. So the New Creature is responsible for 
his body of flesh. Because he cannot fully control 
thoughts, words and actions, there are sure to be trespasses. 
And these must not only be fought against, but 
must be repented of— taken to the Throne of the 
Heavenly Grace for forgiveness. Here again the voice 
of grace is heard speaking peace through Jesus Christ 
the Redeemer, for the Redeemer through Divine arrangement 
is our Advocate. As such he is both able and willing 
to apply all that may be needed to make good our 
errors of weakness or ignorance. God's grace continues 
thus with us to the end of the journey, lending assistance 
at every step. 

But there are certain things which are not of grace. 
While justification, the basis of our sacrifice, is of grace, 
our presentation of our bodies living sacrifices is not of 
grace. The knowledge of our privilege is by grace, but 
our sacrificing is of our own volition. It is this spirit 
of sacrifice and its manifestation in the spirit of loyalty 
to God and to righteousness which God purposes to reward 
with association with the Redeemer in his kingly 
glory, honor and immortality. In this we are copies of 
God's dear Son. "If we suffer with him, we shall also 
reign with him." Notice well the rewards promised: "To 
him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my 
throne." (Rev. 3:21.) "They shall walk with me in 
white, for they are worthy." (Rev. 3:4.) On the other 



hand, it may be truly said that all of our blessings and 
favors are of God's grace, because we could never have 
merited any of them ourselves— because the foundation 
of all our blessings, honors, glory and immortality rests 
upon the grace of God in Christ, without whom we could 
do nothing and would be nothing. 



R4576 : page 89 

HEALING ALL MANNER OF DISEASES 

-MATTHEW 8:2-17.-MARCH 6.- 

Golden Text:— "Himself took our infirmities 
and bare our weaknesses."— V. 17. 

ALTHOUGH the Great Teacher healed all 
manner of diseases, it is a mistake to suppose 
that this constituted his mission as a 
whole or one of its most important features. 
His healings were performed with three 
ends in view: 

(1) To draw attention to his message. 

(2) To be illustrations of his great 
Work of the future when in Kingdom 
power and glory he shall heal all diseases, 

uplifting mankind out of sin and death conditions completely. 

(3) They were tests of the Master's own faithfulness 

to his Consecration Vow. Throughout his healing ministry 

he laid down his life, so that after three and a 

half years of ministry, the Perfect One had so exhausted 

his vitality that he could not carry his own cross, as 

could the thieves who accompanied him. His great sacrifice 

was thus partially laid down before he reached Calvary, 

where it was "finished." Thus our Lord's miracles 

were performed, as the prophet declares, at his own expense, 

his own sacrifice— "Himself took our infirmities 

and bare our diseases." Every healing performed, to a 

proportionate extent decreased the Lord's vitality. So we 

read, "Virtue (vitality) went out of him and healed them 

all. "-Luke 6:19. 

Leprosy, very prevalent in the East, is used in the 
Scriptures symbolically to represent sin, and the cleansing 
of it to represent purification from sin. It was classed 
as incurable and hence our Lord's curing it demonstrated 
his supernatural power. In the case under consideration, 
as in others, Jesus directed that the miracle be not 
specially blazoned forth amongst the people; for so doing 
would tend to make him too popular, as in some cases it 
led to the demand that he should be recognized as King. 
But he did direct that the miracle be duly reported to the 
High Priest. This was the demand of the Law. And 
furthermore Jesus wished that his miracles should be "a 
testimony unto them"— unto those who sat in Moses' seat 



as the rulers of the people, and who would ultimately 
pass sentence upon him. They must at least know of his 
miracles. 

Not much religion might be expected from Roman 
soldiers, yet our Lord testified of the one whose servant 
he healed that his faith was greater than any he had 
found amongst the Israelites. The Roman entreated favor 
for his servant, and when our Lord promised to go 
to his house to heal him, the centurion answered the Lord 
that a visit was entirely unnecessary, that he would be 
fully satisfied if he spoke the word of healing. Jesus 
dismissed the centurion saying, "Go thy way; and as thou 
hast believed, so be it done unto thee." And his servant 
was healed. 

There is a lesson for us in these words— our Lord's 
ability was unlimited. And his blessings to us are proportionate 
to our readiness to receive them by faith; for 
"without faith it is impossible to please God." And those 
who cannot exercise faith cannot have share in the 
blessings offered under the Gospel call, but must wait 
for the demonstrations of the Millennial Kingdom. 

The circumstance served as a text, and prophetically 
the Lord declared what must have seemed peculiar to his 
hearers— that many would come from the East and West 
—Gentiles— to be associated with Abraham and Isaac and 
Jacob in the Kingdom, while Israelites would be cast out 
of Divine favor into outer darkness of disfavor and there 
have distress. The "outer darkness" of God's disfavor 
has been upon them especially since the destruction of 
Jerusalem. 

The Jews fully expected the setting up of the Millennial 
Kingdom, but supposed none other than Jews would 
be in or of it. The nucleus of the Kingdom class was 

R4577 : page 90 

Jewish— from the day of Pentecost for three and a half 
years, to the time when Cornelius was received as the 
first Gentile accepted. Since then "the middle wall of 
partition" between Jew and Gentile, which previously 
hindered the latter from a full share of God's favors, has 
been broken down. During the eighteen centuries the 
Lord has gathered or "called" disciples from all nations. 
The faithful of these will constitute the Kingdom class. 
In connection with these Abraham, Isaac and Jacob will 
have an honored place for the blessing of Israel regathered 
and through them the blessing of all the families 
of the earth during the Millennium, which, we believe, 
will shortly be in evidence. 

While the faithful of the Jews will share that Kingdom, 
the nation as a whole was rejected from Divine 
favor and cast into "outer darkness"— the same darkness 
which covered the Gentiles, the world in general. They 
have had weeping and gnashing of teeth for eighteen 
centuries and, according to the Scriptures, will suffer 
further yet before the time shall come when God will 



graciously forgive their sin and save them from their 
national blindness and make them, in connection with the 
Millennial Kingdom, his instruments for blessing all the 
families of the earth. 

No miracle of healing was ever wrought by the 
Savior upon any of his disciples. The same is true of 
the apostolic healing— the healing blessings were all 
wrought upon those outside of the discipleship. This was 
because the "call" of the disciples was not to human 
perfection, restitution and health; but to self-denial, self-sacrifice, 
even unto death. Their blessings and privileges, 
above those of the world, were along spiritual lines. The 
awakening of Lazarus and of Dorcas were not in violation 
of this rule, neither was the healing of Peter's 
mother-in-law, for we have no evidence that she was a 
believer and a disciple. 



R4577 : page 90 

POWER OVER THE ADVERSARY 

-MATTHEW 8:23-34. -MARCH 13.- 

Golden Text:— "What manner of man is this, that 
even the winds and the sea obey him?"— V. 27. 

SEVERAL of the apostles were fishermen on 

Lake Galilee. Apparently the Master 

launched out with them occasionally in order 

to obtain rest and quiet; for while he was 

ashore he was constantly active in his mission, 

teaching the people, healing the sick, 

etc. Today's lesson includes an account of 

such a drawing aside from his busy activities. 

Exhausted, he was asleep in the hinder 

end of the fishing smack. Suddenly a great 

storm arose, as is frequently the case on that lake. The 

mighty waves threatened the destruction of the ship. The 

violence of the storm may be judged from the fact that 

even the apostles, who were experienced, were alarmed. 

The account very briefly tells us that as the disciples 

awakened the Master, saying, "Save, Lord, or we perish," 

he arose and rebuked the wind and the sea and there was 

a great calm. And he rebuked the apostles with the 

words, "Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?" Many 

since have read these words with great comfort and 

profit; not that many have been in perils by sea, but because 

all are subject to the storms of life, in which 

mighty billows threaten our destruction. The manifested 

power to deliver from literal waves gives confidence 

that the same Mighty One is able to deliver from every 

trouble. The rebuke of the apostles for lack of faith has 

come home to the hearts of many of the Lord's people, 

chiding them and encouraging them to be more faithful, 



more courageous, more trustful, in the providential care 
of our Almighty Friend. 

Well might the apostles marvel, "What manner of man 
is this, that even the winds and sea obey him." Not until 
they had learned that lesson were they prepared to trust 
him with all their trials, difficulties and interests. And 
likewise not until we have learned the same great lesson 
of Jesus' Messiahship, and that to him at his resurrection 
was granted "all power in heaven and in earth," can we 
fully trust him and rest by faith in his loving care. 

Evidently the apostles all understood that Satan is a 
spirit being, invisible and powerful, and that, to some extent, 
he has power over human affairs under certain 
Divine limitations and regulations. Thus St. Paul designates 
him the "Prince of the power of the air, the spirit 
that now worketh in the children of disobedience."— 
Eph. 2:2. 

We remember the case of the Prophet Job and the 
Bible testimony that God permitted a trial of his faith 
and allowed the Adversary to have great power over his 
affairs. We recall that some of that power was exercised 
through a cyclone, which destroyed the house in which 
Job's children were gathered. 

Possibly the Adversary was permitted to develop the 
storm on Lake Galilee for the very purpose of the lesson 
it gave to the apostles. The "Prince of the power of the 
air" may have thought to destroy the Savior in this manner, 
as later he evidently had to do with his crucifixion 
between two thieves. In the one case his effort was 
thwarted by the word of Jesus. In the other case it was 
permitted to reach success— because "his hour had come." 
We may well remember, too, the declaration that Satan, 
who had been working with Judas previously, fully entered 
into him, according to the account, on the night of 
our Savior's betrayal.— Luke 22:3; John 13:27. 

This study tells us of our Lord's encounter with some 
of the inferior fallen angels, of whom we read that Satan 
is the "Prince of devils." We must not forget that the 
Scriptures deny that these demons are disembodied men 
and that they teach most distinctly that they are fallen 
angels.— 2 Pet. 2:4; Jude 6. 

The Bible tells that these fallen angels at one time 
were holy, but that in the period before the flood they 
became contaminated with sin through association with 
humanity. Since the flood, cut off from association with 
the holy angels and from liberty to materialize and appear 
as men, they have, nevertheless, sought to break down 
the barriers. Not permitted to materialize, they have 
sought to control, to obsess and to possess humanity- 
using the human body as their medium, their body, to the 
extent of their ability to break down the barrier of the 
human will. The Scriptures continually guard us against 
having anything to do with necromancers, wizards, 
witches, mediums, or others, who claim to represent and 
speak for the dead. The Bible assures us that "The dead 
know not anything," and that the only hope for them is 



in the resurrection and that not dead humanity, but fallen 
angels, strive to communicate with us and through us. 
We are not in this blaming spirit mediums with being 
in collusion with the fallen angels knowingly. We believe 
that they are deceived, as are others. Indeed, the Bible 
alone gives light on this subject, as we have been able to 
point out to many mediums whom we have recovered 
from their delusions. 

R4577 : page 91 

The two maniacs of verse 28 were crazy because many 
demons possessed them and attempted to control them in 
different ways. Intelligent physicians recognize that probably 
more than one-half of the inmates of insane asylums 
suffer from this same terrible trouble, demon possession. 

Another account tells us how our Lord questioned the 
obsessed ones and how the evil spirits answered through 
them that they were legion— that is to say, a multitude of 
demons were in possession. They besought the Lord that 
if they could not remain they might at least be permitted 
possession of the herd of swine. The permission 
was granted them. The result was that the entire herd 
of probably hundreds stampeded, rushed down the face 
of the hill, and were drowned in the sea. When we consider 
the nature of the hog, it would appear that there 
were enough demons to supply one for every hog, because, 
unlike sheep, a hog will stand still while his fellows 
in the same herd may become greatly excited. Each hog is 
independent in his action. The number of demons was 
indeed legion. Unable to break down the barrier of the 
human will in a general way, they crowd into poor human 
beings whose will-barriers have been let down. 

Continually we warn people, in harmony with the 
Scriptures, against Spiritism and everything occult, as being 
of the Adversary. We warn them also that hypnotism 
and everything which breaks down the human will is injurious 
and leaves the person the more subject to the invasion 
of these fallen angels into his mind, his affairs, who, 
if yielded to, endanger his sanity through obsession. 

The result of this miracle shows the power of selfishness. 
The multitude came to see the miracle— two men 
who had been crazy, clothed in their right minds. "But," 
said they sordidly, "What a cost! See the hogs floating in 
the sea!" And they besought the Lord to leave their 
country, which he promptly did. The same principle of 
selfishness may be noted everywhere today. The multitude 
are moved specially by their temporal interest, while the 
great blessings of the Lord they pass by comparatively 
unnoticed. Let so many of us as are disciples of the 
Galilean Prophet take a different view of matters and have 
our hearts in harmony with his glorious work of the deliverance 
of humanity and the destruction of everything 
obnoxious to the Divine will— even as swine were contraband 
of the Jewish Law. 



R4578 : page 91 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE RANSOM 

WATCH TOWER readers can bear witness of 
the fact that this Journal has always encouraged 
the study of the Scriptures and the 
attainment, so far as possible, of an intellectual 
appreciation of God's Word. We 
have, however, always insisted that Divine 
Revelation was intended, not to puff us up 
with mere knowledge of Divine mysteries, 
but to build us up in the character-likeness 
of our Redeemer and of our Father. Hence 
our frequent reiteration of St. Paul's words, If I had all 
knowledge and understood all mystery, yet had not love, 
it would profit me nothing.— I Cor. 13:2. 
We should steer clear of the two extremes:— 

(1) Of those who lay all stress upon the heart and 
feeling and ignore a study of the Divine Word and its 
mysteries. 

(2) Those who study the Bible from curiosity, or from 
a desire to shine before their fellows, and who ignore 
heart-development and a sympathetic entrance into the 
spirit of the Divine Plan. 

Doubtless many of our readers understood fundamentals 
of the Gospel of Christ before they came in contact 
with the DAWN-STUDIES and their elaboration of the 
philosophy of the Divine Plan. We are sure that many 
would be inclined to say, "No, I never understood anything 
whatever respecting Ransom, Restitution, Justification 
and Sanctification until I read THE WATCH TOWER publications; 
my previous Christian experience seemed hazy, 
like a dream in comparison with present realization of the 
length and breadth and height and depth of Wisdom, Justice 
and Love Divine." 

But no, dear Brother, we remind you that even your 
hazy ignorance of the philosophy of the Ransom did not 
hinder you from mentally grasping and appropriating to 
yourself the great general fact that "Christ died for our 
sins, according to the Scriptures" (I Cor. 15:3), and that 
we have "redemption and remission of sin through his 
blood." On the basis of that faith and without philosophizing 
you had "peace with God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ." More than that: you possibly had some appreciation 
of having made a consecration to the Lord, turned 
over a new leaf, etc.— however vaguely you realized this. 
And you had learned lessons in the School of Christ along 
certain lines, even though you did not know that you were 
in School preparing for the great work of the future— 
the judging of the world. You knew something about 
self-sacrifice, too, even though you did not appreciate the 
philosophy of how you were to share "in the sufferings 
of Christ" as a member of his Body. 



It is well that we call these things to mind for two 
reasons: 

(1) The remembrance of them will make us more considerate 
of fellow-Christians, whose eyes of understanding 

have not yet opened to the philosophy of the Divine 
Program. 

(2) It will keep us from becoming excited when some 
poor fellow-traveler, falling asleep, has the nightmare and 
shouts, "Wake up! Wake up! THE WATCH TOWER has 
denied the Ransom, the Mediator and the New Covenant, 
and has been doing so for thirty years." The poor brother 
who is thus excited should consider his own mental state 
and realize that he has never seen a philosophy of the 
ransom presented in any other publication. If he can 
produce it we will be glad to have him cite it to us— 
volume and page. The difficulty has been superficiality. 
He never comprehended the philosophy of the ransom— 

or possibly he did and has become blinded to it. 

Faith in the Atonement is the important matter. But 
the more accurate our knowledge, the stronger and firmer 
and more intelligent will be our faith. If the brother 
who thinks he is waking up when he is really going to 
sleep will sit down and connectedly attempt to put together 
a philosophy of the Atonement he will do himself 
a great service, for he will soon discover that in picking 
out a few threads of argument from our presentations, 
he has spoiled his philosophy entirely. He will find himself 
unable to lay down systematically, logically, reasonably, 
the Divine Plan of the Ages, tracing it from the 
promise made to Abraham to the close of the Millennial 
Age. 

It is one thing to pick a quarrel, to dispute and object 
and to quote a text here and there on a subject, and to 
"throw dust"; but it is quite another thing to systematically 
map out the Covenants, their mediators, their time, 
their place, the types, the antitypes, etc. Any of us may 

R4578 : page 92 

take a narrow or a comprehensive view of a subject such 
as the Ransom. One time we might say broadly and 
truthfully, "Everything was secured by the death of 
Christ." Or, more accurately and minutely we might 
proceed along the Scriptural lines to note the various 
steps of the Divine Program in our Lord's leaving the 
glory of the heavenly condition to be born a babe— in his 
boyhood experience; in his consecration at Jordan; in his 
death at Calvary; in his ascension; in his appearing as 
the Advocate of the Church before the Father; in his 
pouring out of the Pentecostal blessing; in his dealing 
with the Church during this Gospel Age, developing an 
elect "little flock" and also a "great company" to the 
spirit plane; in his Second Coming; in the uniting of his 
members, his Bride, to himself; in his sealing the New 
Covenant for Israel— and for the world through the privilege 
of becoming Israelites; in his Millennial reign of 



glory and the end thereof, when "he shall see of the 
travail of his soul and be satisfied."— Isa. 53:11. 

Similarly we might speak of the Ransom— that "Jesus 
gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time." 
Undoubtedly that was the Divine intention. But the application 
of the Ransom during this age to the Church 
and during the next age to the world is a further elaboration, 
showing the relationship of the "due time" to the 
great fact of a Ransom Price and its broad application, 
ultimately for all. 

What constitutes a faith in the Ransom, and what constitutes 
a denial of it, are proper questions, proper studies. 
Irrespective of perfect or imperfect philosophy, a true 
believer in the Ransom is one who acknowledges— 

(1) That the reconciliation to God has already been 
effected and that the basis of that reconciliation lay in 
the merit of Christ's sacrificial death. 

(2) To deny the Ransom is to deny one or both of 
those propositions directly or indirectly. For instance, 
for anyone to claim relationship with God on the ground 
of his own perfection or meritorious works, aside from 
Christ's sacrifice, would be a denial of the second proposition. 
For anyone to claim that he is not reconciled to 

God through the death of his Son is to claim that he has 
not yet had experience with the blessings secured through 
the ransom. It means a denial or rejection of his share 
in the ransom— a denial of At-one-ment between him and 
the Father. Hence those who claim that they need a 
mediator are denying the At-one-ment as between God and 
themselves— and this means, so far as they are concerned, 
a denial of the effectiveness of the ransom. A ransom 
which did not at-one for sin and bring the sinner back 
into full fellowship with God would not be a ransom. 

We are not hereby claiming that those who say that 
Jesus is their Mediator are knowingly denying the ransom. 
We assume that many of them are merely confused 
and will ere long, under God's providence, see matters more 
distinctly. We are merely pointing out that theoretically 
and logically such deny the finished work of Christ on 
their behalf, when they claim that he is the Mediator 
between them and God. It seems remarkable that any 
could become so confused as to imagine that, as New 
Creatures, they ever sinned or were ever alienated from 
God. It was not as New Creatures that we needed ransoming. 
It was the natural man fallen through sin whose 
sin needed to be atoned for by the death of the Man Christ 
Jesus and the application or imputation of the merit of 
that sacrifice. 

The application of our Lord's ransom merit "for us," 
when he ascended up on high, had the effect of immediately 
cancelling all of our sins and bringing us into direct 
at-one-ment with the Father the moment we by faith accepted 
the Lord's terms and presented ourselves living 
sacrifices. Not even for one moment did Jesus stand 
between us and the Father. The very moment that he 
applied to us his merit was the same moment in which the 



Father received us as New Creatures begotten of the holy 

Spirit, "Sons of God without rebuke." (Phil. 2:15.) Our 

Lord Jesus was made unto us wisdom, justification, sanctification 

and will yet be made unto us deliverance; but it 

was God that drew us, that called us. "It is God that 

justifieth." (Rom. 8:33.) It is God that sanctifies us to 

himself and that will by and by raise us up also by Jesus 

to the glorious perfection of the divine nature. Our 

Redeemer is our Advocate who, covering us with the robe 

of his own merit, presents us at once and directly to the 

Father, without any one between. 

Note, in contrast, how differently the Ransom merit 
will affect the world of mankind during the Millennium. 
It will not similarly cancel their sins and 
instantly turn them over to the Father. To do so 
would mean their ruination, for the Divine Law 
would instantly condemn them to death again; because, 
carnally minded, rebellious, not subject to the Law of 
God. The merit of the Ransom will be applied for the 
world indirectly in the sealing of the New Covenant with 
Israel, so that all the world under that Covenant provision 
and under the great Mediatorial Kingdom of Righteousness, 
for a thousand years may have fullest opportunity 
for the opening of the eyes of their understanding, for the 
changing of their stony hearts to hearts of flesh, to human 
love and sympathy. During that age none will be 
introduced to the Father; the Mediator will stand between 
God and man until he shall have perfected the willing and 
obedient— until he shall have actually justified them. All 
will be under the judgment of the Royal Priesthood after 

R4579 : page 92 

the order of Melchizedek for disciplining and uplifting. 
During that age all those who refuse to heed that Great 
Prophet, Priest, King, "Mediator between God and men" 
will be utterly destroyed from amongst the people in the 
Second Death. (Act. 3:23.) Not until the end of the 
Millennial Age (not until mankind shall have reached 
absolute justification or perfection) will the full results 
of the ransom be theirs. Then they will be introduced 
to the Father blameless and unreprovable. 

In a word, then, the efficiency of the Ransom Price of 
our Lord's sacrifice comes instantly to the consecrated believer 
through faith-justification and obedience of sacrifice, 
while the merit of that ransom will properly be 
gradually bestowed upon the world during the entire 
Millennial Age. 



R4579 : page 92 

QUESTIONS ON JUSTIFICATION 

Question.— (1) Did the Court of the Tabernacle represent 



justification by faith merely, or did it represent 
justification to eternal life rights? 

Answer.— In seeking for the lessons of the Tabernacle 
types we should remember that they represent both 
progress and completion. In reality, all those saved during 
this Gospel Age are called to be priests— no one is 
called to be of the "great company," the antitypical Levites. 
Those who will become members of the "great company," 
the antitypical Levites, will be such as have been called 
to the priesthood and who took certain steps in harmony 
with that call, but failed to make their calling and 
election sure. Eventually, as shown in the type, only a 
"little flock" of priests, will attain the condition typified 

R4579 : page 93 

by the Tabernacle itself. Eventually a large number, 
begotten of the holy Spirit, will fail to manifest sufficient 
zeal as sacrificers and will be accounted only as Levite 
helpers. Their place will be in the Court, as shown in type. 

Now let us view the processes by which the antitypical 
priests and Levites reach their fixed positions 
represented by the Tabernacle and the Court. All who 
are feeling after God and righteousness may be said to 
draw near to the Tabernacle. To such the great altar 
and its sacrifice will be manifested. By faith they may 
then enter in through the gate and be behind the curtain 
in the Court. They are in the Levite attitude or position, 
but are not yet really Levites in the finished sense. Passing 
the altar they proceed to the Laver and see its water 
and their privilege of washing, putting away the filth of 
the flesh. As faith alone did not determine them to be 
Levites, neither does the washing or putting away of sin. 
They must additionally approach the Veil, which symbolizes 
consecration— they must stoop to this Veil and 
pass under it before they can belong to the spirit-begotten 
class. 

Inside the Veil they are nominally priests. And if 
they will, they may proceed to enjoy the privileges of the 
shewbread and of the light from the golden lampstand 
and proceed to the Incense Altar antitypically by responding 
to all the opportunities and privileges granted them of 
laying down their lives for the brethren— presenting their 
bodies daily, hourly, living sacrifices in the Lord's service, 
"a sweet odor." If faithful even unto death they then will 
pass beyond the rent Veil into the Most Holy condition. 
As members of the High Priest's Body they will then have 
free course, full privilege to the Tabernacle condition 
forever. Or rather, as shown in the other type, they become 
living stones in the glorious spiritual Temple. 

But those who made the consecration and who fail to 
burn the incense on the Golden Altar may not remain in 
the Tabernacle— they must go out again into the Court. 
They lose the priestly privileges, but not their Levite 
privileges and right to remain in the Court condition. 
Only a willful, deliberate rejection of the Lord's grace and 



turning to sin— anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife, etc., 
works of the flesh and of the devil, which would mean 
their utter destruction in the Second Death— would exclude 
them from the Court of favor. Those who pass the Gate 
and the Altar, some of them going, perhaps, so far as to 
use the Laver but refuse to make consecration of 
themselves, will be ultimately rejected from the 
Court condition. They will be thrust out and become 
parts of the world, to be dealt with by the Great Redeemer 
during his Mediatorial Reign— to have all the privileges 
of the remainder of the world and no more. 

JUSTIFIED TO PEACE 

Question.— To what stage of our justification does the 
Apostle refer saying, "Being justified by faith we have 
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ"? 

Answer.— From the time we first approach God we 
begin to have a measure of this peace. (Romans 5:1.) 
It continues with us as long as we are walking in the 
right direction, growing in knowledge and in obedience. 
Those whose faith or obedience stops find their peace with 
God diminish. If the faith and obedience extend to the 
point of full consecration and the begetting of the holy 
Spirit it becomes the "Peace of God which passeth all 
understanding, ruling in our hearts." (Phil. 4:7.) The 
latter text refers to the perfected peace imparted by the 
holy Spirit, resulting from a full consecration to the Lord. 

To illustrate: Imagine a person not in harmony with 
God, but feeling after him. Typically he recognizes the 
Divine Presence as represented in the Tabernacle. He 
draws near to God. He finds but one "gate" for entrance 
from the camp to the court. There he beholds the 
brazen altar with its sacrifice representing the Redeemer's 
meritorious sacrifice. Passing the altar implies faith in 
the redeeming work. From the time of entering the court 
condition of faith, the peace continues to increase with 
each onward step of obedience. When the Laver is 
reached and its lessons of cleansing mind and heart are applied 
the peace with God increases, because of the obedience. 
Next, the First Veil is seen, representing consecration 
to death. If the stoop of full consecration to pass 
under the Veil be made, the result is full or perfect peace, 
such as our Lord referred to when he said, "My peace I 
give unto you." Our peace is no longer merely through 
faith in our Redeemer's work, but more than this; it has 
become peace, the gift of God's love, the begetting of the 
holy Spirit, which passeth all understanding, ruling in our 
hearts. But if, when the first Veil is reached and seen 
to represent the sacrifice of all earthly interest, then that 
step be not taken, the result will be a lessening of the 
peace and possibly a more or less rapid retrograde movement 
back toward the "gate"— toward the world. 

ANCIENT WORTHIES NOT IN THE COURT 



Question.— Were the Ancient Worthies in the condition 
represented by the Court of the Tabernacle? If not, 
why not? 

Answer.— No. In their day the Priest had not yet 
come and the antitypical Tabernacle and its Court had not 
been established; hence they could not be in it. According 
to their hearts, as expressed in their conduct, they 
must have been members of the household of faith. It 
is our understanding that ultimately they may be granted 
a place with and as a part of the "great company," the 
antitypical Levites of the antitypical Court condition. 

JUSTIFIED FULLY TO HUMAN RIGHTS 

Question.— Are all who are justified freely from 
Adamic death the recipients of life rights on the human 
plane? 

Answer.— If in the word freely is signified fully our 
answer is, Yes. Whoever is fully justified out of Adamic 
death is fully justified to human restitution. This will be 
the case with the world during the Millennium. During 
that thousand years the world will gradually rise out of 
its unjust and imperfect condition— gradually attain perfection 
or justification. 

Applying the question to the present time— to faith-justification: 
A full justification would be attained only 
at the moment when Christ would accept the sinner as a 
disciple and that is at the moment of consecration. He 
does not spurn the sinner who is approaching him, exercising 
faith and evidencing a desire to forsake sin. All 
such are justified to their measure of faith and obedience, 
to have his fellowship, his aid; as it is written, "No man 
cometh unto the Father but by me." He invites the sinner 
to have confidence in him as a burden-bearer, saying, 
"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, 
and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and 
learn of me." (Matt. 1 1:28,29.) All thus approaching 
have a measure of peace and a measure of justification, 
but neither complete. The full or complete justification 
and peace are obtainable only at the moment when the 
sacrifice is fully tendered and accepted. At that moment 
our great Advocate and Elder Brother imputes to us his 
merit, so that our consecrated sacrifice can be accepted. 

For our Lord to impute his merit to us in the full sense 
sooner than that moment of consecration and spirit-begetting 

R4580 : page 94 

would be to do injury to the interests of those 

who would fail to go on to consecration and discipleship: 

because if Christ's merit were fully imputed to them, canceling 

the sins that are past and presenting them to the 

Father, they would not be acceptable to the Father during 

this age unless they did consecrate to death. And, being 

unable to maintain themselves in Divine relationship as 

justified humans, they would be amenable to the Second 



Death, because the provision of the Mediatorial Kingdom, 

etc., has not yet gone into operation. Without that New 

Covenant arrangement under the better Mediator no imperfect 

human being would have any opportunity for attaining 

perfection. If Christ's merit were now applied 

(to any except the actually justified and sanctified), it 

would put them directly into the hands of Jehovah and under 

the jurisdiction of his Law, and the result would 

be failure, Second Death. Only the sanctified can say, 

"The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us." 

(Rom. 8:4.) On the other hand, note the Divine arrangement 

that the Father does not deal with us as men, but as 

New Creatures. The Redeemer becomes our Advocate and 

applies his merit at the instant of our consecration. The 

Father's approval by the impartation of the holy Spirit 

is the evidence of the acceptance of our sacrifice under 

the imputed merit of Christ. As the Great High Priest 

is a Spirit Being, so must all his members be. And it is 

only with the spirit-begotten ones, therefore, that the 

Heavenly Father deals in any sense of the word. 

CAN ANY PASS FROM THE COURT? 

Question.— Is there any way to retreat from the antitypical 
Court condition without going into the Second 
Death? 

Answer.— Yes, and no. For any of the antitypical 
Priests and Levites to abandon the Court would mean to 
leave the condition of membership in the "little flock" or 
in the "great company" to go to some other condition. 
There would be no other condition for them to go to, except 
as suggested, the Second Death. 

On the other hand, let us keep in memory the fact that 
there are at present prospective or tentative Levites. We 
refer to those who are approaching through the Gate of 
faith past the Altar and the Laver and before the first 
Veil, but who have never taken the consecration step, fully 
renouncing their earthly rights. These have had justification-peace 
only, and that conditioned upon their obedience 
to the sacrificing terms of the "high calling." When 
they ceased to go forward, ceased to obey, their justification 
to peace began to die. These gradually go out of the 
Court, but not into the Second Death condition— because 
their justification had never reached the point of vitalization 
in sacrifice. 



THE CHRISTIAN'S BATTLE 

(OLD CREATURE) 

Your brother has offended you. 

Must you forgiveness show 
When he has not forgiveness asked? 

I really do not know 
That you are called to go that far— 



He's very much to blame. 
Of course, I would not slander him, 

Nor injure his good name; 
But then, I think, I'd show him, too, 

That he has quite offended you. 

(NEW CREATURE) 

How can I be a child of God 

And not forgiveness show? 
Why, he has covered all my sins, 

And I must surely grow 
In that sweet grace, which from the heart 

Forgives by word and deed. 
I would be like the blessed Lord; 

For in his Word I read 
That he left all the joys of heaven, 

To die that I might be forgiven. 

(OLD CREATURE) 

Your brother has imposed on you; 

Says, "All that's thine is mine." 
It is not right; what shall you do? 

Where will you draw the line? 
Why should you share your earthly goods 

Which you by thrift acquired? 
That which you toil for is your own; 

And you are not required 
To give to every one who comes 

To seek your help, your bread, your home. 

(NEW CREATURE) 

I've often wished that I had lived 
When my Lord left his throne, 

And trod this earth in human form, 
That I might then have shown 

My love to him, in service sweet; 
But still the suffering Christ 

Walks by my side each day and how 
Neglected, poor, despised, 

Still needing ministries of love- 
Now here's the chance, my love to prove. 

(OLD CREATURE) 

Your brother shows no gratitude 

For all your kindly deeds. 
He surely should express some thanks, 

When you supply his needs. 
You've loaned, you've given, you've gone without; 

You've helped him all you could; 
I really think, in counting up, 

You've done more than you should. 
I'd call a halt, till he has seen 

How very kind you've always been. 

(NEW CREATURE) 

What! work for thanks! then I should lose 



A future rich reward; 
All service to my brother, now, 

Is done to my dear Lord. 
Each little sacrifice I make, 

Is precious in his sight. 
To see my love and zeal abound, 

I know is his delight. 
For all the wealth beneath the sun, 

I would not miss his sweet, "Well done. 

(OLD CREATURE) 

Your brother slandered you, I hear, 

And tried on you to throw 
Suspicions base to injure you; 

Told things that were not so; 
Surmised that you had evil done; 

Tells others of his fears, 
With coolness meets your looks of love, 

And costs you many tears. 
You do not owe him in return 

A love which he will only spurn. 

R4580 : page 95 

(NEW CREATURE) 

'Tis not my brother you hold up; 

Tis not his faults you show. 
It is my brother's enemy, 

Like you, a deadly foe. 
My brother does not do the things 

That you lay at his door; 
Tis his old creature that one day 

Shall trouble him no more. 
The New Creation is my kin, 

The New Creation does not sin. 

(OLD CREATURE) 

Your brother claims he walks in love; 
Then why is he so mean? 

In many people of the world 
There's more goodness seen 

Than he shows in his daily life; 

You know you're vexed with him, 

He has such ugly little ways, 
And such besetting sins: 

He sorely lacks in Christian grace- 
Now, how can he win in the race? 

(NEW CREATURE) 

The way is getting narrower, 

More steep and rough it grows; 
And fewer they who walk therein. 

Lord, I would be of those 
Who walk on to the very end 

Through good report or ill— 
My chief desire to know and do 



Thy blessed holy will. 
Complete in me thy work of grace, 
That I may see thee face to face. 

REBECCA FAIR DONEY. 



page 95 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES (V) 

Man for Whom Atonement Was Made. 

APRIL 3 

(1) What is the signification of the word ransom in the 
English and in the Greek? Cite the Scripture. P. 427, last par. 

(2) What light does the meaning of the word ransom 
throw upon the work of Atonement? P. 428. 

(3) Does the word redeem have a somewhat similar 
signification to the word ransom? And have the translators 
of the English Bible helped or hindered the student, and 
how? P. 429-431. 

(4) What about the word lutroo? Explain its significance 
and use. P. 431,432. 

(5) Explain the word lutrosis, also rendered redemption, 
and cite Scriptures. P. 432, 433. 

(6) Explain the meaning of the Greek word poieolutrosin 
and its uses in the Scriptures. P. 433, par. 3,4. 

(7) About the word apolutrosis: explain it and refer 
to its use and its meaning. P. 434-437. 

APRIL 10 

(8) Cite the uses of the words redeem, redeemer, redeemed, 
redemption in the Old Testament. Examine these 

and show their proper application. P. 438. 

(9) Is the commercial idea involved in the words describing 
man's redemption and its cost? P. 439, par. 2. 

(10) How does this commercial thought harmonize with 
the substitute thought and with the signification of the word 
ransom? P. 439, par. 1. 

(11) What object is served by the teaching of this 
Scripture that the "world is bought"?— that the penalty of 
man's sin was death, under the Divine arrangement? 

P. 439, par. 2. 

(12) So far as the redeemed are concerned, what does 

it matter by what process God satisfied the demands of his 
own Justice, if to them it comes as a gift? What 
purpose, then, is served in the Divine explanation as to how 
we were redeemed and how the Divine Justice was satisfied 
before we could be delivered from the power of sin and 
death— curse or sentence of the Divine Law? P. 439, par. 3. 



(13) Mention some of the Scriptures which show that 

our Redeemer gave all that he had; that he kept nothing back, 
but made a full sacrifice of his every talent, power, position 
and right, that thereby he might become man's Redeemer and 
eventually have a right to be the Mediator of the New 
Covenant between God and mankind in general? P. 440. 

(14) Cite some Scripture showing what ransom was paid 
for man. P. 441, par. 1. 

(15) Cite some Scriptures showing what was the penalty 
for sin and what the price paid in offset or cancellation 

of that sin. P. 441. 

(16) Did the payment of the ransom price effect the 
forgiveness, and release all mankind or any number of them 
from the death sentence? P. 442, par. 1. 

(17) When our Lord ascended on high, was he possessed 

of a sufficiency of merit which, if applied, would have effected 
the cancellation of the sins of the whole world? And did 
he so apply it? And if not, what did he do with it? 
P. 442, par. 1. 

(18) Who are included in the term us? For whom did 
the Lord make application of his merit when he ascended 

on high and what proof was furnished to the Church showing 
that the Father accepted the merit thus applied? 

(19) What can we say respecting the meaning of the 
words hilasmos and hilasterion? What Scriptures refer to 
these and what do they teach? 

APRIL 17 

(20) When we read that without the shedding of blood 
there is no remission of sins, did it mean any blood? If 

not, what blood? And did it mean that shedding of the blood 
remitted the sins or that the blood must be shed and 
then be used as a basis for sin remission? P. 442, last par. 

(21) Explain how and why the shame and ignominy of 

the cross, etc., were necessary to our Lord, whereas the penalty 
of sin as originally stated to father Adam was 
merely death without stipulations respecting shame and 
ignominy. P. 443. 

(22) What Scriptures particularly show that mankind 
is in a wrong condition, alienated from his Creator, and 
nothing but the sacrifice of Christ could be effective for his 
reconciliation, either by justification by faith now or actual 
justification by and by during the Millennium? P. 444, 445. 

(23) Cite some Scriptures which teach that our Lord's 
sacrifice was not for the Church alone, but also for the sins of 
the whole world. P. 446. 

(24) What Scriptures directly state that mankind were 
bought with a price— the blood of Christ? P. 446, last par. 

(25) By whom was the purchase made? P. 447. 

(26) Of whom was the purchase made? P. 447-449. 

(27) Why, for what purpose, was the purchase made? 
P. 450. 

(28) What part did love and wisdom have with justice 
in this arrangement for human sin? P. 451. 



APRIL 24 

(29) May we then say that although man be released 

from sin and death only by the satisfaction of Justice, nevertheless 
the triumph of Justice was preeminently a victory of 
Divine Love through Justice? If so, show it. P. 452, par. 1,2. 

(30) Who sold the race into sin and what compensation 
did he receive? P. 452, par. 3. 

(3 1) Is this matter of the purchase of our race by the 
Lord Jesus Christ a mere figure or theory, or is it bona fide, 
actual, and does it carry with it actualities of progression 
and control? P. 452, par. 4. 

(32) Is it by virtue of this purchase that the Redeemer 
has the right to be the restorer of the race, and by giving 
to it the purchased life, does he become its Life-Giver or 
Father, and is this term Father Scripturally applied to him? 
Explain the process of the philosophy. P. 453, par. 1. 

(33) Our Lord laid down the price of the race when 

he died. Did he take it back again when he arose from the 

dead on the third day? If not, why not? Explain the 

entire transaction and show positively that the ransom for 

sin remained and will always remain and that thus our forgiveness 

and reconciliation are upon a firm basis. P. 453, last 

par.; P. 454, par. 1. 

(34) What would have been implied had our Lord risen 
from the dead a human being— thus taking back the ransom 
price? P. 454, par. 2. 

(35) Could the man Jesus possibly be referred to as 

the new Father of the race— the Second Adam? Why not? 
Explain the matter fully. P. 454, par. 3,4. 



page 97 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI MARCH 15 No. 6 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

A Layman on the "New Theology" 99 

The Shepherd and His Flock 100 

Money Changes All Things 101 

Verging on Danger 101 

"All Deceivableness of Unrighteousness" 102 

Is the Mediator an Advocate? 104 

When God Covenanted with Abraham 105 

"He is Not a Jew— Outwardly" 106 

Note Further Misinterpretation 106 

Sin and Sickness Related 107 

Our Easter Lesson 108 

Faith, the Channel of Blessing 108 

Re Berean Studies in the Scriptures 110 



Re Fifth-Sunday Local Conventions 110 

Some Interesting Letters Ill 

page 98 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



R4586 : page 98 

BROTHER RUSSELL IN EUROPE AND AFRICA 



Brother Russell proposes a very hasty European tour. Incidentally, 
at the instance of the newspaper people connected 
with the publication of his sermons, he will extend the journey 
to Jerusalem and the Great Pyramid in Egypt. A brief outline 
of his journey follows: 

Leave New York April 5, arrive Cherbourg (France), April 
11; Paris, April 12; Basle (Switzerland), April 13. (Here an 
all-day meeting with French and Swiss brethren is proposed.) 



Rome, April 14; Naples, April 15; Alexandria (Egypt), April 
18; Cairo (and Pyramids), April 19; Port Said, April 20; 
Jaffa, April 21; Jerusalem and vicinity, April 21-24. 

Return same route to Rome, April 30; Venice (Italy), May 
1; Vienna (Austria), May 2; Warsaw (Russia), May 3, arriving 
7:42 a.m., leaving midnight. (An all-day meeting is proposed.) 
Berlin, May 4, arriving 11:25 a.m., leaving 10 p.m., 
May 5. Here we hope to meet many German friends as well 
as representatives from Norway, Sweden and Denmark. May 
6, Barmen-Elberfeld; London, arriving Charing Cross Station, 
5:12 p.m., May 7. 

London meetings, May 8, 15 and 21. The intermediate dates 
are open for the various cities of England, Ireland and Scotland 
as reports may be received at our London branch office. 

page 98 



1910-SUMMER CONVENTIONS-1910 

Louisville, Ky., June 17-19.— Brother Russell will be present 
on the 19th and be the principal speaker. 

Chicago, 111., June 24-26.— Brother Russell will be present on 
the 26th and be the principal speaker. 

Lake Chautauqua (Celeron Auditorium), July 30th to Aug. 
7.— This will be the chief or General Convention of the year. 
Specially favorable excursion rates have been secured. The 
cheapest rate will be for those who will start their journey 
July 29. On that date tickets should be bought to Chautauqua 
for one fare plus $2. Another date will be announced 
later at one and one-half fare for the round trip. Full particulars 
then. We merely announce the dates now that all 
desiring to attend may make timely arrangements. The location 
is ideal. Specially low rates of board for the nine days 
or less will be secured at cottages and hotels on the lake shore 
at $1.00 per day and up. Numerous little steamers plying 
the lake will afford easy communication with the Auditorium. 



ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS TO BE ADDRESSED 
BY THE EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL: 

WASHINGTON, D. C, MARCH 13 

Morning and evening sessions, Masonic Temple, Ninth and 
F streets, N.W., 10:30 a.m. Praise, Prayer and Testimony 
meeting. 7:30 p.m. Brother Russell will address the friends. 
Discourse for the Public, New National Theater, at 3 p.m. 
Subject, "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." Visiting friends 
will be heartily welcomed. 

ALLENTOWN, PA., MARCH 20 

All meetings in Lyric Theater, 25 North Sixth street. 



Praise, Prayer and Testimony meeting at 10 a.m. Address 
for the interested at 1 1 a.m. Afternoon service for the Public 
at 3 p.m. Subject, "Man's Past, Present and Future." Visiting 
friends will be warmly welcomed. 

BOSTON, MASS., MARCH 27 

Praise, Prayer and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 a.m. Evening 
meeting for the interested at 7:30. Morning and evening 
meetings at Franklin Union Hall, Berkeley street, near junction 
of Tremont street. Afternoon session for the Public at 3 p.m. 
in Tremont Temple, Tremont street, between School and 
Broomfield streets. Subject, "Man's Past, Present and Future." 
Visiting friends will be heartily welcomed. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., APRIL 3 

Morning services at 10:30 o'clock in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 
13-17 Hicks street, two blocks from P.R.R. Annex 
Ferry and five minutes' walk from Brooklyn Bridge entrance. 
Question meeting in the same building at 8 o'clock, preceded 
by a half hour's song service. Discourse for the Public at 3 
p.m. in Brooklyn Academy of Music, on Lafayette avenue, St. 
Felix street, and Ashland place. Subject, "Overthrow of 
Satan's Empire." Visiting friends will be warmly welcomed. 



R4581 : page 99 

A LAYMAN ON THE "NEW THEOLOGY" 

[A STRIKING AND ABLE REVIEW OF DR. ELIOT'S VIEWS.] 

THE following from The Religious Herald 
contains considerable truth and is well worth 
the reading as bearing on matters seen from 
THE WATCH TOWER:- 

"You have probably seen in the papers 
references to the definition of the new theology 
given by Dr. Eliot, president emeritus 
of Harvard College, and for thirty-five years 
the first citizen of Massachusetts, if not of 
New England. But second-hand newspaper 
accounts are apt to be inaccurate; I thought you might 
like to see the original, and accordingly am enclosing a 
copy of the Harvard Theological Review, under separate 
cover, containing his lecture. 

"Dr. Eliot has been much criticized, but for my part I 
admire his courage and honesty. Now, as always, he 
speaks the truth as he sees it, without fear or favor. Too 
many of the advocates of the new theology pursue the 
policy which a Methodist minister in a neighboring parish 
explained to me; they express their views freely at ministers' 
meetings, but have a tacit understanding not to mention 
them to the pews. And this respect for the tender 



feelings of the superstitious ones (!) who occupy the 
pews is, after all, not impolitic; for if the new theology 
were understood by the average layman, he would find it 
so hard to distinguish from the old atheism that, according 
to his temper, he would stay at home and save his money, 
or would try to get a new pastor installed. 

"The Methodist clergyman I mention tells me that a 
great majority of the younger ministers of that Church, 
in this part of the country, are believers in the new 
theology. A majority of the Protestant ministers that I 
know hereabouts adhere to it, including most of the 
younger men. 

"You will see that Dr. Eliot's lecture consists of two 
parts. The first, which is negative, is practically undistinguishable, 
so far as I can see, from ancient atheism. 
In fact, the new theology, as I understand it, in its advanced 
form, has less belief in a God (considered as a 
personality, with conscience and will), who created the 
universe and the living creatures in it, than David Hume, 
Edward Gibbon, Thomas Payne, Voltaire, and J. J. Rousseau 
had. 

"As to the positive part of the new theology— well, I 
shall wish to know what you think of it. 

"It is easy for me to understand this state of mind of 
the atheist, agnostic, or materialist, and in this age so 
many of the foremost intellects, especially on the Continent, 
deny all evidence of the existence of God, that I am 
not surprised to learn that any man holds such views. 
But to deny positively, on the one hand, all those conceptions 
of the Creator that seem natural to man, and then, 
without adhering to the logic of atheism, agnosticism, or 
materialism, to set up the hazy, and, to my mind, illogical 
view of God which is presented in this new theology, 
hardly seems normal, nor does it seem as if it could ever 
acquire many earnest followers among the common people. 
It seems to me to bear strong internal evidence of its 
origin in the study of the skeptical professor of theology, 
and to have, if I may use the expression, a perhaps unconscious 
but yet hypocritical origin. Of course, when I 
say this, I do not at all refer to Dr. Eliot. 

"But let us put ourselves for a moment in the place of 
the man who has been ordained to the Christian ministry, 
who has lost faith and lacks the courage to turn his back 
on his calling and his friends, to confess himself a failure, 
and to begin life anew. To such a one the new theology 
appeals strongly; it saves his consistency; it saves his 
salary; it saves him from the humiliation that open 
apostasy would involve. Skeptics commonly feel more or 
less dislike of an ex -priest; the faithful consider him an 
apostate. But by embracing the so-called new theology, 
he holds his pastorate or lectureship and wins reputation 
as being learned, liberal and progressive. 

"Whatever the cause may be, the so-called new theology 
seems to be dominant in most Protestant theological seminaries 
in Germany, England and the northern part of the 
United States, or where not dominant, to be rapidly increasing 



its influence. 

"You will note in Dr. Eliot's lecture that in denying 
the existence of a conscious personal God (as distinguished 
from the God who is the sum of all living souls, human 
and brute, good, bad and indifferent alike), he denies all 
hope of a future life. 

"How curious, also, the misunderstanding of the mission 
of pain on pages 399 and 400. The most ordinary intellect 
ought to see that if there were no pain in the world, a baby 
would chew off its own fingers; a cat, or even a child, 
would walk into the fire before intellect had taught him 
his danger; and so on to the end of the chapter. 

"Perhaps one might think that because this lecture was 
delivered at Harvard it is too extreme a statement of the 
New Theology. But the New Theology is world-wide. For 
many of its disciples it has no God (except as the soul of 
the universe may be a God, if one can grasp that idea), no 
inspired Bible, no heaven-sent Savior of the world; its 
fundamental principle, if I have been able to make it out, 
is the absolute and positive negation of any supernatural 

R4581 :page 100 

power whatever in the past, present or future, with all 
that that implies. And as far as its professors and votaries 
have come under my observation, it is, in this fundamental 
principle, pretty much the same at Harvard, Union, Yale, 
Chicago; very much the same among Episcopalians, Methodists 
and Baptists as it is among Unitarians and 
Congregationalists; and it seems to have won a large 
majority of the young clergy of the Protestant Churches 
in this section. There are minor differences, of course; 
Dr. Eliot's position is the advanced logical position, 
towards which all the others are tending, but which not 
all have yet reached. Some men, moreover, are entirely 
subject to the influence of the new theology; others are 
influenced partly by the new and partly by the old in all 
stages of progress, but in general acquiring a little more 
of the new leaven and losing a little more of the old each 
year. 

"Well, this is rather a long letter on theology from one 
who is not a theologian. My interest is not wholly, perhaps 
not chiefly, theological; it is rather practical and sociological. 
I have long been convinced that the Church 
could not adopt Darwinism without being killed by it, and 
the New Theology is largely the effect of Darwinism on 
the Church. 

"We all know that there is a sort of elective affinity 
between unbridled democracy and atheistic socialism. By 
unbridled democracy, I mean the kind which gives to the 
Sea Island negro the same political weight as to his former 
master; which gives to the half -pauper, half-vicious 
denizens of the slum districts of our great cities the same 
voting power as the independent householder or business 
man possesses; aye, which gives them more, since as they 
are more numerous, they who pay no direct taxes are allowed, 



in effect, to levy them on those who do, by electing 
aldermen and other officers as worthless as themselves 
—the sort of democracy which really believes the old 
maxim, "Vox populi, vox Dei." This may seem like political 
heresy to many, but when the new theology shall 
have destroyed the common man's belief in God, the feeling 
of moral obligation to him and to our fellows, as 
his children (as it will do if it is not vigorously opposed), 
and when the Marxian missionaries shall have 
made as much progress in teaching their gospel of robbery 
to the negroes of the South and the poorer classes of our 
cities as they have already made on the Continent, and 
are making in London, we shall begin to appreciate what 
sort of a Vox Dei the Vox populi of a godless people can 
be. This affinity between extreme democracy and atheistic 
socialism has long been strikingly manifest on the Continent; 
it begins to be seen in England and America. The 
North of Germany, I am told, is so far won by atheistic 
and Marxian socialism— the so-called Social Democracy— 
that the existing order is chiefly maintained in the German 
Empire by the Catholic South, the country districts, and 
the well-drilled bayonet. 

"And to me, one of the most interesting things in connection 
with the so-called new theology is the fact that so 
many of its disciples are showing about as much affinity 
for militant socialism as the atheism of the Continent 
shows, and for the same reasons. This, of course, is not 
true of all its disciples or teachers— is emphatically not 
true of Dr. Eliot— but it seems to me to be a tendency of 
the system. 

"Christianity teaches that man is inclined to sin; that 
his natural impulses are often bad; that he needs human 
government as well as Divine guidance; "the powers that 
be are ordained of God." The majority of the followers 
of Marx and many of the professors of the New Theology 
alike deny the existence of God (in the sense in which 
the Church has heretofore understood that existence), 
and the tendency of man to sin; they say that man's natural 
impulses are good and for the most part teach that 
salvation lies in the destruction of poverty and misery. 
Christianity teaches brotherly love, but forbids robbery 
and even covetousness. Marxian socialism pretends to 
advance brotherly love, but its maxim is the appropriation 

R4582 : page 100 

of all the means of production (farm and factory alike) 

to the use of the State, without compensation; and the 

majority of its apostles, knowing well that it can never 

succeed where Christianity prevails, wage constant and 

bitter warfare on the Church. And it is from their camp 

that the attacks on the doctrine of a future life, as tending 

to make contented slaves of men in this world, most frequently 

come. That rather astounding doctrine has to 

my knowledge resounded from at least three or four of 

the pulpits of this country within the last year, without 



exciting remark or answer, so far as I have heard. 

"The inter-relations or inter-actions between Darwinism, 
the New Theology (or its equivalent, for most practical 
purposes, the old skepticism) and Marxian socialism 
are interesting and in a way important, but much too large 
for a friendly letter." 



R4582 : page 100 

THE SHEPHERD AND HIS FLOCK 

VOGUE, a secular journal, may not have keen 
spiritual vision, but it surely sees some 
earthly things rationally, as the following 
extract clearly proves:— 

"Although the masculine non-church goer 
has for a long time attracted the disapproving 
attention of Church writers as well as 
of a large number of the clergy, who have 
sternly rebuked him from the pulpit, he 
stubbornly continues to pursue the even 
tenor of his way. And worse than this, whereas in days 
gone by he alone was to any great extent open to the 
charge of backsliding in such respect, of late years his 
wife and daughter in increasing numbers have taken to 
omitting regular church attendance, and that without the 
least loss of caste, except, perhaps, in small, conservative 
communities. 

"Why is it that men and women who not only lead respectable 
lives, but who devote much of the time they can 
spare from the most pressing personal claims to what are 
incontestably good works, are today so frequently to be 
counted among those who habitually absent themselves 
from divine service? This is the question over which 
many good parsons are in despair, and it is but natural 
that they should be, for between their concern for the 
souls of their communities, and the prospect of being left 
without employment, they have much to worry them. It is 
also the question that is perplexing church councils, which 
are at their wit's end to devise methods of persuading 
(coercion being no longer permissible in the Protestant 
communion, at least) people to come back into the fold. 
But in spite of all the perturbation and efforts at reform 
on the part of the religious agencies of the age, the number 
of the non-church goers keeps on increasing at a rate 
alarming to those who regard Sunday observation, according 
to ecclesiastical formula, as the only test of character, 
and the only hope of salvation. 

"Perceiving the trouble churches are in over the drifting 

R4582:page 101 

away of their congregations, ex-President Eliot, of 
Harvard, not long ago submitted to an interested world his 



plan of a new religion, but although it was cordially received 
by the public, the ecclesiastics would have none of 
it. The projected system failed to provide for any phase 
of current ecclesiasticism, including the ministerial office, 
mysticism and the like, and, therefore it is not surprising 
that they frowned upon it, and refused to permit it Christian 
sanction. But whether the Protestant leaders like it or 
not, the only hope of winning the majority of those who 
have forsaken the Church back to affiliation with religious 
groups is the reduction of Church system, as nearly as 
practicable, to the two principles— Love Thy God With 
All Thy Heart and Thy Neighbor As Thyself. In spite 
of ecclesiasticism the more enlightened classes are already 
engaged in conjuring out in a myriad practical ways the 
command of neighborly love, and it is only by a convincing 
presentation of the claim of God upon the loyalty of 
the race, that the majority of the unchurched can be 
made to include that also in their creed of life. 

"The right of private judgment— fought for and won 
centuries ago— is what is now being exercised by the non-church-goer, 
and what he asks of the ethical leader is not 
high-priced choirs to discourse glorious harmonies, or 
sacerdotal vaudeville of any kind. These aids to crowd-drawing 
do not touch the core of the matter. His demands 
are more serious and fundamental, for he believes that the 
hour has come when the Church must go back to the 
Master, and seek from him a new interpretation that 
shall fit the requirements of this age." 



R4582:page 101 

MONEY CHANGES ALL THINGS 

ASSUREDLY the public prints assist in keeping 
the world straight— sometimes by sarcastic 
allusions like the following from the Easton 
Call. Undoubtedly the intelligence and 
freedom of the press should be credited with 
much of the advantage of our day over 
that termed "the dark ages." We quote:— 

"One of the most amusing phases of 
the sacerdotal vaudeville this country is witnessing, 
is the way schools and colleges of 

the denominational kind are trying to shake off their religious 
connections in their greed to get hold of some of 
Mr. Carnegie's money. It is a well-known fact that Mr. 
Carnegie has no gifts for institutions ruled by church 
boards and trustees. To comply with this condition, 
Dickinson College, always regarded as a Methodist institution, 
has been turning all kinds of somersaults. The 
trustees of that college met in Philadelphia recently and 
passed resolutions, denying that the Methodist Church had 
any control over Dickinson College whatever, and forbidding 
the journals of that Church from publishing any such 



statement. The president of the college was also instructed 
to report his college as "nonsectarian" in the 
future. So that the reforms that once caused men to be 
tortured and burned at the stake, now come voluntarily 
to the tune of the Carnegie funds. 

"Soon we may expect to see Lafayette College saying 
good-bye to the Presbyterian fathers and falling in line for 
something more substantial than the dope handed down by 
John Calvin. 

"Of course, the ecclesiastical gentlemen are making 
a stubborn fight to preserve the special privileges of the 
clergy. They say that if you take away the religious 
foundation, the colleges will go to pieces. This reminds 
us of a story: Some years ago a large manufacturing 
plant at High Bridge, New Jersey, was discovered on fire 
at night. A message was sent to Phillipsburg for aid and 
one of the local companies loaded its engine on a car 
and went to High Bridge, but arrived after the buildings 
had burned. Early the next morning an Irishman arrived 
in Phillipsburg from High Bridge. 'Well, Pat,' asked 
some one, 'how did our boys make out last night at the 
fire?' 'Sure, and they did nobly well,' answered Pat; 
'after strinuous ifforts, they succeeded in savin' ivery 
bit of the ground on which the great buildings were 
built.'" 



R4582:page 101 

VERGING ON DANGER 

THE following from the Censor shows how the 
people, as represented by their spokesmen, 
are thinking. Our admonition to our readers 
is, "Seek ye first the Kingdom"! "Be content 
with such things as ye have"! While 
seeing the strife and trouble coming on 
the world take no part in it. "Wait ye upon 
me, saith the Lord" ! In his own time and 
way our God will right every wrong and 
Messiah's Kingdom shall bless all the nations 
of the earth. We quote:— 

"While it is a pitiful confession of their own abject 
weakness, when the people do without food as the only 
means of protecting themselves from robber monopolies, 
a vast amount of good may flow from the present food 
strike, nevertheless. While to do without meat can be 
nothing more than a temporary expedient, for the Beef 
Trust, as one paper says, can save until next month the 
meat you refuse to eat this month, at which time it can 
restore old prices, with a little something by way of interest, 
the movement, as a most forcible agitation, is bound 
to result in something, although we may feel sure that the 
'passes' now being made by politicians in office will never 
result in much. 



"Surely this general blind uprising of the people should 
carry a warning to Pierpont Morgan and those under him 
at Washington and elsewhere. The strike is a mild but 
distinct danger sign, and if Mr. Morgan had ever had time 
to read history a little bit he would see it. The extortionate 
price of food is not Hunger, but it verges on 
Hunger. Our masters should know that it is dangerous 
to fool with the popular stomach. So undeveloped is the 
average man, that the stomach is still lord of life. To 
get food is still the main incident of existence. Our 
masters, if they are wise, would know that it is possible 
to oppress the people to any extent that pleases them, so 
that they but have the sense to stop short of hunger. The 
average American can be deluded, abused and robbed to an 
extent that is amazing, just as long as those who spoil him 
leave him enough to eat to keep him from starvation. He 
has no ambition, to speak of, beyond filling his stomach, 
and he will tolerate conditions that give him less than that. 
Leave him enough to eat to keep him from positive starvation, 
and he will do little more than murmur. But don't 
go beyond that point. That tyrants, oppressors and robbers 
have occasionally overstepped that limit has caused 
results which have made history. They will tell you that 
the French Revolution was a great protest against 

R4583 : page 102 

feudalism and a great uprising for democracy. Stuff! The 
French Revolution was a hunger strike pure and simple. 
"How long present conditions persist in this country, 
depends on how soon our masters force us to the hunger 
point. Revolutions and reforms are not results of reasoning 
of the popular brain, but of feeling of the popular 
stomach. The people in the mass have small power of 
reason, and have never had much. Our degree of progress 
is the amount of increased nervous sensitiveness in 
the human stomach. Until we reach the hunger point there 
will be no reform in this country. The plunderers of 
privilege will continue to ride our necks until the insistent 
call of our stomachs forces us to assert our torpid manhood. 

"The food strike is a thing the Censor foresaw years 
ago. Who knows but it is the beginning of that revolution 
which we must have to restore our liberties? For it is a 
matter of history that all oppressors are blinded by their 
own success and keep going until they go too far— past 
the danger point of hunger. Thus I feel certain that while 
there may be breaks in the system of despoiling the people, 
seasons of temporary relief, this matter may be considered 
as merely in its incipiency. The present discrepancy between 
wages and prices is not a new thing; it is not of today 
or yesterday or last year. This conspiracy is nearly 
fifty years old. Ever since the Civil War the conspirators 
have been toiling to secure control of the government, and 
organize their little game. It is within the last five years 
only that they have perfected the vast scheme of plundering 
the people through monopoly of all sources of distribution. 



Will they quit now or be satisfied? It is not to be 
expected." 



R4583 : page 102 

"ALL DECEIVABLENESS OF UNRIGHTEOUSNESS" 

"The energy of the Adversary, with all powers and signs and wonders 
of falsehood, and with every deception of iniquity to 
those who are perishing, because they admitted not the 
love of the Truth, in order that they might be saved. On 
this account God will send an energy of delusion to their 
believing the falsehood."— 2 Thess. 2:9-11— (Diaglott). 

DO WE forget that the Apostle's solemn words 
apply particularly in this harvest time, and 
specially to the closing years of the harvest? 
We are now in the time above all others 
when we may expect strong delusions, not 
only upon nominal Christendom, but upon 
those who have been specially favored with 
the light of Truth now shining. Should we 
not expect that the next five years of the 
harvest would clearly demonstrate the truthfulness 
of this prophecy by St. Paul? 

Some of the strong delusions are apparent enough- 
Spiritism, Theosophy, Christian Science, Church Federation, 
the Adversary's means of distracting the hearts and 
heads of some who otherwise would be Bible students. 
So far as we understand the prophecies of the Bible, these 
delusions will have wonderful power upon the world of 
mankind and especially in Christendom, which will gain 
power during the next few years. As the Apostle expresses 
it, these delusions will have their power largely 
because God's people have not been sufficiently awake to 
the privileges of Bible study— they have reverenced creeds 
rather than the Word of the Lord. They have worshipped 
and served and sought to be in accord with Churchianity 
rather than with the Truth. Hence, they are unfortified; 
they are without the Christian armor which St. Paul 
urged, saying, "Put on (therefore) the whole armor of 
God, that ye may be able to stand... in the evil day, 
and, having done all, to stand."— Eph. 6:11-13. 

But our special thought properly centers upon ourselves 
and those who, with us, have been favored of the 
Lord with the illumination of this harvest time. Will all 
of those who have heard the harvest message and rejoiced 
in it be safe in this "evil day," or will there be some strong 
delusions for them also— for their testing, their sifting? 

Other Scriptures assure us that the great hour of trial 
coming upon the whole world must begin with the Church 
—"with the house of God"— with those professing to be 
saints. St. Peter implies this when he says, "If it begin 
first at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the 



Gospel of God?" (I Pet. 4:17.) St. Paul gives the same 
thought, saying of the Church, "Every man's work shall 
be made manifest; for the day shall declare it; because it 
shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's 
work of what sort it is." (I Cor. 3:13.) The intimation 
is that the severity of the testing will come first to the 
saints. In whatever proportion our doctrines include 
fallacies, errors, in that same proportion will be the severity 
of our testing. Those whose faith structure contains 
little of wood, hay and stubble will suffer least; while 
those who have more of these combustibles will suffer the 
more. 

Be it noticed that all the creeds handed down to us 
contain many errors and that the test of our loyalty to the 
Truth was our willingness to renounce these and to replace 
them with the gold, silver and precious stones of the 
Divine Word. For one reason or another this matter of 
confessing error and relinquishing it is a severe trial to 
many. It tests loyalty to God and his Word. It tests humility 
of heart. It tests willingness to confess our errors. 
It tests love for the brethren. However trifling the mistake 
it requires an overcoming courage to declare it, to 
renounce it. This has been the procedure for the past 
three hundred years, as God's people have emerged more 
and more from the smoke of the "dark ages." Because of 
these difficulties and tests the progress out of darkness into 
the full, clear light has been slow. At every step of the 
journey Light and Truth have been slandered, opposed, 
vilified, persecuted, and the advocates of Truth have been 
pilloried and roasted either figuratively or literally. 

Our Adversary, intent upon maintaining his hold upon 
the minds of God's people, has fought every inch of Truth 
for the past four centuries. He has made it hot for those 
whom the Lord has by his grace been leading step by step 
into the clear light of the knowledge of the glory of God 
and of his wonderful Plan of Salvation. Shall we wonder 
if our Adversary still pursues the same course and with 
still greater vigor than ever— with still more "energy" 
than ever? By no means! We accept his present opposition 
as the fulfillment of Scripture and we expect no 
cessation, but rather a further aggressiveness on his part 
to the end of the harvest. 

It is not necessary for us to assume that only the devilish 
are used by Satan. Satan uses as his agents in opposing 
the light, in persecuting those who go on in the path of the 
just, which shines more and more, the very best people he 
can get hold of. The pathway of the Church shows from 
the first that the Adversary has succeeded in using good 
as well as bad men in the accomplishment of his purposes 
—and undoubtedly the better the man the more acceptable 
would he be as Satan's servant and the more influential. 
Note the case of Saul of Tarsus, instigator and assistant 

R4583 : page 103 

in the murder of St. Stephen; note the fact that St. Paul 



tells us that he acted in all good conscience, and verily 
thought he did service to God and not to Satan, who 
blinded his eyes. Note the case of John Calvin, who, with 
many noble traits of Christian character, was so led astray 
by the Adversary, so blinded, that he used his high office 
in Geneva to burn a fellow-Christian at the stake. Doubtless 
he also thought that he did God service. Note also 
that scribes, priests and Pharisees were responsible for 
the death of our Lord and thought that they did God service. 
Of them St. Peter says that they did it ignorantly, 
for had they known they would not have crucified the 
Prince of Life. And so, doubtless, it is today, and will be 
until near the close; some, loyal of heart, may be amongst 
our enemies— slanderers, murderers. Like St. Stephen, 
let us pray for them. 

But we cannot hope thus of all— especially now when 
the light of Truth is shining so much more brightly and 
when the Lord is especially testing the loyalty or disloyalty 
of those professing his name, with a view to their 
separation and to the determining of their eternal destinies. 
No doubt some who will be of the "Great Company" will be 
more or less deceived of the Adversary by the strong delusions 
of this hour. Such in their blindness and deception 
may set forth darkness for light and light for darkness. 
They may do it with great positiveness, but scarcely, we 
think, with bitterness— anger, malice, envy, hatred, strife 
—works of the flesh and of the devil. 

Is it inquired, why? since this Saul of Tarsus was so 
bitter? We reply that that great persecutor of the Church 
had not yet received the begetting of the holy Spirit. He 
could not, therefore, sin against it and "grieve the holy 
Spirit of promise." On the contrary, those who will constitute 
the "Great Company" will all be of the consecrated and 
spirit-begotten class. All so begotten of the holy Spirit 
must have the Spirit of Christ. If it be lost the result 

R4584 : page 103 

would not only mean loss of the illumination and going 
into outer darkness, but also a total loss— the extinguishing 
of the Spirit of begetting— the Second Death. Let us 
not forget that the Spirit of God is the Spirit of love- 
meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly 
kindness, love. 

Some one has said, "It is but one step from the sublime 
to the ridiculous," because of the facility of human imagination. 
Similarly it might be said that right and 
wrong, Truth and untruth, may be so viewed as to change 
the sentiment almost instantly. Hypnotists act upon this 
power and so do attorneys. As the case may be, the client 
will be pictured by the one attorney as the representative 
of every grace and virtue, and by the opposing counsel the 
same traits, acts and words may be distorted and a beautiful 
character be represented as hideous, mean of motive, 
puerile and false of conduct. Thus the Apostle wrote, 
"Unto the pure all things are pure; but unto them that are 



defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure."— Titus 1:15. 

Your great Adversary's endeavor, therefore, is to 
poison our minds, to introduce thereinto impurity, anger, 
malice, envy, hatred and other works of the flesh and of 
the Adversary. To the extent that he succeeds in poisoning 
our hearts he alienates us from the Lord and from all 
those who are in accord with him; and this is his object. 
He succeeds best through human instrumentalities. We 
all know that if one dog becomes affected by hydrophobia 
every other animal is more or less in danger of becoming 
mad through even slight association— and infection. Thus 
Satan's "strong delusion" spreads from one to another 
until many be defiled by the root of bitterness. And to the 
mind, the heart, once embittered and out of alignment 
with the Divine view of things, everything takes on different 
colors and the end of the matter is far-reaching; as 
the Apostle intimates, "Lest thereby many be defiled." 

The embittered or impure heart sees things from its 
own standpoint. The evil tongue once started may "set 
on fire the course of nature," as St. James declares; and 
that evil tongue is itself ignited from Gehenna— the Second 
Death. (James 3:6.) That is to say, the evil, malicious, 
baneful, slanderous, back-biter is already himself 
bitten by the Adversary, and, unless cured, his would 
surely be a case of Second Death. And the same rule 
would apply to all bitten by him. The Scriptures, therefore, 
continually urge God's people to observe the Golden 
Rule— to do, to say, to think of others as they would be 
thought of, spoken of and dealt with. They continually 
urge upon us the putting away of bitterness, evil-speaking, 
busy-bodying, that we may the more fully and the more 
completely put on Christ and be more fully under the control 
of his holy Spirit of love, meekness, patience, long-suffering 
and kindness. 

"If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them" 
(John 13:17), is the Lord's message. The Lord is not now 
speaking to those who need to be forced and pounded into 
proper shape, in accord with the Divine character. He 
will deal with that class during the Millennium under the 
New Covenant, when his Mediatorial Kingdom will bring 
them into subjection forcibly. Now the Lord is speaking 
to another class of an entirely different disposition: He 
seeketh such to worship him as worship him in Spirit and 
in Truth— such as love him and love his righteous requirements 
of the Golden Rule, and beyond this, the high standard 
of the New Commandment— to love one another to the 
sacrificing point, as he loved the Church and gave himself 
for the Church. 

The Lord is now seeking merely the class called— the 
"little flock" who possess the Lord's Spirit or disposition, 
and love the brethren to the self-sacrificing point. It is 
incumbent, therefore, that all who would be recognized of 
the Father as possessing the character-likeness of the Lord 
Jesus should resist and put away, mortify, deaden, 
every unholy, unloving, unjust sentiment, as they would 
avoid the virus of hydrophobia or of a contagious disease. 



In a word, while we still urge as always growth in knowledge, 
we also admonish as always that growth in grace 
must be proportionate, if we would be pleasing to the Lord 
and accepted as joint-heirs with Jesus in his Kingdom. 
Whoever unkindly, untruthfully, slanderously, wickedly, 
underhandedly, insinuatingly with others may speak or 
act towards us, we must not dare to render evil for evil, 
nor railing for railing, but "be kind and gentle towards 
all." 

In fact, we must not even entertain an unkind thought 
respecting those who oppose us, but, as Michael would 
not speak evil of Satan, but said, "The Lord rebuke 
thee!" so must it be with us. And here notice the slanders 
of Satan. His own mind, full of ambition, accredited 
the Almighty with the same and told Mother Eve that 
God had forbidden her eating of the tree of the knowledge 
of good and evil because he desired to keep his human 
children in ignorance and under mental slavery. He even 
declared that the Almighty had falsified when he declared 
that the wage or penalty of disobedience in the matter 
would be death. As Satan could and did speak evil of the 
highest dignities, so his followers, misguided by his Spirit, 
speak slanderously of us. But as Michael dare not bring 
against Satan an accusation of railing, so let us beware 
that we do not retaliate upon those who speak evil of us 
and say all manner of evil against us falsely, because of 
our faithfulness to the Lord and his Word. A little while 
and the faithful will all be rewarded. 



R4584 : page 104 

IS THE MEDIATOR AN ADVOCATE? 

SOME speak of "The New Covenant Advocate." 

Is such an expression true respecting 

our Lord Jesus? Is he the Advocate of the 

New Covenant? We answer, No. Our 

Lord is the Mediator of the New Covenant, 

but not its Advocate. He is its Mediator in 

the sense that he is referred to in the 

prophecies as the one who will fulfill his 

Office. He began his work at his consecration 

and continued it faithfully to Calvary. 

By that consecration and faithfulness unto death he became 

the surety of the New Covenant— the assurance or 

guarantee to us that the Covenant will ultimately go into 

effect, and that he will be the one through whom it will 

be made effective. He is the Mediator of the New Covenant 

since he ascended up on high, in that he is co-operating 

with the Father in the carrying out of the Divine purpose 

of the selection of the Church as members of his 

Body— sharers in the sufferings of Christ and in the glory 

that shall follow. Soon the Mediator will have received 

to himself every member of his Body, all whose names are 



written in the Lamb's Book of Life. Then the Mediator 
complete will begin his work officially. The merit of the 
Mediator's sacrifice, now loaned or imputed to us, the 
Church, for our justification and sanctification, he will 
then, as Mediator between God and men, apply on behalf 
of Israel and all who may become Israelites under the 
New Covenant provisions, which will immediately go into 
effect. For a thousand years the great Mediator will stand 
between God and man— because God cannot accept or deal 
with the sinful of heart. These during the Mediatorial 
Kingdom will receive full enlightenment and instruction 
and assistance, to the intent that they may be lifted out 
of their sin and death condition up to perfection and everlasting 
life. Not until they shall have reached actual 
perfection at the end of the Millennium will the Mediator 
step out of his Office and thus bring together God and 
restored mankind— all the children of Adam except the 
Church, the "great company," and those who die the Second 
Death. As soon as the Mediator thus steps from 
between God and men, mankind will become responsible 
directly to God, and Justice without mercy will prevail. 
None will need or deserve mercy, because, having enjoyed 
God's mercy for a thousand years and having been perfected 
thereunder, they will be fully able to maintain their 
standing on the plane of Justice, if their hearts be loyal 
and true. 

It can be readily seen that the world thus under the 
Mediator during the Millennium will need no Advocate, because 
they will have no dealings with the Father, but 
merely with Christ, the Mediator. 

Note the difference between the above and the 
Church's attitude to the Father and the Son during this 
Gospel Age. We are introduced to the Father at once, 
because our hearts are in the right condition— desirous 
of knowing and doing of God's will to the extent of our 
ability and trusting in the merit of Christ's sacrifice already 
applied on our behalf. When we consecrate our 
lives after the example of our Redeemer— "to suffer with 
him," "to be dead with him," that we may live and reign 
with him— the Redeemer, according to the Father's Plan, 
becomes our Advocate, endorses our petition, applies his 
merit on our behalf and becomes guarantor for us, that we 
may be loyal to God, or die the Second Death. As our 
Advocate, our Lord does not stand between the Father 
and us, but stands with us as our Elder Brother, as Chief 
Priest over his own House of Priests. "For both he that 
sanctifieth and they who are sanctified, are all of one; 
for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren; 
saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren; in the 
midst of the Church will I sing praise unto thee."— 
Heb. 2:11,12. 

The Redeemer purposes no mediatorial work in behalf 
of the Church. He is not styled our Mediator, but our 
Advocate. "We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the Righteous." (I John 2:1.) Instead of standing 
between the Father and us, as during the Millennium he 



will stand between the Father and the world, he introduces 
us immediately to the Father, and the Father, on receiving 

R4585 : page 104 

us, immediately begets us of the holy Spirit. Our Lord's 
words are, "No man cometh unto the Father but by me" 
—the Advocate of the Church. 

As sinners we had no relationship to God. When we 
believed and turned from sin we had a justification by 
faith tentatively imputed to us, permitting us to draw 
nigh to God and to hear his message through Christ- 
speaking peace to us and informing us of the High 
Calling and assuring us that "Now is the acceptable 
time"; that during this Gospel Age he is willing to accept 
us as living sacrifices through the merit of Jesus and to 
beget us of the holy Spirit to the divine nature. The 
moment we accepted those terms our Redeemer became 
our Advocate and immediately the entire contract was 
closed and we were begotten of the holy Spirit. We were 
no longer in the flesh, but in the spirit— no longer in the 
Court, but in the Holy. 

The New Creature being without sin needed no Mediator 
to come between it and God. On the contrary, the 
New Creature sings:— 

"Sun of my soul, my Father dear, 
I know no night when thou art near. 
O! may no earth-born cloud arise 
To hide thee from thy servant's eyes." 

But the New Creature needs an Advocate. Even 
though it is in full relationship with the Father, and even 
though as a New Creature it has no sin— the sins cancelled 
at Calvary were those of the old creature only. Is 
it asked why the New Creature, begotten of God, sinless, 
needs an Advocate? We reply that it is because he has the 
treasure of the new mind in an earthen vessel that is very 
imperfect through the fall. The sins of his mortal body 
were all cancelled through the imputation of the Advocate's 
merit and at that moment the old nature died and 
ceased its responsibility. He that is dead "hath ceased 
from sin." (I Pet. 4:1.) The New Creature, which at that 
moment was begotten and as a new mind or new will 
took possession of the mortal body reckoned dead, is held 
responsible for its conduct in exactly the same manner that 
the owner of a dog is responsible for him. Whatever 
violence the dog may do, the owner is responsible, because 
he should have chained him up. So we, as New 
Creatures, are responsible for our hands, our feet, our 
eyes, our tongues, in what they may do. If the tongue 
slander another through weakness, force of habit, etc., the 
New Creature is responsible and must give an account. 
If other wrongdoings be committed, there is a similar 
responsibility in every case. 

The New Creature cannot claim that the merit of 
Christ has cancelled these imperfections of his flesh in advance. 
He can merely claim in the Apostle's words, "The 



forgiveness of sins which are past, through the forbearance 
of God." (Rom. 3:25.) What, then, must he do in 
respect to these daily deflections— trespasses of omission 
and commission due to the imperfections of his flesh? The 
Apostle's answer is, "If any man (in the Church) sin, we 
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 
Righteous." (I John 2:1.) "Having such an high priest 

R4585 : page 105 

over the house of God (the antitypical priests and Levites) 
let us draw nigh to God in full assurance of faith, 
that we may obtain mercy and find help in time of need." 
We thus pray, "Our father which art in heaven. ..forgive 
us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass 
against us." If as New Creatures our Lord and Advocate 
sees that we are cultivating his Spirit of mercy towards 
others, he will at once advocate our plea and secure for 
us Divine cancellation of the errors of our flesh, to which 
we, as New Creatures, were not a party and did not consent. 
If as New Creatures we gave partial consent to the 
wrong course, we would be liable in that proportion to 
some kind of stripes or punishment. And if any sin wilfully 
—heartily assented to sin knowingly and intentionally 
and without protest— it would prove that such was 
no longer a New Creature, but "twice dead, plucked up by 
the roots." 

Our Lord will continue to be the Church's Advocate 
with the Father down to the moment when the last member 
of his Body and of the Great Company shall have 
finished his course and passed beyond the veil to be a 
member of the "Church of the First-born, whose names 
are enrolled in heaven." Then they will no longer need an 
Advocate, because their resurrection change will make 
them perfect and the good intentions of their wills as 
New Creatures will find no impediment in their new 
bodies. They will be like their Lord, partakers of the 
divine nature and sharers of his glory and of his work. 
Then, as members of the great Prophet, Priest, Mediator, 
Judge and King, they will assist in dispensing the Divine 
blessings to the world of mankind for a thousand years. 
Then our Lord's office of Advocate will terminate with the 
glorification of the Church, and his office of Mediator 
between God and the world will be ready to begin. 

WHEN GOD COVENANTED WITH ABRAHAM 

Gradually those who went out from us because they 
were "not of us" are going into darkness on all subjects. 
This was to be expected. A root of bitterness developing 
in the heart affects the sight. Light becomes darkness; 
darkness becomes light. New things pass away. All 
things become old again in the wrong sense. 

These friends, not content with urging unscripturally 
that they need a Mediator between them and God, become 
very angry with us because we point out to them the 



truth on the subject— that the Mediator is between God 
and men and not between God and the New Creature. They 
seem to want to have a different view, and, of course, find 
plenty of opportunity for it. People usually find what 
they look for. Infidels who are in a wrong attitude of 
mind and desirous of finding fault with the Bible 
succeed in convincing themselves of its inconsistencies, 
contradictions, etc. Sometimes they succeed in deceiving 
others whose intentions are good, but who are lacking 
in spiritual discernment. We suggest that our proper attitude 
towards these erstwhile friends is to let them alone 
—to allow God to deal with them. Such of them as he sees 
to be honest-hearted and of right spirit he will guide in 
judgment and lead back again into the Truth; such as he 
cannot approve for any part of his work, he has a perfect 
right to cast aside. We may not murmur, but rather be 
glad that our eyes are open to see the wisdom and the 
justice of the Divine decree, "The wages of sin is death." 
If, then, those who were once with us and "of us" have not 
been influenced by all the Lord's leadings in the past and 
the presentations of the present, what more can we do 
for them but leave them in the hand of him who is too 
wise to err and too just to be unkind? 

These erstwhile friends, busy seeing what they can 
object to, are step by step walking into darkness. One of 
their recent claims of finding new light and proof that 
THE WATCH TOWER teachings are erroneous is that there 
was no Abrahamic Covenant at all; that what God said to 
Abraham was merely a proposition to make a Covenant 
and that the New Covenant is the promised one. They 
think that it began somewhere about the time of our 
Lord's First Advent, but they do not know when and can 
find no Scripture on the subject, and are afraid to make a 
guess, lest it be shown to be fallacious. The reason back 
of this endeavor to cast out the original Covenant with 
Abraham, and to declare that it was merely a promise that 
the New Covenant would be made in due time, is evident. 
They perceive that the Church cannot properly be under 
two Covenants, or two "mothers," and are determined 
that they are the children of the New Covenant; hence 
they strive to show that there was no Covenant, except 
the Law Covenant, until Christ came. They are put to 
great perplexity when some one quotes the Apostle's 
words that the "Law was added because of transgressions 
(added, of course, to the Abrahamic Covenant) until 
the Seed (specified by the Abrahamic Covenant) should 
come." (Gal. 3:19.) Another Scripture which gives them 
trouble is St. Paul's statement that the Law Covenant was 
430 years after the Abrahamic Covenant. They know not 
how to explain this in harmony with their theory that the 
Law Covenant was made 1600 years before the time they 
claim the New Covenant began. 

After worrying themselves as above, some of them 
have taken up a new line— anything to be different— anything 
to prove that the DAWN-STUDIES are incorrect, 
blind guides. The later claim is, "Yes, there must have 



been some kind of Covenant made with Abraham, but it was 
made fifty years later than the DAWN-STUDIES say. It 
was made after Abraham had typically offered Isaac in 
sacrifice." There, they tell us, God said to Abraham, "By 
myself have I sworn, saith the Lord; because thou hast 
done this thing and hast not withheld thy son, thine only 
son; that in blessing, I will bless thee, and in multiplying, 
I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the 
sand which is upon the seashore; and thy seed shall possess 
the gate of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the nations 
of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed 
my voice."— Gen. 22:16-18. 

See, they say, THE WATCH TOWER and DAWN-STUDIES 
have erred in saying that God made the Covenant with 
Abraham when first he came into the land of Canaan; 
whereas he merely promised it then but did not actually 
make the Covenant until fifty years afterward— when 
Isaac was twenty-five years old, and after Abraham had 
offered him as a sacrifice in a figure. 

We reply that our critics are in error. God called 
Abraham while he was yet in Haran, to come out into the 
Land of Canaan and that he would there make a Covenant 
with him. Abraham believed and, at the death of 
his father Terah, removed to Canaan. Thereupon the 

R4586 : page 105 

Lord blessed him and consummated the Covenant with 
him. That Covenant was repeated in different forms from 
time to time and confirmed to Isaac and to Jacob long 
afterward. Even if the time of making oath to the Covenant 
were a matter of dispute it would not alter the fact 
that the Covenant itself was made directly after Abraham 
obeyed and removed to Canaan. The various statements 
respecting the matter are, "I have made a Covenant with 
thee," "I have sworn," etc. To suppose that these restatements 
of the Divine Purpose are either New Covenants 
or intimations that the Covenant had not been 
made is to suppose erroneously. 

See where the argument of our friends would lead 
them chronologically. If the Abrahamic Covenant was not 

R4586 : page 106 

made until after the figurative offering of Isaac it would 
add fifty years to the chronology at that point. We base 
our reckoning on St. Paul's words, "The Covenant, which 
was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law, which 
was 430 years afterward, cannot disannul." (Gal. 3:17.) 
If, therefore, instead of counting the 430 years from the 
time Abraham entered Canaan we count it from a date 
fifty years later when he offered Isaac, we would be adding 
fifty years to our chronology. What would that mean? 
It would throw everything out of gear— the chronology itself 
and the harmony based upon it. For instance, add 
that fifty years and it would make the six thousand years 



end fifty years sooner than 1872, namely, in 1822, which 

would mean that the Millennium, the seventh-thousand 

year period, would begin in 1823. The absurdity of this 

need not be discussed. Another beautiful time feature 

would thus be spoiled— the one suggested by Brother 

Edgar— that the giving of the Covenant is exactly midway 

chronologically between the time of the fall and the 

sending of the Gospel to the Gentiles, Cornelius being the 

first one to receive it. However, as before intimated, we 

can expect anything, everything, in the way of misunderstanding 

and misrepresentation, bitterness and personalities 

from these erstwhile friends. "If the light that is 

in thee become darkness, how great is that darkness!" 

The darkness seems to affect people, not merely intellectually, 

but morally, blunting their sense of right and 

wrong, truth and falsehood, decency and honor. Let us 

beware of rendering evil for evil, slander for slander, 

or the cultivation in the slightest sense of roots of bitterness, 

hatred, envy, strife— works of the flesh and of the 

Adversary. 



R4586 : page 106 

"HE IS NOT A JEW-OUTWARDLY" 

"He is not a Jew who is one outwardly,. ..but he is a Jew 
who is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart." 
Romans 2:28,29. 

THOSE who argue that the Church is under 

the New Covenant, instead of under the 

Abrahamic Covenant, symbolized by Sarah, 

as the Apostle says, are perplexed with the 

plain prophecy of Jeremiah 31:31-33. It 

distinctly declares that New Covenant provision 

to be for the house of Israel and the 

house of Judah— the ten tribes and the two 

tribes of the Jewish nation. Perplexed, 

they answer that they are Jews; that all 

Christians are Jews, and that the New Covenant prophecy, 

therefore, applies to them and proves that it has 

already been established and that they are enjoying its 

provisions. 

In reply, we ask them first of all to read the context 
from verse 27 to the close of the chapter. It seems difficult 
to imagine a mind so twisted and blinded that it 
would be unable to see that the entire passage is for the 
Jew— natural Israel. There is not the slightest reference 
to Spiritual Israel or any spiritual experiences. 

In desperation they quote the text at the head of this 
article in proof that they are Jews and therefore in New 
Covenant relationship with God. But, alas for them, they 
thus go from one misinterpretation to another! If they 
will look up the context of the above text they will find 



that it applies not to spiritual but to natural Israel. It is 
a portion of St. Paul's argument showing that the Jew 
was not justified by being under the Law Covenant; and 
that he could be justified only by accepting Christ as his 
Redeemer from the sentence of the Law Covenant incurred 
by his inherited imperfection. Note the argument 
—verses 17-24. 

The culmination of the Apostle's argument is found in 
the next chapter (3:9,10) in the words: "What then? 
are we [Jews] better than they [Gentiles]? In no wise; 
for we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that 
they are all under sin [condemnation]. As it is written, 
There is none righteous, no, not one." See the further 
argument of verses 19-29. 

St. Paul's constant argument was that it was not 
necessary for Gentiles to become Jews in order to become 
Christians, but that the Jew must become dead to the Law 
and the Gentile become dead to sin in order that both 
might become one in Christ Jesus— Christians. 

NOTE FURTHER MISINTERPRETATION 

Let us ask these bewildered brethren a few simple 
questions, that they and we may know just where they do 
stand on the question of their being Spiritual Jews. 

Is it as "new creatures in Christ" that this claim to being 
Jews is put forth? Yes, they answer. We reply with 
the Apostle's words, "There is neither Jew nor Greek" 
in Christ. Besides, the New Covenant proposes restitution 
and applies to those whose stony hearts are to be 
changed to hearts of flesh. Where is there a spiritual 
promise to the Jew? And the New [Law] Covenant would 
condemn every imperfect person, as did the Old one. "Ye 
are not under the Law [Covenant], but under Grace."— 
Rom. 6:14. 

"Ah, yes," they answer, "We erred in stating that we 
are Jews and under the New Covenant as 'new creatures.' 
We will change that answer and say rather, that as Jews 
we were justified under the New Covenant and then became 
'new creatures' and members of Christ under the 
Abrahamic Covenant." 

You are making a bad argument worse, by a further 
confusing of the Scriptures. The natural Jew could get 
free from the condemnation of the Old Law Covenant 
only by renouncing it— dying to it and becoming alive 
toward God as a member of The Christ. What advantage 
would accrue to a Gentile, to get under another Law Covenant, 
new or old? None, surely! 

Christ is the Mediator of the New [Law] Covenant to 
bring as many as possible of Adam's race back into full 
harmony with God. During the Gospel Age he is laying 
the foundation for his great work by first making satisfaction 
for their sins. Soon the antitypical Atonement 
Day will end and satisfaction for the sins of the world 
will be made. Forthwith the world will be turned over 
to him, and his mediatorial reign will begin. 



His mediation will not be for each person individually, 
but for the world collectively. He will reign or mediate 
for a thousand years, and not until its close will he deliver 
over to the Father— Justice— those whom he will succeed 
in uplifting out of sin and death conditions. During all 
the time he mediates the world will have no direct dealing 
with the Father, but only with the Mediator of the New 
Covenant. 

On the contrary, the Church of this age is justified 
and accepted by faith, as was Abraham, and is backed by 
"the blood of Christ." Then, upon consecration to be 
"dead with him," they at once come into relationship with 
God as "members of the Body of Christ." Thank God for 
our portion of blessing under the Abrahamic Covenant 
and our glorious Redeemer- Advocate! And praise God 
for the world's coming blessing under a 
Redeemer-Mediator ! 



R4587 : page 107 

SIN AND SICKNESS RELATED 

-MATTHEW 9:1-13. -MARCH 20.- 

Golden Text:— "The Son of Man hath power 
on earth to forgive sins."— V. 6. 

JESUS left the country of the Gergesenes at 

their request, because they feared that other 

healings of obsessed people might destroy 

other herds of swine, the chief industry of 

that place. He came by boat to his own city 

of Capernaum, where most of his mighty 

works were done. The people thronged 

about him and soon he was busy preaching 

to a houseful about the love and mercy of 

God and the duty and responsibility of man. 

The house was of the ordinary type of one story, with 

large tiles constituting the roof and with outside stairs 

leading thereto. Presently a paralytic borne upon a 

stretcher was brought by his friends that the Lord might 

heal him. They could not enter because of the multitude 

which filled the room and extended into the court. In 

their earnestness they climbed the stairs, removed the 

large stone tiling near the center of the house and let the 

man on the stretcher down in front of the Savior. It 

was not necessary to explain or to entreat. The Great 

Physician's heart went out in loving sympathy. He recognized 

the prayer of faith and answered it at once, but 

not as might have been expected. 

To teach a great lesson respecting the relationship between 
sin and sickness, and to show himself powerful to 
deliver them both, he said to the sick man, "Son, be of 
good cheer. Thy sins be forgiven thee"! Possibly the 



palsied man and his friends may have felt disappointed. 
Like many of our day they may have appreciated the 
loaves and fishes and healings accomplished by our Lord 
more than they were able to appreciate his work as a 
Redeemer, the Sin-Bearer, the one through whom comes 
forgiveness of sins. 

But there were present some very religious people 
learned in the Law, who understood that transgression of 
the Divine Law could not be forgiven, except by the satisfaction 
of that Law. When these in their hearts began to 
murmur, Jesus knew it and said aloud, "Which is easier— 
to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, or to say, Arise and 
walk?" The Master would have his critics see that even 
they without authority could say, Thy sins be forgiven 
thee, and none have power to know on the subject. But 
they could not heal the man and dare not say to him, 
Arise and walk. He thus convinced them that what 
they had thought the more difficult was really the easier, 
and that the one who could say the latter could doubtless 
truthfully say the former. Then, turning to the sick man, 
Jesus said, "Arise, take up thy bed and go unto thine 
house"— and he did so. 

On a very similar occasion the Scriptures tell us 
that our Lord said to the healed one, "Go thy way and sin 
no more, lest a worse thing fall upon thee." In these words 
our Lord indicated a relationship existing between sin 
and sickness. The more we consider the subject the more 
we are assured of this. Sickness is so much of death 
working in us toward completion. Before the death 
sentence came there was no sickness. After the Redeemer 
shall, during the Millennium, have put away sin, 
the time will come, we are sure, when "there shall 
be no more sighing, no more crying, no more dying." Not 
only so, but do we not all recognize that the dying we 
have inherited from father Adam has come to us down 
through the ages along the lines of mental, moral and 
physical sickness, impairment of function? And do not 
all recognize that to whatever extent sin is indulged in 
willingly, the effect is not only moral abasement, but 
an increase of disease, sickness— death working in us? 

The Jews were under the Law Covenant of DO AND 
LIVE and hence the forgiveness of sins with them would 
imply proportionate release from sin's infirmities, under 
the New Covenant during the Millennium. (Jer. 31:31.) 
When the glorified Christ shall in the end of this age 
antitypically sprinkle the mercy-seat with the virtue of 
his secondary sacrifice it will not be for the Church, as at 
first, but for the world, "for all the people." (Lev. 16:33.) 
With the Church of this Gospel Age the Divine programme 
is different. Received under the Abrahamic Covenant 
the forgiveness of their sins is associated with their 
Consecration Vow to sacrifice the earthly life and all its 
interests for the attainment of the heavenly life and 
joint-heirship with the Redeemer in his Kingdom. Hence 
the forgiveness of sins does not mean to the Church release 
from physical ailments. 



It was shortly after this that Matthew, elsewhere 
styled Levi, was called to be one of the twelve Apostles. 
He was a publican— that is to say, a collector of taxes 
for the Roman government. Publicans were despised for 
two reasons:— 

(1) It was considered very disreputable to assist a 
foreign government to collect taxes from one's friends 
—kin. 

(2) Many of these publicans were rascally and took 
advantage of their position to make themselves wealthy 
through bribes, over-collections, etc. We may be sure 
that Matthew-Levi was not of the dishonest type, else 
he never would have been called to association with 
Messiah as one of his Apostles and prospective joint-heirs 
with him in his Kingdom. For such position the 
highest degree of honesty is requisite. And if Jesus 
would never call a dishonest man, neither would a dishonest 
man have accepted his call, because there was 

nothing to be gained— neither reputation, wages nor 
fraud. Similarly Zaccheus was an honest publican who 
proffered to restore fourfold to anyone he had wronged, 
thus emphasizing the fact that he would not want to be 
dishonest. 

Other Scriptures intimate that Matthew at once made 
a supper for his friends and acquaintances, that these 
might thus have the better opportunity for acquaintance 
with the Lord, who also was a guest. But the Pharisees, 
cynical and critical and fault-finding, objected that if 
Jesus were righteous he would not be found in such company. 
Our Lord, however, sent them word that not the 
healthy, but the sick need a physician, intimating that for 
this reason he was fellowshiping sinners, that he might 
do them good. He was not descending to sin in any 
form, but seeking to lift up sinners. Then he quoted to 
them from his wonderful memory the words from Hosea 
the Prophet, "I desired mercy and not sacrifice." (Hosea 6:6.) 
He tells them that he came not to call the righteous, 
but sinners. 

Note a lesson for ourselves and for all: "There 
is none righteous, no, not one." (Romans 3:10.) 
All are sinners. All have come short of the Divine 
standard of perfection. Whoever, therefore, claims that 
he is righteous and on that score rejects the Redeemer is 
a hypocrite— in a wrong condition of mind, not ready 
for any of the blessings God now has to bestow. 

God is calling none to discipleship with Jesus, except 
such as acknowledge that by nature they were children of 
wrath and who first accept forgiveness of sins through the 
precious blood. 



R4587 : page 108 

OUR EASTER LESSON 



--MARCH 27.- 

Golden Text:— "I am he that liveth and was dead; 
and, behold, I am alive forevermore."— Rev. 1:18. 

WITHOUT quitting our study of the teachings 

of the great Prophet of Galilee we must not 

allow Easter Sunday to pass without noting 

its peculiar lesson— the resurrection of the 

Savior from the dead. Our text comes to 

us as fresh as though delivered yesterday 

from the lips of the risen Redeemer— his 

special message to his people. How much 

there is in these few words! They affirm 

with positiveness that Jesus really died, the 

Just for the unjust, that he might bring mankind back 

from sin and condemnation to harmony with God. With 

equal force they tell us that he is dead no longer, that 

although unseen to our natural eyes, our faith may recognize 

the fact that he arose from the dead and ascended 

up on high, there "to appear in the presence of God for 

us."-Heb. 9:24. 

What was effected by his death and what is the 
value of his life to mankind? 

His death was necessary because death was the 
sentence against Adam and all his race, because of original 
sin— disobedience. St. Paul says, "By one man's 
disobedience sin entered the world, and death as a result 
of sin, and thus death passed upon all, for all are sinners." 
It was not an angel that had sinned and hence 
an angel could not be the Redeemer. The Divine Law 
was an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, an ox for an 
ox, a man for a man. Hence nothing but the sacrificial 
death of a perfect man could redeem the race from their 
death sentence. Any perfect man could have thus been 
substituted, but there was none in the whole world; hence 
the necessity that our Lord should be "made flesh" that 
he might redeem us. (John 1:14.) Hence, as the Scriptures 
explain, "he who was rich, for our sakes became 
poor"— leaving the perfection of the heavenly nature and 
coming down to perfect human nature; he was "holy, 
harmless and undefiled, separate from sinners."— 
Heb. 7:26. 

The death of Jesus did not redeem the world, but it 
constituted a ransom price for the world whenever it 

R4588 : page 108 

might be applied. Our Savior laid down his life, surrendered 
it to the Father, in obedience to the Divine 
suggestion. As a reward he was highly exalted, given a 
name above every name on the spirit plane. Not having 
forfeited his human rights by sin, but merely having laid 
them down, in obedience to the Father's wish, he has 
these to dispose of, to give as a bequest or testament 
to humanity. 



But if we may thus see clearly an inestimable value 
in our Redeemer's sacrifice of himself, a glance will show 
us that his resurrection was of equal importance. Had the 
Father not raised him from the dead, it would have implied 
some unfaithfulness, some failure on our Lord's 
part. And if he had not arisen, how could he have made 
application of his human rights on our behalf? No 
wonder St. Paul forcefully declares, "If Christ be not 
risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is 
also vain... .Ye are yet in your sins. And they also 
which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.. ..But 
now is Christ risen from the dead and become the first-fruits 
of them that slept. "--I Cor. 15:14-20. 

So, then, upon the death of Jesus and his resurrection 
hang the resurrection hope of the Church and of the 
world. We must differentiate these as the Scriptures do. 
The Church is to have share in the "first" or "chief resurrection," 
called also "Christ's Resurrection," "his resurrection." 
(Phil. 3:10.) The resurrection of Christ and 
his Church is to the spirit nature of glory and perfection. 
On that glorious plane the Heavenly Bridegroom will 
soon claim his espoused Church as his Bride and joint-heir 
in his Kingdom. 

Then the world's resurrection will be due to begin- 
not a resurrection "change" to spirit nature, etc., nor an 
instantaneous work at all. Theirs will be a resurrection 
to human nature, human perfection, but of gradual development 
—first the awakening, "every man in his own 
order," and subsequently the gradual raising of them up 
out of sin and death conditions to perfection of life— as 
many as will obey the great King of the Millennial Kingdom. 
And such as will refuse obedience will be cut off- 
destroyed in the Second Death. 

It is greatly to be regretted that very many Christian 
people, including many of the clergy, have failed to 
discern the great importance of the resurrection, in connection 
with the teachings of God's Word. This serious 
omission has aided greatly in the confusion which has 
led many to a rejection of the Word of God under the 
teachings of Higher Criticism and Evolution. Let us 
honor the Heavenly Father and the Redeemer by heeding 
the testimony of the Bible respecting the importance of 
the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. In proportion 
as we do this we will be surely following the example 
of the Great Teacher and of all the Apostles. And are we 
wiser than they that we should leave their teachings or 
neglect them? Nay, we will "take the more earnest heed, 
lest we should let these things slip" and become bound, 
as many have been, through the neglect of the teachings 
of this doctrine. 



R4588 : page 108 

FAITH, THE CHANNEL OF BLESSING 



--MATTHEW 9:18-34.-APRIL 3.- 

Golden Text:— "All things are possible 
to him that believeth. "-Mark 9:23. 

FAITH in God consists in taking him at his 

word— accepting and believing his Revelation 

of his Character and his Plan in respect 

to ourselves and others. We should 

clearly distinguish between faith and 

credulity. Some very good people make 

the mistake of supposing that the more 

absurd the thing which they believe, the 

greater is the faith. Faith does not spurn 

reason, but uses it within certain prescribed 

and rational lines. In order to have faith in God, we 

must first satisfy our reasoning faculties:— 

(a) That there is a God; 

(b) That he has a dependable character— is Just; is 
Wise; is Powerful; is Gracious; 

(c) We must reasonably assure ourselves that what 
we accept as his message is worthy of acceptance— bears 
marks of truthfulness and harmony with the Divine 
Character. He who does not seek such evidences as a 
foundation for faith is merely credulous— not faith-full. 

Because so many Christian people ignore the proper 
definition of faith many candid minds are repelled from 
Christianity, refusing, they tell us, to believe absurdities. 
We urge Christian people to a more rigid examination 

R4588 : page 109 

of their faith in God and in the Bible, that, as the 
Apostle says, We may be able to "give a reason for the 
hope [the faith], that is within us." (I Pet. 3:15.) We owe 
this to ourselves, as well as to those whom we would 
endeavor to interest in God's Word. In the light now 
shining upon God's Word it is possible, as it was in the 
days of the Apostles, for the man of God to be "thoroughly 
furnished" and able "to rightly divide the Word of Truth" 
and to show to his friends and neighbors solid, logical 
grounds for each item of his faith. We admit that this 
was not, apparently, possible during the dark period 
which intervened between the first century and now. 
Knowing how to sympathize with the many who have 
perplexities respecting the reliability of the Bible as the 
inspired Word of God, we invite correspondence from 
such, feeling sure that we can assist them. 

Our present study illustrates faith from four different 
standpoints:— 

(1) The faith of Jairus— the father, on behalf of his 
daughter; 

(2) The faith of the woman who, on her own account, 
touched the hem of the Lord's garment; 

(3) The faith of the two blind men who encouraged 



one another; 

(4) The faith of those who brought to the Lord a 
deaf and dumb man possessed of a demon. 

Jairus, the ruler of the synagogue in Capernaum, our 
Lord's home city, knew Jesus well. He sometimes called 
upon him to read the Sabbath lesson. (Luke 4:16.) On 
a previous occasion with others he entreated the Lord on 
behalf of the centurion's servant. (Luke 7:4.) Now 
affliction had invaded Jairus' home. His only daughter, 
twelve years old, was dying. The Master had been absent 
across the sea. Amongst the throng awaiting him 
was Jairus, who, because of his prominence as a representative 
man, was properly given first audience. He 
manifested his faith not merely by his request that the 
Lord would come and heal his daughter, but also by his 
conduct in prostrating himself, figuratively expressing 
his homage, obedience and faith. He had left the daughter 
in a dying condition. She was dead at the time that he 
was talking to Jesus and urging haste. Before they 
reached the house messengers came, saying that it was 
too late, that she was dead. When Jesus arrived, neighbors 
had gathered, in harmony with the Jewish custom. 
Some were playing doleful tunes on flutes; others were 
groaning and lamenting. It was the custom for the females 
of a family and neighborhood, when they heard of a 
death, to give a shriek and then to continue murmuring, 
mourning as they entered into the death chamber a while 
later. The Master bade all these to depart, lightly saying, 
"The maid is not dead, but sleepeth." The language 
is similar to that used respecting Lazarus. She was dead, 
according to the usual human expression. But she was 
not dead from the Divine standpoint— not extinct as is a 
brute in death. God's provision from the first was that 
the death sentence upon humanity would be cancelled by 
the Redeemer's sacrifice and that as a result there will be 
a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust. 
From this standpoint the Scriptures speak of death 
as a sleep, from which there will be a glorious awakening 
in the resurrection morning— in the dawning of the 
Millennial Age. Thus Abraham and others of the past, 
both good and bad, are referred to as falling asleep, 
sleeping with their fathers, etc. Thus Stephen, the first 
Christian martyr, fell asleep. (Acts 7:60.) Evidently this 
does not mean that the dead go to sleep in either heaven, 
purgatory or hell. The Bible explains the matter, saying 
that many that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake. 
(Dan. 12:2.) As all in Adam die, even so all in Christ 
shall be made alive. (I Cor. 15:22.) What would have 
been death to them and eternal cessation of being has been 
changed by virtue of the Redeemer's sacrifice and is a 
sleep of unconsciousness, until the morning when the 
great Redeemer will say to all, as he did to Lazarus, 
"Come forth," or as he did in this case, to Jairus' daughter, 
"Talitha Cumi"— "Come, my child." So, we are assured 
that eventually all that are in their graves shall hear the 
voice of the Son of Man and come forth. (John 5:28.) 



On the way to Jairus' home a woman in the crowd surrounding 

the Lord touched the hem of his garment, believing 

in his greatness and power and that thus she would 

get a blessing. The thrill of life and strength immediately 

came into her body, just as the touching of the storage 

battery with a wire would draw the electric current. 

Our Lord was full of vital energy. He was perfect, not 

only free from sin, but free from sickness and death conditions. 

He noticed the loss of vitality and, turning, inquired, 

"Who touched me?" The poor woman was fearful 

that she had stolen a blessing, of which she felt herself 

unworthy. But soon she was assured by the kindly 

words and look of the Master. This incident teaches us 

clearly that our Lord's miracles drained upon his vitality. 

R4589 : page 109 

Thus from Jordan to Calvary he willingly, gladly, responded 
to the needs of those about him— laying down 
his life. 

The two blind men who met Jesus, hailing him as 
Messiah, the promised King of David's line, encouraged 
one another and both got the desired blessings, according 
to their faith. Here we have illustrated the advantages 
of Church fellowship in respect to faith stimulation. Let 
us assist one another in the most holy faith. Let us be 
helpers and not hinderers to fellow-pilgrims. The Master 
did not attempt the healing of all the people. For instance, 
there was but one healed at the Pool of Siloam, though 
many were there. So here Jesus admonished those whose 
eyes were opened to keep the matter quiet. But they could 
not. Their joy was so great and the Lord's humility in 
the matter served to draw forth their praise the louder. 
So with us— quickened from the dead, spirit-healed, and 
with the eyes of our understanding opened— we cannot 
refrain from telling the good tidings and praising the 
Lord. -Romans 1:12; Acts 4:20. 

The man possessed of a demon and made both deaf 
and dumb was in such a deplorable condition that he 
could not help himself, neither could he ask the Master's 
aid; neither could he hear, if anyone should exorcise the 
demon. His friends, however, exercised faith in his behalf. 
Jesus responded and cast out the demon. The man 
was healed. The multitude marveled. But the Pharisees 
were envious. They wished to pose as the chief religionists 
and to have and to hold the popular respect, which was 
rapidly passing to Jesus. The poison of envy in their 
minds so perverted them that they declared that Jesus 
himself was Satan, Beelzebub, the Prince of devils. Let 
us learn the lesson and avoid envy, malice, hatred, and 
fill our hearts instead with the spirit of meekness, gentleness, 
patience, love, and thus become more and more 
like our Master, increasing our faith. 

O for a faith that will not shrink, 
Though pressed by every foe; 



That will not tremble on the brink 

Of any earthly woe; 
That will not murmur nor complain 

Beneath the chastening rod, 
But in the hour of grief or pain, 

Will lean upon its God. 



R4589 :page 110 

RE BEREAN STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Brother Bohnet's interesting 
letter in February 1 TOWER, re Berean Studies, suggests 
to my mind that you might be pleased to have me recount 
our experience in the Church at Los Angeles, where I 
believe the Berean Bible Studies originated, in the form 
of "Outlines," as we then called them. We had had some 
very unsatisfactory experiences in the Bible Study by 
book, chapter and verse, which we tried for about one 
year, if I remember correctly. But we were continually 
"running up against" verses which had not been explained 
in DAWNS or TOWERS, and whose proper interpretation 
we could only "guess at," and the result was that 
some combative spirits in the meeting would insist upon 
their private and personal expositions being accepted by 
the congregation, to the ultimate disruption of the meeting. 
This we found so unedifying, so unprofitable, that 
we were led, I believe by the Lord, to the arranging of 
Topical Bible Studies on various subjects, with questions 
and references to be examined by the members of the 
class before coming to meeting. 

I do not believe any other Church has received the 
benefit enjoyed by the Los Angeles congregation in these 
studies. And I can account for it only in this manner:— 

First— the class studied the questions at home, studied 
as though each one was to lead the meeting, studied as 
though upon each member rested the responsibility of seeing 
that the Truth, and that only, was clearly set forth in 
every statement made in the class. (You see we were 
so far away from headquarters that we were not favored 
with Pilgrim visits more frequently, during that period, 
than about once in three or four years, and we had no 
brethren among us who were gifted with the talent of public 
speaking, and thus we were thrown upon our own resources, 
and compelled to depend upon the Lord and each 
other for our "edification in the most holy faith"!) 

Secondly, the leader called upon individuals by name, 
to answer the questions. As we are only "children of a 
larger growth," I believe the feeling that we would 
probably be called upon personally to answer a question 
incited us to study more than if we thought, "Oh, I won't 
be called on; it does not matter whether I study or not." 
There is in all of us a little pride, which must be appealed 
to sometimes. 



Again, our aim was not to leave a single question until 
every member in the class had a perfectly clear understanding 
of the matter, even though we were often obliged 
to spend two, three or four meetings on one question 
alone. Every member was encouraged to ask questions, 
not to be ashamed of his ignorance, but to realize we 
were all students in the School of Christ, all learners at 
the feet of the Great Teacher! 

Again, we studied to bring up Scriptural quotations 
which would corroborate, or seem to contradict, our accepted 
position on any doctrine, and thus we were enabled 
to "put on the whole armor of God" to such an extent 
that the various Pilgrim brethren who visited us afterwards 
mentioned especially the knowledge manifested in 
the Los Angeles Church, as well as their growth in the 
fruits of the Spirit, due to the application of this knowledge. 
(Pardon what might seem to be undue laudation; I 
refer to it only as a proof of the good received by us in 
the Berean method of Bible Study.) 

As some of the friends seem to think you, dear 
Brother, "got up" this method and are "forcing it upon 
the Church," perhaps the above may assist them to a 
better understanding of the matter. You are at liberty to 
use this letter as may seem to you best. Praying his 
continued blessing upon you, 

Yours in the service of our blessed Lord and Redeemer, 
G. W. SEIBERT. 



R4589 :page 110 

RE FIFTH-SUNDAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I heartily enjoyed my visit yesterday and Saturday 
with the dear ones at Canton in their "Fifth-Sunday 
local convention," and thank you for affording me the 
blessed privilege to meet with them. Enclosed find program. 
It was my privilege to address the local class twice 
on Saturday and the general assembly twice on Sunday, 
besides the Berean lesson after-talk. 

Brother, you should have been present at the morning 
testimony meeting and heard the splendid testimonies of 
the dear friends. It would have comforted your heart 
to hear yourself so frequently referred to as the faithful 
servant of the Lord, and the assurance of loyalty to your 
teachings, and the confidence in you as a loving brother, a 
noble-minded man, whose every word and act bespeaks 
the thorough Christian. I fear, however, your modesty 
would have prompted you to leave the hall before half a 
dozen testimonies had been given, for every one of them 
had some favorable allusion to yourself and your service. 
Truly it was good to be there, and when finally the Vow 
song was sung by the entire congregation tears of joy 
came to more eyes than mine. It sent thrill after thrill 



through my being until I could hardly refrain from shouting, 
and you know I am not easily swayed by emotion. 

I have perhaps been to twenty conventions, large and 
small, since coming into the Truth in 1892, and write truly 
when I assure you that this little convention of about 200 
Truth friends afforded me greater pleasure than any of 
the others. Possibly, as we come nearer the goal of our 
hopes, we more and more appreciate the sweet fellowship 
of the saintly ones of like precious faith, and possibly the 
attitude of the opposing ones draws us closer and closer 
together. Often, on the farm in my earlier days, 
when some strange dog or other animal would come near 
the sheep, I noticed how they would huddle together as 
though for mutual protection. Just so when we see 
enemies near, we, like sheep, instead of scattering, draw 
closer together. The dear sheep about Canton are drawn 
very, very close to you, dear Brother. Not only would 
the sheep in threatened danger bunch together, but they 
kept close to the one who fed and cared for them. The 
sheep of the Lord well know who it is that is supplying 
them the wholesome spiritual food today. The goats are 
ever on the alert for brush and leaves, which they prefer. 
Peter was admonished of the Lord to feed the lambs 
and sheep, but he could not hope to satisfy goats with 
sheep provender. Neither can you or any of us. 

Some of the friends at Canton told me of the effort 
of a certain brother who came amongst them to turn 
them out of the way by what they considered were exaggerated 
or wrong assertions. They took note of his 
changed deportment from what he had been on former 
visits when he came to them in like faith. He preferred 
to talk mostly on matters of no interest to them. 
He mentioned religious matters only in connection with 
evil speaking, slander and backbiting until he fairly disgusted 
his hearers. But not so the certain class who 
seemed to enjoy his unchristian attacks on the life and 
character of another. The friends called to mind the text, 
"Speak evil of no man," and especially Paul's admonition 
prohibitive of the speaking aught against an Elder, and 
thus he was unconsciously "driving nails into his own 

R4590 : page 1 1 1 

coffin," as the Germans say. I cautioned the friends to 
ever beware of anyone who allows himself to speak evil 
of others, assuring them that even were the statement 
entirely true the one who so speaks is manifestly more 
guilty in God's sight than is the one he is endeavoring to 
malign and injure. 

In giving my own testimony in the general assembly, 
prompted by the other testimonies of the friends present, 
I told the dear ones of how I had for many years been a 
member of the Bible House family, had eaten and 
lived there, and even enjoyed your uncomfortable 
bed-lounge with you on various occasions since 
the year 1895, and that never once in all that 



time had I heard a cross or angry word from 
your lips, and that never had I known you to do or 
say aught unbecoming a Christian and a gentleman. 
Brother, I may have been somewhat personal, but in view 
of some malicious attacks that had been made on you 
behind your back I could not refrain from uttering the 
truth in your defense, although I am well aware of your 
practice to make little or no defense of yourself, but to 
vigorously defend others, or the Truth, or a matter involving 
a principle or doctrine. While I can say, All 
honor to the man who can adhere to such a policy persistently, 
yet sometimes I feel that you really ought to defend 
yourself, if not for your own sake, for the sake of 
many dear ones on whose shoulders part of the burden 
falls. You always say in substance, "The Lord knows all 
about it," and with him you let it rest. The letter enclosed 
contains a sentence right along this line. You will 
not need to return it. 

I think these Fifth-Sunday conventions are a means 
of great blessing to our people, stimulating and refreshing. 
I would like to hear from the friends elsewhere as 
to their experience re these little gatherings. I feel like 
encouraging all the Truth friends to institute these occasions 
of spiritual uplift. I will do all in my power 
to assist. Both at Detroit and Canton they worked me 
pretty hard, yet it was joy to serve the friends. I regret 
my inability to serve as I should like. The Lord, however, 
knows I am willing to do the best I can. The bond 
of Christian love was strengthened in the heart of 
everyone who attended yesterday's convention, I am sure, 
and you are more dearly than ever entrenched in the 
hearts of all who were there. God bless you and keep you 
in his tender care. 

Thanking you once more for making it possible for me 
to be there, I remain in loving sympathy, 

Your Brother in Christ, our Advocate and Lord, 
J. A. BOHNET. 



R4590 : page 1 1 1 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I desire to let you know of an incident that is an occasion 
of joy to our little class, and I believe it is an act of 
justice to a Brother to hasten to tell the good report we 
can now give, inasmuch as you were acquainted at the 
Jacksonville Convention, February, 1909, with the 
estrangement that existed. 

We are so glad to announce that Brother , once 

our Elder, has won a great victory over the "old man," 
pride, self, and the Adversary. He, by the grace of God, 
at a testimony meeting, arose and confessed his faults, saying 
that pride and the Adversary combined had deceived 



and cheated him of the blessed fellowship of this class, 
that he had been to the throne of grace with the matter and 
desired to do nothing but the Lord's will in all matters and 
desired to again meet regularly with "those of like precious 
faith." 

Each one present at the end of our Brother's testimony 
came forward and extended the hand of fellowship and 
love. Stimulated by the example, another one of our 
class who had been unstable, arose and testified in like 
manner, to whom also we demonstrated our love and 
good will by shaking hands. We felt that the power of 
God's holy Spirit had worked mightily in our midst and 
rejoiced greatly. These two Brothers are demonstrating 
the sincerity of their testimony by attending all the meetings 
regularly, which is our Lord's appointed way of 
blessing his Church, those who "forsake not the assembling 
of themselves together as is the manner of 
some." 

Yours faithfully in our Redeemer and King, 
M. L. MCILVAINE. 



MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

For months the publications of those poor "dreamers," 
so graphically described by the Apostle Jude, have been 
coming through the mail into our home. 

Dear Pastor, what a fearful thing to be "spots on the 
feasts of love" of God's dear people as they meet to worship 
and learn of him. To be "trees whose fruit 
withereth— twice dead, plucked up by the roots"! The 
empty clouds ("without water"), carried about by winds, 
"every wind of doctrine." 

Will you offer a special prayer for me and mine that 
we may "keep ourselves in the love of God, looking for 
the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life"? 

And for the foolish ones, deluded for a time by these 
"wandering stars," who have gone in the way "of Cain, 
Balaam and Core," pray that we may have all proper 
"compassion, making a difference," "pulling them out of 
the fire," by continually feasting our minds on the Truth, 
and keeping on the "whole armor of God," thus being 
equipped for any service or any trial. Surely, we never 
could help any one by imbibing error, even with the 
thought of being better able to contrast it with the Truth. 

A number of times I have thought of writing letters to 
some, trying to help them; but if all the clear, beautiful 
expositions of Scripture we have been given through the 
TOWERS cannot dispel their mental and spiritual clouds, 
I thought anything I might say surely would do no good. 

May the God of all grace keep you continually; give 
you wisdom, grace and strength to meet every need. 

Yours in our blessed Redeemer and Advocate, 
MRS. C. A. WISE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Since the opponents of the Vow called attention to the 
small number of names registered, the Birmingham 
Church has decided to send a full list of her members that 
have taken the Vow, as a means of expressing to you our 
hearty approval and appreciation of it. 

While the majority took it some time ago and so notified 
you, yet others have been dilatory about sending in 
their names. Only a few have not yet seen the necessity 
for taking it, and we trust, in God's providence, they may 
soon see "eye to eye" with us, as no antagonism has been 
shown. 

We would like to say, also, that we feel most grateful 
for the season of refreshing that we have recently enjoyed, 
and are confident that much permanent good will 
result therefrom. 

Yours in him, 

B. T. M., --Secretary. 



page 1 13 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI APRIL 1 No. 7 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

The Memorial Passover Supper 115 

What We Memorialize 115 

"My Cup of the New Covenant" 116 

"Let Us Keep the Feast" 118 

Secret Faults and Presumptuous Sins 118 

Yearly Requests for Pilgrim Visits 119 

The Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand 120 

More Tolerable for Sodom 121 

Truth Spreading in India 121 

The Least in the Kingdom 122 

John in Prison Doubted 122 

The Letter and the Spirit 123 

Publisher's Notices 126 

Bro. Russell's Jerusalem Trip 126 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 127 

page 114 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



R4597 :page 114 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS 

The Brooklyn Eagle advises that it has received a great 
many requests for the sermons, but for the present it concludes 
not to publish Brother Russell's sermons. Should it change 
its opinion later we will advise our readers. 

Meantime do not forget to encourage by letters and cards 
those papers that are publishing the sermons— especially the 
one located nearest to your home. Encourage also by your 
own subscription or those of your friends. If a paper ceases 
to publish the sermons, please do not berate it, but merely in 
kindly terms express your disappointment at the loss and your 
hope that the sermons will be continued. The proper time to 
encourage the Editor is while the sermons are a regular 
feature. 

Report concerning Volunteer Matter. We have no method 
of checking our printers except as you assist us. Please, therefore, 
report to us on post-card the receipt of your Volunteer 
consignment— stating how many bundles you received and 
the condition in which they arrived, and how many papers to 
each bundle. You need not count every bundle, but average 
them; count about two. One brother recently reported that 
his bundles of one hundred averaged only ninety-seven. This 
small shortage on a million copies would amount to thirty 
thousand. Kindly assist us in this matter. 

page 114 



BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS IN GERMAN 

A German newspaper publishing the weekly sermon can be 
supplied to our readers on a clubbing proposition at the low 
rate of $1 per year in the United States or $1.50 per year in 
Canada or Europe. Send orders to us. 

R4597 :page 126 

PUBLISHERS' NOTICES 

page 126 

[CONTINUED FROM 2ND PAGE] 



R4597 : page 126 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S JERUSALEM TRIP 

Curiosity as to why Bro. Russell takes the trip to Jerusalem 
is not to be wondered at amongst our readers. He is recognized 
as being intensely practical and having a reason for 
every move. 

His motive in this instance is not curiosity, nor change of 
scenery, nor health, nor relaxation; for a stenographer accompanies 
him, so that not an hour may be lost. 

He goes at the suggestion of the newspaper syndicate 
which handles his sermons, and all of his expenses are provided 
for. The syndicate feel the public pulse and urge that 
it is necessary to center the public interest upon the preacher 
in order to make his sermons the more attractive to the publishers 
and to the reading public. Brother Russell yields to 
anything which does not bridle his tongue nor compromise the 
Truth. 



AMENDED DATES ABROAD 

In order to keep an appointment at Rome, May 1, Brother 
Russell will arrive one day later at Vienna, Austria, May 3; 
Warsaw, Russia, May 4, and at Berlin, May 5. The Swiss 
meeting will be at Berne instead of Basle. London arrival 
will be at 8 o'clock Sunday morning, May 8, at Liverpool 
St. Station, giving another day for Barmen. 



page 126 

ITEMS AGAIN IN STOCK AND NEW ONES 

"Heavenly Manna" in German, same price as English. 

Syrian, "What Say the Scriptures About Hell?" Price, 10c. 

Syrian, "Calamities; Why God Permits Them." (Tract 
pamphlet.) 

Norwegian, DAWN-STUDIES. Vol. III. 

Hungarian PEOPLES PULPIT. Order all you can use. Free. 

1910 Motto Cards, very beautiful, very cheap. Will close 
them out five for twenty cents, postage prepaid. (See description, 
November 15 issue.) 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES in full leather binding, gold edges, 
postpaid; any volume, 60c. We still have a few leather first 
volumes without volume number on binding. Specially suitable 
for gifts. 

STUDIES in India paper, per set of six volumes, postpaid, 
$4.40. 

STUDIES in Karatol binding (same general dimensions as 
India paper edition, but cheaper paper and binding), per set 
of six volumes, to WATCH TOWER subscribers, $1.65. 

"Outlines" (six booklets bound in one volume), cloth, 



50c; leather, $1.00. 

"Helps" (same as in latest WATCH TOWER BIBLE), cloth, 
50c.; India paper edition, leather bound, $1.25. 



CROSS AND CROWN PINS 

Some time ago we announced both gold and silver cross 
and crown pins. The order was only partly filled and many 
of our friends were obliged to wait on our later order. We 
believe this will be to their advantage, though we regret the 
delay. What we now have are very satisfactory. They are 
in stock and you can order at your convenience. 

No. 1. Cross and Crown design in ten carat gold, three-fourths 
inch in diameter. The crown is burnished. The surrounding 
wreath is rustic and washed in green gold. The 
cross is of dark red enamel with only the outlines showing 
gold. The pin has a patent fastening. Price, $1.15. 

No. 2. This is exactly the same as No. 1, except that instead 
of the pin it has a screw-clamp at the back, making it 
more desirable for men's wear. Price, $1.15. 

No. 3. Exactly the same as No. 2, except that it is one-half 
inch in diameter. Price, $ 1 . 

No. 4. This pin is of smooth burnished gold with a circle 
instead of a wreath. No enamel. Patent pin fastening. 
Price, $1. 

No. 5. Exactly like No. 1, except that it is of silver instead 
of gold. Price, 35c. 

These prices all include postage and are very much less 
than jewelers would charge, as we have them manufactured 
in large quantities for your convenience. None is showy. 

The demand for the small one-half inch celluloid pins continues. 
We have a large stock now; 3c each, 25c per dozen. 



"THE TORONTO WORLD" 

This journal assures us that hereafter it will publish 
Brother Russell's sermons every week in full— three columns 
in Monday edition. All WATCH TOWER subscribers can have it 
on the clubbing list for an additional 50 cents, or $1.50 for 
The World and THE TOWER— anywhere in Canada. 



DO THIS INSTEAD! 

Not everyone knows how to approach newspaper people to 
show the advantages to them of publishing "Pastor Russell's 
Sermons." All would, therefore, best desist and let the work 
be done by the Newspaper Syndicate now handling the 
service. Co-operate with the syndicate rather, and write to 
it or to us your views and what you would be willing to do 
to assist the newspaper if it should begin the publication. 



"THE OVERLAND MONTHLY" 

Many of our readers took the Overland magazine last year 
because it published a series of articles on "The Divine Program" 
from Brother Russell's pen. Such will no doubt be 
interested to know that Brother Russell has engaged to send 
twelve articles this year on the topic, "God's Chosen People." 
This series began with the February issue. The magazine can 
be had of news dealers at 15 cents the copy, $1.50 per year. 
By special clubbing arrangements the year's issues will cost 
our subscribers only 80 cents. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR MAY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family 
listens to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," 
then joins in prayer. At the breakfast table the 
MANNA text is considered: (1) 80; (2) 49; (3) 244; 
(4) 313; (5) 93; (6) 165; (7) 135; (8) 107; (9) 4; (10) 
155; (11) 8; (12) 67; (13) 312; (14) 283; (15) 280; 
(16) 105; (17) 333; (18) 152; (19) 12; (20) 214; (21) 
95; (22) 178; (23) 293; (24) 30; (25) 60; (26) Vow; 
(27) 218; (28) 201; (29) 195; (30) 264; (31) 88. 



R4590 :page 115 

THE MEMORIAL PASSOVER SUPPER 

AS heretofore announced, the date of the 

Memorial Supper Anniversary this year 

falls on Friday evening, April 22d, after 

six o'clock, according to Jewish reckoning. 

The Christian Church originally kept this 

Passover Memorial as we now do, but in 

order to make the dates more regular, and 

also in order to draw the minds of Christians 

away from the thought of following 

the Jewish precedents too closely, the 

method of reckoning the date was slightly altered. Thus 

the Jewish reckoning let the Passover fall where it might 

as respects the days of the week. But the change made 

the anniversary of our Lord's death to come always on 

a Friday, styled "Good Friday," and his resurrection date 

always, therefore, to fall on the Sunday thereafter, "the 

third day," styled subsequently Easter Sunday. The Jewish 

reckoning of time was by the moon as well as by the 

sun. Thus the majority of years with them had twelve 

months, but occasionally one would have thirteen months. 

The Jewish reckoning of the Passover date begins to 



count with the first New Moon after the Spring 
equinox, the Passover day thus coming on the full moon, 
fourteen days thereafter. Subsequently the Christian 
Church accepted the Friday near the first full moon after 
the Spring equinox, even though the moon was new before 
the Equinox. This explains the difference in dates 
this year, Good Friday, according to Catholic usage, falling 
on March 25, while the corresponding date, according 
to Jewish reckoning, will be April 23. We celebrate the 

R4591 :page 115 

Memorial on the evening preceding. Yet it is not the hour 

or day of our Lord's death, but the fact that is chiefly important. 

This year such a Memorial service will be in 

order on Friday evening, April 22, after six o'clock 

(Nisan 14th). The next afternoon, Saturday, April 23, 

at 3 p.m., will correspond to the hour of our Lord's 

death; the Jewish Passover Feast beginning three hours 

later. So much explanation for the satisfaction of the 

minds of all. 

WHAT WE MEMORIALIZE 

We memorialize four great matters:— 

(1) The death of our Lord Jesus as the Passover 
Lamb. 

(2) Our relationship or participation with him in the 
sufferings of Christ, the death of Christ, as followers in 
his steps and sharers in his cup. 

(3) We celebrate incidentally and prospectively the 
great deliverance which soon will follow this passing over 
of the present night-time. The deliverance will affect 
first of all those passed over, the Church— the "little 
flock" and the "great company," the antitypes of the 

Royal Priesthood and the Levitical host or tribe. The deliverance 
of these will come in the morning, the resurrection 
morning, the Millennial morning. 

(4) We also incidentally commemorate the great "feast 
of fat things" which will follow the passing over of the 
Church, when the passed-over ones shall be associated 
with their Lord in his heavenly Kingdom as the great 
antitypical Prophet, Priest, Judge, Mediator and King 
over all the earth, to bless and uplift the human family 
through the merit of the same precious blood which he 

now permits the passed-over ones to participate in sacrificially, 
after the imputation of its merit to them has 
made them worthy. 

These different points should be kept in memory separate 
and distinct from each other if we would have the 
greatest blessing from this Memorial. 

Looking unto Jesus as the "Lamb of God," we behold 
his spotlessness— "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners." We behold how "he was led as a sheep 
to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before his 
shearer, so opened he not his mouth." (Acts 8:32.) By 



speaking the word he could have resisted those who were 

intent upon his destruction. He assures us that no man 

took from him his life; that he laid it down himself— voluntarily. 

He laid it down not in obedience to the Father's 

Law, for Justice could not demand sacrifice; but laid 

it down in accordance with the Father's will, saying, 

"I delight to do thy will, O my God; thy law is written 

in my heart." From this standpoint the Christian 

believer can rejoice greatly that the Redeemer spared not 

himself, but freely delivered himself up with the foreknowledge 

that in the Divine purpose the value of his 

sacrifice would ultimately redound, first for the benefit 

of his followers, and subsequently for the blessing of all 

the people. Hence in partaking of the broken, unleavened 

bread we memorialize the purity, the sinlessness, of him 

who gave himself to be, in God's due time, the Ransom-Price 

for all of mankind. From this standpoint we 

realize that his shed blood signified that his death was 

necessary in order that our condemned humanity might 

be restored to life without infracting the Divine Law. 

Our hearts should pause here to appreciate, not only the 

love of our Lord Jesus Christ, but also the love of the 

Father, who designed the programme; and the Justice of 

God thus exemplified; and the Wisdom of God in making 

R4591 :page 116 

the arrangement; and the faith also to grasp the Power 
of God, as it will ultimately be manifested in the full 
carrying out of all the glorious purposes and promises 
which we Memorialize. 

The second point is scarcely less important to us than 
the first. The first blessing from the Redeemer's sacrifice 
has been offered during this Gospel Age to such as 
have the "hearing ear" and the appreciative heart. This 
blessing is most astounding. It purposes a still further 
blessing to such of mankind as turn from sin and accept 
the grace of God in Christ by faith, and present their 
bodies living sacrifices, with full consecration, vowing 
to walk in the footsteps of Jesus. To all such, during this 
Gospel Age and until the completion of the elect number, 
the Redeemer will impute the merit of his sacrifice, in 
order to make their sacrifices acceptable in God's sight- 
to the intent that they may suffer with him in the flesh, 
and share with him in the begetting of the Spirit now 
and in birth to the Spirit plane in the resurrection. Thus 
as his glorified "members" they may be associated with 
him in his Millennial Kingdom, when he shall act as 
"Mediator between God and men." The word men here 
includes all not begotten of the holy Spirit to be New 
Creatures on the spirit plane. 

Our partaking of the bread symbolically represents our 
partaking of the fleshly perfection of the man Jesus. 
We partake of his perfections by faith, and not actually. 
He gives us, not restitution to human perfection, but 
merely an imputation of his righteousness, his perfection, 



as covering in the Divine sight the blemishes, the imperfections, 
of our fleshly bodies, which we have tendered 
to God as living sacrifices. 

When as our great Advocate the Redeemer imputes 
to our offering the merit of his sacrifice the Father accepts 
the same and begets the sacrificer to the new nature 
as a "member of the Body of Christ." And since we 
are not at once perfected as New Creatures, but still 
have mortal flesh, the Father "adopts" us in a sense that 
includes our justified flesh and all of its interests. 

It is only those who have thus partaken of the merit 
of Christ and whose sacrifice God has accepted that are 
directed in conformity to their Covenant of sacrifice to 
drink of his cup and to daily be immersed into his death. 

"MY CUP OF THE NEW COVENANT" 

The cup is not ours, but the Lord's. The life or sacrifice 
symbolized by the blood is not ours, but the Redeemer's. 
We are merely given the privilege of drinking it, 
partaking of it. The blood of Jesus could have sealed 
the New Covenant between God and Israel, and on behalf 
of all mankind through Israel by the New Covenant, 
without being offered to us at all. The offering to us 
of the privilege of participation in the cup of Christ's sufferings 
and death is therefore not to indicate that it 
was insufficient nor that we could add anything to it. It 
illustrates the grace of God— that he is willing to receive 
us and make us joint-heirs with our Lord and Savior, 
if we have his Spirit. The Spirit which actuated Jesus 
was a spirit of devotion to the doing of the Father's will 
—to the smallest detail, and even unto death. Exactly 
this same spirit must be in all those whom the Father 
will now accept as members of his Bride, his Body, his 
Church in the heavenly glory. Hence the Redeemer emphasized 
the matter distinctly, saying that all who would 
sit with him in his Throne must drink of his cup of self-denial, 
self-sacrifice, and must be immersed into his 
death. 

This is exactly what St. Paul points out to us, namely, 
that our Lord is the true Bread, the true Loaf, which 
came down from heaven, and that we are invited to be 
portions of the One Loaf, which ultimately will be the 
Bread of Life for the world during the Millennial Age. 
We not only partake of Christ, but, accepted by him according 
to the Father's plan, we become members with 
our Lord in the larger Loaf, the multitudinous Christ. 
Hence, as St. Paul suggests, when we break this Bread 
together as a Memorial, we not only symbolize our Lord's 
broken Body, but in a larger sense we symbolize the 
breaking of the Church and our own breaking or dying 
as members of that Church. "The loaf which we break, 
is it not the communion (the common union or participation) 
of the Body of Christ? For we, being many, are 
one Loaf, the one Body; for we are all partakers of that 
one Loaf." -I Cor. 10:16,17. 



The cup of the fruit of the vine to us means the sacrificed 
life of our Lord. But additionally, it reminds us 
that we, in becoming his disciples, accepted his invitation 
to share his cup. To us this means faithfulness in self-sacrifice 
as the Lord's representatives, even unto death. 
"The cup of blessing which we bless (for which we give 
thanks as the greatest imaginable favor of God bestowed 
upon us), is it not the communion (the general union, 
the fellowship) of the Body of Christ?" Does it not 
represent our Lord's sacrifice and our share with him in 
his sacrifice, by his invitation and in harmony with the 
Father's pre-arranged Plan, in which he foreknew us with 
Jesus from before the foundation of the world? 

Oh, what a depth of meaning attaches to the Communion 
Cup from this standpoint! Oh, what heart-searching 
should go with the accepting of it! How evident 
it is that this Communion Cup represents not merely 
turning from sin; not merely believing in Jesus; not 
merely preference for right over wrong, but chiefly 
the presentation of believers' bodies living sacrifices 
to God: sacrifices considered holy, because of the imputation 
of Jesus' merit, and which sacrifices God has accepted, 
begetting the offerer to the new nature as a New 
Creature!— Rom. 12:1. 

No wonder the Apostle intimates that whoever lightly, 
irreverently, yet intelligently, partakes of this symbolic 
flesh and symbolic blood brings condemnation upon himself. 
It is of this blood, viewed from this standpoint, 
that the Apostle speaks in Heb. 10:29. He speaks of 
some who count the blood of the Covenant wherewith 
they were sanctified an unsacred or common thing— some 
who do despite to the spirit of grace, favor, which has 
called us with this high calling during this Gospel Age. 
The Apostle intimates that God's providence for such 
would be the Second Death. We cannot understand the 
Apostle to mean that Church members who have never 
made a real consecration to God, who have never understood 
the real grace of God, the real privilege which they 
enjoy— that these should be subjects of the Second Death. 
The context, on the contrary, intimates that the persons 
referred to had at one time a clear understanding of the 
matter; that they had been "once enlightened"; that they 
had not only been justified by faith in the precious blood 
to approach God thus, but, on the basis of that justifying 
faith, they had gone on to sanctification— presenting their 

R4592:page 116 

bodies living sacrifices. The text cited indeed declares 
that it refers to only such as despise the blood of the 
Covenant (the Cup we memorialize), with which they 
had previously been sanctified by the begetting of the 
holy Spirit when they agreed to "drink of Christ's cup" 
in their consecration. 

"EVEN YOUR SANCTIFICATION" 



Our sanctification, which is the will of God and in 
harmony with which the present Gospel call is made, is 
effected not when we are "called," nor when we begin 

R4592:page 117 

to turn from sin, nor when we begin to hear and heed the 

voice of God, but when, under the influence of these blessings 

and mercies of God, we come to the point of full consecration 

—full discipleship, full surrender, full sacrifice 

of all of the earthly rights and privileges, that we might 

have instead thereof the spiritual blessings, the divine 

nature, joint-heirship with our Lord in his Kingdom. Is 

it asked who would despise such a favor as this? Who 

would repudiate the privilege of being joint-sacrificers 

with the Lord? Who would spurn "his cup" and "his 

baptism" into death in view of the privilege of being associated 

in the reward? The answer is that surely none 

would do so who still retain the spirit of begetting and 

faith-appreciation of the things not seen as yet— glory, 

honor and immortality. If, therefore, any who have once 

tasted of the heavenly gift and been made partakers of 

the holy Spirit and participated in the powers and privileges 

of the coming age— if they shall fall away, it is 

impossible to renew them again unto repentance. 

We cannot read the heart. We cannot know, surely, 
who have seen beyond the first veil, and who have not. 
We cannot know absolutely who have committed the "sin 
unto death," and who have not. We are not to judge one 
another. We are rather to accept one another's expressions, 
provided the course of life corresponds— in that 
it is not symbolically represented by the injurious thorns 
and thistles. If, however, any should repudiate "the 
blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified"— 
if any should claim that participation with Christ in this 
Memorial Cup is participation in something common or 
ordinary, and not participation in his great sacrifice, it 
would imply that he had lost his spiritual vision, his 
spiritual apprehension of the value of being a partaker 
of Christ's cup— the blood of the Covenant, which shortly 
is to be sealed for Israel and through Israel for all the 
families of the earth who will come into harmony with 
its Divinely arranged terms. 

It may be possible that some who have professed to 
see the spiritual things, some who have professed a fulness 
of consecration even unto death, some who have professed 
to appreciate the participation in the breaking of 
the One Loaf and the drinking of the one cup of fellowship 
with Christ in his death, have never really appreciated 
these things. Perhaps they not only deceived us by their 
statements, but also deceived themselves. 

Let us remember our Lord's words, "By their fruits 
ye shall know them." If those who once professed that 
they were sanctified, set apart, consecrated sacrificers as 
members of the Body of Christ and who partook of his 



cup of suffering and self-denial and then manifested a 
spirit of holiness and gave evidences of developing the 
fruits and graces of the spirit, we may safely consider 
that they were spirit-begotten. If these afterward repudiate 
the blood of the Covenant and view the privilege of 
partaking of Christ's cup as something that is merely 
common or ordinary, but not exclusive and only for the 
members of Christ— if these now manifest no longer the 
fruits of the Spirit of God, but the fruits of the spirit of 
the Adversary, we may well fear for them that they not 
only have lost the light, but also lost the Spirit. We are 
not to expect that such would necessarily go to open deeds 
of violence, murder, robbery, etc. It would be sufficient 
evidence of their having lost the Spirit of the Lord if they 
should develop afresh the spirit of anger, malice, hatred, 
envy, strife. These St. Paul designates works of the 
flesh and of the devil. 

True, a sanctified member of the Body of Christ 
might be overtaken in a fault, or act in a manner that 
would imply anger, but he certainly could not have 
malice and hatred. Besides, if overtaken in a fault, he 
would soon realize his difficulty and not only go with the 
fault to the throne of heavenly grace for forgiveness, but 
also go and make reparation and full apology to those 
wronged, injured, by the act. Whoever, therefore, indicates 
that his spirit has become a malicious one, gives 
evidence that he has already lost the Spirit of God and 
is "twice-dead, plucked up by the roots," and belongs to 
the thorn and briar family and not to the vine. 

"THE EARNEST OF OUR INHERITANCE" 

In our Memorial service let not our hearts merely 
meditate upon the sufferings of Jesus, nor merely upon 
the sufferings of the members of his Body as they walk 
in his footsteps to sacrificial death. On the contrary, let 
us receive a proper exhilaration of spirit from our participation 
in this cup. We read that Jesus rejoiced in 
spirit, and the Apostle urges all these who are drinking 
of the cup, saying, "Rejoice in the Lord; and again I say, 
Rejoice!" The Christian's life is not a sad or morose 
one, but a most joyful one. He can even be joyful in tribulation, 
"knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and 
patience, experience; and experience, hope." Knowing 
also that "our light affliction, which is but for a moment, 
worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory"— beyond the veil. (Rom. 5:3,4; 2 Cor. 4:17.) 
We thus partake in the cup of suffering and joy which 
is an earnest of our inheritance, which we will receive at 
the Second Coming of our Lord and our gathering together 
with him— as his members and his Bride class. 
This rejoicing in spirit is necessary to our courage and 
zeal in the service of the Lord. Note the operation of 
it in St. Paul, who, with Silas, could sing praises to God 
in the prison with his feet in the stocks and his back 
lacerated. And so it should be with all Christ's true followers 



in the narrow way. With the wound of every 
thorn, with the pain of every sharp arrow of bitter words 
with which we are assaulted for Christ's sake, we may 
have joy unspeakable. 

JOY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 

A further joy may be ours as we gradually comprehend 
more and more fully the significance of this New 
Covenant or New Testament blood in which our Lord 
offers us an opportunity to participate. He imputes his 
merit and thus enables us to be dead with him. He thus 
passes the blood of the New Covenant through us, his 
members. But it is offered only to such as pledge themselves 
to be dead with Christ. Even then it is not given, 
but merely imputed or loaned to us to make good or worthy 
our offerings when the great High Priest as our Advocate 
presents them and accepts them in the Father's 
name and grants us his Spirit of adoption. 

These earthly rights which belong to our Lord Jesus 
alone, which are at his disposal, are to go by the New 
Covenant to natural Israel. (Jer. 31:31.) "They shall 
obtain mercy through your mercy." (Rom. 11:31.) We 
may therefore rejoice in sympathetic anticipation of the 
blessings about to come to natural Israel, in which all 
mankind will have an opportunity of sharing. If their 
casting away at the beginning of this age was preparatory 
to our acceptance, how glad we may be that our acceptance 
will not mean their everlasting loss, but, on the 
contrary, that they will be profited through the blessing 
of Spiritual Israel, members of the great High Priest and 
Mediator and fully "qualified servants of the New Covenant." 
(2 Cor. 3:6.) Thus to Israel eventually will 
be given the earthly blessings and promises which God 
originally set apart for them, and which were typified under 

R4592:page 118 

the Law Covenant and its typical Mediator Moses, 

who is like unto or a type of the great Mediator, the 

Christ of God, of which Jesus is the Head and the overcoming 

saints, his faithful followers, are accounted members. 

-Acts 3:22,23. 

Let us then appreciate this glorious Memorial more 
and more as the years go by, seeing in it expressed more 
and more of the "Love Divine all love excelling," whose 
length and breadth and height and depth surpass all 
human comprehension. 

"LET US KEEP THE FEAST" 

We urge upon the Lord's people who recognize the 
foregoing facts and signification to meet in the name of 
the Master as his "members," and comply with his invitation, 
"Do this in remembrance of me," and not as the 
Jews, in remembrance of the type; as St. Paul said, "As 



often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show 
the Lord's death till he come" (I Cor. 1 1:26): until at 
his coming he shall change the Church, which now is his 
Body of humiliation, to make it in the truest sense his 
glorious Body. 

Again, we suggest that where the dear friends possibly 
can they meet together in little groups, and where this is 
impossible, they nevertheless should celebrate alone with 
the Lord. We do not urge large gatherings on such occasions, 
but the reverse— that each little group or company 
meet by itself as a separate organization of the 
Body of Christ. "Where two or three are gathered together 
in my name, there am I in the midst of them."— 
Matt. 18:20. 

The Congregation of Brooklyn Tabernacle will meet 
at No. 13-17 Hicks street, Brooklyn, near the Fulton 
Ferry and Jersey City (P.R.R.) Annex, and not far distant 
from the terminus of the Brooklyn Bridge. On the 
preceding Sunday there will be an immersion service. All 
who desire to participate will, if possible, please give 
word in advance. Friends from nearby cities will be accommodated 
with pleasure at this immersion service. 
But no Memorial Service invitation is given to distant 
friends. Individuals, however, who have no better opportunity 
at their homes will be welcomed at any of the 
classes anywhere. 



R4592:page 118 

SECRET FAULTS AND PRESUMPTUOUS SINS 

"Cleanse thou me from secret faults. Keep back thy servant 

also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over 

me; then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent 

from the great transgression. Let the words 

of my mouth, and the meditation of my 

heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O 

Lord, my strength and my Redeemer."— Psa. 19:12-14. 

THIS prophetic prayer represents well the heart 

attitude of the fully consecrated and earnest 

Christian. While realizing forgiveness of 

the "sins that are past through the forbearance 

of God," through the grace of God 

which was in Christ Jesus, which imputed 

our sins to him and his righteousness to 

us who believe in him, nevertheless the 

well-instructed soul realizes his faults, his 

shortcomings. These secret faults may be 

of two kinds: (1) They may be faults which were secret 

to ourselves at the time committed— slips, unintentional 

errors. Of course, the earnest heart, desiring full fellowship 

with the Lord, will regret even his unintentional 

shortcomings and will strive and pray for Divine grace 



to get the victory over these. But besides these there are 
other secret faults, which are secret in the sense of being 
unknown to any one but ourselves and the Lord— imperfections 
or faults of the mind before they take the outward 
form of actual and presumptuous sins. 

All Christians of experience in the good way and in 
the battle against sin and self have learned that there can 
be no outward or presumptuous sins that have not first had 
their beginning in the secret faults of the mind. The 
sinful thought may be one of pride suggesting self-exaltation; 
it may be one of avarice suggesting unlawful acquisition 
of wealth; or it may be some other fleshly desire. The 
mere suggestion of the thought before our minds is not 
sin; it is merely the operation of our faculties, and of the 
influences which surround us, inquiring of our wills 
whether or not we will consent to such thoughts. Many 
consent to thoughts of evil who at the time would utterly 
repudiate any suggestion to commit evil deeds; but if the 
thought be entertained it is a secret fault, and the growing 
tendency would surely be toward the more outward and 
presumptuous sinful conduct, the tendency of which is 
always from bad to worse. To illustrate: Suppose the 
suggestion should come to our minds of a method by 
which we could advance our own interests of fame or 
honor or reputation by the undermining of the influence 
and reputation of another, how quickly the evil, selfish 
thought, if entertained, would lead to envy and possibly 
to hatred and strife. Almost surely it would lead to backbiting 
and slander and other works of the flesh and the 
devil. The beginnings are always small, and correspondingly 
much easier to deal with than in their developed 
form. Hence, the prophetic prayer, "Cleanse thou me 
from secret faults" and thus restrain or keep me back 
from presumptuous sins. 

In the Epistle of James (1:14,15) we read, "Every 
man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own desire 
and enticed. Then, when desire hath conceived, it 
bringeth forth sin; and sin, when it is finished, bringeth 
forth death." Here we have the same thought differently 
expressed. The temptation consists at first in the presentation 
to the mind of suggestions which are impure or 
unkind or unfaithful to obligations; but there is no sin, no 
fault, as yet. The fault begins when we harbor the evil 
suggestions, begin to turn them over in our minds and 
to consider the attractions which they may have to offer. 
This is where desire (taking hold of the evil thing instead 
of resisting it) causes a beginning of the secret 
fault; and it is only a process of development, which in 
many instances, under favorable circumstances, may be 
very rapid, that sin, the presumptuous or outward acts of 
sin, results— for instance, bearing false witness against 
a neighbor, or slander, or other evil deeds. And the evil 
course having begun in the fostering of the evil suggestion, 
and having progressed to presumptuous sin, there 
is a great danger that the entire course of life will be 
ultimately affected thereby and bring the transgressor 



into that condition where he will commit the great transgression 
—wilful, deliberate, intentional sin— the wages 
of which is death, "Second Death." 

It would appear, then, that every intelligent Christian 
would continually pray this inspired prayer, for cleansing 
from secret faults, that he might thus be restrained from 
presumptuous sins; and thus praying heartily, he would 

R4592:page 119 

also watch against these beginnings of sin and keep his 
heart in a cleansed and pure condition, by going continually 
to the fountain of grace for help in every time of 
need. He who seeks to live a life of holiness and nearness 
to the Lord by merely guarding and striving against outward 
or presumptuous sins, and who neglects the beginning 
of sin in the secrets of his own mind, is attempting a 
right thing in a very foolish and unreasonable way. As 
well might we seek to avert smallpox by outward cleanliness, 
while permitting the germs of the disease to enter 
our systems. The bacteria or germs of presumptuous 
sins enter through the mind, and their antiseptics and 
bacteriacides of the truth and its spirit must meet them 
there and promptly kill the bacteria of sin before it 
germinates and leads us to such a condition of evil as will 
manifest itself in our outward conduct. 

For instance, whenever the bacteria of pride and self-importance 
present themselves, let the antidote be promptly 
administered from the Lord's great medical laboratory 
for the healing of the soul. The proper dose to offset this 
species of bacteria is found in the words, "He that exalteth 
himself shall be abased, and he that humbleth himself 
shall be exalted"; and, "Pride goeth before destruction, 
a haughty spirit before a fall." 

If the thought presented to our minds be the bacteria 
of envy, then let us promptly apply the antidote which declares 
that envy is one of the works of the flesh and of the 
devil, and contrary to the Spirit of Christ, which by our 
covenant we have adopted as ours. And let us remember 
that envy is closely related to and apt to be followed by 
malice, hatred and strife, which, under some circumstances, 
mean murder, according to our Lord's interpretation. 
-I John 3:15; Matt. 5:21,22. 

If the bacteria which presents itself to our minds is 
avarice, with the suggestion of unjust methods for its 
gratification, let us promptly apply to it the medicine furnished 
in the Lord's Word, namely, "What shall it profit 
a man if he gain the whole world and lose his own soul?" 
"For the love of money is the root of all evil, which some, 
coveting after, have erred from the truth and pierced 
themselves through with many sorrows." 

The more attention we give to this subject, the more 
we will be convinced, from our own personal experiences, 
of the truth of the Scriptural declarations respecting the 
beginnings of sin as secret faults in the mind; and the 
more we will appreciate the statement of the Word, "Keep 



thy heart [mind, affections] with all diligence; for out 
of it are the issues of life."— Prov. 4:23. 

But we are not to wonder that God has so constituted 
us as to permit temptations to come to our minds, nor are 
we to pray that we may have no temptations; for if there 
were no such presentations, no such temptations, then 
there could be no victories on our part, no overcoming of 
sin and of the Wicked One. But we know that for this 
very reason we are now in the School of Christ; not that 
we shall there be shielded from all temptation, but that 
we may learn of the great Teacher how to meet the 
Tempter, and, by our Master's grace and help, to come 
off conquerors, victors in the strife against sin. The degree 
of our success in this conflict will depend largely 
upon the keenness of our faith and trust in the great 
Teacher. If we feel confident of his wisdom, we will follow 
closely his instructions and keep our hearts [minds] 
with all diligence. Faith in the Lord's wisdom and in his 
help in every time of need is necessary to us in order 
that we may be thoroughly obedient to him; and hence it is 
written, "This is the victory that overcometh the world, 
even your faith," that is, it will be by the exercise of faith 
and the obedience which flows therefrom that we shall be 
enabled to "come off conquerors and more than conquerors 
through him that loved us and gave himself 
for us." 

Nor are we to seek Divine aid far in advance; as, for 
instance, to be kept throughout the year to come, or month 
to come, or week to come; rather we are to know that if 
we have made a covenant with the Lord and are his, that 
he is near us at all times in every trial, in every temptation; 
and that his assistance is ready for our use; if we 
will but accept it and act accordingly. Hence, our prayers 
should be for help in the time of need, as well as general 
prayers for the Lord's blessing and care for each day. In 
the moment of temptation the heart should lift itself to the 
great Master, in full assurance of faith, recognizing his 
love, his wisdom and his ability to help us, and his willingness 
to make all things work together for good to those 
who love him. Asking for his assistance in such a time of 
need would surely draw to us the Lord's counsel and help 
and strength for righteousness, truth, purity and love; and 
thus we should be hourly victorious, daily victorious, and 
finally victorious. 

The difficulty with many is that they are looking for 
some great battles, instead of averting the great battles by 
availing themselves of the Lord's provision, and keeping 
their minds cleansed from secret faults. The little battles, 
which are much more numerous, are the ones in which 
we gain the victories with their ultimate rewards. "Greater 
is he that ruleth his own spirit [mind, will] than he that 
taketh a city." 

Finally, the grand results of obedience to this counsel 
of the Lord, the grand attainment of those who have faithfully 
kept their hearts with diligence, is expressed in our 
text, and may well be the repeated earnest prayer of all the 



sanctified in Christ Jesus— "Let the words of my mouth, 
and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy 
sight, O Lord, my strength and my Redeemer." 



R4593 :page 119 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS' ASSOCIATION 

FOR many years the dear friends who regularly 

meet all over the world for the study 

of God's Word, using WATCH TOWER publications 

as helping hands, have been perplexed 

to know how to advertise themselves. 

We have continually warned against everything 

simulating sectarianism and Churchianity. 

But we have been at a loss to know 

what to suggest to the friends along this 

line. It is true that wherever two or three 

are met in the Lord's name, they would be entitled, if 

they chose, to speak of themselves as a Church. But if 

the name Church be used our friends and neighbors inquire, 

What Church, What denomination? And we find 

it impossible to explain to them in a reasonable time that 

we do not mean a sect or party separate from other 

Christians. Indeed, there is danger of our losing sight 

of the fact that we are non-sectarian— that we acknowledge 

all as brethren and members of our Church, Christ's 

Church, the Church of God, who give evidence of full 

consecration to self-sacrifice, following in the footsteps 

of the Redeemer. There is a disposition on the part of 

R4593 : page 120 

some, unconsciously, to fellowship only such Christians as 
are outside of all denominations. Our true position, 
nevertheless, is that we recognize all loyal to our Redeemer, 
whether babes or fully-grown, whether in 
Babylon or out of her, whether they follow with us or 
indirectly speak evil of us. 

Now in the Lord's providence we have thought of a 
title suitable, we believe, to the Lord's people everywhere, 
and free from objection, we believe, on every score— the 
title at the head of this article. It fairly represents our 
sentiments and endeavors. We are Bible students. We 
welcome all of God's people to join with us in the study. 
We believe that the result of such studies is blessed and 
unifying. We recommend therefore that the little classes 
everywhere and the larger ones adopt this unobjectionable 
style and that they use it in the advertising columns of 
their newspapers. Thus friends everywhere will know 
how to recognize them when visiting strange cities. 

In harmony with New York State laws the association 
will be under the direction and management of the 
Peoples Pulpit Association, which, in turn, represents the 



Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. 

We have adopted the style Brother instead of Pilgrim, 
as requiring less explanation to the public; and the term 
lectures instead of sermons, as carrying with it less prejudice. 
It should be our desire, while holding the Truth in 
love, to present it as acceptably as possible, giving none 
offense to any— Jew, Gentile or Christian— seeking in 
everything to glorify God and to assist his people out of 
darkness into his marvelous light. 

To avoid everything that might be construed as "joining," 
the membership is confined to those constituting the 
chartered Peoples Pulpit Association. The provision is 
made that all Bible Student Classes using the Bible Study 
Helps published by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society may consider themselves identified with the Association 
and are authorized to use the name "International 
Bible Students' Association" in respect to their meetings. 



R4593 : page 120 

THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN IS AT HAND 

-MATTHEW 10:1-15.-APRIL 10.- 

Golden Text:— "Freely ye have received, 
freely give."— Matthew 10:8. 

JESUS had been preaching for more than a 

year when he appointed twelve of his followers 

to be specially his representatives 

sent forth— Apostles. He sent these two and 

two throughout Judea. They had not 

the Father's appointment. They had not 

yet received the holy Spirit from on high 

and did not receive it until Pentecost, some 

two years later. The holy Spirit was not 

yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified. 

(John 7:39.) But by virtue of the holy Spirit given 

without measure to Jesus at the time of his baptism, 

he conferred upon these Apostles his own special powers 

that they might heal the sick, cast out demons, etc. But 

their special mission, like his own, was not that of healing 

physical ailments merely, nor chiefly. They were to proclaim 

the Lord Jesus to be the King, the long-expected 

Messiah, and to tell the people that the time was at hand 

for the establishment of his Mediatorial Kingdom, in conjunction 

with their nation. This message would be in 

harmony with the expectation of all the Jews. For centuries 

they had been waiting for the fulfillment of God's 

promise made to Abraham that through them all the families 

of the earth would be blessed. The miracles of Jesus 

and the Apostles were to call attention to the proclamation, 

"The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand." (Matt. 3:2.) 

This message, in harmony with that of John the Baptist, 



was expected to arouse all the "Israelites indeed" and to 
attract their attention to Jesus as the King. They were 
particularly warned that their message was not for the 
Gentiles, nor even for their neighbors, the mongrel people 
called Samaritans. True Jews, and these only, were 
called upon to make ready their hearts and minds that 
they might be participants in the Kingdom and its glories. 
Their message was only "to the lost sheep of the house of 
Israel."— V. 6. 

They were to make no provision for their journey — 
neither money nor extra clothing. They were to learn a 
lesson of absolute dependence upon the Master who sent 
them forth. They were not to be beggars seeking from 
house to house. On the contrary, they were to recognize 
the dignity of their mission and service for God and ambassadors 
of Messiah and were to inquire in each village 
for the most worthy, the most saintly, the most holy 
people, because these would be the ones who would be 
specially interested in their message— whether rich or 
poor. And such of these as received their message would 
be glad indeed to treat them as representatives of the 
King, whose Kingdom they announced. Their stay in each 
place was to be as guests until they were ready to depart 
to the next place. On entering into a house they were to 
salute the householder in a dignified manner, advising him 
of the object of their call. If received peacefully, cordially, 
their blessing would be upon that house. Otherwise 
they were not to lose their own confidence and 
serenity, but to pass along and look for one more worthy 
of the message and of them as its representatives. Those 
receiving them would receive a blessing. Those rejecting 
them and their message would lose a great privilege. 

THE GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM 

Many wonder greatly why it was proper for our Lord 
and the Apostles to declare the Kingdom of Heaven at 
hand when, as a matter of fact, it has not yet come and, 
by the Lord's directions, its followers still pray, "Thy 
Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven." The understanding of this furnishes the key 
to the appreciation of much of the Bible that is now misunderstood. 
We must, therefore, outline the matter in 
some detail. 

For more than sixteen centuries Israel had been waiting 
for the fulfillment of God's promise that they would 
become so great that through them the Divine blessing 
would extend to every nation. Our Lord through the 
Apostles signified that God's time had come to fulfil all 
of his promises made to the Jewish nation if they were 
ready for them. To be ready they must be a holy nation. 
And to instruct them and prepare them their Law Covenant 
had been introduced to them through Moses centuries 
before. And now, just preceding Jesus, John the Baptist 
had preached to them reformation, repentance, getting 
into harmony with the Law, that they might be ready to 



receive the Messiah. While as a people they were the 
most religious nation in the world at that time, nevertheless 

R4593 : page 121 

but few of them were "Israelites indeed"— at heart 

fully consecrated to God; fully in accord with the principles 

of holiness. As a consequence, instead of the 

whole nation being ready for God's work, only a small 

remnant of them were saintly and received the message. 

At the close of Jesus' ministry only about five hundred 

worthy ones had been found, and the multitude cried, 

"Crucify him!" while the godless Pilate inquired, "Why, 

what evil hath he done?" Most evidently, therefore, 

Israel was not ready to be used of God in the blessing of 

the other nations. 

God foreknew this, however, and through the prophets 
declared that a remnant only would be found worthy. 
To the nation as a whole our Lord declared, "The Kingdom 
of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation 
bringing forth the fruits thereof." (Matt. 21:43.) Accordingly 
five days before his crucifixion our Lord said 
to them, "Your house is left unto you desolate. Ye shall 
see me no more until that day when ye shall say, Blessed 
is he that cometh in the name of the Lord."— 
Matt. 23:38,39. 

The Kingdom privileges or opportunities which were 
first offered to natural Israel were transferred to Spiritual 
Israel, whose existence began at Pentecost. All "Israelites 
indeed" of the fleshly house were privileged to 
become members of the spiritual house— to receive the 
begetting of the holy Spirit and adoption into the Body 
of Christ, which is the Church. Of this Church St. Peter 
says, "Ye are a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a peculiar 
people."— I Pet. 2:9. 

After selecting as many Jews as were worthy a place 
in Spiritual Israel, nominal Israel was cast off from Divine 
favor until the completion of Spiritual Israel, when 
God promises that his favor shall return to them. (Rom. 1 1:25,26.) 
Meantime the invitation has gone through 
the Lord's faithful members to every nation, seeking such 
as have the spirit of loyalty to God, the spirit of "Israelites 
indeed." All such are accepted with the Jews as 

R4594:page 121 

members of the same Kingdom. Around these Spiritual 
Israelites have gathered all sorts, so that there is an outward 
or nominal body or Church numbering millions, as 
well as a real body or Church scattered amongst them. 

As at the end of the Jewish Age Jesus came to inspect 
them and to set up his Kingdom if enough worthy ones 
were to be found, so he will do in the end of this Gospel 
Age; he will come to Spiritual Israel to find the saintly. 
The Scriptures assure us that from first to last, from 
Pentecost until the end of this age, a sufficient number 



of saints will be found to constitute the elect Church of 
Christ, designed of God to be his Queen and Joint-Heir 
in the Millennial Kingdom, which will then be set up and 
begin the work of blessing the world. After the spiritual 
Kingdom of God shall have been exalted, the Bible assures 
us, in Romans 1 1:25-32, that God's favor will return to 
natural Israel and they will be the first nation to be 
blessed under the new order of things that will then prevail 
and through those of that people in harmony with 
God the blessing will extend to every nation. 

"MORE TOLERABLE FOR SODOM" 

The Sodomites were wickedly immoral; yet, in the 
Master's estimation, less wicked than those who, after 
hearing the Gospel, rejected it. This principle applies to 
many people and many cities of our day, as well as to 
Capernaum. The Master assures us that when the great 
Millennial Age, otherwise called the Day of Judgment, 
shall furnish opportunity for the whole world to be on 
trial for everlasting life or everlasting death, it will be 
more tolerable for the Sodomites than for many others. 
In proportion as anyone has come to a knowledge of 
Christ he has become responsible. The death of Christ 
secures for Adam and all of his race one full opportunity 
for salvation and no more. The majority have died in 
heathenish darkness without any opportunity; and many 
in Christian lands have disregarded their opportunity, as 
did the people of Capernaum. All must be brought to a 
full knowledge of their privileges in Christ and then all 
rejectors will be destroyed.— Acts 3:23; I Tim. 2:4; 
Matt. 20:28. 

It is for us to be followers of Jesus and the Apostles— 
to walk in their steps of devotion and thus to make our 
calling and our election sure to a share with Messiah 
in his Kingdom, which, during the Millennium, will bless 
Israel and all the families of the earth under a system of 
rewards and punishments, called judgments. The Scriptures 
distinctly tell us that the Israelites and the Sodomites 
will be sharers in that work of restoration— restitution. 
-Ezek. 16:50-55; Acts 3:19-21. 



R4594 : page 121 

TRUTH SPREADING IN INDIA 

WE are much gratified with the reports reaching 
us from India. Apparently the Lord 
has a great harvest field there. A large 
proportion of the natives in the cities understand 
the English language, which is 
taught in the schools; besides a considerable 
number of English-speaking people 
reside there. The fact that India's three 



hundred millions have come under subjection 

to the British rule has operated both 

favorably and unfavorably as respects Christianity. It 

has carried the Bible to the people— to a very limited extent, 

of course. But it has also carried here and everywhere 

much of error and much of combination with sin 

and pride. Apparently many people in India realize the 

impossibility of ever converting the world. And such of 

these as are of believing hearts are earnest and ready 

for the harvest message— the gathering of the Lord's 

jewels and the establishment then of the Millennial Kingdom 

for the blessing of all the families of the earth with 

restitution privileges.— Acts 3:19-21. 

Our Brother Devasahayam writes us that in the city 
of Madras there are approximately 120 to 150 who have 
considerable ear for the Truth. But the majority of 
them, weak and fearful, he styles Nicodemuses, because 
they desire to inquire after the Truth in secret rather than 
more courageously. Apparently there is a good field in 
India for laborers— Colporteurs and preachers. Few, of 
course, can afford the expense of such a journey and few 
are qualified for the position. Europeans there are quite 
generally well educated, as are many of the natives; and 
no one could properly present the Truth unless he could 
speak English quite grammatically and with some 
fluency. Moreover, it is a place where great self-denial 
would be required, as the people are poor and Colporteurs 
would have more difficulty than here in meeting their 
expenses. 

Some of you, but not all, know of Brother Devasahayam's 
conversion to the Truth; hence we give a brief 
recital. His father was a convert to Christianity, a native 
preacher in India. The son desired to enter the ministry, 
and, seeking a good education, came for it to the United 

R4594 : page 122 

States. He took a college course, working his way as 
janitor, etc., through a college under the auspices of the 
Methodist Church. In common with all colleges, that one 
had Professors who inculcated Higher Criticism and Evolution, 
and Brother Devasahayam was poisoned thereby. 
He was too conscientious to further consider preaching 
the Bible, which he had come to disbelieve. He had gained 
an education, but lost his religion. 

He came in contact with the Truth, but cared not 
to read it, disbelieving everything connected with 
Churchianity. 

A friend of the Truth, deeply interested in him and 
believing him to be honest, paid his expenses to the Saratoga 
Convention. There he became partially interested in 
the Truth and began to read the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. He 
stopped with us at the Bethel Home while studying and 
became fully convinced respecting the Bible and the Divine 
Plan of the Ages. He gave his heart fully to the 
Lord and symbolized his consecration by baptism. The 



Society paid his way to India and purposes to co-operate 
in the work there as the Lord shall seem to open the door 
further. 



R4594 : page 122 

THE LEAST IN THE KINGDOM 

--MATTHEW 11:1-11. -APRIL 17.- 

Golden Text:— "But the witness which I have is greater than 
that of John; for the works which the Father hath given me 
to accomplish the very works that I do, bear witness 
of me, that the Father hath sent me."— John 5:36. 

JOHN THE BAPTIST, the Master declared, 

was a prophet; yea, more than a prophet, for 

of him it was written, "Behold, I send my 

messenger before thy face, who shall prepare 

thy way before thee." (V. 10.) This 

noble character was God's chosen servant 

for heralding the Messiah to Israel. His 

message to the people had been "the Kingdom 

of Heaven is at hand; repent and believe 

the good news." Many had responded 

and had been baptized, symbolically washing themselves 

from sin and giving fresh adherence to the Law and care 

in its observance. Prophetically John had declared that 

stirring times were ahead of the nation; that the Messiah 

was about to make a separation between the true wheat 

and the chaff class; that he would gather the wheat into 

his barn, but would burn up the chaff in unquenchable 

fire. The wheat in this prophecy signified "the holy," "the 

righteous," who, as a result of following Messiah, would 

be exalted or glorified. This prophecy was fulfilled at 

Pentecost and subsequently, when the "Israelites indeed" 

were accepted of God as sons on the spirit plane— begotten 

of the holy Spirit— as members of the Body of Christ, 

members of the Kingdom class— then in embryo, but, 

later on, by resurrection power, to be ushered into heavenly 

glory and dominion. The remainder of the nation, 

merely nominally God's people, had merely the outward 

form, as chaff. For such, the Prophet John declared a 

time of trouble at hand, symbolically represented by a furnace 

of fire, which would consume them as people. As the 

forepart of this prophecy was fulfilled at Pentecost, it 

reached final accomplishment thirty-seven years later, 

when the entire nation collapsed, ceasing its national 

existence, which it has never since re-attained. 

JOHN IN PRISON DOUBTED 

But instead of Jesus becoming a great king after the 
manner of John's expectation, to reward his faithful and 



destroy the impious, John beheld, What?— Himself cast 
into prison and Jesus surrounded by a paltry few— barred 
from the vicinity of Jerusalem because the Jews sought 
to kill him, and doing most of his preaching in "Galilee 
of the nations," amongst those who made less religious 
profession and amongst whom were few scribes or 
Pharisees or Doctors of the Law. Moreover, Jesus had 
not made any attempt to deliver his forerunner from 
prison, although he continually manifested great power in 
the healing of diseases and the casting out of devils. 
What could it all mean? was John's query. Had he been 
mistaken? 

Surely he was not mistaken in supposing that he had 
God's testimony to Jesus at the time of his baptism; as he 
had declared, "This is he!" But what he? Was he merely 
another prophet still greater than himself preceding the 
still greater and true Messiah? Thus wondering, he sent 
messengers to inquire of Jesus, saying, "Art thou he that 
should come (the Messiah), or look we for another?"— 
Are we to look behind you for a still greater through 
whom God will fulfill his prophecy? 

PROOFS OF JESUS' MINISTRY 

In answer to the query our Lord sent word to John 
particularly of the work he was doing— healing the sick, 
casting out devils and preaching the good tidings of God's 

R4595 : page 122 

grace to the poor. And he added, Tell John not to get 
offended; not to allow his faith to stumble in respect to 
me. Otherwise he will lose a great blessing. 

The Master improved the opportunity to discuss John's 
case, who he was, etc., with the multitude. For the fame 
of John's preaching had spread throughout the land and 
many from all parts went to hear him. What did they find 
him? Merely a reed shaken by the wind, pliable to those 
who would influence him? Oh, no! They found him a 
rugged character, strong, independent in the advocacy of 
the Truth, in the bearing of his message. Did they find 
him clothed in soft raiment and giving evidences of being 
related to the great, the wealthy, the noble of the time? 
No, he was simply clad, lived in seclusion, and was faithful 
and earnest in the delivery of his message to all who 
would hear. But if they went out expecting to hear a 
prophet they were not disappointed, for John was more 
than a prophet. As another account renders this, "Among 
those that are born of women, there is not a greater 
prophet than John the Baptist; but he that is least in the 
Kingdom of God is greater than he."— Luke 7:28. 

THE LEAST IN THE KINGDOM GREATER THAN JOHN 
THE BAPTIST 

These words by our Lord have caused much perplexity 



amongst Christian people, who have failed to discern the 
necessity of "rightly dividing the Word of Truth." (2 Tim. 2:15.) 
The matter is simple enough when we remember 
that John was the last of the faithful under the Jewish 
dispensation. He was not invited to become one of the 
disciples of Christ, nor one of the Apostles, neither did he 
live until Pentecost to share in the blessings there poured 
upon the faithful. He belongs to a class described by St. 
Paul in Hebrews 1 1:38-40. He was in a class with 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets, of whom 
the Apostle says, "They without us shall not be made perfect" 

R4595 : page 123 

—"God having provided some better thing for us"— 
the Gospel Church, the Body of Christ, the Bride class- 
man for them.-Heb. 1 1:40. 

The Great Teacher continually referred to the Kingdom 
in all of his discourses and in the sample prayers 
which he set forth. This Kingdom is to come into power 
at the close of this Age and under it, as the Millennial 
Kingdom, the whole world will be subjected to Divine Law 
for their deliverance from sin and death, if they will, into 
righteousness of life. The class that will compose that 
Kingdom are spoken of in the present time as a Royal 
Priesthood in a prospective sense. They are in the School 
of Christ for preparation for the Kingdom. Those faithful 
will make their calling and election sure to places 
in that Kingdom and sit with the Master on his Throne, 
judging, blessing and uplifting mankind. How wonderful 
a blessing is ours! We cannot be so great as our Lord, 
the Head, and his Apostles, his most honored members, 
but if faithful in that which is least, our glorious reward 
will be exceedingly high— "far above angels and principalities 
and powers and every name that is named."— 
Eph. 1:21. 



R4595 : page 123 

THE LETTER AND THE SPIRIT 

"Who also hath made us Able Ministers of the New Testament, 
not of the letter, but of the spirit; for the letter killeth, but 
the spirit giveth life."— 2 Cor. 3:6. 

WE must not understand this— "the letter 
killeth, but the spirit giveth life"— to refer 
to our letter or our spirit, nor to the letter 
of the Word, nor to the spirit of the Word 
of God, nor to the letter of the Law, nor 
to the spirit of the Law, but to the letter of 
the Covenant and the spirit of the Covenant, 
because that is evidently what the Apostle 
is discussing here— "Who hath also made 



us Able Ministers," or qualified or efficient 

servants or messengers of the New Covenant. Taking the 

broad thought connected with the Covenant it would be 

this: That all the angels are in Covenant relationship 

with God, not through a New Covenant, but by a Covenant 

that is very old. Not, perhaps, by a Covenant that 

was expressed in so many words, but by a Covenant that 

was understood in that they receive everlasting life and 

all their blessings on condition that they be obedient 

to God. Such is their Covenant relationship. 

Adam, the founder of our race, was similarly created 
in Covenant relationship with God. God's Law was written 
in his very heart, or his very being; and, without being 
specified in so many words, it was understood by him that 
if he would be obedient he should have everlasting life and 
everlastingly enjoy all of God's favors and blessings. We 
see that Adam failed in this. He broke the Covenant. 
The result was Divine sentence upon him— the death 
sentence— and that has followed all of his posterity because 
they have inherited imperfections, so that however 
good their intentions, their work is imperfect— all, therefore, 
are out of Covenant relationship with God. 

In the case of Abraham, God intimated his willingness 
to deal at some time and in some manner with any of our 
race who were out of relationship merely through wicked 
works and not through wicked hearts or intentions. 
Abraham, being of the class who are in accord with God 
in heart, in their desire for harmony with the Divine 
will, was granted at once a measure of Covenant relationship 
in that he was privileged to be called the friend of 
God instead of the enemy of God. He was privileged 
to know of God's provisions of blessing, not only 
for himself, but for all who would likewise become 
harmonious with God. He was not given the details of 
this, but merely the rough outline, sketch. In due time 
his descendants, the children of Israel, were given a further 
compact with God, under which he offered to give 
them everlasting life if they would keep his Law, because 
it is written, "He that doeth these things shall live 
by them." This, the Apostle says, they thought would be 
of great advantage to them, but they found the requirements 
impossible for them. Therefore the Law, which 
was granted them apparently as a favor— and it was a 
favor in certain senses— "they found to be unto death," 
and not unto life. Later, through the Prophet Jeremiah 
and others, God explained to them that the fault of the 
Covenant was not in the Law, not on his part, but it was 
on their part, because they did not keep the Law, and 
the only way that anything could be done to their advantage 
would be to enter into a New Covenant through a 
new Mediator, a Mediator who would be able to make up 
for their deficiencies and to assist them in a manner that 
Moses was not able to do. 

From that time onward God's people began to look for 
this new Mediator. They saw that Moses himself foretold 
this Mediator, saying, "A Prophet shall the Lord your 



God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me [my 
antitype]; him shall ye hear in all things, and it shall 
come to pass that the soul that will not obey that Prophet 
shall be destroyed from amongst the people." 

All the expectations of the Jews thenceforth were 
for this Messiah; and by the words of the Prophets we see 
that God specially pointed out the coming of this Messiah, 
saying, "Behold, I send my Messenger before my face to 
prepare the way before me, ...even the Messenger of 
the Covenant, whom ye delight in"— the one you have 
been waiting for, the one you have been praying for, the 
one you have built your expectations upon, even him I shall 
send, saith the Lord; but who shall abide in the day of his 
coming; who shall stand when he is here, for he shall be 
like fullers' soap, in that he will cleanse everything; he 
will be like a refiner's fire, in that he will purge all imperfections 
from those to be associated with him, that he 
might purify the sons of Levi, that he might offer a 
sacrifice acceptable to God. Israel was expecting that God 
would carry out all of his original proposition to make 
them his chosen people and use them as a channel of 
communicating the blessing of eternal salvation and 
reconciliation— eternal life, to the world of mankind— 
to bring all the world into Covenant relationship with 
God. This was called to Israel a New Covenant, because 
God had made a proposition of this kind to 
them before, namely the Law Covenant, which they 
were unable to keep. "This, therefore, is to be a 
Covenant with you anew, afresh," so to speak, a better 
Covenant. That is, not one better in some of its features, 
in its Law for instance, but better, more favorable to you; 
not more favorable in that it would require less than obedience 
to the Divine Law— "Thou shalt love the Lord thy 
God with all thy heart, mind, soul and strength, and thy 
neighbor as thyself"— but a better Covenant through the 
Mediator it would have— a Mediator better qualified than 
was Moses, and an arrangement which would be more 

R4595 : page 124 

favorable for helping them out of their difficulties, imperfections, 
etc. 

When our Lord Jesus came, he therefore was this 
Mediator of this New Covenant. He came for this purpose. 
But who of them abided in the day of his presence? 
Who of them were ready when he appeared? Very few. 
Only the "Israelites indeed," and his teachings, his ministry, 
were like the fullers' soap and like the refiner's 
fire. He did at that time purify the sons of Levi, the 
consecrated ones, that they might offer themselves unto 
the Lord; that they might present themselves living sacrifices. 
Thus the Church might be a sacrificing priesthood 
class. And so it has been all through this Gospel Age. 
Having selected all the suitable material from amongst the 
Jewish nation, the privilege of becoming antitypical 
Levites and antitypical priests, largely passed to the 



Gentiles, to fill up from among them the number lacking 
of the Jews. Thus we have been brought into this class, 
to be a part of this sacrifice, that we might offer unto the 

R4596 : page 124 

Lord an acceptable sacrifice. All of this we understand 
to be preparatory to the great work of the Mediator, the 
greater mediation of this New Covenant arrangement. 

God is now selecting the antitypical house of Levi and 
the antitypical Royal Priesthood. The Church in this age 
shall be completed, and glorified— the great Body of the 
Mediator will be completed and he will be ready to begin 
his great work. His work will be the installation of New 
Covenant relationship, or, as stated in other words, the 
institution of Covenant relationship between God and 
Israel anew, afresh, upon a better basis than the arrangement 
made through Moses, because this antitypical Priest, 
this antitypical Moses, will have power to forgive sins of 
the people, and therefore the right to restore them and to 
bring them up out of degradation. From the time he will 
take hold of his work as Mediator of the New Covenant, 
those under the New Covenant arrangements will have 
a share of this blessing and thus they will be in relationship 
to God and enjoying his favor, but not to the full 
measure, merely in and through the Mediator. For instance, 
when at the conclusion of this age the Lord shall 
present his blood a second time on the mercy-seat on behalf 
of all the people, he will thereby seal the New Covenant, 
make it operative, and take his place as the great 
Mediator or King of the Millennial Age. By virtue of 
this application of his blood and sealing of this New 
Covenant he will take charge of the world of mankind 
and by virtue of the sealing of the New Covenant with 
Israel he will use that nation in a special manner, to be 
his channel of blessing. 

The New Covenant arrangement will mean that the 
nation of Israel will enjoy certain favors and blessings, 
but that their relationship will not be with God direct, 
but merely with the Mediator. Then the Mediator will 
have the authority and the right to guarantee them eternal 
life and to assist them up to it and to give them all the 
rewards and blessings, just as though they were fully in 
favor with God. They will be in favor with God through 
him, but so far as God's Law is concerned they will still 
be imperfect, be under the Divine sentence, and thus kept, 
as it were, at arm's length from the Almighty; but he 
has made the arrangement that through this Mediator, 
this Prophet, Priest, King, Judge, all his mercy and favor 
will be extended to Israel. That nation, therefore, during 
that time, will have all these blessings and gradually 
begin to have restitution favors and uplifting from every 
evil of the present time— release from evil. The blessings 
will extend to other nations in that they will be permitted 
to come in and participate with Israel by becoming 
Israelites indeed, by receiving circumcision, perhaps not 



with hands, but circumcision of the heart. They will 

come into this relationship with the Mediator, this relationship, 

therefore, with the Father through the Mediator, 

and, as the Prophet declares, It shall come to pass that the 

nation that will not thus come to the Lord, to Jerusalem, 

and recognize the new relationship thus established in 

Israel, and take a share of it as they will be privileged to 

do, to that nation there will be no Divine blessing. They 

will be under the curse just as much as ever. That is to 

say, they will be under Divine disfavor just as much as 

ever. They will not be exposed to Satan and his machinations, 

but they will be subject to the various features 

of the penalty— death, the penalty for sin. 

During the Millennial Age, then, this New Covenant 
arrangement, at the hands of the Mediator, will mean a 
blessing to all who will be under the Mediator and shielded 
by him from the full requirements of Divine Justice, 
which would destroy them because of their imperfection, 
and under this beneficent arrangement they will come up 
to the full perfection of their nature and in the end of the 
Millennial Age be fully able to meet every Divine requirement 
and no longer need a Mediator between them and 
the Father. And so, as the Apostle tells us, at that time 
having put down all sin and disobedience, having destroyed 
death, having uplifted humanity from death, except those 
who will go into Second Death, the Lord will deliver over 
the Kingdom to God, even the Father— not for its destruction, 
but because it will at that time be fully able to 
enjoy direct all the blessings of Covenant relationship 
with God, which in an imperfect condition it could not 
have. 

Such will be the Covenant relationship in the fullest 
sense at the close of the Millennial Age. Mankind will be 
back to the same place exactly as Adam occupied at the 
beginning when he was created in the image and likeness 
of God and was called "son of God." So mankind, fully 
restored, fully harmonized with God, will be back in full 
relationship with him and they will all be subject to the 
Father. 

As Adam was tried after he was a son of God, so these 
will be tried. After the thousand years Satan shall be 
loosed that he may test and attempt to deceive them. If 
after all their experience with sin they should have any 
lurking sympathy with it, the deception will be sure to 
discover this sympathy, thus determining the individual's 
unfitness for eternal life. By this time they must have 
developed such character as would bring them to the place 
where they would love righteousness and hate iniquity or 
else they could not have everlastingly this Covenant relationship 
with God. 

We see, then, that during the Millennial Age the New 
Covenant relationship will be just the same or just what 
it will be at the end of the Millennial Age, except that 
it will be under the direction of a Mediator and have its 
limitations, because of the imperfection of humanity, 
while later they will be perfect. 



Come back to our text, to the declaration that "God 
also hath made us able [qualified] ministers of the New 
Covenant." We see that we are now ministers of the New 
Covenant, servants of the New Covenant. We are 
serving it in the sense that Jesus served it. Jesus 
served it in the sense of first preparing himself to be 
the great Prophet, the great Priest and King— Mediator 
—so likewise we are in preparation, receiving our 
lessons and disciplining ourselves and developing in 
character likeness of our Lord, that we may be members 
of his glorious Body, members of that glorious Seed, 
Prophet, Priest, King, in the future. This is the sense in 
which we are made able ministers or able servants of it 

R4596 : page 125 

—namely, that we not only serve it in keeping our bodies 
under and developing the fruits and graces of the holy 
Spirit in ourselves, but that we do this also toward each 
other. The Bride makes herself ready. These servants 
of the New Covenant help to make each other ready. 
They are all members of the Body of Christ, and able 
ministers. 

This is not an imperfect ministration; it is a ministration 
that is accomplishing its work, its purpose. It will 
actually accomplish the matter. The sacrificing that we 
do is all bona fide; it is not sham; and the preparation 
that we make is bona fide; it is not sham. In what way? 
In this way: We were neither ministers nor suitable to 
be ministers of this New Covenant when we "were children 
of wrath even as others," but when we heard of the 
grace of God, we had the blessed ear, and when we saw 
that glorious invitation, we had the blessed eye, and when 
the eyes of our understanding and the ears of our understanding 
comprehended this message of God's grace, 
speaking peace in Jesus Christ our Lord, our hearts were 
of that attitude and condition that they responded. We 
had the same experience as our Lord. As he had the eye 
of understanding fully opened to know the Father's will 
and the obedient ear, saying, "I delight to do thy will," so 
also our hearts must have attained that position of desire 
to know the Father's will before we could in any sense of 
the word be pleasing or acceptable to him. And even in 
this condition we are not acceptable because the Lord 
looks beyond this and says, respecting us, You are well 
intentioned and your motives are good, but your flesh is 
weak and you are fallen. Then he pointed us to the fact 
that he had appointed for us an Advocate. Looking to 
the Advocate we perceived "Jesus Christ the Righteous," 
who offered to be our Advocate and to make good all of 
our imperfections, if we desired to join with him in his 
sacrifice. So we brought ourselves to the Lord. We 
presented our bodies living sacrifices. We acknowledged 
that of ourselves we are not perfect. We acknowledged 
that the good intentions were all that we had. We 
heard his grace and consecrated ourselves to the full. We 



gave up everything to walk in the steps of Jesus and suffer 
with him now that he might be glorified with him. 

At the time we reached this point of consecration and 
desired to be associated with Jesus as able ministers, or 
able servants of the New Covenant, Jesus advanced to us, 
became our Advocate, and presented our cause before the 
Father, advocating it and applying of his merit to cover 
all of our blemishes. When he did so the Father accepted 
us and forthwith counted us as members of the Body of 
Christ, members of the Royal Priesthood— associated with 
Jesus as able ministers of the New Covenant, new Testament. 
And so we are going on as able ministers now because 
we are accepted in the Beloved, not acceptable under 
the terms of the mediatorial Kingdom of the next age, because 
there is no such arrangement now, and there is no 
such mediatorial work going on now, but we are accepted 
as members of the Mediator, as members of the Body of 
Christ. The Head of this Body having made good our 
defects so that our sacrifices could be acceptable, our 
standing is unique, different from that of the world of 
mankind in the future. As able ministers, or as recognized 
ambassadors of God in the world, we are associated with 
Christ in the work which he is now carrying on, to wit, 
the work of gathering together the Lord's Jewels all 
through the Gospel Age. This is the special work that 
the Lord has given us to do at the present time. The 
Bride is to make herself ready. As soon as the Bride 
is made ready then the great work will begin for the 
world of mankind; but now our able ministry of this New 
Covenant is in the sense of preparing us, preparing ourselves 
and presenting our bodies living sacrifices, laying 
down our lives for the brethren— and all this, as members 
of the Great High Priest, is, in another sense, part 

R4597 : page 125 

of his work; or rather, as the Apostle says, "It is God that 
worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure." 
It was God that worked in Jesus that he should 
accomplish his sacrifice in the proper manner, and it is 
God that is now working in us in the same manner. He 
set before us a great prize. As we read of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, "Who for the joy that was set before him, 
endured the cross, despising the shame, and is now set 
down at the right hand of God," so also we learn that 
God hath "given unto us exceeding great and precious 
promises that by these we might become partakers of the 
divine nature." By the operation of these promises in our 
hearts we are enabled to lay down our lives for the 
brethren and to copy the characteristics of our Lord and 
Savior, even unto death. 

Now, we are qualified or able ministers of the New 
Covenant, not of the letter, but of the spirit. The Mediator 
of the Covenant, of course, should be in harmony 
with all the terms of the Covenant. The terms of this 
New Covenant are the perfect obedience to God as represented 



in the Divine Law, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy 
God with all thy heart and with all thy being and with 
all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thyself." Of course, 
Jesus is in full accord with this Law of God which he 
accepted as the basis of the arrangement he would make 
for mankind, and all of those whom God would accept 
as members of his Body, as associates with him, as able 
ministers and servants with him of this New Covenant- 
all such must be in accord with the Divine Law, else how 
could they be servants of that Law? But now, says the 
Apostle, in our case we are not able to measure up to the 
standard of the letter of that Covenant, but we are able to 
come to the measure of the spirit of it, to the intention of 
it. And in harmony with this he says elsewhere, "The 
righteousness of the Law [that is, the true meaning, the 
true spirit of the Law], is fulfilled in us, who are walking 
not after the flesh but after the spirit." He does not say 
that we are able to walk up to the spirit, up to the Divine 
Law, and we know indeed that we are not able to do so, 
but we are able to walk after it. 

As we are accepted of God as able ministers of the 
New Covenant, and as members of this Body of the 
Mediator, King and Priest at the time of our consecration, 
through the merit of Jesus our Advocate, so God has 
made provision that for any unintentional infractions of 
this Law, of this Covenant, on our part "we have an Advocate 
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous." He 
is not only an Advocate when we first come to the Father 
and present ourselves living sacrifices, and are accepted 
through the imputation of our Lord's merit, but he is our 
Advocate still— and we need his advocacy still, because, 
while we have this standing as new creatures, and as new 
creatures our intentions are good, nevertheless as new 
creatures we are responsible for the earthen vessel, the 
natural body, through which we operate as new creatures. 
We are responsible for all of its infractions of the Divine 
Law. Therefore, as the Apostle tells us, if we find that 
unintentionally, contrary to the intentions of our will, the 
spirit of our mind, we infract the Divine Law, we are to 
come with courage to the throne of heavenly grace. We 
are not to suppose that what our Lord did for us when 
we presented ourselves living sacrifices makes good our 
defects to the end of life. We are to understand that he 
merely made good the defects to that point and that for 

R4597 : page 126 

every imperfection and deviation since that time we are 
to come to the throne of grace and obtain mercy and find 
grace to help. We come with courage because we have 
such a great High Priest, because we realize that we are 
members of the House of God, antitypical Levites, who 
include both the Little Flock and the Great Company. 
They are all privileged to come with courage to the throne 
of heavenly grace and there obtain mercy and grace to 
help in every time of need. Thus the "able ministers" 



[servants] of the New Covenant may maintain their 
standing with God continually, through their Advocate, 
"who ever liveth to make intercession for them." It is 
because we have this Advocate, because we recognize 
Jesus as our Advocate, that we may come to the throne of 
grace. All those come who are privileged to call God our 
Father for the forgiveness of those trespasses, which come 
day by day and which are unintentional on our part. It is 
then that we make apology and get forgiveness and assistance 
that we may be more faithful, more able to overcome 
in these various respects thenceforth. Thus we are qualified 
ministers of the New Covenant, not according to the 
letter of that Covenant, as it will operate during the 
Millennium, but according to the spirit of the New Covenant, 
which now operates toward us through our Advocate 
and enables us at all times to be acceptable to the Father 
through him, and to perform the service of able ministers 
and to abide in the Holy and to hope ultimately to pass, 
as members of the Body of the great Priest, Prophet, 
Mediator and King, beyond the second vail into the Most 
Holy. 



page 127 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES (V)* 

Man for Whom Atonement Was Made. 

MAY 1 

(1) Had the payment of the Ransom by our Lord any 
bearing upon his office as Mediator of the New Covenant? 
P. 455. 

(2) Did our Lord by this redemptive work seal the 

New Covenant, or did he merely become the "surety" (Heb. 7:22) 
of the New Covenant, and has he left the sealing of it 
to be accomplished at the end of this Gospel Age after his 
faithful shall have drunk with him his cup, the blood of the 
New Covenant— sharing in his sacrifice and "filling up that 
which is behind of his afflictions"? 

(3) When did Christ become the Mediator of the New 
Covenant? when that Covenant was promised (Jeremiah 31:31), 
or when he was promised that he would be its 

Mediator or servant? Cite Malachi 3:1. 

(4) Does the fact that he is the appointed Mediator of 
the New Covenant imply that he has already done all the 
work pertaining to the New Covenant or any of the work 
pertaining to it? 

(5) When St. Peter tells of the Times of Restitution of 
all things that will be brought in at the Second Coming of 
Christ, he also tells of a Great Prophet, greater than Moses, 



the antitype of Moses, who shall be "raised up from amongst 
his brethren." Are we to understand that this great Prophet 
is the Messiah as a whole, Jesus the Head and the Church 
his Body, and that the raising up process has been in progress 
throughout this Gospel Age, and that this antitypical Moses 
is to be the Mediator of the New [Law] Covenant, as Moses 
was the Mediator of the Old Law Covenant? 

(6) By Divine arrangement this great Mediator sacrifices 
his earthly rights that he may have the privilege of 
giving them as his legacy, or testament, or will to Israel as 
its New [Law] Covenant. When will he thus seal or ratify 
the New Covenant? The Apostle says that no will is valid 
until after the death of the testator. Should we understand 
this to mean that not until the entire Body of Christ has 
tasted death would it be possible for the New Covenant to be 
sealed and made operative toward the natural seed of 
Abraham? 

MAY 8 

(7) If the earthly blessings surrendered by Christ and 

the Church are to be given to Israel and to the world through 
Israel, under the terms of Restitution during the Millennium, 
when should we expect that New Covenant to begin to be 
operative, and should we expect its manifestation to be actual 
Restitution in some form? P. 456, 457. 

(8) How completely will the world recognize The 
Christ, the Mediator, during the Millennium? Will he be the 
all-responsible Head of the world or will mankind approach 
the Father through the name and merit of the Mediator? 

P. 458. 

(9) Some, ignoring the force of the word Ransom, if 

not, indeed, denying it, are in the habit of speaking of receiving 
pardon for their sins. What shall we say as to the 
Scripturalness of this? Explain the difference between the 
two words, pardon and forgiveness, and show why one is 
right and the other is wrong in this connection. P. 459. 

(10) Even if we should admit that the word pardon 
might be used in such a way as not to ignore the Ransom 
feature of the Divine testimony, is it wisest and best to use 
these words indiscriminately and synonymously to the confusion 
of some? 

(11) While it is true that the effect of the Divine arrangement 
towards mankind is practically the same as though 

we were pardoned, may we not conclude that our Creator 
had some good purpose in explaining to us the philosophy of 
the message by which he could be "just and yet be the Justifier" 
of sinners? Give a short statement of the philosophy of 
the matter from this standpoint. P. 460, 461. 

(12) Some have proclaimed that they do not see the 
Justice of God in compelling our Lord Jesus to be man's 
Redeemer. Do any Scriptures put the matter in this light? 
If not, how shall we view it? P. 462. 

(13) We have seen that Jehovah cannot forgive sin in 
the true sense of the word pardon— without consideration 
and without the satisfaction of Justice. We now inquire, Is 



it possible for our Lord Jesus, or for the disciples, or for us 
to pardon the transgressions of others? If so, how and why? 
Explain the difference between the rules which govern us 
and those which control the Almighty's course of action. 
P. 462, 463, 464. 

MAY 15 

(14) Since death is the wage of sin, what shall we say 

to the suggestion of some that every man pays his own death 
penalty when he dies? Explain the matter thoroughly. 
P. 464, par. 2. 

(15) Why is the Adamic death spoken of as a complete 
and not spoken of as an everlasting destruction? P. 464, 465. 

(16) In what way does universalism deny the Ransom? 
P. 466, 467. 

(17) Why did God not make us in such condition that 
we could not sin? P. 467, par. 2. 

(18) What kind of worship does God desire? And does 
his plan contemplate his rejection of any other worship? 
P. 467, par. 2. 

(19) How will a permission of choice eventually operate 
for the best interests of all concerned? P. 468. 

(20) What kind of salvation has God tendered to the 
race? Are there terms connected with it and what are they? 
P. 468, par. 3. 

MAY 22 

(21) Was the original trial of father Adam a favorable 
one, just one, and will the new trial secured for him and his 
race through our Saviour's death be any the less just or fair 
or favorable? P. 468, par. 4. 

(22) Why did Christ die to save us from the curse? 
P. 469, par. 1,2. 

(23) Explain the Scripture, "God will have all men to be 
saved," and the other Scripture, "So all Israel shall be saved." 
Are either of these salvations eternal? Give a full statement 
of what each implies. P. 469, par. 3. 

(24) Why does God will that our race shall be saved 
from the blindness of ignorance and superstition which 
came through the great Adversary's machinations and human 
weaknesses? P. 469, last par. 

(25) Since we read that Christ died, "The just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us to God," should we understand 
this to mean that Justice is obligated to recover man from 

all that was lost in Adam? Give the reasons for the answer. 
P. 470. 

(26) Does Justice have anything to do with mankind's 
restoration, except as the Redeemer makes application of his 
merit— now as Advocate for the Church and during the Millennium 
as Mediator for the world. P. 471. 

MAY 29 

(27) What force is there in the expression that "there is 



no name given in heaven or amongst men whereby we must 
be saved" except the name of Jesus? Show how this is so 
and why this is so, connecting the same with the Divine Plan 
of Salvation in its world-wide application. P. 472, par. 2. 

(28) If all the world's affairs will be in the hands of the 
Mediator of the New Covenant, what shall we understand 
to be his mind, his will, his good pleasure, respecting those 
for whom he will make mediation. P. 473. 

(29) Will God accept any lesser standard than perfection 
as the terms of eternal life through the Mediator? P. 474. 

(30) How will that item of our Lord's prayer be fulfilled 
which speaks of God's will being done in earth as in 
heaven? P. 475, par. 1. 

(31) Will the Restitution from sin and death conditions 

be effected instantaneously? If not, why not? P. 475, par. 2. 

(32) Give six reasons why a gradual process of Restitution, 
such as the Scriptures imply will be granted to man, 

will be more to their advantage than instantaneous Restitution 
or perfecting. P. 475-477. 

(33) Give three reasons why a gradual Restitution Divinely 
provided will be the most advantageous arrangement 
possible for the redeemed. P. 478, 479. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as 
before; and hence page for page differs. The references 
given in these Berean Studies apply to the present edition, 
a copy of which postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep 
your old edition, for unfortunately the new Bible Helps 
refer to its pages. 



page 130 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 



SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, 
five vol.; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in Greek three vols.; in French, two vols.; 
in Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. 
each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the 
same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 
each. 



page 129 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI APRIL 15 No. 8 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

To What Degree Should We Confess Faults? 131 

Were the Ancient Worthies on Trial for Life? 132 

More Tolerable for Sodom 132 

"I Will Have Mercy and Not Sacrifice" 133 

Birthday Greetings (Poem) 134 

Be Temperate in All Things 135 

"Professing Themselves to Be Wise" 135 

Some Interesting Questions 136 

Woman the Glory of Man 136 



Significance of Coals from the Altar 137 

Some Types of the Resurrection 137 

Joyful in Tribulations (Poem) 138 

The Privilege and Power of Prayer 138 

The Redemption Price and Its Application 141 

The Memorial Supper 142 

Some Interesting Letters 142 

page 130 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



THE "SPECTATOR" AND "THE WORLD" 

The Hamilton Spectator will resume publication of the sermons 
if sufficiently encouraged. Rate for daily, additional to 
WATCH TOWER subscription, $1.80 per year; $1.13 for six 
months, or 68 cents for three months; 75 cents for the semi-weekly 
per year or 38 cents for six months. Send orders to 
us. The Toronto World also will continue the sermons in 
full if sufficiently encouraged. Price, additional to WATCH 



TOWER, 50 cents per year for Monday issue. Do not forget 
to encourage the publishers by complimentary letters and 
cards. 



IMMERSION SERVICE 

Arrangements for Water Baptism have been made in 
Brooklyn for those who desire to symbolize their baptism 
into Christ's death. The service will be conducted immediately 
after the afternoon service of Sunday, April 17. Those 
desiring to avail themselves of this privilege will, if possible, 
kindly advise us in advance. 



R4598 : page 130 

SERMONS IN THE NEWSPAPERS 

How about renewing your subscriptions for newspapers 
publishing Brother Russell's sermons? Do your part! Be 
prompt! If a few narrow souls hating the good tidings of 
God's love try to discourage the Editors from publishing the 
sermons; the thousands who are being blest should tell of 
their profit and pleasure and thus encourage the newspaper 
men. Renew through us or direct, as you please. Use part 
of your "Good Hopes" thus if you think proper. You have 

page 130 

our clubbing rates in the PEOPLES PULPIT— December issue. 



R4597 :page 131 

TO WHAT DEGREE SHOULD WE CONFESS FAULTS? 

"Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for 
another that ye may be healed."— James 5:16. 

THIS text represents a general principle of 

humility and willingness to make acknowledgment 

when we commit a fault, particularly 

to the one against whom the fault or 

wrong has been committed, with due apology 

and reparation so far as possible. It is 

quite proper for us to freely concede that 

we are not perfect, and no one should attempt 

to pose as perfect, but rather to 

acknowledge what the Scriptures declare 

that "there is none righteous, no, not one"; that we are 

merely righteous in our intentions and efforts and are 

trusting for full covering in the sight of God through 



the merit of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

There might be times when the confession of a fault 
should be made publicly to the advantage of others and 
if we feel sure that the telling of our own shortcoming 
would be of advantage to others, we should not hesitate 

R4598 :page 131 

to tell of the matter in a proper way with a view to assisting 
others; but our thought is that in general we do 
well, not only to hide our imperfections, but that it 
should be our daily endeavor to put our faults away 
completely. 

In this passage, however, the Apostle has a deeper 
thought; he is discussing here the case of one who has 
committed a sin that has alienated him from God, causing 
a cloud to come between them. It has been a repetition 
of sins, or something to this effect. He is spiritually 
sick, whether physically sick or not. The prescription for 
him is that he call for the Elders of the Church that they 
may pray over him and anoint him with oil in the name 
of the Lord. "The prayer of faith shall save the sick" 
(the spiritually sick, we think), "and though he has committed 
trespasses or sins they shall be forgiven him." 
The brother is not in a condition to advocate his own 
cause with the Lord, and the Lord therefore arranged it 
so that we should feel a sympathy with our brother and go 
to his relief and make intercession for him. Not that our 
intercessions would avail of themselves; it must be the 
intercession of our Advocate that would avail for the 
wrongs and imperfections before justice; but our Advocate 
may at times thus withhold himself for the good 
of one in error and for the sake of drawing out the sympathy 
of the brethren who have knowledge of the case, 
that they may seek to assist, remembering themselves lest 
they also should be tempted, lest they also should fall 
from their steadfastness, and that therefore the spirit of 
sympathy and mutual helpfulness may be encouraged in 
the Church. 

There is nothing that would be in the way of an Elder 
Brother in the Church praying for one of the fellow-members 
of the Body of Christ or against the members of 
the Church praying for each other in general without 
special request. This would be entirely proper. If one 
should see a brother taking a wrong course, he should not 
only pray for him, but should seek to restore such a one 
in the spirit of humility by calling attention to the course 
he has taken, as wisely as he may be able; but of course 
the matter could not go so far under such circumstances 
as under the circumstances above recited— that the sick 
one should call for the Elders to pray for him, realizing 
his own need. 

Not merely should the Elders pray for those whom they 
see going astray, but the Lord has put a special responsibility 
upon every member of the Church, every member 
of the Body, to look out for all other members to the extent 



of ability and opportunity, yet there could not be 
the same degree either of responsibility or of propriety in 
a younger brother in the Church attempting to correct 
and rebuke and exhort, etc., an Elder Brother. The 
Apostle says to Timothy, "Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat 
him as a father"; thus we see what a younger 
brother in the Lord's family might do, if he saw what he 
thought to be a deflection from the proper course. But 
he should feel a hesitancy about approaching the matter 
and feel also that he would be laboring under a disadvantage 
and would not be as likely to accomplish good results 
as if he were one of more experience. Therefore it would 
be wise for him to pray for the person in secret for a 
while, rather than be too free about giving advice. But 
if he finally thought it necessary, it would perhaps be 
wiser for him to speak to some of the Elders of the 
Church and ask them for their opinion; or if they thought 
it would be wise that the brother be spoken to by them. 
We are not supposing that he is imagining evil— "evil 
speaking"— about the person, but that he has some absolute 
knowledge about some wrong qualities of disposition, 
wrong course of life, something he knows to be wrong, 
something that is outwardly seen, something that is not 
merely imagined. We realize that many of the things that 
comprise evil speaking, etc., are purely imaginary, such 
as, "I thought he was going to do so," and "I thought she 
was doing so," or "I thought she might have been intending 
to do" thus and so. These things are classed with 

R4598 : page 132 

evil speaking. In these cases the brother should make 

the subject a matter of prayer to see that he is not busy-bodying 

in other people's affairs; that he is not setting up 

his judgment in a matter that is of no great importance; 

that it is something really serious and disastrous to the 

brother and dangerous to his interests as a New Creature 

in Christ Jesus. 

The general course, however, should be to go to the 
person alone, as our Lord instructed in Matthew 18:15; 
the going to an Elder would be only in the case of some 
very serious matter in which the person felt that his own 
power to set the matter right was entirely insufficient. It 
is our belief that those instances would be very few. If 
the matter is a trespass against himself, it would be his 
duty to go to the person alone; if it is something 
against the Church or that is outwardly immoral or wrong 
or a violation of some recognized principle of righteousness, 
it would seem to be on a little different plane and 
would call for someone who would be more in authority, 
since it is not the rights of the individual that are trespassed 
upon, but the interests of the Church or the Truth 
or the Lord's cause. In such cases the Elders would no 
doubt be the better able to judge and would know better 
how to approach the matter. 



R4598 : page 132 

WERE THE ANCIENT WORTHIES ON TRIAL FOR LIFE? 

THE Ancient Worthies were not on trial for 

life or death; they were never brought to 

that condition of intelligent opportunity for 

eternal life which would make them amenable 

to a sentence of death. Such a condition 

of knowledge and opportunity did not 

obtain in the world until our Lord came. 

"Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ"; 

"he brought to light, life and immortality." 

These were never disclosed before our 

Lord's time, and consequently no such responsibility, as 

now exists, had come. 

In a certain sense the Jewish nation had been typically 
justified and was typically on trial for life or death, but 
this was not an actuality so far as life and death eternal 
were concerned, because God knew in advance that they 
could not keep the Law, and that they could never have 
eternal life under it; and he had arranged in advance 
that they should be redeemed from the curse of the Law 
irrespective of anything they might themselves do in the 
matter. Hence it was only in the typical, or figurative 
sense, that they were on trial for life or death. 

The Ancient Worthies "had this testimony that they 
pleased God." They pleased him in that when they ascertained 
his will they set about doing it, even before he 
gave it to them as a law or obligation, even before he 
could ask them to obey him and promise them eternal 
life for their obedience. Abraham manifested his faith 
in God although there was no redemption yet accomplished 
in the world. Christ had not yet come. And although 
Abraham was not on trial for life or for death God 
granted Abraham his favor and declared that he pleased 
him; and his word tells us that "a better resurrection" is to 
be not only to Abraham, but to all these Ancient Worthies 
—a resurrection to human perfection. But since human 
perfection will come only under the mediatorial reign 
of Christ, the Ancient Worthies will not be introduced to 
the Father in the complete sense until the close of the 
Millennial Age. 

Hence, they will not have life, in this fullest sense, 
until that time, when, at the close of the Millennial Age, 
the Kingdom shall be delivered over to the Father. What 
they will have in the meantime will be the perfection of 
human nature and all the blessings that God provides for 
mankind, through the great Mediator. But they will not 
come into actual and personal relationship to God, so as 
to be determined worthy of eternal life, until the completion 
of the Millennial Age, because that age is set 
apart for the very purpose of determining who of all 
mankind may have eternal life, aside from the spirit-begotten 



ones of the present time. At the close of the 
Millennial Age, when all mankind shall be in perfection 
of being, they shall be tried of the Father for their worthiness 
or unworthiness of eternal life— just as Adam, while 
enjoying perfection, was tested as to whether or not he 
was worthy to have life made perpetual or eternal. 

Since the Ancient Worthies will be a part of the world 
under the New Covenant arrangements, it follows that 
they will not have this decision of the Divine Court, 
Divine Justice, respecting their worthiness of eternal life 
until the completion of the Millennial Age, until the conclusion 
of the trial at the end of that age, which will 
bring to them, as it will bring to all others who are faithful, 
the great reward of life eternal. 



R4599 : page 132 

MORE TOLERABLE FOR SODOM 

-MATTHEW ll:20-30.-APRIL24.- 

Golden Text:— "Come unto me, all ye that labor and 
are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest."— V. 28. 

IN the cities of Capernaum, "his own city," 

Bethsaida, and Chorazin, situated on the Sea 

of Galilee, the majority of our Lord's notable 

miracles were performed. Nevertheless, 

even in these cities, the majority rejected 

his Messiahship. Today's study tells 

how the Great Teacher arraigned the people 

of those cities for their unbelief, declaring 

that if the mighty works done in them had 

been done in the Gentile cities of Tyre and 

Sidon they would have repented. Hence it will be more 

tolerable for the people of those cities than for the people 

of Capernaum in the Day of Judgment. 

We must rid our minds of the old and fallacious 
thought that the Day of Judgment will be a period of 
twenty-four hours. We must see that from God's standpoint 
a day simply signifies a period or an epoch; as, for 
instance, a twenty-four hour day, a forty-year day in the 
wilderness, and the thousand-year day of Christ, the Millennium. 
The latter is the day referred to in our text as 
the Day of Judgment. Only a few of mankind have their 
Day of Judgment or trial now. These few are specially 
blessed with eyes of understanding to see and with ears 
of understanding to appreciate the special privileges of 
this present time. The great mass of mankind are thoroughly 
blind and deaf to the spiritual things connected with 
the present calling and election of the Church. 

Respecting these the Master thanked the Father, "Because 
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, 
and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, 



R4599 : page 133 

Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight." (Vs. 25,26.) 
The Great Teacher did not mean that he was glad, thankful, 
that his message was hidden from the majority, that 
they might slide down into eternal torture in darkness. 
Oh, no! Surely not! He did mean that he appreciated the 
Father's wisdom in not allowing any but those of proper 
condition of heart to see and clearly understand the present 
call of the Church. For the uncontrite of heart to 
see, to understand, would mean two things:— 

(1) They would oppose God's Plan the more; 

(2) They would come under greater responsibility 
themselves. 

Hence we with the Master may be glad of the wisdom 
displayed in the Divine arrangement of hiding certain features 
of the great Plan of the Ages from all except the 
"very elect." "The secret of the Lord is with them that fear 
(reverence) him and he will show them his Covenant." 
-Psa. 25:14. 

"Thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven 
(highly exalted in privilege and opportunity), shalt be 
brought down to hell (to hades, to the grave, to destruction); 
for if the mighty works which have been done in 
thee had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until 
this day." (V. 23.) The reason is clear. The people 
of Capernaum were evidently harder-hearted than the 
people of Sodom and, from the Lord's standpoint, were 
more blameworthy. What shall we say, then, of our day 
of still greater privilege in many respects— Bibles in every 
home, preaching in every city, education in every family? 
What might not the Lord reasonably expect of us? 

MORE TOLERABLE FOR SODOM 

We have already referred to a Day of Judgment as the 
thousand-year day of Christ's Millennial Kingdom, when 
the people of Capernaum with those of Tyre and Sidon 
and Sodom and Gomorrah and all the other cities and nations, 
except the elect Church of this age, will be placed 
on trial— for life everlasting or death everlasting. 

According to our Lord's words present knowledge, 
great or small, brings its proportion of responsibility. The 
greater the favor of God enjoyed now, the greater will be 
our responsibility then. Evidently this means surprises 
for the world. Not only the Sodomites, but many of the 
heathen who have thus far enjoyed little or nothing of 
God's grace, will be in a more favorable condition as respects 
the prospects of the future than some who are now 
richly favored but are neglecting their privileges. Our 
Lord intimates that the Judgment or trial of the Millennium 
will be tolerable, not intolerable, for the people of 
Capernaum and more tolerable for the people of Sodom. 
How much more reasonable this is than the unscriptural 
nonsense that was once taught us by our well-meaning, 



deluded forefathers, who made the various sectarian 
creeds that are now causing trouble, and who then burned 
each other at the stake because of differences of opinion 
respecting these creeds and claimed that in so doing they 
were copying God, who was torturing the people of Tyre 
and Sidon and Capernaum and Sodom and hundreds of 
millions of others, heathen and civilized! 

How seriously we have all misunderstood and misrepresented 
the Gospel message! Let us turn to the 
prophecy referred to by our Lord and note this. In 
Ezekiel's prophecy, 16:49-61, the Lord rehearsed in advance 
the greater wickedness of Israel than of her neighboring 
sister peoples, Samaria and Sodom, and tells that nevertheless 
he will restore all three of them, bringing them 
again from the tomb and establishing his Covenant with 
them through Messiah in the Millennial Age. Let us remember, 
too, that our Lord made this promise of restitution 
(Acts 3:19-21) through the very Sodomites who were 
destroyed by fire which came down from heaven. 
(Luke 7:29,30.) They were temporarily destroyed by 
fire as an example or illustration of the absolute annihilation, 
destruction, which ultimately will come upon all 
willful sinners, the Second Death. But before any will 
be thus cut off from all hope he must be brought to a 
clear knowledge of the Truth and have a full trial in the 
great and glorious day of Judgment, which St. Paul tells 
us God has provided and in which the saints of this age, 
the Bride of Christ, with her Lord, will share in the work 
of judging. 

The Father hath delivered all of his great work into 
the hands of the Lord Jesus, and only by knowing him 
can we know the Father in the proper sense, in the intimate 
sense, because the Son, as the Great Teacher, reveals 
the Father to all who are pupils in his School. 

Our study closes with our Lord's invitation to those 
who now have the hearing ear and seeing eye of obedient 
faith. To these, life's experiences, sin's burdens, and 
general unrest are preparations for the Divine message, 
"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy-laden 
and I will give you rest." Those invited must expect 
to be servants and to wear the "yoke" of obedience to 
the Divine will— the yoke of Christ, the service of Christ. 
To be successful they must learn of him, walk in his 
steps. They must be meek and lowly in heart. Such, and 
such only, will find his yoke an easy one and his burden a 
light one— much lighter than the yoke and burden of sin. 
Only such will find rest unto their souls now and be prepared 
to enter into the heavenly rest as "joint-heirs" with 
Christ in his heavenly Kingdom, which is shortly to bless 
and judge the world. 



R4599 : page 133 

"I WILL HAVE MERCY, AND NOT SACRIFICE" 



-MATTHEW 12:1-14.-MAY 1.- 

SABB ATH observance is the essence of this 

study. Reasonable people, regardless of 

their religious convictions, are ready to admit 

the wisdom, the expediency, yes, the 

necessity, for a Sabbath day, a rest day once 

a week. Whatever disputes there are on 

the subject, therefore, pertain to which 

day shall be observed and to the manner 

of the observance. When, through Moses 

as Mediator, God adopted the nation of 

Israel as his peculiar people, accepting them into Covenant 

relationship through their promised obedience to the 

Law, he fixed for them a special day of the week, the 

seventh, to be their Sabbath, or day of rest. This Law 

specially appertained to Palestine. Had it extended beyond, 

to encompass the whole earth, it would have been 

necessary for the Law to specify which day should be 

considered the Sabbath on the other side of the earth, 

where the time would, of course, be twenty-four hours 

different. 

But those of us who are not Jews by nature and not 
under that Law Covenant are not bound by its limitation 
that the Sabbath should be on the seventh day of the 
week. Indeed, neither Jesus nor the Apostles ever placed 

R4599 : page 134 

the Gospel Church under the Law Covenant at all. They 
tell us that those under it were the "house of servants" in 
bondage and that we are the "house of sons," if we "stand 
fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free." 

This does not mean liberty or freedom to do wrong. 
But since Christians are not limited to the land of Palestine, 
it leaves us free to follow the spirit of the Law rather 
than its letter. This is true of the entire Ten Commandments, 
as well as of the Fourth. The Heavenly Father 
does not address his spirit-begotten children with commandments 
not to kill, not to steal, etc., because such 
commandments to them would be unnecessary. Begotten 
of the holy Spirit, they love God and reverence him 
alone, and would not think of homaging images, nor of 
profaning the Holy Name, nor of doing injury to a neighbor 
or a brother. On the contrary, their love for God 
would lead them to honor his Name, to serve his Cause. 

R4600 : page 134 

And their love for their neighbor as for themselves would 
prompt them to render him service— "doing good unto all 
men as we have opportunity, especially to the household 
of faith." (Gal. 6:10.) This love, the Apostle assures 
us, is the fulfillment of the Law, so far as we are concerned 
—the fulfilling of the spirit of the Law— for "ye are 



not under the Law (Covenant), but under [the] Grace 
(Covenant). "--Rom. 6:14; Gal. 3:29. 

The Jews had a system of Sabbath Days and Sabbath 
Years-the Seventh Day and the (7 x 7 + 1 = 50) Fiftieth 
Day, or Day of Pentecost. And they had a system 
of year Sabbaths, the Seventh Year and the (7x7+1= 50) 
Fiftieth Year, or Year of Jubilee. These were 
typical, as the Apostle explains, and true Christians may 
enjoy the antitypes. Thus to us the Seventh Day represents 
a Rest of a higher character than that of the Law— a rest 
of faith, as instead of a physical rest. "We who believe 
do enter into his rest"— a faith rest based upon our acceptance 
of Jesus as our satisfaction before God. The fulness 
of this rest we attain when we receive the begetting of the 
holy Spirit. And this was typified by the sending of the 
holy Spirit on the Day of Pentecost. Similarly Israel's 
Sabbatic Year of Jubilee has its antitype in the great 
Millennial Age of Rest. (Acts 3:20.) But we leave the 
discussion of this for a more convenient season. 

The Great Teacher as a Jew was as much under the 
obligations of every feature of the Law Covenant as any 
other Jew. We may be sure that he did not violate any 
feature of it. He was obligated to keep the letter of it in 
a sense and degree which he has not commanded us, his 
followers. It is ours merely to keep the spirit of it. Hence 
if we were living in Palestine neither the Seventh Day 
nor any other particular day of the week would be obligatory 
upon us. But it would be our pleasure to maintain the 
spirit of the Jewish Law. Acting along the lines of 
this liberty, the early Church began to meet on the First 
Day of the week, because it was on that day that their 
Redeemer arose from the dead. On that day he appeared 
to some in the upper room and to two on the way to 
Emmaus and to Mary, and subsequently to others of the 
disciples near the tomb. These four manifestations of the 
Lord's resurrection marked that day in a special sense 
as a holy day to the early Church. They waited during 
an entire week and then again he appeared on the first 
day of the week. Indeed, so far as we may know, all of 
his eight appearances to his followers after his resurrection 
were on the first day of the week. No wonder, then, 
it became known to them as the Lord's Day. No wonder 
if they specially associated with that Day all the blessings 
of God and a rest of faith which came to them through 
the Redeemer. Quite probably those who lived in Jewish 
communities would continue to observe the Seventh Day 
also, because its general observance would make this a 
necessity. But the First Day of the week became the 
general time for the Lord's followers to assemble themselves 
and to partake of a simple meal called breaking of 
bread (not the Lord's Supper) in commemoration of the 
fact that on the day of his resurrection Jesus manifested 
himself to his followers in the breaking of bread. 

THE LAW MADE VOID BY TRADITIONS 



But we are not to understand from the present study 
that the Master reproved the Jews for keeping the Seventh 
Day, which was their duty. His reproofs attach to certain 
extremes. The Pharisees exaggerated some features and 
entirely overestimated other features of the Law. In their 
theory there was no harm in eating the corn on the Sabbath 
Day, but to pull an ear of it they construed to be 
reaping. And to rub it out of the chaff they considered 
to be threshing and winnowing. Similarly, to scratch or 
look for a flea was estimated to be hunting, and thus 
God's reasonable Law was made to appear absurd. It was 
such absurdities only that Jesus combatted. He showed 
that one had a right to satisfy his hunger, and cited a 
case where the Prophet David had done so without blame. 
He cited also the fact that the priests labored on the 
Sabbath Day without blame. He explained that God was 
desirous of seeing in his creatures the quality of mercy 
towards one another, rather than merely the sacrificing 
of their comforts. Had they recognized this Truth they 
would not have found fault with the Apostles. 

Then, as though to demonstrate his position, he healed 
a man with a withered hand, also demonstrating by his 
miracle that he had the Divine favor and that his teaching 
on the subject had this evidence of its truthfulness. 
He pointed out the inconsistency of his critics, saying that 
since they would relieve one of their brute beasts, if he fell 
into a pit on the Sabbath they would see, therefore, how 
illogical was their position in objecting to his performing 
cures of human ills on the Sabbath Day. But the evil 
heart is not amenable to reason. The very fact that he 
demonstrated his teachings to be superior to theirs excited 
the Pharisees to envy, malice, hatred, and the very spirit 
of murder. Thus they evidenced that they lacked the 
quality of mercy, love, which God would specially approve, 
and without which we cannot be his children. Sacrifice 
is right in its place, but mercy more particularly indicates 
the acceptable condition of the heart. Quite probably 
Jesus did so many of his miracles on the Sabbath Day as 
a type— as a prophetical picture of the great fact that the 
antitypical day, the great Sabbath Day, will be the Seventh 
Thousand Year period, the Millennium. 



R4604 : page 134 

BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 

Four pounds of love we send to thee today, 

And only four, 
For Uncle Samuel's mail bags, they say, 

Can take no more. 
But mail bags, boxes, sacks of ev'ry kind 

Are all too small, 
And only hearts are large enough 

To hold it all. 



So take our love on the installment plan, 

Dear friend of mine— 
We send a part today, more when we can. 

We trust for thine! 

CLASS AT NASSAU, N.H. 



R4600 : page 135 

BE TEMPERATE IN ALL THINGS 

-PROVERBS 23:29-35.-MAY 8.- 

Golden Text:— "At the last it biteth like a serpent 
and stingeth like an adder."— V. 32. 

WHILE it cannot be said that the Bible commands 

total abstinence from intoxicating 

liquors, it can be said that everywhere from 

Genesis to Revelation it reprobates drunkenness 

and points us to its debauching 

effects as injurious both physically and 

spiritually. We think probably that the 

climatic conditions of the centers of civilization 

and the nerve tension of our day 

make the evils of intemperance specially 

grievous at this time. These facts would fully justify us 

as followers of Jesus and the Apostles should we go beyond 

them in urging absolute total abstinence as respects 

all alcoholic liquors. Special emergencies and conditions 

require to be specially met. 

As, for instance, while Adam's children being nearly 
perfect could and did intermarry, nothing of the kind 
would be wise or in any sense justifiable now because the 
great depravity of our race through heredity has so 
prefaced our natures along certain lines of our weaknesses 
that even for two cousins to marry is dangerous as respects 
the sanity of their posterity. In other words, circumstances 
alter cases. In the interim of nearly nineteen 
centuries undoubtedly great changes have taken place 
along certain lines and the wisest and noblest of humanity 
are practically agreed that in our day, at least, alcoholic 
beverages are extremely unwise, extremely injurious. 
They are dangerous for the strong of character, and 
awful, irresistible temptations to the weak, who should 
have the encouragement of the strong in the bearing of 
their burdens of hereditary weakness. The amount of 
crime and sin which directly and indirectly are traceable 
to the influence of alcohol should make all good people 
stand in awe of it and use their influence in opposition to 
it. In this we are not condemning all those who more or 
less participate in the stream of crime and sin produced 
by alcohol. Doubtless amongst those who manufacture and 
dispense these beverages there are, as well as amongst 
those who own stock in distilleries and breweries, persons 



of noble minds, who would rather do good than do evil. 

By some process of reasoning which we do not fully comprehend 

they throw the responsibility off their own shoulders 

upon the shoulders of their weaker brethren and 

sisters of the human family. Unquestionably money is at 

the bottom of the traffic. As the Apostle declares, "The 

love of money is the root of all evil." 

THE DRUNKARD'S PORTRAIT 

In today's Study Solomon the Wise gives us the picture 
of the drunkard— redness of eyes; woe; sorrow; contentious; 
complaining. He advises, "Look not thou upon the 
wine when it is red and giveth color to the cup and goeth 
down smoothly. At last it biteth like a serpent and stingeth 
like an adder." It would appear that there is a charm 
or enticement connected with alcoholic stimulants which 
gradually wastes the strong and quickly enthralls the 
weak of will. The wise man associates the demoniacal 
power of liquor with its twin-sister, fleshly desire and general 
immorality, saying, "Thine eyes shall behold strange 
women and thy heart shall utter perverse things." He 
adds, "Thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst 
of the sea [like floating wreckage] and as he that lieth on 
top of the mast"— in imminent danger of destruction. He 
describes the condition of those who become beastly drunk. 
They are unconscious of injury and seem to have their 
chiefest pleasure in unconsciousness, so that, upon recovering 
from one debauch, their desire is to seek the stimulation 
again. Thus are the chains of slavery to a most 
degrading habit gradually forged and manhood gradually 
enslaved and earthly prospects, not to mention heavenly 
hopes, go glimmering. 

It is written in the Scriptures, "No drunkard shall inherit 
the Kingdom of heaven"— no drunkard, therefore, 
can hope to be a member of the Body of Christ, the elect 

R4601 :page 135 

Church. Thank God, this no longer means to us his utter 
perdition, but it does signify great loss. We are never to 
forget, however, that, having once been a drunkard and 
having turned from that deplorable condition, the individual 
would be a drunkard no longer. Let us remember 
that only "overcomers" are promised a share in his 
Millennial Throne and Kingdom. He who loses the mastery 
of his flesh to the extent of being a drunkard is certainly 
not an overcomer and not at that time in line for 
joint-heirship with Christ. The President of the United 
States expressed the following sentiment: "To a man who 
is actively engaged in reasonable work, who must have at 
his command the best that is in him, at its best— to him I 
would, with all the emphasis that I possess, advise and 
urge, Leave drink alone— absolutely.' He who drinks 
is deliberately disqualifying himself for advancement. 
Personally I refuse to take such a risk. I do not drink." 



When Mr. Taft expressed this he was Secretary of 
War, and evidently did not disqualify himself for advancement 
by his total abstinence. General Frederick D. Grant, 
an outspoken total abstainer, said: "Drink is the greatest 
curse of Christendom, because practically all crime and 
all disaster are the result of it. Ninety-five per cent— I 
will make it no less— of desertion and acts of lawlessness 
in the Army is due to drink. Vice is simply drink in 
another form. Whoever heard of a saloon completely 
divorced from the 'White Slave Traffic,' or a house of 
infamy without a bar? You may tell the young men that 
General Grant does not drink a drop of liquor— has not 
for eighteen years— because he is afraid to drink it." 



R4601 :page 135 

"PROFESSING THEMSELVES TO BE WISE" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A few days ago a Brother put into my hands a little 
booklet published in America, with the object of demolishing 
faith in the Scripture chronology as shown in 
the STUDIES, and to show that the deductions which have 
been drawn are hopelessly wrong. I found the booklet 
very dull, with its many reiterations of statements that 
the findings of Vol. 2 are at fault. Because it cannot do 
better it quotes Vol. 2 on the necessity of a correct 
chronology, and that a difference of a single year in that 
shown would throw the harmony into discord. Then it 
goes on to "prove" the chronology is wrong, and being ill-content, 
it proceeds to make the discord. The claim is 
that Jehoram, of Judah, did not reign as king of Judah 
for eight years, as the Scriptures say, but that he reigned 
four years with his father Jehoshaphat, and only four as 
real king. As I happened to be familiar with the passages 
bearing on this point of history I replied at once to 
the question put to me, and the suggestion was made that 

R4601 :page 136 

I send the reply to you, and in case you may have nothing 
better at hand, you may judge it worth while to use it. 
The difficulty is raised by the attempt to correspond 
the events of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, a task 
which, so far as chronology is concerned, must always 
give unsatisfactory results, because of the peculiar methods 
of reckoning the years of a reign, and because no 
attempts were made to give details. The Father knew 
our needs, and caused a second account to be given, one 
which gives an unbroken record of the kings of Judah 
from David to the end of the kingdoms. That which 
the book of Kings did not give we have in the books of 
the Chronicles, surely a direct word to us from our God, 
and surely a sufficient ground for our faith. But take the 



passage upon which all this opposition is based, and it 
will be found to be a confirmation rather than a source 
of doubt; it strengthens our faith! 

Here is the account of the kings of Judah and Israel 
about that time: Asa was contemporary with Ahab of 
Israel, three years. (I Kings 22:41.) His son, Jehoshaphat, 
reigned twenty-five years. In the seventeenth year 
of Jehoshaphat, Ahaziah of Israel began to reign and is 
said to have been king two years. But in the eighteenth year 
of Jehoshaphat, Jehoram of Israel was made king, and 
he reigned for twelve years. In his fifth year Jehoshaphat 
died and Jehoram of Judah reigned in his stead, and 
in the twelfth and last year of Jehoram of Israel Jehoram 
of Judah died, having reigned eight years. (I Kings 22:42,5 1 ; 
2 Kings 3:1; 8:16,25.) These passages and 
this item of history well illustrate the difficulty of getting 
a certain chronology from a comparison of the lives of 
the kings of Judah and Israel; but it also shows that the 
account in Chronicles is reliable, for the total years 
under review agree even though the details do not show 
the closest harmony, owing, as we have said, to the method 
of counting which obtained. In this period the number 
of years for Judah is: Asa, three years; Jehoshaphat, 
twenty-five; Jehoram, eight; total, thirty-six. The number 
for Israel is: Ahab, twenty-two years; Ahaziah, two; 
Jehoram, twelve; a total of thirty-six, exactly the same 
as recorded of Judah when we take the Scripture statement 
that Jehoram of Judah reigned eight years. 

With much love in the Lord, your brother, 
J. HEMERY. 



R4602 : page 136 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE GARMENTS OF GLORY AND 
BEAUTY 

QUESTION.— Was there any significance in 
the fact that the High Priest, after having 
performed the services of the Day of 
Atonement, took off his linen garments in 
the Holy and left them there and put on 
garments of glory and beauty when he came 
forth to bless the people? 

Answer.— The High Priest all through 
this Gospel Age is carrying on the work of 
sacrifice; it was not only when he offered 
up himself, but during all this age he continues to be the 
sacrificing Priest, and although he has passed beyond the 
vail, he is still, so to speak, in the linen garments of 
sacrifice; and his secondary offering, that of the antitypical 
goat, will be accomplished in the linen garments, 
when he will enter in beyond the vail and present the blood 



of his Body, which is the Church, at the close of this 
antitypical Atonement Day, when the Church shall have 
filled up its share of the sacrifice of Christ. Our Lord, 
the High Priest, will then, the second time, sprinkle the 
blood, the merit, upon the mercy-seat, thereby sealing the 
New Covenant and applying his merit on "behalf of all the 
people." 

Having done this he will come forth to bless the 
people; but he will not again appear in the linen garments 
of sacrifice. The change will be made unseen to the 
world. The last they will see will be the going in of the 
priests after the sacrificial work of the present time, the 
Gospel Age, and the first they will see in the New Dispensation 
will be the appearance of the great Priest in 
glory and beauty— in "the glorious garments." Not that 
they will see these with their natural eye; but his glory 
shall be revealed through the ministration of the New 
Covenant blessings to Israel and the world, and this revelation 
of all the glorious things represented in the various 
garments of the High Priest will be a manifestation that 
will last all through the Millennial Age— the various robes, 
the ephod, etc., will all have their fulfillment then in the 
glorious work of the Anointed One. 

The beginning of this manifestation in glory will be 
in the time of trouble, of which time we read: "All shall 
wail because of him." It is his manifestation in power, 
the breaking in pieces of things of this present order of 
affairs, that will cause the great time of trouble that the 
Scriptures announce will be the conclusion of this Age 
and the inauguration of the Millennial Age. Thus the appearing 
in glory will have various stages, but all will be 
on the glorious plane; none will be again on the sacrificial 
plane of the present age. 

In this picture of the robes of the Priest we understand 
that the High Priest typified the entire Priesthood, 
the Under-Priests as well as the Head; that the Head did 
not need the covering, but that the covering of the linen 
garments represented the merit of Christ imputed to us, 
the members of his Body, whom the Father accepts and 
justifies and whose imperfections are covered through 
him. We understand that the white robe represents especially 
our share in the picture; that the High Priest 
going forth in glory typifies in large measure the glory of 
the Church in connection with her Head, as we read: "It 
doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that 
when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall 
see him as he is." Another Scripture declares that we 
shall be his glorious Body, or his Body in glory, and that 
"we shall be glorified together with him." 



WOMAN THE GLORY OF MAN-THE CHURCH THE 
GLORY OF CHRIST 

Question.— In the Scripture which says that woman 



is the glory of man, is the intimation conveyed that the 
Church is the glory of Christ? 

Answer.— We understand it is. We are not to understand 
by this, however, that woman is the glory of the 
man in the sense of being more glorious than the man; 
nor that the Church is the glory of Christ in the sense of 
being more glorious than Christ; nor that the Son is the 
glory of the Father in the sense of being more glorious 
than the Father; but we do understand that the Father 
is especially glorified in the Son because of the closeness 
of the relationship existing between them and because 
of the honor that the Father has shown the Son. 
Similarly Christ will be glorified in the Church because 
the wonderful glory that will be manifested through the 
Church will be a reflection of the glory of Jesus— all as a 
result of the Father's grace through him. 

R4602 : page 137 

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF COALS FROM THE ALTAR 

Question.— What is signified by the Priest's taking 
coals from the altar and using the same for the offering 
of the incense in the Holy? 

Answer.— We see that the fire used in all three of 
these different places represented our Lord's dying, or 
death process. The fire outside the Camp represented 
the destructive influences which came against him and 
caused his death, as viewed from the world's standpoint. 
The fire in the Court represented the same destructive influences 
that came against him and caused his death, as 
viewed from the standpoint of believers. To those outside 
the Camp the burning of the flesh and hide and hoofs 
and horns had a very evil odor, bad odor. To those that 
were inside the Court the burning of the fat— it was 
practically all fat in the sin-offering that was offered on 
the altar at this time— represented that which is not a 
bad odor, as the burning of fat does not give off a bad 
odor when burned under proper conditions and circumstances, 
as it is almost all pure carbon. As has already 
been suggested, the fat would represent the love and 
zeal which would characterize the sacrifice. In a lean 
animal there is very little fat; in a fat animal there is 
much fat to be put on the altar and correspondingly would 
augment the zeal, the flame, with which it would burn. 
But entirely aside from the burning of the fat and of the 
animal outside the Camp is the fact that fire was used 
to start this flame of sacred love and self-sacrifice. 

The coals of fire upon the altar, that which caused the 
burning of the fat, would not seem to represent anything 
that our Lord had or did, but rather experiences from the 
ordinary affairs of life. Wood doubtless was used on the 
altar, as we read in some places, and the glowing embers 
from this fire upon the altar were taken inside the vail to 
constitute the basis of the offering on the Golden Altar, 
the offering of the incense. This shows, therefore, that 



the fire was of the same kind in all three of these pictures 
—wood-fire that burned the animal outside; wood-fire that 
burned the fat in the Court; and wood-fire or coals of fire, 
that burned the incense upon the Golden Altar. 

What does fire here represent? We answer that, as 
usual, fire represents destructive influences. Was there 
anything peculiar about these destructive influences that 
would mark them as separate and distinct from many other 
destructive influences. Our thought is that the fact that 
they are connected with the altar and were typified by the 
fire which burned only on the altar, implies that they were 
destructive influences which were connected with the 
sacrificing; not the destructive influences which might 
come against mankind in general, as disease, or war, or 
famine, or pestilence, or from some other such general 
source of fire, trouble, destruction, but rather here a sacrificial 
fire, sacrificial influence, something connected with 
what was being offered; therefore such adverse influences 
as would be of the Father's appointment and for the very 
purpose of accomplishing this test or sacrifice; as our 
Lord expressed it, using another figure: "The cup which 
my Father hath poured for me, shall I not drink it?" It 
was not the Jews that poured that cup for him; it was 
not the Pharisees that poured that cup; it was not the 
Romans; it was not the people nor the hypocrites; it was 
not the scribes that poured that cup; but it was the Father 
who provided the cup. 

We would understand, then, that all these coals of fire 
represent those classes of circumstances and conditions 
which the Father provides for the very purpose of proving 
the character and the loyalty and the genuineness of 
our devotion. Carrying the coals into the Holy would 
thus seem to identify those two altars as expressing to 
us in symbol or type that the spirit of devotion which believers 
see consuming the sacrifice that is voluntarily offered 
to the Lord and which, while in line, in harmony 
with righteousness, is not commanded by the Divine law, is 
the sacrificing principle which is so acceptable in God's 
sight. It was in harmony with this, therefore, that our 
Lord offered up himself, in the sense of crumbling the 
incense upon the fiery coals. Thus day by day he laid down 
his life, allowed himself to come in contact with these 
experiences, which served to destroy his earthly nature 
and sent forth a sweet fragrance to God. It was not any 
and every tribulation, as before intimated, but simply those 
which the Father had provided and were connected with 
his sacrificial experience. 



SWEETENING OF THE WATERS OF MARAH 

Question.— What typical significance is there in the 
fact that when the waters of Marah were found to be 
bitter, and the Children of Israel had no water to drink, 
Moses caused a certain tree to be cut down and thrust 



into the stream, and thus sweetened the waters? 

Answer.— As a result of Adam's sin there was nothing 
permanently refreshing for God's people to partake of. 
Those who desired to be his people, those who left the 
world behind them, found a great deal of unsatisfaction, 
if we may so express it, from the provisions of the law, 
which brought only condemnation. In due time, however, 
God caused the death of our Lord Jesus, and through or 
by means of his death— through the message of the ransom 
sacrifice— those who drink of this fact, this water, will 
not find that brackish taste. 

We might say that it would not be unreasonable to 
consider that there is a correspondency of this at the 
present time. During the Dark Ages the water of life 

R4603 : page 137 

became very much polluted, and, as a consequence, undesirable. 

When we came to the waters of the Lord's 

Word and found that they were brackish and impure, 

nauseating, not wholesome, the Lord in his providence 

showed us more clearly than we have seen in the past the 

great doctrine of the Ransom, the reason for the cutting 

off of our Lord Jesus in death. Here was the manifestation 

of Divine Love and Mercy. And since we have 

realized this truth; since the truth has come in contact 

with and purified the message of the Dark Ages, we can 

partake of it with refreshment and joy. 

We may not know if this was intended to be a correspondency, 
but we can at least draw some lessons from 
it, the lessons being true whether the matter was intended 
to be thus applied or not. 



SOME TYPES OF THE RESURRECTION 

Question.— Since the Lord arranged very many types 
during the Jewish Age respecting the Gospel Age and 
the future, what would you consider the most important 
type of the resurrection? 

Answer.— If we consider this question as relating especially 
to our Lord we see a number of types that very 
forcefully illustrate his resurrection. The one our Lord 
mentioned should be classed as amongst the most important, 
for two reasons: First, because he mentioned it and 
thus gave it prominence, and second, because it and it 
alone of all the types gives the exact length of time of 
his entombment. Our Lord's words were, "As Jonah was 
three days and three nights in the belly of the fish, so shall 
the Son of man be three days and nights in the heart 

R4603 : page 138 

of the earth," thus indicating that his resurrection would 
be on the third day and that he would be brought forth 



from the grave as Jonah was brought forth from the 
belly of the fish, which he styled "the belly of hell," the 
grave, sheol, the hades condition. 

It would appear, too, from the Apostle's words, that 
we should give prominence to the picture of our Lord's 
resurrection as shown by Abraham's receiving Isaac as 
from the dead, when he had already consecrated him to 
death and was about to slay him, the Lord staying his 
hand and giving him instead another sacrifice. 

We are justified also in supposing that the "wave-sheaf" 
offering was a very prominent illustration or type of 
the resurrection of our Lord, particularly because it occurred 
just at the time which marked the day of his 
resurrection, the morrow after the Sabbath, the fiftieth 
day before Pentecost. This was apparently given to illustrate 
the raising up of our Lord Jesus as "the first-fruits 
unto God," "the first-fruits of them that slept," 
"the first that should rise from the dead." It, therefore, 
is a very beautiful picture. See Lev. 23:10,11,15,16. 

If we think of the types of the world's resurrection 
we see a variety. As has been suggested, the crossing of 
Jordan might be considered a type of the passing out of 
the death condition into Canaan beyond. The Jubilee, 
the restoration of every man to his former estate, is 
certainly a wonderful picture of the "times of restitution 
of all things," of the lifting of humanity up out of sin, 
degradation and death, out of their lost condition, and 
bringing them back to the former estate, full perfection 
of the human nature. 

We would be fully justified, we think, in considering as 
types the miracles of our Lord in awakening some of the 
sleepers— Lazarus, Jairus' daughter and the son of the 
widow of Nain. These were given to us as foreshadowing, 
and therefore in a sense as typifying or illustrating 
the resurrection. 

Another picture of the resurrection, not only the 
awakening, but also the raising up of mankind, is shown in 
the end of the Day of Atonement. When Moses had received 
the blessing for the people as a result of the second 
sprinkling of the blood, he came forth, and, lifting up his 
hands, blessed the people. The people were waiting in 
dust and sackcloth and sorrow because of sin, and now 
the blessing of Moses and Aaron, the Lord's blessing 
through them, signified the removal of that curse and the 
uplifting of the people— their raising up from sorrow to 
rejoicing in the Lord. 



R4603 : page 138 

JOYFUL IN TRIBULATIONS 

"ESTEEMING THE REPROACH OF CHRIST GREATER 
RICHES THAN THE TREASURES OF EGYPT." 



When we consider all thy goodness, Father, 
Thy gentleness, thy tenderness, thy grace, 

Our hearts stir with the mighty impulse 

Thy praise to show in every time and place. 

That all our outward life might show thy praises; 

That other souls might know how good thou art, 
And that our every thought and word and action 

Might show our heart, like thine own perfect heart. 

Thy sons, indeed! and when thy face, O Father, 
Seems turned away, and we are chastened sore, 

We thank thee for thy love so true and faithful 

That scourgeth whom thou lovest more and more. 

We praise thee, since in all thy gentle dealings 
We see thy glory and thy beauty shine, 

And in each act of thine we read so clearly 
The sacred, holy peace of love Divine. 

But, Father, more than all for this we thank thee— 

For privilege to serve and suffer still, 
As did our blessed Lord and holy Master: 

Our sacred joy, since 'tis thy sacred will. 

Thus, Father, spare us not; let fall the death stroke 
Of pain and suffring that our flesh must see. 

But give us grace that in the sharp ordeal, 

Our hearts may yield sweet perfume unto thee. 

We glory in our fleshly tribulation: 

No joy of earth is sweet as pain for thee. 

If pain for thee is sweet, what is the measure 
Of Kingdom joy, our rapture soon to be! 

ETHEL HALSTEAD. 



R4603 : page 138 

THE PRIVILEGE AND POWER OF PRAYER 

"And Jesus spake a parable unto them to this end, that 
men ought always to pray and not to faint."— Luke 18:1- 

TO THE thoughtful, appreciative mind, one of 

the greatest privileges which the Word of 

God offers is that of personal audience and 

communion with the King of kings and 

Lord of lords. When we consider how great 

is our God, and how exalted his station, how 

wonderful is the condescension that thus 

regards our low estate! He it is whose 

glory covereth the heavens, and whose kingdom 

ruleth over the whole universe. He it 

is who is without beginning of days or end of years— 



"From everlasting to everlasting thou art God." He is 
the immortal, the Self-Existing One, "dwelling in the 
light which no man can approach unto, whom no man 
hath seen nor can see." 

The heavens declare his glory and the firmament 
showeth his handiwork. In all his vast universal domain 
there is nothing hidden from him, nor can he be 
wearied by its care. His wisdom, who can fathom? and 
his ways, who can find them out? or who hath been his 
counsellor? His mighty intellect grasps with ease all the 
interests of his wide dominion, from immensity to minutia. 
His eye never slumbers nor sleeps, nor can the smallest 
thing escape his notice, not even a sparrow's fall; and the 
very hairs of our heads are all numbered. It is his skill 
which clothes with life and beauty the grass of the field, 
which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven. 

And are not we, the creatures of his hand, "fearfully 
and wonderfully made," and the subjects, too, of his love 
and care?— "O Lord, thou hast searched me and known 
me. Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising; 
thou understandest my thought afar off. Thou compassest 
my path and my lying down, and art acquainted 

R4603 : page 139 

with all my ways; for there is not a word in my tongue, 
but, lo, O Lord, thou knowest it altogether. Thou hast 
beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me. 

"Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, 
I cannot attain unto it. Whither shall I go from thy 
spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I 
ascend up into heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed 
in the grave, behold thou art there; if I take the wings of 
the morning and dwell in the uttermost part of the sea, 
even there shall thy hand lead me;. ..even the night 
shall be light about me. Yea, the darkness hideth not 
from thee, but the night shineth as the day; the darkness 
and the light are both alike to thee."— Psa. 139:1-12. 

Fallen creatures though we be, from the noble estate 
in which we were created, God so loved our race, even 
while we were yet sinners, as to make provision at great 
cost for our redemption and restitution and subsequent 
eternal glory. And therefore it is— because he loves us— 
that through Christ he extends to us the gracious favor of 
coming to him as children to a father. Wonderful is the 
condescension, wonderful the love and favor of our God! 

Yet our God is a God to be revered. He is not one 
like ourselves, our equal, into whose presence we may 
come without that ceremony and decorum due to his 
glorious person and office. (Job 9:1-35.) The court of 
heaven has regulations and ceremonies of respect and due 
deference which must be complied with by every man 
who would gain an audience with the King of kings; and 
it behooves us to inquire what those regulations are before 
we presume to address him. Here the Word of God 
gives explicit directions. Our Lord Jesus, the appointed 



"days-man" for whom Job so earnestly longed (Job 9:32,33), 
said, "No man cometh unto the Father, but by me. 
I am the way." (John 14:6.) Then he gave us an 
illustration of the manner in which we should address 
him, in what is known as the Lord's prayer.— Matt. 6:9-13. 

The illustration teaches (1) that we (believers in 
Christ) may consider ourselves as in God's estimation reinstated 
(through faith in Christ) to the original position 
of sons of God, and that we may therefore confidently address 
him— "Our Father." (2) It indicates on our part worshipful 
adoration of the high and holy One, and profound 
reverence for the glorious character and attributes of our 
God— "Hallowed be thy name." (3) It expresses full 
sympathy with his revealed plan for a coming Kingdom 
of righteousness, which will be according to his will— 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is 
done in heaven." This shows the attitude of heart to be 
toward righteousness, and fully submitted to the Divine 
will and purpose, that God may work in it to will and to 
do his good pleasure. (4) It expresses in plain and simple 
language its dependence on God for daily needs, and the 
confidence of a child in the Father for the supply of 
those needs out of his abundant fulness— "Give us this 
day our daily bread." (5) It seeks forgiveness for 
trespasses, and recognizes also the obligation thus incurred 
to render the same to those trespassing against us— 
"And forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors"; 
and (6) it seeks to be guarded against temptation and to 
be fortified by God's abounding grace against all the 
wiles of the Adversary— "And abandon us not to trial, 
but preserve us from evil." 

Such are the principles which must ever characterize 
our attitude of mind and heart when we would avail ourselves 
of the privilege of addressing the throne of 
heavenly grace. In brief, our prayers, to be acceptable 
to God, must express confident faith, loving esteem and 
reverence, full sympathy with the Divine Plan and submission 
to the Divine will, child-like dependence upon 
God, acknowledgment of sins and shortcomings and desire 
for forgiveness, with a forgiving disposition on our part 
toward others, and an humble craving for the Divine 
guidance and protection. These may not always all be 
expressed in words, but such must at least be the attitude 
of the soul. 

Those who thus come to God are privileged always to 
have their interests considered at the throne of grace, and 
the welcome we shall always find there may be judged of 
by the cordial invitations to come often and tarry long. 
Well might we hesitate to avail ourselves of such privileges 
were we not thus assured, but having this assurance 
we may come with confidence to the throne of grace. 

The Lord knew how necessary to our spiritual life 
would be this communion with himself. Tempest-tossed 
and tried, how much we need our Father's care and the 
comfort and consolation which his presence and sympathy 
realized imparts. And have not all the meek and 



contrite in heart the promise not only of the occasional 
attentive hearing, but of the abiding presence of both the 
Father and the Son, our Lord Jesus? Jesus said, "He 
that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is 
that loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved of my 
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to 
him. Judas— not Iscariot— saith unto him, Lord, how is 
it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us and not unto the 
world? Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love 
me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, 
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with 
him. "-John 14:21-23. 

The thought which this promise of the abiding presence 
of the Father and Son conveys to our minds is that 
their thought and care and interest will be constantly upon 
us, and that at any instant we may engage the special 
attention of either or both. The same idea is also conveyed 
by the words of the Apostle Peter (I Pet. 3:12)— 
"For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his 
ears are open unto their prayers." And we are urged to 
be "instant in prayer," to "pray always, and not to faint," 
to "pray without ceasing"; for "Like as a Father pitieth 
his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him; for 
he knoweth our frame, he remembereth that we are dust." 
"As the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his 
mercy toward them that fear him," and "As far as the 
east is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions 
from us." Yea, "the mercy of the Lord is from 
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his 
righteousness unto children's children, to such as keep his 
covenant and to those that remember his commandments 
to do them. "-Rom. 12:12; Luke 18:l;IThes. 5:17; 
Psa. 103:13,14,11,12,17,18. 

We cannot come too often, then, to the throne of the 
heavenly grace, if we are of those who can claim the 
abiding presence of the Father and the Son— if we are of 
those who love him and keep his commandments and who 
recognize the Lord Jesus as the only way of access to the 
Father. And even "if any man sin"— be overtaken in a 
fault— so that from his outward conduct he might be 
judged as not loving the Lord, yet, if he repent, let him 
remember that "we have an Advocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ the righteous," who "is the propitiation 
[satisfaction] for our sins," "who also maketh intercession 
for us." "Who," then, "shall lay anything to the charge 
of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that 
condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is 
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who 
also maketh intercession for us."— I John 2:1,2; 
Rom. 8:33,34. 

Wherefore, the Apostle urges, "Seeing, then, that we 

R4603 : page 140 

have a great High Priest that is passed into the heavens, 
Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession; for 



we have not a High Priest which cannot be touched with 
the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted 
like as we are, yet without sin. Let us, therefore, come 
with confidence to the throne of grace, that we may obtain 
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need."— 
Heb. 4:14-16. 

With such urgent and loving invitations let no child 
of God hesitate to come to him often or to tarry long in 
communion and fellowship with him. It is our privilege 
to enter into our closets and shut the doors and pray to 
our Father which seeth in secret, who will reward us 
openly. (Matt. 6:6.) And not only so, but he will go 
with us through all the business and hurry and commotion 
of the day; and at any instant in the midst of cares 
and perplexities we may turn our prayerful thoughts to 
him for wisdom, for strength and Christian fortitude, or 
for comfort and consolation for ourselves or others. And 
though we hear no responding voice, if we are attentive 
to the course of his providence we will shortly see the 
shaping of events and circumstances for our good and the 
good of others in answer to such prayers. Beloved, have 
we not many a time proved this true?— in perplexities, in 
tribulations, in afflictions, in persecutions, in bereavements, 
in temptations and trials? 

In coming to God we need have no fear that he is too 
busy with other matters of greater importance, or that he 
is weary of our coming to him repeatedly with things of 
small importance. It was to assure us against this very 
thing that our Lord spoke the parable of the importunate 
widow, who was heard and answered on account of her 
importunity. In so doing we evince both the earnestness 
of our desires and our faith that our prayers will be answered, 
if we faint not from lack of faith or zeal when 
the answer is delayed, as often it must necessarily be, 
since time is an important element in all God's work. 

All night, until the break of day, Jacob wrestled in 
prayer, saying, "I will not let thee go, unless thou bless 
me." Paul thrice besought the Lord until he was assured 
his grace would be sufficient for him. The Lord himself 
frequently spent whole nights in prayer, and he prayed 
earnestly and with many tears. (Luke 6:12; Matt. 14:23; 
Mark 6:46; 1:35; Luke 5:16; Heb. 5:7.) And the 
Apostle Paul says, "In everything, by prayer and supplication 
[earnest pleading] with thanksgiving, let your requests 
be made known to God."— Phil. 4:6. 

The Apostle himself acted on this principle when he 
urged, in his letter to the Romans, that the saints "strive 
together [Greek agonize] with me in prayers to God for 
me," that he might safely accomplish a certain work which 
seemed to be of the Spirit's leading.— Rom. 15:28-32. 

"In every thing": That signifies that our heavenly 
Father is deeply interested in everything that relates to us 
and ours. What thing is too small for his notice who 
numbers even the very hairs of our heads? In today's 
household or business cares, then, we may have his loving 
sympathy and helpfulness. Do a mother's counsel and a 



father's wisdom seem inadequate to restrain and guide 
aright the wayward course of impetuous and over-confident 
youth, they may bring their cares and fears to the 
Lord; and, as the children cross the threshold to meet the 
world's temptations, his wisdom and providence may be 
invoked to so shape their circumstances and surroundings 
as to show them eventually the sure, safe way and the 
folly of pursuing any other. 

Do business cares perplex and annoy? remember the 
Lord's caution, "Be not overcharged with the cares of 
this life," and the Apostle's warning, "They that will be 
rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many 
foolish and hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction 
and utter ruin; for the love of money is the root of all 
evil, which, while some coveted after, they have erred 
from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many 
arrows. But thou, O man of God, flee these things and 
follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, 
meekness. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on 
eternal life." And, remembering these things, come to the 
throne of the heavenly grace for wisdom and direction as 
to how you may so adjust your temporal affairs as not to 
be overcharged with the cares of this life. It is right to 
be charged with them to the extent of diligence (Rom. 12: 1 1) 
and the utilization of such diligence in the Lord's 
service; but it is the overplus, the corroding care, that 
interferes with peace of mind and communion with God, 
that is to be avoided. 

Does poverty pinch and cause anxious thought? take 
that also to the Lord in prayer; and then, while diligently 
using the means at hand to provide things decent and 
honest, patiently and confidently wait and watch the indications 
of providence, assured that he who feeds the fowl 
of the air, "which neither sow nor reap nor gather into 
barns," and who "clothes the grass of the field, which today 
is and tomorrow is cast into the oven," is both able 
and willing to clothe and feed you and yours. 

And so through all the list of earth's trials and cares, 
its wants and its woes, its bereavements and disappointments 
and calamities and distresses, its failures and shortcomings 
and sins and mistakes, we may take them all to 
the Lord in prayer and receive that strength and sympathy 
and consolation and help we so much need. Let us live 
in the presence of the Father and the Son who have 
promised to abide with us. It will sweeten our days and 
comfort our nights and ease our burdens and lighten our 
cares and brighten our hopes, and, in a word, it will lift 
us above the world into a higher and purer atmosphere. 
Such is the will of heaven concerning us. Let us appreciate 
and avail ourselves of the privilege. 

By all the encouragements of precept and example, 
the Lord assures us that the fervent prayer of a righteous 
man (a justified and consecrated child of God) availeth 
much. (Jas. 5:16.) We are urged also to come in faith. 
Jesus said, "If ye have faith and doubt not.. .all 
things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye 



shall receive." (Matt. 21:22.) As he was addressing 

his consecrated disciples, it must of course be understood 

that all their petitions would be subjected to Divine 

wisdom, and therefore the answers to their prayers, 

though always sure, might not always be in the way expected, 

but they would always be considered and answered 

in some way for their highest good. 

What a blessed privilege, dear fellow-disciples of 
the Lord, is ours, to be "instant in prayer," to "pray 
always"— to lift up our hearts and minds to God at any 
time and in any place and to realize thus daily and hourly 
that the Father and our dear Lord Jesus continually abide 
with us. And then, when the active duties of the day have 
been performed under his eye and supervision, or at any 
time when the soul realizes its necessity, how precious is 
the privilege of entering into our closets and there alone 
with God unburdening our hearts. 

While secret prayer is the blessed privilege of every 
child of God, and one without which his spiritual life cannot 
be sustained, it is also the privilege of Christians to 
unite their petitions at the throne of grace. This united 
prayer is specially commended by the Lord. (Matt. 18:19.) 
"Again I say unto you, that if two of you shall 
agree on earth as touching anything that they shall ask, 

R4603 : page 141 

it shall be done for them of my Father, for where two or 
three are gathered together in my name, there am I in 
the midst of them." 

With such promises as these, together with an experience 
of their fulfilment, who can doubt the love and 
favor of our God and of our Lord and Savior, Jesus 
Christ? Therefore let us be encouraged to pray always 
and not to faint when the answers seem to tarry long, for 
time is often required to work out the deep designs of an 
allwise and loving Providence. Remember the words of 
the angel to Daniel. Daniel said, "While I was speaking 
and praying and confessing my sin and the sin of my 
people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the 
Lord my God, for the holy mountain of my God; yea, 
while I was speaking in prayer," the answer came by the 
hand of an angel who said, "O Daniel, I am now come 
forth to give thee skill and understanding. At the beginning 
of thy supplications the commandment came forth, 
and I am come to show thee; for thou art greatly beloved." 
-Dan. 9:20-23. 

On another occasion, when Daniel had mourned three 
weeks, fasting and praying, because of his inability to 
understand, the angel of the Lord came and said, "Fear 
not, Daniel, for from the first day that thou didst set thine 
heart to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy 
God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy 
words."-Dan. 10:2,3,10-12. 

Even so shall it ever be with all the beloved of the 
Lord. At the beginning of our supplications God begins 



to set in operation the influences and to shape the circumstances 

which are designed to work out the intended blessing 

for us— if we faint not, but continue instant in prayer, 

thereby evincing our continued earnestness of desire, and 

if we confess our sins, and set our hearts to understand, 

and chasten ourselves before him. How many prayers 

are not heard or are hindered because the one who asks 

does not first purify himself of evil in his own heart? 

"Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye 

may consume it upon your lusts"; i.e., you ask selfishly 

and without regard to the will of God. (Jas. 4:3.) But 

to the chastened and sanctified comes the promise— "Before 

they call [reading the desire of the heart even before 

it finds expression in words] I will answer [will 

begin so to shape events as to bring the answer soon or 

later]; and while they are yet speaking I will hear." 

(Isa. 65:23,24.) While this is in connection with a 

prophecy relating to the Lord's people in the Millennial 

Age, it is also true of all his faithful ones of this age. 

Praise the Lord for all his loving kindness even to the 
least of his lowly children! 



R4601 :page 141 

THE REDEMPTION PRICE AND ITS APPLICATION 

"Ye were redeemed, not with corruptible things, such as silver and 
gold. ..but with the precious blood of Christ."— I Pet. 1:18,19; 
I Cor. 6:20. 

OUR Lord's sacrificed life constitutes the 
price of redemption, but his having the 
price and the application of the price are 
properly considered two things. He applied 
the price for believers when "he ascended 
up on high, there to appear in the presence 
of God for us"— the Church, the household 
of faith, the consecrated ones. And the 
Scriptures show us that he will later apply 
this price for all mankind— that it is intended 
for all ultimately, but has not as yet been applied 
for all. 

Hence the Scriptures declare that the "world 
still lieth in the wicked one"; that mankind are still "children 
of wrath." We were "children of wrath even as 
others" still are, but we have escaped the condemnation 
that is on the world, because the merit of Christ's sacrifice 
has been applied on behalf of believers and we came under 
the terms of that application when we believed the Lord, 
turned from sin, accepted the Redeemer by faith, and made 
a consecration. Then we were begotten of the holy Spirit 
of the Lord. 

It might be asked: Since our human life is sacrificed 
at the time of our consecration and begetting of the holy 



Spirit, will it be true that, when the last member of the 
Body of Christ has offered himself in sacrifice and is 
spirit-begotten, all the imputed life rights so sacrificed will 
be in the hands of our Lord? And if this be true, would 
it be necessary for all the Tribulation Class to be 
resurrected before the blood or merit could be applied for 
the sealing of the New Covenant? And again: Might 
not the New Covenant be sealed and the Ancient Worthies 
brought forth as the first-fruits thereof before the 
resurrection of the Tribulation Class? 

The sacrifice is unto the Father and accepted by the 
Father, and, so far as we will be concerned, the matter 
might be considered as ended at the time the last consecrated 
member of the Body of Christ has made his calling 
and election sure. But on the other hand the "great 
company" class entered into an arrangement, not with 
confidence in their own ability to accomplish anything 
for themselves, but because of the specific arrangement 
made that the Redeemer would cover all their sins, all the 
imperfections and shortcomings that were theirs at the 
time of their consecration, which the Apostle speaks of 
as "the sins that are past through the forbearance of 
God." 

The Lord Jesus offered to be their Advocate with the 
Father and to be with them, an ever-present help in time 
of trouble. He promised to be their Advocate in respect 
to all the trials and difficulties of life, and in their battlings 
with the flesh and in the occasional manifestations of the 
imperfections of the flesh, contrary to the will of the New 
Creature. He agreed to advocate for all this, and hence 
his interest in these members of the "great company" will 
continue after the "little flock" class shall have been dealt 
with and shall have passed beyond the vail. And since 
the basis of his advocacy is the merit of his sacrifice, the 
maintaining of his standing as their Advocate would seem 
to require that he should retain for this purpose, in the 
hands of the Father, the merit of his sacrifice, and hence 
would not yet apply it for the sealing of the New Covenant 
for Israel and through Israel for all the world. 

In the type, the sending away of the scape-goat into 
the wilderness toward the close of the Day of Atonement 
and no account being given of its destruction, might seem 
to imply that the "great company" and their experiences 
would not be taken into consideration at all beyond the 
time of the sending away of the goat; but the argument 
foregoing seems to prove conclusively that the merit of 
Christ must continue applicable until the last member of 
the "great company" class shall have suffered the complete 
destruction of the flesh which he failed to give up 
voluntarily. 



R4603 : page 142 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER 



DIVINE PROVIDENCE permitting, Brother 

Russell and the party of friends accompanying 

him on the trip to Palestine, expect to 

have the privilege of celebrating the antitypical 

Passover Supper, commemorating 

our Lord's death, by partaking of the 

emblems, the bread and the wine, in Jerusalem, 

and in the "upper room" in which, 

according to tradition, the Lord and the 

Apostles partook of the last Passover Supper 

together, and where the Lord instituted that service which 

so wonderfully sets forth his death and the privilege 

afforded the "members in particular of his Body" of 

being broken together with him, and of participating in 

the communion (common-union) of his sacrificial blood, 

by drinking the cup with him. 

That all who desire may be together in spirit at that 
season and have their thoughts and prayers directed along 
the same lines at the same time, we submit a table of the 
relative time of day it will be in other places:— 

7 p.m., Friday, April 22, at Jerusalem, will correspond 
to the following time, on same day, at these places:— 

6 p.m. in Berlin, Germany, and surroundings. 

5 p.m. in London and British Isles. 

I p.m. in Maritime Provinces. 

12 noon, in New York, N.Y.; Washington, D.C., 
and all Eastern time cities. 

I I a.m. in Chicago, St. Louis and all Central time 
cities. 

10 a.m. in Denver and all Mountain time cities. 

9 a.m. in San Francisco and Pacific Coast time cities. 

The Congregation of the Brooklyn Tabernacle will 
gather together to celebrate the Memorial at 13-17 Hicks 
street in the evening of the same day at 8 o'clock. As 
before announced in THE TOWER no special invitation is 
extended to distant friends, as the best interests are perhaps 
served by each group gathering together in its respective 
locality. However, those living in places which 
present no favorable opportunity for observing the event 
will be welcomed at any of the classes anywhere. 



R4604 : page 142 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

page 142 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Richest greetings in the name of Christ. Permit me to 
express my heartfelt appreciation of your loyalty to the 
Lord and his precious Truth; also your earnestness and 
zeal in striving to do God's will, daily laying down your 
life in his service, spending and being spent, even though 



the more you love the less you are loved. 

Dear Brother, I have enjoyed "Present Truth" for the 
last four years, and I can truly say by his grace that these 
few years have been the grandest season of my life. 

Pardon me for not having written to you before this, 
for I really wish to say that I appreciate your labor of love 
on behalf of the household of faith. My only regret is that 
I am not able to express to you my love and gratitude for 
your faithfulness (words fail me to thus express my feelings), 
but trust, my dear Brother, you shall be able to 
receive these few lines in the spirit in which they are sent. 

When I look back into the past, I realize how dark was 
my way before the eyes of my understanding were open. 
Oh! I cannot thank our Heavenly Father enough for permitting 
me to see and appreciate this glorious light of his 
Truth, thus unfolding his great love to even me, the least 
of the least. Oh! I know I have not been worthy, but 
trust that I shall (by his grace) go on to the end, daily 
to show forth his praises, who has called me to this precious 
Truth. 

I also wish to say that I have received a great help, 
and a rich blessing, since taking the Vow; it is certainly 
helping to keep on the whole armor, while some who have 
not taken the Vow are not withstanding the darts of the 
Evil One. 

Assuring you that I ever remember you before the 
throne of grace, I am and hope to remain, 

Your humble and loving Brother, 

F. MANGOLD, --, N.Y. 



R4604 : page 142 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Your kind letter to the Pilgrims and Colporteurs at 
hand, which was very much appreciated, and I will indeed 
endeavor to profit by suggestions. We have been in 
the Colporteur work now for seven years, and these years 
have indeed been the most blessed of all others. We have 
by the Lord's grace delivered 6,271 books this year as 
against 7,088 last year. We trust that we may prove so 
faithful that the Lord will permit us to serve to the very 
end. It would be hard to do anything else; and if faithful 
we need not, but may continue for 1,000 years in this 
glorious work. How wonderful that the Lord arranged 
his work in such a way that we can all help and receive 
the blessing connected therewith! 

I wish, dear Brother Russell, to assure you of my continued 
and growing love for you as the Lord's servant 
over the harvest work. I am very thankful to the dear 
Lord that my faith in you, and in this being the whole 
Truth and nothing but the Truth, has not been shaken. 

It seems very clear to me that if I have been reckoned 
perfect, and then say I need a mediator (a reconciler), I 
ignore my reckoned perfection. Surely I would want to 



know in advance what I am to receive in place of the 
blessed Truth, before I cast it aside. 

I feel sure that the Lord's grace will be sufficient for 
you, for our Master said, No man is able to pluck them 
out of my Father's hand. Nevertheless, let me assure you 
of my deep sympathy and also appreciation for your labor 
of love. I received all my knowledge of "present truth" 
through the DAWN-STUDIES, and surely, if my heart is 
right, I would esteem you very highly in love for your 
work's sake. May the dear Lord bless you more and more. 
May he pour you out such a blessing that there shall not 
be room enough to receive it. I remember you personally 
in my prayers daily, that you may continue to abide in his 
love. Pray for me, dear Brother. I thank you very much 
for the cross and crown pin; you may send it to my address 
here. 

Yours in the glorious harvest work, 

RAY VAN HYNING,-Ohio. 



MY DEAR BROTHER AND BELOVED PASTOR:- 

I thank God and take courage, because of the marvelous 
light that is now shining upon my so darkened 
horizon; and, praise God, it is to shine brighter and 
brighter unto the perfect day. Running from one denomination 
to another, thinking myself satisfied and soon 
finding myself more thirsty than ever, oh how I was 
craving for the real water of life! At last I landed 
among the tongue-people, who got under the power. I 
cried to God night and day to give me this new tongue. 

R4604 : page 143 

I was sure now that if I could only get this tongue I 
should always be satisfied. I starved myself for days 
and weeks in order to "get down flesh." I was soon a 
veritable skeleton and, of course, commenced "to shake" 
from nervousness. Then the tongue-people commenced to 
operate on my jaws and soon I was declared of the interpreter 
as "speaking in a new tongue." I kept fasting, 
kept nervous, kept shaking and kept "talking away" as 
long as I felt a nervous strain; I thought "the spirit" was 
upon me. 

Yet under all this I am sure God saw my earnest heart, 
and sent me deliverance. Two sisters of the tongue-people 
were the cause. One, the foremost in the ranks 
of the tongue-movement, was under the power; the other 
had a vision. "I see a hand," said the sister. "It's a 
child's hand," said the sister under the power and supposed 
to be used by the holy Ghost to answer all questions. 
"No, it is a grown person's hand," said the sister 
in her vision. "Ah, yes! (as correcting herself) the 
Savior's hand," said the sister under the power. I was 
sitting listening to them, and I thought at the moment, "If 
the holy Spirit is giving a vision to one and explaining 



it through another, would it not correspond"? At once 
the scales fell from my eyes, so to speak. From that 
time the demons lost their control over me more and 
more. Soon after a friend (not in "present truth") 
handed me THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES. I was offered 
this book six years before, but would not accept it, answering 
that my Bible was enough for me. He kept on 
advising me to read it, so at last I told him I would look 
it over. I had scarcely opened its pages when I saw 
things explained, according to Scripture which I had long 
been looking for. I at once began to study it night and 
day. I can now say, "glory to God in the highest." His 
choicest blessing upon you, dear Brother Russell. 
One of the smallest of his little ones, C. J. JENSEN. 

IN REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I am duly in receipt of your kind letter of the 5th instant 
and rejoice with you in the peace and joy that has 
come to your heart through a clearer appreciation of the 
love of our God as it shines in the face of Christ Jesus 
our Redeemer, and the wonderful Gospel in him. Truly, 
our God "has put a new song into our mouths, even the 
praises of our God," and we go forth with great rejoicing 
in the privileges that we have of being witnesses of these 
things. 

So walking in our dear Lord as you have received him, 
may you become rooted and grounded and built up in him 
that at his revelation you may be granted an abundant 
entrance into the everlasting Kingdom. 

Very sincerely your Brother and fellow-servant. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings to you and the dear co-laborers at Brooklyn. 
Some months ago a sister handed me the report of expenditures 
of a mission in India. I wrote to the address, 
telling how wonderfully God is revealing to his people 
his wonderful Plan, mentioning among other things 
Daniel's prophecies, and saying that if they would like to 
read along lines which have been specially helpful to me I 
would be glad to send them some literature. I heard 
nothing for some time and was about to give up all hope. 
But while in Chicago a letter came which I will copy and 
enclose. This sister who handed me the report, Sister 
Pauline Martens, of Ft. Wayne, says these native missionaries 
are strong characters, but, as you will see by 
the letter, lack light. 

I have already sent "Food for Thinking Christians," 
"What is the Soul," "Our Lord's Return," and several 
other tracts, also several copies of PEOPLES PULPIT. 

I had no extra copy of Vol. I and, thinking you would 
be interested in this matter, I copied the letter for you. 

Your sister in his service and in the hope of a share 



in the "First Resurrection." B. H. ROSS. 

THE REPLY 

MY DEAR SISTER IN CHRIST:- 

I am very late in answering your kind letter, but I 
know you will pardon the delay, as my illness this year 
has caused it. My head and my eyes have troubled me 
for several months, but the Lord is faithful and he has 
kept me. I am much better now and can attend to almost 
all the work the Lord has put into my hands. 

I shall be so glad and so thankful to you for the reading 
you said you would send me regarding the prophecies 
of Daniel, if I wanted them. Not only I, but my friend 
and sister in the Lord, Miss Chandra, also will thankfully 
receive and read what you send. I had been praying the 
Lord specially and I regard your offer as an answer to 
my prayer. 

The Lord bless you abundantly above all that we can 
ask or think. Wishing you a very happy New Year with 
rich gifts from the Lord unto his glory, 

I am gratefully yours in him, 

SHORAT CHUCHEBUTTY.-India. 

IN REPLY 

DEAR SISTER:- 

In the absence of Brother Russell we are acknowledging 
your kind letter. 

With you we are much interested in the dear one in 
India concerning whom you advise us. We know that it 
would be in harmony with Brother Russell's desire to 
send this brother at least the first volume of SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, but are uncertain whether you request us to mail 
this copy to you that you might remail it to him, or if 
you desire that we forward it to him from here. We 
await information on this point, when we will bring the 
entire matter to the attention of Brother Russell. 

Yours in the love and service of the Truth. 



page 143 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

My greetings to you will be found in Numbers 6:24-26. 
My last and first letter took more of the form introductory. 
The present is indited as a mark of praise and 
thanksgiving to our Heavenly Father for the wonderful 
unfolding of his Word, granted me through a study of 
your valuable works-DAWN-STUDIES, Tracts, TOWERS, 
etc. I feel, dear Brother, caught away from the present 
evil world and, like some new flower, transplanted in "the 
world which is to come," as with patient eagerness I read 
THE TOWER as delivered. 

At time of writing I have read Vols. 1, 2, 3 and have 



gone far enough into Vol. 4 to be able to repeat my eulogy 
of 1, 2 and 3 and say— "Wonderful! Nobody ever has told 
me before." 

My vocation is that of a preacher; the congregation to 
which I minister is in a good measure interested in the 
wondrous things being made known through God to those 
having the hearing ear and eye of faith. 

Why preachers of Christendom in general will have 
nothing to do with your valuable writings is accounted 
for by saying they have greater privileges, better salaries, 
and higher praise in the service of the world and of the 
devil, than in the blessed service of the King of kings. 

Your yoke-fellow, H. WILSON CUST. 



page 146 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, 
five vols.; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; 
in Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. 
each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the 
same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 
each. 



page 145 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI MAY 1 No. 9 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Counting the Blood Common 147 

The Faith Seed and the Law Seed 148 

Going Outside the Camp 150 

What Law Was Weak? 151 

"When I Shall Take Away Their Sins" 151 

"They Hated Me Without a Cause" 152 

My Trustful Obedience (Poem) 153 

The Power of a Woman 153 

The Binding of "The Strong Man" 154 

The Fulfilment of Prophecy 155 

Ancient Worthies— How Perfected? 157 

Yearly Requests for the Traveling Brethren 158 

Some Interesting Letters 158 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 159 

Brother Russell's June Convention Tour 159 

page 146 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



SERMONS IN THE NEWSPAPERS 

The Pittsburg Post is undertaking the publication of the 
"Brooklyn Tabernacle Bible Studies," and will continue them 
if encouraged sufficiently. The clubbing prices are $5.70 per 
year by carrier and $3.50 by mail. The Pittsburg Dispatch 
still continues the publication of the sermons. The Indianapolis 
Star also publishes the Bible Studies at the same clubbing 
rates. The Weekly New York Tribune Farmer is now 
publishing the sermons, and clubs with THE TOWER for $1.50. 



SERMONS IN CHICAGO "INTER-OCEAN" 

The PEOPLES PULPIT Sermons are now being published in 
the Weekly Inter-Ocean and Farmer of Chicago, 111. By our 
special clubbing arrangement we are able to furnish this 
paper for 50 cents in addition to your regular TOWER subscription. 
The Inter-Ocean is a good paper, and we should 
receive many subscriptions. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR JUNE 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered: (1) 62; (2) 133; (3) 135; (4) 191; (5) 
109; (6) 260; (7) 267; (8) 67; (9) 95; (10) 130; 
(11) 264; (12) 288; (13) 222; (14) 245; (15) 33; (16) 
93; (17) 152; (18) 145; (19) 176; (20) 284; (21) 4; 
(22) 238; (23) 87; (24) Vow; (25) 246; (26) 127; 
(27) 325; (28) 7; (29) 94; (30) 107. 



R4605 : page 147 

COUNTING THE BLOOD COMMON 

"Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought 
worthy who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and 
hath counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he 



was sanctified, an unholy thing [a common thing], 
and hath done despite to the spirit 
of favor."— Hebrews 10:29. 

THE APOSTLE is here evidently contrasting 
Moses and his Law with the Antitypical 
Moses and the greater Law. Any one who 
despised the Law of Moses, the arrangement 
made and established through the 
typical Law Covenant, was condemned to 
death, a sentence from which he is to be released 
through the merit of Christ. Since 
that condemnation was merely of a temporal 
character this does not affect his 
eternal interests. 

It is evident that there is a difference between these 
two condemnations— that if any one should come under 
the condemnation of the Antitypical Moses his punishment 
would be even more severe. This severer, or "sorer 
punishment," we understand to be the "Second Death"— 
utter annihilation. If any one despises the Law of God, 
in any particular, as expressed through Christ and the 
New Covenant arrangement, he will be worthy of the 
Second Death. This principle, we see, will apply all 
through the Millennial Age, in the sense that any and 
every one who, after being brought to a knowledge of the 
provisions and favors that God has brought to him 
through Christ, shall then treat the matter lightly and fail 
to reciprocate such love, fail to be obedient to this arrangement 
for his relief, will be counted unworthy of receiving 
any more favor of God and will go into the 
Second Death. Evidently, however, the Apostle is not 
here considering what will happen at the end of the 
Millennial Age, and we merely mention it incidentally to 
show the wide scope of the comparison between Moses and 
Christ. 

The Apostle is not applying this text, however, to the 
world, but to the Church. All the context shows that he 
is addressing the Church, those who have been begotten 
of the holy Spirit, those whose sins have been covered by 
the imputation of Christ's righteousness and who, in the 
strength of that covering, are justified, have presented 
their bodies living sacrifices. For what purpose do we 
thus make consecration? It is in answer to our Lord's 
invitation to drink of his "Cup"; to be baptized into his 
death; to suffer with him as members of his Body, that we 
may reign with him and be his members on the plane of 
glory, members of the Spiritual Israel, the Spiritual Seed 
of Abraham, for the great work of blessing natural 
Israel and through natural Israel, all the families of the 
earth. 

So, then, the Apostle, in bringing this matter to our 
attention, is discussing the Church and what will happen 
if any of us— not any of us who have merely turned from 
sin, and have realized that Christ is the great Atoner 
for our sins— no, but those of us who have been justified 



through faith in his blood and have been sanctified— those 
of us who should then fall away. 

We remember that on the night of our Lord's institution 
of the last Supper, the same night in which he was betrayed, 
when he took the cup he said, "This cup is my 
blood of the New Covenant, which is shed for many for 
the remission of sins." God's intention regarding this 
blood, as the blood that will seal the New Covenant, is 
that it should be efficacious to the remission of all the sins 
of Adam and his children. This was the purpose, the object 
for which our Lord's blood was shed. "This is my 
blood," not your blood. It is the blood or life that I am 
giving, that I consecrated when I was begotten, and that 
I am to relinquish today upon the cross (for it was then 
the same day or part of the same day in which he was 
crucified). This which is mine today— the blood that will 
seal the New Covenant between God and men— I invite 
you to participate in. "Drink ye all of it." All of you 
drink of it and drink all of it. Leave none. The invitation 
to participate in this blood, this cup, is never to 
be given to any other people or class but you— you who 
are specially called for this purpose. Not only you 
Apostles to whom I now speak, but all those who shall 
believe on me through your word, and who similarly shall 
make this consecration and undertake to be baptized into 
my death, I invite to drink of my cup. 

The Apostle asks concerning this cup of which we participate 
in the communion, "Is it not the participation of 
the blood of Christ"? (I Cor. 10:16.) We answer, 
Yes. Is not the blood of Christ the blood of the New 
Covenant? Are we not, therefore, participating in the 
blood of the New Covenant? In the participation, 
therefore, in that blood, by the invitation of our Lord, 
are we not sharers in his "Cup" and all that pertains to 
it? Yes. What does this mean to us? A great deal. 
We should be very thankful for the great privilege we 
have been accorded to share in his "Cup," to be "baptized 
into his death." As the Apostle Paul declares in the 

R4605 : page 148 

third chapter of Philippians, I count all things as loss that 
I might win Christ; that I might have fellowship in his 
suffering; that I might be baptized into his death; share 
his "Cup" of suffering; so should we. Paul counted 
every other interest and consideration as of no value in 
comparison with this great privilege of the Gospel Age, 
which is accorded us. 

Now, if we should ever lose sight of this wonderful 
privilege, if we should ever come to the place where we 
fail to appreciate the fact that we have been invited to 
share in our Lord's "Cup," have been invited to participate 
with him in this blood of the New Covenant, this 
blood which is to ratify, to seal the New Covenant, it 
would be doing despite to all these privileges and favors 
which have been specially given to us, but never given to 



any other people in the world and never will be given 
again, a great privilege never offered to the angels, but 
offered only to the Lord Jesus Christ himself, and those 
who would have his spirit during this age. 

If, then, we lose our appreciation of that "Cup" and 
say that it is only an ordinary thing, only such as all 
nominal Christians have thought it to be; only turning 
away from sin and trying to live an upright life; it is not a 
special sacrifice; it is not a participation in the blood of 
Christ at all, nor drinking of his "Cup," then we are 
despising and rejecting all the privileges that were offered 
to us specially, above those offered to any other 
people. It would signify that we had despised the whole 
arrangement and that something was wrong with our 
hearts— providing, however, we did it intentionally, willingly, 
knowingly, after we had seen that this is the privilege 
of sacrifice, after we had known that we were accepted 
as members of Christ, to "suffer with him, that we 
might also reign with him." 

For all such as have ever had this clearer knowledge 
and appreciation, to turn away is to reject this "blood of 
the Covenant," and to do despite to it, and to fail to use 
the privileges offered. In undertaking to use these privileges 
they had first, of necessity, to make the sacrifice of 
the earthly nature. It therefore follows that there is nothing 
left for them, for they have scorned the new nature 
and the Lord's provisions which are obtainable only 
through participation in the sacrifice of Christ. No 
opportunity for restitution is left them. Hence the only 
thing for them is that which is appropriate for those who 
despise God's arrangement after they have once understood 
it, and that is the Second Death. 

The "sorer punishment" mentioned by the Apostle 
(Heb. 10:29) is the "sin unto death." Are we competent 
to point out who have committed that sin? For 
our own part we would prefer not to exercise judgment 
in the matter, but merely to say that such judgment is for 
the Lord. We will not make any decision until we see the 
Lord's judgment. 

The Apostle says that we are not to judge one another. 
If, for instance, you should say, I believe that Jesus died 
and that he is our Redeemer, but I have lost that idea which 
I once had of our being invited to become dead with him; 
to share with him in his suffering at the present time 
and later the glory that shall follow— should we then say 
to you, Oh, you have committed the sin unto death; 
you have despised the blood of the Covenant wherewith 
you have been sanctified, and therefore, having no restitution 
privileges to go back to, you have practically gone 
into the Second Death condition? We answer, No. We 
do not understand that it would be for us to judge you or 
to decide respecting you, because we do not know to what 
extent your previous declarations were true. We do not 
know that you ever understood what you were doing when 
you thought that you had made a full consecration. Perhaps 
you did not understand yourself. Therefore, we 



prefer to say that since we are not sure in the matter it 
is not for us to judge. However, we are to remember 
what the Scriptures say in this connection, "The Lord will 
judge his people." If, therefore, we should see that, 
after you had rejected the blood of the Covenant by which 
you have been sanctified or specially set apart as a sacrifice, 
as a member of the Body, God had turned you aside 
apparently and had withdrawn all light from you and had 
thrust you out of his favor, to the extent that we could 
see this, we would be justified in saying to ourselves at 
least, whether we mentioned it to another or not, that the 
Lord was dealing with you. 

We cannot imagine that if anyone would reject the 
Lord in any sense of the word it would still leave him in 

R4606 : page 148 

the light of Truth. We must understand that if anyone 
rejects the Lord, the light of Truth will gradually pass 
from him, and he will see no more than many do, no more 
than a nominal church-goer or any worldly person. Such 
passing into outer-darkness is a sign that the Lord's favor 
has been lost. To what extent it has been lost we might 
not wish to determine, but if, in conjunction with this, 
there is manifested the character of the Adversary, the 
spirit of Satan— anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife— then 
we should conclude that the Spirit of the Lord had left 
and that the loser was dead— "twice dead, plucked up by 
the roots"— Jude 12. 

It would not be worth while to pray longer for such 
a one, especially after we had done all in our power. God 
is willing to do all that can be done, but he has certain 
fixed laws and principles, and if anyone has once enjoyed 
these and then scorned them, the Lord would not change 
his principles for any prayers, even though offered carefully 
with tears. 



R4606 : page 148 

THE FAITH SEED AND THE LAW SEED 

"Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace; to the end that 
the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only 
which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the faith 
of Abraham, who is the father of us all."— Rom. 4:16. 

PAUL HAS elsewhere shown that there is 
but the one Seed of Abraham (Christ) in the 
chief or special sense, in the highest sense. 
And he tells us that it is our privilege and 
"calling" to be members of the Body of 
Christ. "If ye be Christ's, then are ye 
Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the 
promise." We who are not Abraham's seed 



according to the flesh, are thus counted as 
Abraham's Seed because of our faith and 
because we become members of the Spiritual Seed. We 
are not to suppose that this is trifling with language and 
that the Lord would say "Abraham's Seed" and then 
accept as Abraham's seed those who are not his seed, 
who are not of his posterity at all. That would be to 
make his language delusive and ensnaring and deceptive. 
It must be, therefore, that our Lord Jesus is the "Seed of 
Abraham," not only according to the flesh, but that he is 
also the Seed of Abraham according to the Spirit, on a 
higher plane than his fleshly relationship to Abraham; 
and it is on this higher plane that we are members of our 
Lord's Body. We are members of him as New Creatures; 

R4606 : page 149 

we are members of the Christ Spiritual, and not of the 
Man Christ Jesus. 

It is important, therefore, for us to see how Jesus became 
the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, and to see that he 
was not the Spiritual Seed of Abraham and could not 
have fulfilled those conditions as the Man Christ Jesus. 
For instance: God promised that "in the Seed of Abraham 
all the families of the earth should be blessed"; but the 
Man Jesus could not bless the world after the manner that 
God had implied— could not give them eternal life. He 
could not give it to them because he did not have any 
more eternal life than he needed for himself. The only 
way in which he would be able to give eternal life would 
be according to the Divine Plan, viz., that he lay down 
his earthly life in accordance with the Divine arrangements 
and will; that God would then give him, as a reward 
for this obedience, the higher nature, the divine 
nature, with its glory and honor on the higher plane, and 
that this would leave him in possession of the earthly 
rights which he had as a man and which he did not forfeit 
by disobedience. It would leave him these as an 
asset or fund of blessing, to give to mankind. 

THE SPIRITUAL SEED 

So, then, the only way in which our Lord could be the 
Seed of Abraham to bless all the families of the earth 
would be as a New Creature, the New Creature Christ 
Jesus. The New Creature on the spiritual plane has a 
gift to bestow and mankind on the earthly plane is needing 
this very blessing which he has to give. And it is 
this Spiritual Christ of whom we are invited to become 
members— this great Mediator. And in order for us or 
for any Jew to become members of this Spiritual Christ, 
this Spiritual Seed of Abraham, one thing is necessary; 
viz., not a certain earthly relationship to Christ or a certain 
earthly relationship to Abraham, but a begetting of 
the holy Spirit to this same spiritual nature that Christ 
possesses. Whoever, therefore, through the merit of Christ, 



is enabled to offer his body a living sacrifice, acceptable 
to God, and does this, will get the promised reward 
to the same nature that Christ possesses— will become a 
member of his Spiritual Body. Hence this Spiritual 
Seed may be comprised of people of the natural seed of 
Abraham and of those not of his natural seed, as in our 
case. We who are Gentiles are now becoming members 
of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, but we could not become 
members of the natural seed; we were never such. 

As the Apostle intimates in this text, it is the Divine 
purpose to have two seeds of Abraham; one of them the 
Spiritual Seed, to which we have just referred, and the 
other the natural seed of Abraham. The one of these, 
he says, is developed according to the spirit, according to 
grace, favor. We do not come into this relationship 
through the Law, but we come into it through participation 
with Christ. It is the favor of being permitted to 
present our bodies living sacrifices, acceptable to our Redeemer, 
of having this sacrifice accepted by God and of 
having a share in the reward. This is the favor or grace 
which now comes to us as the Spiritual Seed, in which 
we have participation to the extent of our faithfulness to 
the Lord. 

This is the Seed, then, that we find represented by the 
"stars of heaven." The other seed of Abraham is likened 
unto the "sands of the sea." This Scripture tells us that 
this seed, the earthly seed of Abraham, is a seed that will 
be developed under the Law. We know from the same 
Apostle's writings that this Law could not be the Law 
that God instituted with the Jews at the hands of Moses. 
That Law did not bring any of them everlasting life. It 
did not bring forth any of the seed of Abraham to 
perfection. 

How, then, shall we understand the Apostle in connection 
with this statement, that some of the seed are to 
be of the Law, when the Law could make nothing perfect? 
We answer that he was here pointing back to that 
Law Covenant which was instituted through Moses, and 
in the other expression he is pointing forward to the Law 
Covenant of the future, which will be instituted at the 
end of this Gospel Age, and which is called the New [Law] 
Covenant. It will be the same as the one just referred to, 
but it will have a better mediator, one who will be able to 
give eternal life and all the blessings God intended for 
them and promised. We see, then, according to other 
Scriptures, that all the nations will have the privilege of 
coming in under this New [Law] Covenant arrangement, 
of which Christ is the Mediator and of which we are becoming 
members, so that by the end of the Millennial 
Age, his Seed will include all the saved on the human 
plane. All will get eternal life who shall comply with 
the conditions— "the number of whom will be as the sands 
of the seashore for multitude." 

Hence this statement, "that which is of the Law, and 
that which is of grace," refers to those who are now the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham through grace, and to those 



who will become the seed of Abraham under the New 
Covenant arrangement during the Millennial Age by 
obedience to the Law under the better Mediator than 
Moses, under the great antitypical Moses, Christ the Head 
and the Church his Body, whom God is now raising up 
during this Gospel Age. He raised up the Head eighteen 
centuries ago. The Body will soon be fully raised up 
and joined to the Head in glory. 

THE EARTHLY SEED 

While the Ancient Worthies will be a separate and distinct 
class from the remainder of mankind, and while 
they are to have a special reward for their faith, in that 
they will "have a better resurrection," will come forth 
from the tomb in full human perfection; nevertheless, 
they will be under the Law, because there seem to be 
only two ways by which any could be brought into harmony 
with God. First, there will be those who sacrifice 
the earthly interests in the present time and are begotten 
to the spirit nature and are thus counted in as members 
of the Spiritual Seed; and secondly, those who will 
come in under the New [Law] Covenant, of which the 
Spiritual Seed will be the Mediator. As Abraham and 
the other Ancient Worthies cannot be included in the 
Spiritual Seed, the only place to put them, logically, is 
with the natural seed; and that they were not begotten to 
the spiritual nature is clearly evidenced by our Lord's 
words when he said of John the Baptist, "There hath not 
arisen a greater Prophet than John the Baptist, but the 
least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than he." He 
thus clearly marked the dividing line between those in the 
Kingdom class and those who cannot be in that class, 
however great they may be. We must understand, therefore, 
that the Ancient Worthies, in their perfection, will 
be subject to the rules and regulations of the Millennial 
Kingdom and from the very start will have the full perfection 
of all that the remainder of mankind will be able 
to attain during the Millennium. That special privilege 
will be a reward for the faith they manifested, and will 
gain for them participation in the Kingdom work, to be 
agents of the spiritual class and to attain the perfection of 
the human nature instantly, instead of having to climb 

R4607 : page 150 

up gradually out of imperfection, as will the remainder of 
the world of mankind. 

As we have already suggested, we think there are 
statements in the Scriptures which imply that God intends 
ultimately to give them a place on the spiritual plane, but 
we see no way in which they can come to that plane under 
the arrangements thus far outlined in the Word of God, 
up to the completion of the Millennial Age. It is our 
thought, however, that instead of becoming members of 
the Bride of Christ, their place will be rather with the 



"Great Company," serving before the throne, and not 
seated in the throne. 



R4607 : page 150 

GOING OUTSIDE THE CAMP 

"Let us go unto him, without the Camp, bearing 
the reproach with him."— Heb. 13:13. 

ISRAEL had become God's people in a particular 

sense, and had indicated their desire to 

be his people before they came into this 

"Camp" condition; and the "Camp" and all 

of the arrangement of the tribes and their 

relationship to the Tabernacle were significant 

of this fact. Nevertheless, they were 

not in accord with God, because of their imperfection. 

Hence, in order for them to remain 

in Covenant relationship with God, it 

was necessary for the priests to offer the Atonement Day 

sacrifices. 

The Camp typified partly what now is a fact and partly 
a condition that will obtain during the Millennial Age. 
At that time many of the world of mankind will be desirous 
of being in accord with God— that is, in their 
hearts, they will prefer to be right rather than wrong; 
they will prefer to be in accord rather than out of accord; 
and this picture of the "Camp," we understand, represents 
all who will ultimately come into accord, all who 
will ultimately wish for righteousness and will desire to 
do God's will. 

The "Camp" condition at the present time, however, 
we could not think would represent the world in the broad 
sense, but rather the worldly church. It would represent 
those who with more or less desire wish to be in accord 
with God and who profess his name, but through ignorance 
or superstition or love of the world are not in 
the proper attitude of heart to receive the deep things of 
God, the spiritual things, at the time in which this spiritual 
work, the work of Atonement, is being carried on. We 
do not understand that these were ever begotten of the 
Spirit. They are merely moral, or outward Christians— 
the Christian world— Christendom. These, we understand, 
are now represented in the Camp condition. In 
our Lord's day the Camp condition did not represent 
Christendom, but the Jewish nation. It did not include 
Gentiles at all— the world in that sense of the word— but 
merely the Jewish nation, which typically represented all 
those who will desire to come into accord with God. 

In his day, therefore, our Lord did not go outside to 
the Gentiles, and in speaking of the world he did not mean 
the heathen. When he said, "Marvel not if the world 
hate you; it hated me before it hated you," he was speaking 



of the world from the standpoint of natural Israel. 
The heathen were not taken into account, not having had 
sufficient knowledge to determine whether they would or 
would not be God's people. 

But during this Gospel Age the Camp does not consist 
of the Jewish people because matters have changed. 
The Camp today represents Christendom. For our Lord 
in his day to have gone outside the Camp would have been 
to go outside the nominal church system of his time and 
to do the will of the Father irrespective of their support; 
and for us now to follow him thus outside the Camp would 
be to go outside of the present environments, viz., outside 
of Christendom, in the sense of ignoring the views and 
teachings, the approval, the snares, of Christendom. It 
would mean to go outside of their favor, outside of their 
influence and social position. The Camp condition here 
does not represent people who are aliens in the sense of 
being evil-intentioned or of wilfully rejecting God, but 
those who make some outward show and claim of being 
God's people. 

Some might be inclined to ask why could it be understood 
with this view of the matter, that the Day of 
Atonement sacrifices, the sacrifices of this Gospel Age, 
are "in behalf of all the people," the entire world of 
mankind? 

We answer that they are for all the people, in the 
sense that all people will have the opportunity of availing 
themselves of the privileges of these sacrifices, of the 
benefits derived therefrom; but, strictly speaking, they 
will not be for all the people, because they will be applicable 
only to those who will become, in the Millennial 
Age, true Israelites. If any one refuses the opportunity 
of becoming of the "Seed of Abraham" he will not get 
any benefit from the Atonement; he will be refusing his 
share of the ransom by refusing to come under the arrangement 
that will then obtain— that will then be opened 
up by the great Mediator. Just as in Israel's time, if 
there were any Gentiles who desired to become Jewish 
proselytes and who would conform to the terms and conditions 
appertaining to the joining of the Jewish nation, 
they might become Israelites with all the privileges of an 
Israelite; but if any declined those terms and conditions, 
then such failed to become Israelites, failed to get any of 
the blessings that were under the Mosaic Law. And 
similarly during the Millennial Age: Anyone who will 
refuse to come under the terms and conditions of the 
New Covenant, and to come into relationship with the 
Mediator, will fail to get the blessings, fail to get the 
restitution, and all the privileges that will come through 
restitution, and consequently will fail to gain eternal life. 

In view of this answer the question may arise, In what 
sense does the nominal church system of today and the 
nominal church system of our Lord's day constitute a picture 
of that class which will be dealt with under the New 
Covenant arrangements of the future, as the people of 
God, the Israel of God, the Camp class? 



We answer that because these people, the Jews in their 
day, and nominal Christians today, profess a desire to be 
in accord with God, profess to be his people, profess to 
desire to do his will, they are properly representative of 
this class who during the Millennial Age will be desirous 
of doing God's will. The people are now, through the 
various false theologies and the Great Adversary's misleading 
mistaught doctrines of devils instead of the 
Truth; traditions of Elders instead of the Word of God. 
Men are now misinformed, but at that time they will hear 
the Lord's message and there will be no misunderstanding. 
The Lord "will turn unto the people a pure language," a 
pure message— so different from the teaching of the present 
time— no corruption, no defilement, no intermingling of 
Babylonish errors with Truth. 

Our supposition is that today any one, other than a 

R4607 :page 151 

hypocrite, who is professing to be of the Church of Christ, 
would really desire to serve the interests of the Truth 
if he knew the Truth. Similarly the Jews in our Lord's 
day: Had they not been blinded by error and superstition, 
the majority, we suppose, would have preferred to be right 
rather than wrong. This is borne out by Peter's declaration 
when, on the Day of Pentecost, realizing that they 
and others of the nation had crucified the Messiah, he 
said, "I wot, brethren, that in ignorance ye did it, as did 
also your rulers." The majority were not opposed, but 
they were ignorant, and the true light had not as yet shone 
upon them. When this class in the future shall have 
been brought under the influence of the true light, we may 
expect that they will not be in opposition, but under the 
enlightenment then granted will become subjects of God's 
grace and will reach perfection; and all who will endure 
the testing at the end of the Millennial Age, when Satan 
shall be loosed for a little season to try the nations, will 
come unto life eternal, under the terms which God has 
provided. 



R4608 :page 151 

WHAT LAW WAS WEAK? 

"For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through 
the flesh, God, sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful 
flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh."— Rom. 8:3. 

THE LAW here and in other passages evidently 

refers to the Law Covenant. It is not supposable, 

for instance, that God's Law is 

weak or that the Apostle meant anything of 

that kind. In what respect, then, was the 

Law Covenant weak? It was weak or incompetent 



in that it did not bring about the 

desired object. That object was to bring 

the people who were under the Law Covenant 

into full harmony, covenant relationship, 

with God— where they would be perfect; where they 

would have a right to enjoy eternal life and all the 

blessings that God has for the perfect. Since the 

Law Covenant did not accomplish that result, and 

could not, it was weak. It was inefficient in a sense; not 

weak in the sense of being defective, but weak in the 

sense of being ineffective. If we should look for the particular 

features of weakness we would find them connected 

with the flesh. Had mankind been in proper condition 

to profit by it; if all the Jews had been in that condition 

which would have enabled them to obey God, then 

all would have had life by obedience to that Law. Every 

willing and every obedient one of them, having perfect 

abilities in his flesh, would have been able to commend 

himself to God and would have been acceptable— in covenant 

relationship, which would have included eternal life. 

"What the Law could not do in that it was inefficient, 
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh"— 
in the likeness of flesh of sin, or the flesh that was condemned 
because of sin, and for sin, or on account of the 
sin condition, sin in the flesh— proved that sin in the flesh 
is not a necessary thing, as the Jews evidently had come 
to believe, seeing that they strove to keep God's Law and 
yet did not attain to perfection. One way of reasoning on 
the matter (probably many of the Jews did so) would be 
that the Law was too hard; that the Law was too severe. It 
then became, when our Lord Jesus came, a question 
whether the Law that God gave was so severe that no one 
could keep it; whether anyone could be justified by it; or 
whether the Law was all right and whether the condition 
of man was all wrong. Our Lord, by virtue of his 
keeping the Law, condemned sin, thus showing that it 
was not the Law that was at fault, but the sinner. Thus 
by keeping the Law Jesus showed that it was within the 
range of a perfect man to keep that Law and to stand 
approved of God. 



R4612:page 151 

"WHEN I SHALL TAKE AWAY THEIR SINS" 

BEYOND all question the Apostle applies the 
above words (Rom. 1 1:27) to the Jewish 
people at the conclusion of this Gospel Age, 
after God shall have gathered the Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham out of all nations. We 
cannot well consider this the forgiveness or 
taking away of their national sin, because 
their national sin shall have been expiated 
by their punishment in the past 1800 years, 



as St. Paul prophetically foretold, saying, 
"Wrath is come upon this people to the uttermost, that all 
things written in the Law and the prophecies concerning 
them should be fulfilled." 

If, then, it is not their national sin that is referred to 
here, what sins are these? They are the individual sins 
of the Jew, similar to those which are upon all humanity, 
the sin in which they were born; as it is written, "I was 
born in sin, shapen in iniquity; in sin did my mother conceive 
me." This inherited sin comes down, we recognize, 
from Father Adam and Mother Eve and is termed Original 
Sin. It is true that God made a special arrangement with 
the Jewish nation whereby their Original Sin would be 
considered cancelled under the sacrificial arrangements 
of the Mosaic or Law Covenant. But, as the Apostle 
points out, this never brought them life nor release from 
Divine condemnation pronounced first against Adam. It 
merely extended or doubled this condemnation, as it 
were, because they had first the Adamic sin condemnation, 
and second the condemnation of their Law Covenant. 

The only explanation which will fit the Apostle's 
words is that suggested by the Lord through the Prophet 
(Jer. 31:31), "This is my Covenant with you when I 
shall take away your sins." The Apostle shows that this 
taking away of their sins and the instituting of the 
Covenant with them, will be after this Gospel Age, when 
the Church, which is the Body of Christ, shall have completed 
the sufferings of Christ and shall have entered into 
his glory. 

The manner of the taking away of the sins of the 
Jews will not be the same as that of the Church— instantaneous 
—but rather a gradual matter. Instead of Israel's 
being justified instantly to fellowship with God, they will 
be under the care and control of the great Mediator between 
God and men. And this great Mediator, Prophet, 
Priest and King will for one thousand years be engaged in 
the work of taking away their sins, according to this 
Covenant which God specified through the Prophet 
Jeremiah. And at the conclusion of the one thousand 

R4612:page 152 

years he will present them perfect, blameless, irreprovable 
to the Father. Having then accomplished the purposes 
of his Mediatorial Kingdom work he will resign 
his dominion to God the Father, and Israel will thenceforth 
be in actual Covenant relationship with God. 

As we have heretofore seen, it is the Divine programme 
to permit all nations, peoples and kindreds of the 
human family to come in under this New Covenant with 
Israel; to come under the Mediator's blessings and Millennial 
Kingdom; to have a share as Israelites indeed in all 
of the blessed opportunities for having their sins put 
away. And all who do not, whether Jew or Gentile, will 
die the Second death; as it is written, "It shall come to 



R4613 :page 152 

pass, that the soul that will not hear [obey] that Prophet, 
shall be destroyed from amongst the people."— 
Acts 3:23. 

This thought is further confirmed by the statement 
of the Prophet Jeremiah (3 1 :3 1-34), that the Lord 
would take away the stony heart out of their flesh, and 
give them a heart of flesh and renew a right spirit. It is 
not supposable that this would be an instantaneous work. 
It is a restitution work. True, sin had a small beginning 
in disobedience; but under its development it has effected 
headiness, lovelessness of heart, degradation and selfishness 
of character in the whole world of mankind. It will 
be the work of the entire Millennial Age to eradicate this 
stony condition of heart and restore mankind to a proper 
fleshly condition of heart. 



R4608 : page 152 

"THEY HATED ME WITHOUT A CAUSE" 

-MATTHEW 12:22-32,38-42.-MAY 15.- 

Golden Text:— "He that is not with me is against me, and 
he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad."— V. 30. 

SOMETIMES on a battlefield it would appear 

as though each man were fighting for himself. 

All battle lines seem lost in the confusion; 

yet in the end the victory will show 

the same clear-cut distinctions that prevailed 

in the beginning of the battle. According 

to the Great Teacher the entire human 

family is either on one side or on the other 

side of a great battle between right and 

wrong, truth and error, God and Satan. 

There is no doubt whatever as to how the battle will end 

—God will have the victory. Indeed the Bible assures us 

that at any time he could quickly put an end to the conflict, 

deliver his saints, overthrow Satan and his empire, 

etc. The Divine promise is that this will be done in 

God's "due time"— when the Church will be completed 

and changed by the power of the First Resurrection, and 

the time shall come for the establishment of Messiah's 

Millennial Kingdom for the blessing of all the nations of 

the earth. 

Is it asked why the long delay of now six thousand 
years that sin has triumphed, two thousand of this since 
Messiah died for the redemption of sinners and their release 
from the death sentence? The answer is that during 
these nineteen centuries those whom he has favored 
with some knowledge of his will— testing their loyalty to 
him, to his Law, to his representatives— he is testing because 



he seeks to find amongst those professing loyalty, 
such as have the principles of righteousness at heart. 
Our present Study shows how some at the First Advent 
were thus tested and we know that throughout these nineteen 
centuries the experience of the footstep followers of 
the Nazarene have been similar to his own. Frequently 
they have been hated without cause— maligned, misunderstood, 
slandered— sometimes by fellow-religionists of 
honorable standing. In every such instance we are to 
remember that there are but two sides to the conflict— the 
side of God, truth, righteousness, and the side of error, 
falsehood, Satan. 

As we see how blindly scribes and Pharisees and 
Doctors of the Law hated Jesus and said all manner of 
evil against him, we perceive that really they were on 
Satan's side. As we see Saul of Tarsus stoning Stephen 
to death and others persecuting followers of Jesus, we see 
clearly that they were in Satan's service, deluded by him 
and, in some instances, we are assured that these servants 
of Satan and unrighteousness verily thought that they did 
God service. Let us therefore be on guard along these 
lines, remembering the words of the Great Teacher, "Ye 
cannot serve God and mammon." "He that is not for me 
is against me." "He that gathereth not with me scattereth 
abroad." Alas, how many noble people have unwittingly 
been on the wrong side of the great controversy 
—fighting against God and the Truth, ignorantly deluded 
by the Adversary. By permitting this conflict and the 
measure of darkness, God is the more effectively trying, 
testing, those whom he has called to be his people. Not 
only are we tried directly as to the side we will take, but 
in a secondary sense we are tried as respects our humility. 
Those who are honest of heart and who make the mistake 
of fighting against God, when their eyes are opened, have 
a great test of humility in the matter of confession of 
their error and becoming zealous for the Truth. Those 
who are on the right side have also a test of humility, 
that they be not puffed up by their victory, but "humble 
themselves under the mighty hand of God, that he may 
exalt them in due time." 

Satan, because created on a higher plane, is styled the 
Prince of demons in his relationship to the fallen angels. 
Judge of the delusion in the hearts of the Pharisees which 
prompted them to charge the Master with being Satan 
himself and, on this score, accounted for his power to 
cast out demons! The Master took the time to philosophize 
with them on this subject and to show that if the 
time had come when Satan would work against his own 
associates and servants it would imply the speedy fall of 
his empire. He also pointed out that demons had been 
cast out by some whom they acknowledged and honored. 
If he must be Beelzebub to cast out the demons, what 
would their logic be in respect to their neighbors and 
friends who at times had exercised this power! On the 
other hand, if he, by God's power cast out demons, it was 
an evidence that God's Kingdom was nigh, just as he had 



proclaimed. 

Having thus answered their objection he showed that 
they were against him and opposing his Word and that 
this meant that if he were God's representative, they were 
opposing God. Then he called their attention to the fact 
that their words were blasphemous in that they attributed 
God's spirit, God's power in him, to Satan's power. 
Since they did this without any real provocation and in opposition 
to every evidence, it implied that they were 
wicked at heart. Ordinary sins resulting from the fall, 
ignorance, superstition, etc., would all, in God's providence, 
be ultimately forgivable, but a wilful sin against 
light, against knowledge, would be a sin against God's 

R4608 : page 153 

spirit. And for that sin there would be no forgiveness, 
either in this Age, or in the coming Age— either during 
this Gospel Age or in the Millennial Age. If the sin 
were committed against full light, its merit or punishment 
would be destruction, Second Death. But very evidently 
it would be such a sin to only a few. With the majority 
there would be a mixture of wilfulness with ignorance, 
and, if so, the proportion of wrong represented by the 
ignorance could be forgiven; but the proportion represented 
by the wilfulness would need to be punished, because 
unforgivable. 

The scribes and Pharisees, envious of his popularity, 
asked for a sign, a proof of his Messiahship— not recognizing 
his teachings and his miracles as proofs sufficient. 
He then told them of one sign which would come to 
them too late— his stay in the tomb would correspond to 
Jonah's stay in the belly of the great fish. The people of 
heathen Nineveh in the Judgment Age, in the Millennial 
Age, he assured them, would rank higher than they, for 
the Ninevites did repent at the preaching of Jonah, while 
these repented not at the preaching of a greater than 
Jonah. The Queen of Sheba had journeyed afar to hear 
Solomon's wisdom; yet these who were in the presence of 
a greater than Solomon realized it not and heeded not his 
message. Let us not be thus blinded, but, with our whole 
hearts, accept and follow the Nazarene! 



R4610 :page 153 

MY TRUSTFUL OBEDIENCE 

"Child of mine, I love thee; 

Listen now to me 
And make answer truly 

While I question thee; 
For I see that shadows 

Do thy soul oppress 
And they faith so weakens 



That I cannot bless. 

"Thou hast craved my power 

And presence in thy soul; 
Wilt thou yield thee wholly 

Unto my control? 
Wilt thou let me ever 

With thee have my way? 
Yield thyself in all things 

Simply to obey? 

"Though my presence ofttimes 

Seems to be withdrawn— 
Of my inward workings 

Not a trace be shown— 
Wilt thou count me present 

Notwithstanding all? 
Still believe I'm ever 

Working in thy soul? 

"When I give to others 

What I to thee deny— 
Fold them in my sunshine, 

Seem to pass thee by- 
Wilt thou still believe in 

My strong love for thee; 
Yield thee to my purpose 

Whatsoe'er it be? 

"When I to thy pleadings 

Seem no heed to pay, 
And thy foes grow bolder, 

Claim thee as their prey; 
Though towards thee I'm silent, 

Wilt thou stand the test? 
On my word of promise 

Lay thee down to rest? 

"If to all my questions 

Thou canst answer, Yes,' 
Thou shalt be forever 

One that I love best, 
To the inner circle 

Of my favored few 
Thou shalt be admitted 

And my glory view." 



R4609 : page 153 

THE POWER OF A WOMAN 
-MATTHEW 14:1-12.-MAY 22.- 
Golden Text:— "He that is slow to anger is better than the 



mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh 
a city."— Proverbs 16:32. 

JOHN THE BAPTIST, because of his boldness 

and courage as a servant and mouthpiece 

of God, was a thorn in the side of 

King Herod and his courtiers and the great 

of that day. Herod and the high priests 

and the more prominent people considered 

John the Baptist and Jesus fanatics. Doubtless 

they would have made away with them 

quickly, had it not been for their fears of 

the people. The common people heard the 

Master gladly and declared that "never man spake like 

this man"; the same common people believed John to be 

a prophet. 

We will not undertake to say whether John exceeded 
his commission or not when he reproved the King and 
Queen. As a rule, however, we believe it to be the wiser 
plan for Christian ministers to speak forth the Word of 
God fearlessly and plainly, without attempting personal 
application— allowing each hearer to apply the message to 
his own heart. Herodias fortunately represents an uncommon 
class of women. She was governed by boundless 
ambition. She married the man who, for a time, 
seemed in line for promotion to a kingly position. But 
when the title was given by the Roman Emperor to his 
brother, Herod Antipas, she inveigled the latter by her 
charms and, deserting her husband, became Herodias the 
"Queen." John the Baptist, while fearlessly denouncing 
sin, felt led to make a personal application of his teachings 
to King Herod. 

Some have assumed that Herod had requested John 
the Baptist to visit the palace and give a talk on the reforms 
he advocated, and that, in this connection, the 
Prophet pointed out the error of the King's conduct, 
saying that it was not in harmony with the Divine Law 
that he was living with his brother Philip's wife. Herodias 
heard of this and realized that if the King accepted such 
counsel it would mean that herself and her beautiful 
daughter Salome, would become outcasts from the palace 
and be without a home, as it would be impossible for her 
to return to her husband, Philip. The power of Herodias 
over the King led to John's imprisonment. Her next move 
was to effect his death, for she realized her position insecure 
so long as he lived. John's fearless speech might 
yet influence the King. 

This ambitious, wicked, artful woman plotted murder, 
and the King's birthday celebration was her opportunity. 

R4609 : page 154 

She forwarded the arrangements for a great banquet, at 
which were present the nobles and princes of the land. 
Wine was in plentiful supply. She well knew that the wine 
would inflame the passions and relax the moral tone of 



the company. So she had her beautiful daughter, Salome, 

specially prepared and attired, and instructed her to perform 

one of the obscene dances common to the East on 

such occasions, but not commonly indulged in except by 

the lower classes, and never by princesses. The occasion 

was to be a rare one. It was intended to influence the 

King exactly as it did— to admiration and a boastful offer 

to the girl of any gift she would ask. The plan succeeded 

to the letter. The King's words were, "Ask of me 

a gift, even to the half of my Kingdom"— possibly a suggestion 

of his willingness to make her his true Queen. 

Following her mother's instructions, Salome reported 
the matter at once, inquiring of the mother what gifts she 
should request. We can better imagine than describe the 
surprise of the girl when told by the mother to request 
"the head of John the Baptist on a platter." We may 
conceive what a disappointment this would mean; what 
visions of the beautiful and precious things it would destroy! 
—with what surprise Salome must have asked as 
to why this gruesome gift should be given. We can 
imagine the mother hissing to her that the death of John 
the Baptist was the most necessary thing in the world 
for them both— that without it any day might see them 
hurled from conditions of affluence into the abyss of 
degradation and poverty. We can imagine her saying, 
"This, Salome, is the priceless gift which you must ask 
from the King." And the power of the woman over both 
the King and the daughter was wonderfully exemplified in 
the result. Salome went gaily again amongst the company 
of nobles whom she had charmed, and in a loud 
voice accepted the king's offer of whatever she would 
choose, even to the half of his Kingdom, and stated that 
accordingly, the gift should be the head of the Prophet 
on a platter. 

The King's conscience was not quite dead. He was 
grieved; but his pride as well as his subserviency to 
Herodias controlled him. He reasoned that for a King 
to give his word of honor in the hearing of nobles and 
princes and then to repudiate it, would be to him a lasting 
shame. Ah, what an illustration of how "the fear of 
man bringeth a snare" ! What a lesson we read in this! 
—that a man's first responsibility is to his God and to his 
conscience, whatever the cost. Tradition has it that 
Herod was haunted with fear the remainder of his days. 
It is in line with this that when he heard of Jesus and his 
mighty works, he expressed the conviction that somehow, 
the spirit or power of John had passed to Jesus. 

Our lesson brings before us two strong and two weak 
characters. John and Herodias were strong characters, 
the one for the right and for God, the other for selfish 
ambition and sinful indulgence of it. The one swayed 
his nation for their good and prepared the worthy remnant 
to receive Messiah's message. The other swayed the 
King and her daughter to infamy, murder and disgrace, 
and terribly blackened her own character. John's reward 
lies in the future, when he, as a member of the Ancient 



Worthy class, will come forth to a "better resurrection" 
—to be associated with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all 
the prophets in the earthly phase of the Millennial 
Kingdom. 

Herodias, surely continuously unhappy, finally persuaded 
the King to a course which led to his banishment, 
in which she shared. Her future, according to the Bible, 
will be a resurrection to shame and lasting contempt. 
(Daniel 12:2.) Inasmuch as she degraded herself and 
missed grand opportunities, we may assuredly know that 
she will come forth in the Millennium greatly handicapped 
by her improper course in the present life. It 
may take centuries, even under the favorable conditions of 
Christ's Kingdom, for such a deeply-dyed character to 
purge itself of the shame and the lasting contempt and to 
rise gradually to true nobility and human perfection, or, 
failing so to do, to die the Second Death, "everlasting 
destruction." 



R4609 : page 154 

THE BINDING OF "THE STRONG MAN" 

"And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent which is the 
Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years."— Rev. 20:2. 

WE believe that there is a personal Devil and 

that he will be literally restrained in some 

manner; but in the expression in the above 

text it seems that the names "Devil" and 

"Satan" refer not merely to the person of 

the Adversary, but to all that system of 

things of which he has stood as the representative 

or head or center; for instance, 

in Revelation 12:7-9, a great religious 

system is apparently spoken of as the Devil. 

As to when this binding began, and how it will proceed, 
and when it will end, the Lord's parable respecting 
the binding of the "strong man" seems to imply that it 
will begin in a sudden manner. He says that if that 
"strong man" knew at what time the thief would come 
he would watch and not suffer his house to be broken up. 
He thus intimates that Satan would not know at what time 
the catastrophe would come upon him and his arrangements 
and that therefore he would be taken somewhat at 
a disadvantage. 

As to what constitutes the "house" of this "strong 
man" would be another matter. His "house" here would 
stand for his household, which at the present time would 
include the fallen angels. These fallen angels, who have 
been subject to Satan as their prince, will in some sense 
of the word be thrown out of harmony with him. The 
time at which we might expect this would be in the second 
presence of our Lord, and it would seem that, from about 



the time of our Lord's parousia, disorder began to operate 
in Satan's household and that these different endeavors 
that we see in many quarters to carry out certain schemes 
more or less antagonistic the one to the other, might be 
the result of this disorganization. It would further seem 
that there are different bands of evil spirits working upon 
humanity. These various hostile bands may work a great 
deal of havoc, perhaps equally as much as could have 
been done had they all remained in organized relationship 
to Satan himself. But still the undermining or overthrow 
of his authority, seems to be in progress. We believe that 
every advance step of light and knowledge is that much 
of a restraint upon darkness and evil and superstition. 
We properly enough speak of the chains of superstition, 
the chains of darkness, which bound mankind for a long 
time; and very properly we say that these are of the 
Adversary. 

Now, have we anything to indicate that light will serve 
as a "chain"? Did we ever hear of light being a chain? 
We answer that there has never yet been a manifestation 

R4610 :page 155 

of that kind. There is nothing in the past operation of 
light that served as a chain, but it seems that now it should 
operate thus. "Whatsoever doth make manifest is light," 
and that which makes manifest is a "chain," is a restraint 
upon that which is darkness. So here are the two— light 
and darkness; the Prince of Light and the Prince of 
Darkness. The Prince of Light has only recently invaded, 
as it were, the land of the Prince of Darkness to commence 
his work. This work is first, chiefly in the Church 
and in the restraining of the "winds" and the "powers" 
and the troubles coming upon the world; but meantime 
the whole world is getting awake, not necessarily to the 
light of truth, but getting awake to the chains of darkness 
which are upon them and of which they are striving to rid 
themselves. We might notice as an example the 
Higher Critics and Agnostics in large numbers in the high 
places. Many of the most intelligent people of the whole 
world have arrayed themselves, not on the side of Satan 
to do some evil work, but in opposition to all the darkness 
and blindness. They have not, indeed, the "true light" 
as we have it, but they are exercising an influence that is 
antagonistic to the darkness that Satan has heretofore 
used for the restraint of thought, etc. We will not say 
that Satan is not operating to quite an extent through 
these various evil agencies, but we do believe that these 
agencies are not willingly being operated upon by Satan; 
but, as they strive to become loose from him and his 
power, they go to another extreme and he seeks, as far as 
he is able, to corral them again and hold them with some 
other form of error. 

It seems to be clear that in this time in which we are 
living, and since the presence of the Lord, great influences 
have been let loose in the world that are breaking many 



of the shackles of superstition and ignorance. These influences 

are not merely those that are being exerted 

amongst the consecrated, but we refer chiefly to those influences 

which are being exerted amongst those with whom 

we cannot be in accord— the "Higher Critic" class. We 

believe they are doing a great deal to restrain the Adversary 

and his authority over the people, etc. 

In connection with the binding of Satan we read that 
he shall be "bound for a thousand years, that he might 
deceive the nations no more till the thousand years be 
finished"— implying that deception was one of the main 
things in which he had been previously engaged and that 
henceforth he would be so restrained or disabled, whether 
by the light of "Present Truth," or by light of science, or 
whatever it might be, that he would not be able to deceive 
the world in the same manner as formerly. 

We believe that the restraining of his influence is in 
operation. As we look about the world we see that many 
of the various inventions, etc., are apparently being put to 
good use. The telephone, the telegraph, etc., for instance, 
are not generally used for wicked purposes. They are 
used for good purposes, or at least for business purposes. 
In many cases where the attempt has been made to use 
the telephone and telegraph for gambling, the State laws 
have stepped in and forbidden the use of wires for such 
purpose. In respect to the temperance question, also, we 
see that enlightenment is proceeding and people are making 
rapid advancement in the knowledge that alcoholic 
liquors are dangerous. 

And so the education of the world goes rapidly on. 
People are no longer allowed to be vicious or idle. Children 
are compelled to attend school; the truant officer 
looks them up if they are derelict. The knowledge that 
is spreading is wonderful. And the thought that practically 
all this is being accomplished by the world itself, 
and that we have little or nothing to do with it, makes it 
appear still more wonderful. This work is being done by 
people who do not believe in the true religion; they do not 
know God aright; the majority of them, so far as we can 
gauge their own testimony, repudiate the Bible. They believe 
in a vague way in a God of some kind, perhaps in a 
fanciful God, found in every stone and piece of wood. 
Nevertheless they are free from the shackles of the 
darkness of the past and apparently have no desire to go 
back, but forward. It would appear, then, that all of the 
things peculiar to our day in the way of restraining error 
are part of the binding of the Adversary. We may be 
doing our little mite in that direction by advertising 
sermons, giving out literature, etc. 

As to the question when the great Adversary's binding 
will be accomplished, we believe that it will not be 
brought about until the time that the "great company" 
class is completed. It would not surprise us if Satan 
would make a great commotion in the world all through 
the time of trouble. It does not seem that all that terrible 
trouble will come about without the Adversary. We think 



he would enjoy being in the fray, such as we expect it 

to be— world wide, "when the kingdoms of this world shall 

become the Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ." 



R4610 :page 155 

THE FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY 

RESPECTING the fulfilment of prophecy it 

seems to be natural for us, and for all humanity, 

to be impatient and to expect things to 

be done more rapidly than they usually come 

to pass. We had expected a Federation of 

the churches and the giving of life to the 

Federation by the Episcopal system by the 

beginning of this century and now we are 

ten years beyond this period. This is a delay 

as respects our expectations, but we may 

be sure that there is no delay in the matter as respects the 

Divine intention. Our expectations are wonderfully fulfilled, 

however, inasmuch as it was true that when we first 

began to tell about the coming Federation of the various 

churches and systems of Protestantism the matter was 

poo-poohed by all Protestants, who were free to declare 

that there was nothing of the kind contemplated and 

nothing of the kind desired; that they were really better 

off in a divided condition, because in that way there was 

a certain competition. This was the same argument once 

used by business people, to the effect that competition was 

the life of trade; but in business they are finding out that 

combination is the life of trade, and profit and trusts are 

the result. And so in our religious circles the same 

R4611 :page 155 

thought is brought forward, and the tendency today is 
strongly in favor of the Federation which the Scriptures 
indicate and which we pointed out more than thirty 
years ago was coming, and which will result in a great 
blight upon Christianity in many respects. 

Apparently, at first, the prospective Federation will 
mean great prosperity and great progress and will give 
great outward appearance of piety and it will seem as 
though the world is now to be converted. All who will 
not or cannot see it thus will be considered as obstreperous 
and out of accord, and as unreasonable, pessimists 
and hinderers of the public good by those who think that 
this is the Divine arrangement and proper course and 
who do not see as do we the result. This is the very 

R4611 :page 156 

condition of things that the Lord guards his people 

against, by saying, "Say ye not a Confederacy (a Federation) 



to all to whom this people shall say a Confederacy, 
neither fear ye their fear nor be afraid. " The 
fear of all the different denominations seems to be that 
unless something is done, unless something of this kind 
be brought about, the whole religious system will go to 
pieces and God's purposes will fail of being legitimately 
accomplished. We are not to fear thus, and we do not 
so fear. 

We realize that there is a difference between the 
nominal church and the real Church of Christ; that God's 
real saints are to be found in all denominations and outside 
of all denominations, and that he will perfect his 
glorious plan of selecting the Church to be the Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham. The Divine Plan will thus be worked 
out entirely aside from the projects of man to convert 
the world, which we see to be impossible; not that we are 
in opposition to anything and everything possible to be 
done for the heathen, but that we are not putting our 
confidence in these efforts for the glorious outcome which 
God's Word shows us will be realized when our Lord 
"shall see of the travail of his soul and be satisfied." 

But while the matter has not come along as rapidly 
as we might have expected, we may be sure that there 
is no real delay, and we have no doubt that the results 
will be attained in the fulness of time— God's time. 
There is no doubt that this prophecy will be found in 
full accord with the other prophecies respecting the 
close of the Gentile Times and the inauguration of the 
Millennial Kingdom, due in the year 1915. 

Indeed, we see that the people in general are very 
indifferent, as yet, to the matter of Federation. It is 
merely the leaders and ministers of all denominations 
that fear the rising influence of Higher Criticism and 
Socialism in the deprivation of the people of their faith 
in God and in the Bible, and these perceive that something 
in the way of an outward, formal church system is 
necessary to take the place of individual faith and the 
influence of the Word of God. This is the class that is 
anxious for Federation, and we have no doubt the time 
is near at hand when all the Protestant denominations, 
or practically all of the ministers of Protestant denominations, 
will be willing to receive the apostolic blessing 
and laying on of hands from some Episcopal Bishop, and 
thus be recognized by the Episcopal Bishop as having 
the apostolic succession and benediction. And this we 
understand will thereafter be considered the test 
as to the right to exercise any of the functions of public 
ministers, such as preaching, teaching, marrying, etc. 
Thus the people will be more and more brought to regard 
the Protestant ministry as Catholics already regard the 
Catholic ministry. 

This will be the growing sentiment during the next 
few years, the next five years. Five years may seem 
to be a short time in which to accomplish great things, but 
we live in the age of rapidity, in the age of electricity. 
More results are now accomplished in one year than 



might have been accomplished in five years a short time 
ago, consequently in the next five years there will be the 
possibility of as large an accomplishment as twenty-five 
years would have brought about a short time ago— perhaps 
much more than that. We shall expect that, in 
due time, the Scriptures which indicate this Federation 
will have fulfilment and clear demonstration, and that 
before 1915. 

As respects the gathering of Israel back to Palestine: 
It might have seemed strange to us that the Lord did not 
stir up the people sooner, but we may be sure that his 
plans and arrangements are all right. The Zionist movement 
is not yet twenty years old, but it has exerted, and 
is now exerting, an influence over the masses of Jewish 
people all over the world. What more could be expected? 
Meantime the Lord has for some reason kept Palestine 
closed against the Jews by the Turkish edict and by passport 
restrictions; and the fact that it has been closed to 
them has seemed to make them all the more anxious to 
open the door and to go in and possess the land. 

We see a marvelous manifestation of this among 
the masses of the Jews. In their recent conference, 
their very able leaders endeavored to deter them from 
their purpose of entering Palestine at this time— claiming 
that the Turkish government should give them an 
autonomous Jewish government before they would take 
any steps toward entering the land, and that if they 
were to go in now they would blast their own hopes and 
privileges and that the Turks would tax them and keep 
them in subjection and they never could have the opportunity 
of having their own form of government. But 
so strong was the feeling in favor of going in at once to 
possess the land that the arguments of the leaders were 
unavailing, and while feeling great respect for them 
they voted them down and decided that they would go in 
at once and that all the institutions connected with Zionism 
should be moved to Palestine, and their banking capital 
should be transferred there as rapidly as wisdom 
would justify. So we see the movement is gaining 
headway. 

The thought has been held up to some extent and 
has gained force, and is our expectation, that the present 
year will be more eventful respecting Palestine than any 
recent preceding year. Our thought is that from now onward 
we may expect rapid progress there for the Jewish 
cause. We will go there to see regarding it, the Lord 
willing. The next five years may seem a short time in 
which to gather there Jewish people from all parts of 
the world, but we are to remember three things— one 
is that the majority of the Jews are in Russia and rapidly 
coming to the United States; the second is that at the 
present time Jews in all parts of the world, and especially 
in the United States, are very prosperous; third, that God 
does not declare that all Jews will go back to Jerusalem, 
but that he will gather his people, and by this we understand 
him to mean those who have faith in the promises 



made to Abraham, those who are really at heart Israelites, 
those who at heart are anxious to come into harmony 
with him and to receive his favors. 

These are the ones he intends to gather there; and 
these will doubtless include some that are wealthy, 
especially as the troublous times in the next few years 
will indicate the insecurity of property elsewhere; and 
the Jews, many of them having accumulated property, 
will be desirous to return to Palestine, where they feel 
they will be more safe than in any of the large cities of 
civilization. We could not, of course, agree that they 
would be more safe there, because the Scriptures distinctly 
state that the trouble which will encircle the whole 
civilized world will reach to Palestine and will culminate 
there in what the Scriptures term "the time of Jacob's 
trouble." 

"God moves in a mysterious way 

His wonders to perform; 
He plants his footsteps in the sea, 

And rides upon the storm. 
Deep in unfathomable mines, 

Of never-failing skill, 
He treasures up his bright designs, 

And works his sovereign will." 



R4611 :page 157 

ANCIENT WORTHIES--HOW PERFECTED? 

A PERFECT body implies a perfect mind, because 
the mind is a part of the body, and a 
man who has no brains or who has only half 
his brains would not be a perfect man. Probably 
there will be no difference of thought 
thus far in respect to this question, but the 
real point at issue would be: What constitutes 
a perfect character? 

Father Adam had, in one sense of the 
word, a perfect character when he was created 
in God's image and likeness, being perfect both in 
mind and in body. His mind being in the image of God 
his character was good; no blemish was there; no preference 
for sin, but the reverse of this— an appreciation of 
righteousness and a tendency toward it. He had not a 
hard heart, but a fleshly heart— a tender heart. He would 
not be cruel, but just, loving and kind— all that would 
constitute a good man, because God made him thus. 

But there is another sense in which we use the word 
character, a sense in which Adam never had character in 
full, viz., in the sense of character developed, tested and 
proven. God tried him, and because of his inexperience 
he failed, even though his character was good and his 
whole organism perfect. If he had known as much about 



God as we know, he would undoubtedly have stood the 
test; but had he been successful in this test respecting 
the eating of forbidden fruit, we have no thought that 
it would have been the end of his testing. Undoubtedly 

R4612:page 157 

other tests would have come, and gradually he would have 
been growing in the knowledge of God, in obedience, etc.; 
but lacking experience he failed in the very first feature 
of his trial. So the Scriptures inform us regarding our 
Lord Jesus as a man, that he was able to endure faithfully 
because of his previous knowledge of the Father. 

If we suppose our Lord Jesus to have been merely a 
perfect man as was Adam, without any additional knowledge 
of God, without any appreciation of his "glory with 
the Father before the world was," without an insight into 
the Divine Plan given through the holy Spirit and the 
Word of God, we would suppose him equally as liable to 
failure as was Adam; but when we remember that he had 
these various other blessings, then we see the force of the 
Scripture which says, "By his knowledge shall my righteous 
servant justify many, when he shall bear their iniquities" 
—referring to the time of his consecration unto 
death and his crucifixion on the cross. 

Our Lord had the knowledge that enabled him to see 
and understand in a manner impossible to Adam. In his 
case we see that the testing through the Adversary during 
the forty days of fasting in the wilderness was not 
counted of the Father as sufficient proof of his character-perfection, 
but, rather, we find that "he was tempted in 
all points like as we are"— that for three and a half years 
this testing work continued. This inference is to be 
drawn not only from the New Testament records of our 
Lord's experiences, but also from the words of the 
Apostle, "Consider him who endured such contradiction of 
sinners against himself." Again, the same thought is illustrated 
by the high priest who, during the time which 
represents our Lord's earthly ministry, was in the Holy, 
crumbling the incense upon the fire, thus symbolically 
representing the testing and proving, in every particular, 
of our Lord's character. 

If, therefore, it was appropriate that our Lord should 
be tested after he was begotten, as a New Creature, after 
he had consecrated his life even unto death, and if it is 
appropriate that we also should be fully tested after we 
become New Creatures, begotten of the holy Spirit, then 
we might wonder in what manner the Ancient Worthies 
received any testing which would constitute a full proof 
of character. When we examine the records of these men 
—Enoch, Abraham, Moses, Samson, Daniel and others— 
we find that they manifested great faith; and they endured 
severe ordeals and testings of their loyalty to God, and 
their confidence in him. It does not surprise us, therefore, 
that the testimony "that they pleased God," was given respecting 
them. This assures us that they had considerable 



character development. God must have seen their hearts 
to be loyal, else he never would have considered them 
worthy of the "better resurrection." At the same time we 
believe that they will have need of further experience. 

Faith seems to be the chief element of character that 
was developed under Samson's experiences. We do not 
know how much patience, long suffering, brotherly-kindness, 
gentleness, meekness, etc., were developed in his 
character; nothing is stated respecting the matter, but we 
have no reason to suppose that Samson was a very gentle 
man. The slaying of 3,000 men with the jaw-bone of an 
ass as well as other experiences, would not seem to imply 
this. We may reasonably suppose, therefore, that though 
Samson will be brought back in an absolutely perfect condition, 
and under the favorable conditions of the Millennial 
Age, there will probably be experiences in life that 
he never encountered and that will be so new to him that 
he might be in danger of making mistakes. Assuredly he 
will have much to learn respecting the things of the Spirit 
of God. The Scriptures state that all will be brought 
under the blessing of the holy Spirit in the future. 

These Ancient Worthies will not be begotten of the 
Spirit, as is the Church, but the same prophecy that relates 
how the servants and hand-maids are to receive 
the holy Spirit during this Gospel Age, tells also that, 
"after those days God will pour out his Spirit upon all 
flesh." And since those Ancient Worthies lived before 
the outpouring of the holy Spirit, their time for receiving 
a measure of this blessing belongs to the future and 
undoubtedly the giving of the holy Spirit to them will 
have much to do with fixing their characters, which will 
already be perfect. They will be brought to greater 
knowledge, and having already endured testings and been 
proven loyal, they will have only to learn how to use their 
talents and powers in full conformity with the Divine will. 

We understand that these men would be in a die-able 
condition, in the sense of being mortal and liable to death; 
but that they would come under the condemnation of the 
Second Death is highly improbable. If any man has stood 
trial under conditions of ignorance and superstition, and 
the measurable darkness of his time— has endured temptations 
from the world and from the Adversary, and proven 
faithful under those conditions— it is reasonable to suppose 
that he would be found perfect under the conditions of 
the Millennial Age, which will be so much more favorable 
to righteousness and full obedience to God. We therefore 
have no reason to suppose that any of the Ancient 
Worthies will come short of the eternal goal, eternal life. 

The fact that the Ancient Worthies will be under the 
New Covenant arrangement, under the Mediatorial Kingdom, 
not having full access to the Father until the close 
of the Millennial Age, is not an evidence of disfavor nor 
of anything contrary to their best interests, but rather 
a very gracious arrangement by which any possible mistake 
would be covered by Christ's mediation and would 
not bring them under the Divine sentence of the Second 



Death. We are not expecting that they will make mistakes, 
but if, upon their awakening, they should be at 
once turned over to God, and God's law should operate 
as we understand it will, and as it did in Adam's case, so 
that the slightest deflection would mean death, we see 

R4612:page 158 

their position would be much less favorable. Therefore, 
the Millennial Age will provide abundant opportunity to 
come to full knowledge; and we believe the Scriptures to 
indicate, though they do not positively so state, that their 
fidelity being further tested by their service during the 
Millennial Age, as a part of the natural seed of Abraham, 
in blessing the remainder of his seed and all the Gentiles 
who will come into that seed, will constitute them worthy 
of an exchange of nature and a share with the Great Company 
on the spirit plane. 



page 158 

YEARLY REQUESTS FOR THE TRAVELING BRETHREN 

EACH year at this season we ask that those 
desirous of visits by these Traveling 
Brethren send in formal requests therefor, 
preferably on post-card. We keep these on 
file and arrange the routes accordingly. 
We desire these yearly, because frequently 
conditions change greatly within one year. 

Remember that no charge is made for 
these services. The Society pays all the 
necessary traveling expenses, etc., and takes 
up no collections. The cost is borne by the general fund, 
to which many of you are or have been contributors. 

It may be too late to include your place if you write 
when you see that a Brother is headed your way; therefore, 
co-operate please by at once sending a 1910 post-card 
request, answering as many of the questions below 
as possible: 

(a) How many Bible students reside in your vicinity? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet? (Give full street address.) 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday meetings held? 

(f) Was a vote taken to have a visit by one of these 
Traveling Brethren? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 
(h) How many, if any, voted against the invitation? 
(i) Would a suitable place be found for a public 
meeting? 

(j) What attendance do you think could be secured for 
the public session by such notification and advertising 
as your class would give? 



(k) Would a suitable place be found for semi-private 

meetings for the interested? 

(1) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in 

accordance with DAWN, Vol. VI., chaps. 5 and 6? 

If so, give names and full addresses of each. 

(m) Give full names and full addresses of the two (2) 

to whom notices re a Traveling Brother should 

be sent, and notify us as to any change or removal. 

(n) If your town is not on a railroad give the name of 

proper railroad station at which to stop. 

(o) How many miles from station is meeting place, and 

which direction from station? 

(p) Would the Brother be met at station? 

(q) If not, how could the Brother get from said station? 

(r) Give writer's full name and address. 

(s) Any additional remarks. 

These visits are not merely for the public. They are 
intended to encourage small and large classes of Bible 
students. Nevertheless, we urge that their visits furnish 
good opportunities for presenting certain truths to the 
public and thus many grains of wheat are being found. 
We are sure that the Lord has many thousands of such 
children whom he has allowed to take certain lines and 
whom he now desires to bring to a knowledge of Present 
Truth— using it to further ripen and prepare them for 
the heavenly garner. 

If you are too poor in this world's goods to arrange 
for a public meeting, mention that fact. We may desire 
to assist financially. However, it may be possible to hold 
some meetings in a room at your home, if all the conditions 
seem favorable. 

If you cannot answer all the questions affirmatively, 
answer what you can. Finally remember that your request 
is continued for only one year. Hence if you sent 
word last May we shall expect to hear for details from 
you this May also— if you desire such visits. 



R4613 :page 158 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I hasten this letter to you in the hope that it will 
appear in THE WATCH TOWER and stir some good brother 
or sister who heretofore quite overlooked the home field. 

When good Brother Thomas attended the Jacksonville 
Convention, but little more than a year ago, he stood 
almost alone in his community. He heard the testimony 
of our dear Brother Wright of Boaz, Ala., who found, 
after patient years, hearing ears and good, responsive 
hearts in his own family. Now children and their married 
partners, grandchildren and their friends are warm, 
devoted friends of the Truth. 

Could you have been with us during the last two days 



you would surely have had evidence that there is a rich 
ingathering in the South. Today, after little more than 
a year of quickened effort, at least twenty-three give 
good evidence of consecration, having symbolized by 
water baptism. Cotton-planting was forgotten (it was 
the very busiest season), and the rich blessing the dear 
Lord poured out was not to be compared to anything on 
earth. 

I thought of the large class at Reedy, Va., mostly of 
the family of our beloved brother— familiarly known as 
"Cousin Jimmy"; of good and faithful Brother Major 
Grubb, of Rondo, Va., whose children and grandchildren 
recently consecrated; of whole families North, South, 
East and West who just recently have made consecration. 
After father or mother was called beyond the vail, or 
stood faithful but alone for twenty years, some were 
rewarded in their own families. 

Beloved Brother, my own heart is quickened to 
deeper devotion, more zealous sacrifice, more ardent love, 
more patient, long-suffering endurance as I see the rewards 
of long-deferred harvest. 

Scripture texts crowd my mind— "after many days," 
"weeping," "bearing precious fruit," "labor not in vain 
in the Lord," "he that reapeth receiveth wages." How 
my heart burns to tell the dear brethren everywhere— 
"the fields are white to the harvest"! Don't overlook 
the dear home-folk. The Lord will not have more than 
144,000, but Brother John, or Sister Mary, or son, or 
daughter may for all eternity hold before us this joy-giving 

R4613 :page 159 

thought— "My crown came to me because you 
loved me enough to lead me to consecration." 

Perhaps once we presented the Truth smitingly at 
times. We have learned to present it lovingly, considerately, 
better understanding the infirmities of our 
dear ones. How necessary that all our deeds be tender, 
loving, as were our dear Master's! 

I am most grateful to the Great Chief Reaper for this 
Southern trip and the wonderful harvest-gathering that 
is in evidence on every hand. Do all the dear friends 
realize that the opportunities now open will soon pass? 
Can we withhold our services when people read sermons 
and PEOPLES PULPIT as never before? 

Everywhere the dear friends are surely awakening. 
Angels must look on in wonder at the glorious privileges 
accorded to men. 

Thousands of prayers go up as you leave for abroad. 
Hundreds of warm Southern hearts earnestly pray richest 
blessings to the many to be refreshed of other climes and 
foreign tongues. 

Yours in his love, M. L. HERR. 



page 159 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

It is my pleasant privilege, obeying the instructions of 
the Ecclesia here, to inform you that at a meeting 
held last evening you were unanimously re-elected. 
Although it has not been our privilege to have 
you with us in person, we desire to express our grateful 
thanks to you for sending to us such acceptable representatives 
in the persons of your able assistants, the dear 
Pilgrim Brothers, whose visits are always helpful. Then, 
too, you are always with us, representatively, in the pages 
of SCRIPTURE STUDIES and THE WATCH TOWER and your 
other writings and addresses— which we find invaluable 
—and some of which we use in all our meetings. Just 
now we are finding new beauty and grander lessons in 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF THE BETTER SACRIFICES. You 
will never know, dear Brother Russell, until you have 
"passed the vail," and "know even as you are now known," 
what you have been, and continue to be, to us— and 
not to us only, but to all who have learned "present truth" 
through you (and where else have they learned it?). 

We desire to tender to you, and to all the dear ones of 
the Bethel Family, our heartfelt love and affection; and 
we desire to say that our daily petitions go to the throne 
of heavenly grace— that you may be kept faithful just a 
little longer— and then hear the welcome— "Well done, 
good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a 
few things, I will make thee ruler over many things; enter 
thou into the joy of thy Lord." We ask for your prayers, 
dear Pastor, that we, too, may be kept faithful. 

Your brother in Christ, S. N. WILEY. 



page 159 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES (V) 

Man for Whom Atonement Was Made. 

JUNE 5 

(1) State the philosophical relationship between 
Ransom and Substitution. P. 480. 

(2) Give illustration of such Substitution and Ransom. 
P. 481, par. 2. 

(3) What thought of Substitution has led to confusion? 
Explain the matter, showing the right and the 

wrong views of the question. P. 482, par. 1. 

(4) Could the Divine Plan for human salvation have 
been different from what it is? P. 483. 

(5) What two lines of reasoning prove the wisdom of 



the Plan which God has adopted? Pp. 484, 485. 

(6) How would any other Plan than the one adopted, 
Ransom and Restitution, have effected the Gospel Church? 
P. 485, last par. 

(7) May we not expect that time will show that every 
feature of the Divine Plan has been most wise and 
helpful? P. 486. 

JUNE 12 

(8) What is signified by the Ministry of Reconciliation? 
P. 487. 

(9) Who participate in this ministry? P. 487. 

(10) Is this Reconciliation a feature of the Millennial 
Age or is there a feature of it now in operation? Cite the 
Scripture which declares that the Church was reconciled 
to God. P. 487, par. 2. 

(11) When we read that God was in Christ reconciling 
the world to himself, should we here differentiate 
between the Church which accepts the reconciliation 
through faith and the world which is to be reconciled or 
brought into harmony with God by the great Mediator 
during the Millennium? P. 487. 

(12) What constitutes authority to act as a minister 

or servant of the Atonement between God and the world? 
P. 487, last par. 

(13) To whom may these ministers or servants tell 

of the grace of God operating through Christ for the forgiveness 

of sins? What is there in connection which 

operates disadvantageously, hindering the servants from 

bearing record to all mankind, to all the world? Pp. 488, 

489. 

(14) Will the opening of the blind eyes and unstopping 
of the deaf ears during the Millennium permit 

these servants of reconciliation to do a more effective 
work— to a larger number— to all the families of the 
earth? P. 490. 



R4613 :page 159 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S JUNE CONVENTION TOUR 

Lv. Brooklyn, N.Y...Fri. June 17 Penn. R.R.... 9:45 P.M. 
Ar. Louisville, Ky..Sun. " 19 " " ... 10:35 A.M. 

Lv. " "..Sun." 19L.&N 9:30 P.M. 

Ar. Cincinnati, O...Mon. " 20 " 7:20 A.M. 

Lv. " "...Mon. " 20 Big Four 9:30 P.M. 

Ar. Cleveland, O...Tue. " 21 " 6:45 A.M. 

Lv. " "...Tue. " 21 W.&L.E 8:00 A.M. 

Ar. Canton, O Tue." 21 " ....9:38 A.M. 

Lv. Canton, O Wed. " 22 Penna.R.R.... 6:27 A.M. 

Ar. Muncie, Ind Wed. " 22 Big Four 1:32 P.M. 

Lv. " " Thu. " 23L.E.&W 9:52 A.M. 

Ar. Lima, O Thu." 23 " ....12:40 P.M. 



Lv. " " Fri. " 24C.H.&D 9:10 A.M. 

Ar. Dayton, O Fri." 24 " ....11:20 A.M. 

Lv. " " Fri. " 24Penna.R.R.... 9:27 P.M. 

Ar. Chicago, 111.. ..Sat. " 25 " "....7:10 A.M. 



page 162 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, 
five vol.; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 



three vols.; in Greek three vols.; in French, two vols.; 

in Hollandish, Italian, Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. 

each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the 

same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 
each. 



page 161 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI MAY 15 No. 10 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Reaction in Female Seminaries 163 

Away From Ancient Altars 163 

Begotten of God— He Cannot Sin 164 

"My Soul, Be on Thy Guard" 167 

What the Church Shares With Christ 167 

The Heaven-Provided Bread 168 

St. Peter Cried, "Lord, Save Me" 169 

Some Interesting Questions 170 

The Ransom Work 170 

Outward Polish vs. Inward Grace 171 

The Same Vail Untaken Away 171 

Significance of the Under-Priests 172 

International Bible Students Conventions 172 

The Memorial Celebration 173 

Some Interesting Letters 174 

Berean Studies on the Creation 175 

page 162 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



UNITED STATES POSTAL RULES RE SUBSCRIPTIONS 

The Post Office rulings require that subscriptions shall 
stop, be discontinued, shortly after expiration of the period 
paid for. Hence, we may not continue your papers indefinitely. 
If, however, you cannot conveniently send the 
price you may have them sent on credit if you will definitely 
request this. Remember, also, that we have a fund specially 
set apart for the payment of the subscriptions of such as desire 
our journals, but cannot appropriate any of the amount without 
request. This fund we call the "Lord's Poor Fund." 

But remember that whatever you write us on this subject 
must be pointedly stated, so that the Post Office Inspector 
or any stranger reading your letter will know definitely just 
what you desire. It will not do to say, I am poor and would 
like to have THE WATCH TOWER. Rather say: Please enter 
my WATCH TOWER subscription for another year (charge same 
to me and I will remit later; or, I am one of the Lord's poor 
and thankfully accept God's provision in the "Poor Fund"). 



TABERNACLE QUESTIONS 

Specially prepared in booklet form to assist in private and 
class study of "Tabernacle Shadows." 

We consider these questions invaluable aids. We still 
have ample supply, free on request. Order promptly if not 
already supplied. 



R4613 :page 163 

REACTION IN FEMALE SEMINARIES 
WE GIVE liberal extracts from an article following, 



which confirms our recent statement 
that the same polished infidelity which 
for forty years has steadily been leavening 
all the male colleges and seminaries of 
the United States, Canada, England and 
Germany, and which by now has gotten 
possession of nearly every pulpit and 
Sunday school, is penetrating and saturating 
even common school books. 

Many parents see this but forbear to protest, because 
of their lack of spine and their false standard of parental 
love. Instead of standing up for the Truth and the 
Bible they surrender to the arrogance of Young America 
—male and female. They think that they love their children 
too much to oppose them, when really their trouble 
is too much self-love— "approbativeness." They fear to 
have their educated darlings think of them as "old fogies" 
and behind the times. What they need is more love for 
their Creator, more love for his Word and more love for 
their children— to give them backbone to stand up for 
the Truth at any cost. 

But alas! So blighting and stunting has been the 
misrepresentation of the Gospel of Christ that many dear 
souls, possessed of a keen faith, have so little knowledge 
that they cannot defend it. Yea, they know their ignorance 
and fear even to try. 

"My people perish for lack of knowledge," says the 
Lord. Yet the leaders of all denominations teach 
them to boast. They are rich and increased in goods and 
have need of nothing: they know not of their poverty, 
blindness and nakedness. (Rev. 3:17.) Ah! Thank 
God for the Millennial Kingdom so near at hand! What 
would humanity do without it! Soon the half-truth of 
the dark ages would give way to no creed, no faith. And 
what direful results would follow! 

AWAY FROM ANCIENT ALTARS 

[HAROLD BOLCE IN "COSMOPOLITAN."] 

"Colleges devoted to the education of women have 
revised the accepted estimate of life, with startling consequences 
to ancient creeds. Throughout the ages there 
has been a sad procession of believers who regarded life 
as a burden to be borne, and endured it to the end, with 
sighs and tears. And the memory of their sacrifice and 
suffering has been revered by the thousands that follow 
them. In contrast with this philosophy, which has produced 
unnumbered martyrdoms and is still held in some 
circles, there has been preached a militant gospel. Life 
is regarded as a warfare in an arena. In the hymn that 
sings the spiritual triumphs of conquest when the armies 
of the Lord waged battle, the believer rejects a life of 
either resignation or ease 'while others fought to win the 
prize and sailed through bloody seas.' 

"American educators of women are showing what 



they believe to be the fallacy of both these philosophies. 
Life, they say, is neither a burden nor a battle. It is a 
benediction. It is the great Fact. To live right is to 
live joyously. And so the thousands of young women 
coming out of our institutions of learning do not follow 
the centuries of tearful pilgrimage on the Via Dolorosa, 
neither do they choose the Field of Mars. They believe 
that martyrdom in modern times is as anachronistic as 
the stake, and that to regard life as gladiatorial is to miss 
its finest meanings. 

R4614:page 163 

"The significance of this interpretation of life appears 
when its application to current activities is studied. 'Non 
ministrari sed ministrare,' 'not to be ministered unto, but 
to minister,' is the motto of Wellesley College, and this is 
the spirit of all the institutions pledged to the higher education 
of American women. The new evangels do not offer 
up anguished petitions to a non-resident God. Modern 
scholarship is, indeed, fulfilling Comte's prophecy that the 
God of authority would be escorted out of the affairs of 
man. 

"President William De Witt Hyde, of Bowdoin College, 
who is in demand as a lecturer at many girls' colleges, 
teaches that as human experience develops, the divine 
attributes have to be translated into new terms— into 
terms that are in keeping with the deepening experience of 
the race; and that 'we know God only through man.' His 
teaching that a God symbolized by the outgrown experience 
of bygone ages is little better than no God at all, 
finds emphasis in the loftiest thinking among the professors 
in the colleges under consideration. Katharine 
Lee Bates, professor of English in Wellesley College, a 
woman of rare endowments and profound spirituality, 
teaches that the great foundations of Christianity 'plead 
for ampler walls and gates,' and that 'the heresy of youth 
is the outworn creed of age.' 

"The old idea that the good-will of the Infinite could 
be secured by sacrificial offerings on the altar, or by 
lamentations and Te Deums, has been abandoned by the 
colleges. The futility of such petitionings is emphasized 
by Dr. Caroline Hazard, president of Wellesley, who is 
carrying out with distinguished efficiency the work 

R4614 :page 164 

inaugurated by Alice Freeman Palmer. In a talk recalling 
some of the scenes of Palestine, which she visited 
recently, she told of the faithful in Israel who gather at 
the Wall of Wailing and cry out to the God of their 
fathers to restore the Temple and reassemble the children 
of Jerusalem. 'Make speed, make speed, O Deliverer of 
Zion!' has been the intoned cry of these worshipers 
throughout the dismal centuries that have crept across 
the ruins of the great edifice the Preacher built, and yet, 



in spite of all this supplicating of the Throne of Grace, 
the very City of the Jews is a Moslem town! Just as it 
is unnecessary to go back to Sinai to find the covenants 
of God, so it is idle in our age to look to the skies for 
help. 'Each soul,' said President Hazard, 'has its Holy 
City, deep hidden under the accretions of every-day life.' 

"President Hyde, of Bowdoin, not only tells his own 
students, but has sent the message out to all the students 
of this land, that the modern world, at least the intelligent 
and thoughtful portion, has outgrown the old idea 
that God sent his Son to earth, announcing his advent by 
signs and wonders; or that this Son was authorized to 
forgive sinners who conformed to the terms revealed; or 
that Jesus transmitted this miraculously tested power to 
his Apostles. 

"From a student at Berkeley, who has also studied at 
Stanford University, comes the assurance that 'university 
women are taking a brave and enlightened stand on the 
subject of teaching their children and all children the 
vital facts about life.' She adds that the college-bred 
men and women of the Far West 'seem to have been 
swept along about equally before the irresistible non-church 
wave that has left some of them prostrated before 
crass materialism,' but that 'more and more stagger 
again to their feet, and move with eager steps towards 
the dawn of a creedless spirituality.' 

"This confirms the teaching of Doctor Brown, of 
Stanford University, that 'hard and fast theories have 
been going down before the majesty of fact.' He even 
goes so far as to say that what Tom Paine and Robert 
G. Ingersoll taught, as death-blows to faith, is now proclaimed 
as truth by Christian scholarship. 

"But the new gospel has come without bitterness, with 
humanity as its shrine, and the aspirations of the race its 
litanies. 'The contemporary kingdom of love,' said one 
of the lecturers at Wellesley, 'is the only way over 
which we may pass to the eternal kingdom of love.' 

"Not blind petitioning, but active faith and action 
illumine the new creed. 'We still have our dragons,' said 
Miss Hazard. 'Perseus and St. George have not exterminated 
them all. The world is waiting for Andromeda, 
and still more for the active Dorcas. Under Syrian 
skies, or in a Western World, the call is the same— a call 
to service, to high living, to wage war on the powers of 
evil.' And in the litanies which this president and poet 
has written, self-indulgence, evasion, and fear are enumerated 
as the dragons every human spirit has to fight. 

"So far as the outlook of American students is concerned, 
'the eternal city of the skies,' fabled in Christian 
legend, lies in ruins under the feet of modern scholarship. 
But the education of young women, President M. Carey 
Thomas, of Bryn Mawr, points out, is giving us 'a new 
heaven and a new earth.' These young women are going 
out of the colleges not to destroy, but to fulfil. They are 
taught that Jesus of Nazareth 'never mentioned religion,' 
that 'it was farthest from his thought'; and that 'life' was 



the sublime text of his ministry. 

"Dr. George A. Gordon, of Boston, who is popular as 
a lecturer at Wellesley, teaches that 'we lament the loss 
of belief in angels and seek to revive the doctrine of 
familiar spirits; we speak of the pathos of these vanished 
faiths,' but there is infinite gain to man in 'the grandeur 
of this abolition of all intermediaries'; and President 
Hazard sets forth that it must always be one of the 
glories of woman 'that truth can appeal in a direct and 
concrete form to her mind.' 

"The young college women are not dreamers, save as 
they are inspired by the vision of a new society saved by 
service. They are carrying what they believe to be the 
true spirit of Christ and Christmas throughout the year. 
Though all the recorded miracles may be regarded as 
folk-lore, and though the Manger itself may be no more 
than a sacred myth, life remains beautiful and divine, and 
the call to re-create the spirit of the home and to serve 
humanity is regarded as a commission from the 'King of 
kings reigning in the heart of the race.' They indeed 
constitute an army— an undenominational army— but 
their banners are unseen. Instead of breaking windows, 
they are mending hearts. They believe in the integrity 
of law, and so scout the notion that any sea was ever 
rolled back by a wand. They believe that in all ages, 
wherever the Spirit of God has triumphed on earth, 
dominion has been asserted through the thought of man. 
And that divine presence, the colleges teach and the activities 
of college girls give evidence, is as potent today 
on earth as it ever was in ancient times. 

"This, in substance, is the significance of the repudiation 
by the colleges of what they regard as crude and 
narrowing theology. The young women do not cringe at 
the Throne of Grace. To cry out in despair on bended 
knees is regarded not as an evidence of religious advance, 
but an expression of timidity and fear. The laws of the 
spirit are logical and fixed. The electrician does not 
cross himself before the dynamo. The chemist does not 
deal in burnt offerings to give divine quickening to the 
elements." 



R4614 :page 164 

BEGOTTEN OF GOD-HE CANNOT SIN 

"He that is begotten of God sinneth not, for his seed 
remaineth in him and he cannot sin."— I Jno. 3:9. 

AS in human nature there is an earthly begetting 
and an earthly birth, so, the Scriptures 
inform us, the Lord purposes during 
this Gospel Age to develop creatures of a 
new nature. These are spoken of as first 
begotten of the holy Spirit, at the time of 



their consecration, and subsequently developed 
and ultimately "born from the 
dead" as "members of the Body of Christ" 
—sharers "in his resurrection," "the First 
Resurrection," the Chief Resurrection. 

The begetting power the Scriptures declare to be the 
Word of Truth. Through this Word God operates in us 
first of all, and if we respond to the drawing we shall be 
brought into relationship with Christ through faith, 
recognizing him as the Sin-Bearer, as the Great Advocate 
who is willing to appropriate a share of his merit to us 
and thus to justify us from Adamic sin and the imperfections 
of the flesh, which we no longer approve. The 
Word of God having convinced us that all unrighteousness 
is sin, and we, having reached that place where we 
desire to be in accord with God and with righteousness, 

R4614 :page 165 

are informed through his Word that they who would become 
fully his in the present time, and receive his invitation 
to become members of the Body of Christ, to join 
with our Lord in the laying down of earthly life, may 
"present their bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable 
to God, their reasonable service." 

When we do this, our Lord Jesus, as Advocate, imputes 
his merit to us, and we are accepted of the Father, 
during this "acceptable time of the Lord"— this Gospel 
Age, while the full number of the "elect" are being 
chosen. The Father's acceptance is indicated by the impartation 
of the holy Spirit, and we are "begotten [this 
text improperly translates it 'born'] of God." The word 
for "born" and "begotten," being the same (gennao) in 
the Greek, the context must indicate which should be 
used. In the present case it should be the word "begotten," 
because the New Creature is at this time but an 
embryo; it has not a new body; it has merely a new mind, 
a new will, a new disposition, which has been engendered 
by the Spirit of Truth and accepted of the Father 
as a begetting to the spirit nature. 

Everything connected with this New Creature is pure 
and sinless; it has none of the Adamic condemnation nor 
imperfection. It never had. It cannot agree to sin because 
it is out of harmony with sin. The desire for sin 

R4615 :page 165 

which might still lurk in the fallen members of our body, 
would be called, as the Apostle terms it, "the motions of 
sin in the flesh," or the struggles of the flesh. The flesh is 
reckoned dead, but is not actually dead— merely "dying 
daily." The New Creature thus contending against the 
flesh and mortifying the flesh, makes progress in proportion 
to its energy and success in this direction. 

"HIS SEED REMAINETH IN HIM AND HE CANNOT 



SIN" 



If this new will, this new mind, that God has accepted 
and recognized as a New Creature, should ever, knowingly, 
intentionally, approve of sin and connive at sin, 
this would prove that the Spirit of the Lord, the new 
mind, is gone, because it is merely the new will, the new 
disposition, at the present time that represents this New 
Creature. It is not the flesh; it is not the gray matter of 
the brain; it is the will which controls the brain and seeks 
to regulate the thoughts and intentions of the heart, and, 
so far as possible, all the actions of the daily life. The new 
will is the New Creature in the most emphatic sense. If, 
then, the will has ceased to be in harmony with God's 
will, it has perished as a new will and is merely the old 
will revived. This would indicate that the seed of truth, 
the seed of this power of God, has died in the individual; 
for as long as "his seed remaineth in him he cannot sin." 
He cannot intentionally and knowingly approve sin or 
practice sin. 

The New Will might at times be entrapped, because 
the will is very particularly identified with the body, with 
the human brain, and therefore with all the affairs of life. 
At such times it might become thoughtless respecting its 
obligations and the propriety of its course, and so the 
New Creature might be overtaken in a fault; but it could 
not be a New Creature and yet have a will or intention 
to do that which is evil— contrary to righteousness and 
to the Divine will and intention. 

"If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves 
and the truth is not in us." (I John 1:8.) How shall 
we harmonize this text with the preceding one is a question 
that comes up? The Apostle is not here saying that 
our flesh sins and that we do not sin. Nor do we understand 
him to be saying, "If any man says that his flesh 
does not sin he is a liar," but we understand him to be 
saying, "If we [New Creatures] say that we have no sin, 
the truth is not in us." He is thus saying that we, New 
Creatures, are responsible for sin. We understand the 
solution of this to be found in the difference between the 
will or intention of the New Creature, and the ability of 
the New Creature. The New Creature never wilfully 
sins, never intentionally does wrong, but may be ensnared 
through the evil propensities of its fallen body of flesh. 

This earthly body is reckoned dead and God has nothing 
to do with it. God does not judge nor deal with 
dead things; "ye are dead," so far as the flesh is concerned. 
Hence God is not judging the body; he is not 
noting what your body did, what you as a human being 
did, because you no longer exist as a human being, from 
the Divine standpoint or records. Your whole standing 
with God is as a New Creature; but you have a responsibility 
for your body, your tongue, your hands, your feet, 
and all that these do. As a steward over these it is for 
you, as a New Creature, to do the best with them that 
you can, and you are responsible for them. 



To illustrate: If a man owns a dog and knows the 
dog has a bad temper and will bark and bite and annoy 
the neighbors, it is his duty to muzzle the dog or chain it. 
If the dog gets loose at any time and bites somebody, the 
dog will not be sued in court, because the dog has no responsibility 
in the matter, but the suit will be brought 
against the owner of the dog. He is the one that is held 
responsible for what the dog does. 

So in the Divine Court, we as New Creatures are held 
responsible for our body— for what our hands do, for 
what our feet do, and for what our tongues do. If, therefore, 
the body sins, the New Creature is charged with 
that sin, whatever it may be— whether it be a grievous 
sin or a less sin; and when we say, "if the body sins," we 
are merely putting it in an accommodated form, because 
we know that in the flesh there is no perfection; that 
there is not a New Creature who has a body that is perfect 
and that can keep the law of God absolutely. 

"FORGIVE US OUR TRESPASSES AS WE FORGIVE 
THOSE WHO TRESPASS AGAINST US" 

Thus we see that every New Creature is charged with 
the defects of his mortal flesh. These, in the Scriptures, 
are called "trespasses," and in the Lord's Prayer we are 
instructed what we should do with respect to these trespasses. 
When we pray, "Forgive us our trespasses as we 
forgive those that trespass against us," we are not referring 
to Adamic sin, which God does not forgive, but 
which is atoned for by the merit of Christ, imputed to 
us. When we speak here of "trespasses" we are referring 
to those sins which we as New Creatures commit 
unintentionally, against the Divine plan or law because 
entrapped or ensnared by our infirmities or by the surrounding 
conditions and temptations of life. These 
might overcome the New Creature and swerve him from 
his course, just as the bringing of a magnet into the 
vicinity of a compass might cause the needle of the compass 
temporarily to deviate; this would not mean that the 
compass has been spoiled, nor that it is a bad compass because 
temporarily it has been turned from its proper 
course; and so with us. The new mind, the new will, is 
in harmony with God and anything which might distract 
it in any degree would be merely a temporary matter and 
would not necessarily mean our imperfection as New 
Creatures. In the case of the compass, if the opposing 
magnet were removed, the needle of the compass would 
immediately revert to the North; and so with us, if the 
overpowering temptation were out of the way, our hearts, 
as New Creatures, would at once revert to loyalty to 
God. This illustration, of course, is not a perfect one 

R4615 :page 166 

because the compass has no intelligence, no will, no power 
to improve itself nor to add to its resistance of outside 



influences. 

These trespasses, as we bring them to the throne of 
grace, would not be forgiven unless we had an Advocate, 
and then our Advocate could do nothing for us except as 
he had merit at his command that he could appropriate on 
our behalf, because God is dealing on lines of strict and 
absolute justice. Hence when we come to the throne of 
heavenly grace the basis of our faith and confidence 
should be that we have a great High Priest who has entered 
for us into the "Most Holy"; that this Great One 
is our Advocate with God, and that the basis of his effective 
advocacy is the merit of his sacrifice— that he has the 
wherewithal to satisfy Justice on behalf of all of those 
imperfections that are ours unwittingly, unintentionally. 

God might have arranged that the merit of Christ's 
sacrifice should not only cover or be effective for 
"all those sins that are past through the forbearance 
of God" at the time of our acceptance as New Creatures, 
but should also be applied for all further imperfections 
of the flesh to the very end of our lives. But 
he did not make such an arrangement and evidently he 
purposed this that it might be to our advantage, so that 
when we trespass we might have the humiliating experience 
of being forced to come "to the throne of grace to 
obtain mercy and find help for every time of need." Whoever 
has had any experience as a child of God in coming 
to the throne of grace has, doubtless, to some extent, had 
this very humiliation. 

If, for instance, the New Creature found that he was 
overtaken in the same fault a second time, it would produce 
special humiliation, and every additional humiliation 
should make that New Creature more and more earnest 
in his endeavors that this particular lesson should be well 
learned— that never again need he make application along 
the same line to the Lord for forgiveness. Thus we see 
in this arrangement of the Lord a great blessing— a blessing 
in that it will keep us humble and also keep us continually 
coming to the throne of grace and cognizant of 
the fact that we are imperfect according to the flesh; 
keep us looking at the standard which God has set, to see 
to what extent we are still imperfect; and will lead us 
to watch ourselves daily that we may grow as New 
Creatures. In harmony with this the Apostle Paul, addressing 
New Creatures, says: "If any man sin, we have 
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous." 

We must understand the Apostle here to mean that if 
any man sin because of his not having a perfect body, if 
he sin because of the imperfection of the flesh and surrounding 
temptations, but who as a New Creature desires 
to do God's will, let him "come boldly to the throne of 
Heavenly grace." Let him have courage to come. Let 
him not delay to come. As a matter of fact, however, 
we know that many do delay to come to the throne of 
grace; they feel ashamed to go to the Heavenly Father to 
acknowledge that they have made another failure; and 
thus hindered by their shame, or by their pride, or by discouragement, 



they are in great danger, because the longer 

they remain away the more serious will their condition 

become, the colder will be their heart and the more 

numerous will be the spots upon their "robe of 

righteousness." 

GREAT COMPANY MUST WASH THEIR ROBES AND 
MAKE THEM WHITE 

And so it is that those who are most fervent in spirit 
and most fully in accord with the Lord are very careful 
that not even a single spot shall soil their robe of righteousness; 
but if a spot should appear they hasten at once 
to have it cleansed with the blood of Christ; while others 
who take a different course grow gradually more and more 
careless until their robe becomes very much spotted and 
the cloud between them and the Lord becomes darker and 
darker, and they may perhaps be engulfed in worldliness, 
and eventually incur the penalty of the Second Death. 
Even in the case of those with whom it does not eventuate 
so seriously, we see the picture given us in the Scriptures 
of how deplorable is their condition; that they will 
not be accounted worthy to be of the "Little Flock"; they 

R4616 :page 166 

will not be accounted worthy to be of the Royal Priesthood; 
they must suffer many stripes; and the very highest 
position possible for them to attain is a place in the 
antitypical Levite company, the "Great Company," 
servants of the Royal Priesthood. 

This picture is given us, we remember, in Revelation, 7th chapter, 
where the "Great Company" is shown as 
washing their robes and making them white in the blood 
of the Lamb. There would be no need of washing the 
entire robe unless the entire robe were spotted. Those 
who keep their garments unspotted from the world by 
noting every spot which might appear, and go to the 
throne of grace immediately that they, as New Creatures, 
may "walk in white"— these are the ones who are pleasing 
in the Lord's sight. It is to this class that we all 
wish to belong. 

WHEN THE NEW CREATURE CEASES TO EXIST 

It might be asked, at this time, how does Christ act 
as Advocate for the sins of the New Creature and apply 
his merit for their sins? We answer that all the sins that 
are charged to the New Creature are the earthly weaknesses 
and imperfections, and Christ's merit is all of an 
earthly kind. He has nothing to give away of a heavenly 
kind. The sacrifice he made was an earthly sacrifice, the 
merit of which has been imputed to those who come to the 
Father through him; so it is merely for the earthly sins, 
and the unwilling sins, so far as the New Creature is 
concerned, that his merit is applied. 



If the New Creature is unfaithful in the sense of 
agreeing to sin then the New Creature ceases to be- 
there is no New Creature there. But the New Creature 
might be asleep and might be entrapped in that way; as 
for example: There might be a servant who is at heart 
loyal to his master in that he would not wish to connive 
with robbers that they might enter the house; but if that 
servant were careless with respect to the locks on the 
doors and a thief should break in through that carelessness, 
he is unfaithful, and is a transgressor to that extent. 
But if he had connived with the marauders and robbers 
and had opened the door to let them in, he would be no 
longer a servant; he would be no longer a member of that 
household, but an enemy. He would be a robber himself. 

So if we as New Creatures connive at sin and make 
provision for the flesh and watch for opportunities to get 
into relationship with sinful things, the New Creature in 
that case has ceased to be a New Creature. He is an old 
creature, merely masquerading, and there would be no 
further hope for such a one. He has passed beyond hope. 
But if he has been careless and the robbers (we speak of 
these sinful propensities as robbers) have insidiously 
engaged him in conversation, and one is enticing him to 
hold open the door for conversation, while another goes 
around in some other way and thus breaks in, he is responsible 
to the extent that he has communed at all with 
any of these influences. He has no right to have anything 
whatever to do with sin. He has no right to have any 
fellowship with sinful things. He should have nothing 
to do with the unfruitful works of darkness, nor be in 

R4616 :page 167 

harmony with them in any sense of the word, but should 
turn from them as from an enemy. We have no right to 
have any fellowship or sympathy with that which the 
master of the house has prohibited. The Master of our 
house is Christ the Lord, and his will and his rule are to 
be respected, not only in the outward letter, of apparently 
trying to keep the house secure, but to the full extent of 
resisting and treating as enemies everything that is not in 
accord with him. The more firmly we get this thought 
fixed in our minds the greater will be the power that we 
shall find supporting our new wills in this resistance of 
sin. 

"MY SOUL, BE ON THY GUARD" 

According to the Scriptures, as well as according to 
our own experience and that of many others of which we 
have knowledge, all sin which comes in upon a New Creature, 
comes very insidiously and generally in some soft 
way. An outward attack, like throwing stones, is never 
made. One would shut the door promptly against such 
an attack; but it is the smooth-spoken sins, the smooth-tongued 
sins, that come in, the sins that appear to be right. 



Going back to the illustration of the dog: It is when we 
feel that there is some provocation for letting down the 
chain, so that the dog can do some good with his teeth— 
that there is somebody that ought to be bitten— that is the 
time when we throw ourselves open to danger. We are 
slow to learn to fully appreciate the fact that the dog is 
not to bite anybody; he is not to bite the friends of the 
family, nor the enemies of the family. He is to be kept 
chained all the time. Then, as to how much the dog 
may bark: You can readily see what that would mean. 
That is evil speaking. If the dog keeps on barking he 
will annoy not only the family, but also the neighbors and 
friends and even the enemies. The New Creature has 
no right to allow this. His tongue may speak that which 
is good and that only. This is an absolute command: 
"Speak evil of no man"— not only of no man in the 
Church, but of no man outside of the Church; and in this 
case, the man includes the woman. 

We might ask if our Lord Jesus, when he ascended 
up on high, "there to appear in the presence of God for 
us," applied the whole of his merit; and if so, what has 
he now to apply for these daily trespasses that we unwittingly 
and unwillingly commit and on account of which 
we are bidden to come with courage to the throne of 
Heavenly grace and remember that we have an Advocate? 
We answer that our Lord, when he died, gave into the 
Father's hands the entire merit of his earthly life, but 
he did not apply it to any specific use or purpose. He 
merely said, "Into thy hands I commit my spirit"— my all 
is given up to the Father. When he ascended up on high 
all those earthly life-rights were in the Father's hands, 
were in bank, so to speak. But it is one thing to have 
something in bank and another thing to appropriate 
money to others. Our Lord deposited his merit in the 
heavenly bank, so to speak, and it was there for him 
when he ascended up on high to make appropriation of it. 

What appropriation did he make? He did not appropriate 
his entire merit to one individual and as soon 
as that individual was through using it, appropriate the 
whole to another individual; but all this merit of his, in 
every particular and in the widest scope it could possibly 
cover, was left in the hands of God, and he did not appropriate 
it all at one time, but merely drew against it. 
As we would say if we were speaking financially; he drew 
many drafts against that deposit; he imputed a share of 
that merit to each one who would believe in him and turn 
from sin and make a consecration such as he has made, 
and would seek to walk in his steps to the end of the 
journey. 

So, then, our Lord's merit was not merely for believers 
living at the time of his death, but for us who are 
now living and for all consecrated believers of the obedient 
class, and for all of their interests. But while it was 
all put into God's hands for that purpose and left there 
as security for all that class, nevertheless it went out or 
was individually applied as each one needed it. At that 



time there was only a small number of disciples, about 
five hundred brethren, and the merit, or imputation of 
merit, to cover their Adamic sin and render them acceptable 
as sacrifices, was granted instantaneously, and as a result 
the holy Spirit came upon all those in that waiting attitude 
at Pentecost. The Lord has since been appropriating 
his merit to all those who come to the Father by 
him; this merit is applied to no others, and it flows 
from that same source and fountain of grace. It is not 
only sufficient to apply for all the sins, imperfections and 
blemishes of the past, but is sufficient for all the imperfections 
and blemishes as long as we remain in the flesh, 
because it has not been given wholly at any time, but 
remains as a continual fountain of supply, from which 
we may daily draw. 



R4616 :page 167 

WHAT THE CHURCH SHARES WITH CHRIST 

BRIEFLY summed up, the Church is called, by 

special invitation, to a "high calling"; a 

high station— now to suffer with Christ, 

that she may in due time reign with him. 

This suffering with Christ is not suffering 

for sin we may commit, for he never suffered 

in any such sense. If we suffer with 

him, our suffering must be along the line of 

experiencing injustice and in laying down 

our lives in the service of righteousness. 

His sufferings were sacrificial sufferings, hence if 

we share in his sufferings, our sufferings must be 

sacrificial. 

We share with him in the begetting of the holy Spirit 
and we share with him in his resurrection, if, as the 
Apostle says, we are faithful in suffering with him, faithful 
in the matter of participating in his death; for, "If we 
be dead with him, we shall also live with him; if we suffer 
with him, we shall also reign with him." 

Looking at the matter from the standpoint of the 
Scriptures we shall see that they sometimes speak of 
Christ and the Church under the figure of one 
great Priest, Jesus the Head and the Church his Body, his 
consecrated self-sacrificing members, and the "Great Company, 
the antitypical house of Levi, the servants of the 
Priest. Sometimes the Scriptures speak of us as the 
under-priesthood, and Christ Jesus as representing the 
Head of this priesthood. In all these figures the thought 
is that in some sense we share with our Lord in his 
work. As the Apostle expresses it, "we are one loaf," all 
members or participants in that one loaf. The breaking of 
that one loaf, which was accomplished in our Lord Jesus 
primarily, is continuing in those who are accepted as 
members of him, continuing in those who keep their 



hearts with all diligence. 

In the matter of sin atonement, "we were children of 
wrath even as others," and therefore we had nothing 
wherewith we could procure the redemption either of ourselves 

R4617 :page 168 

or of anybody else. Hence we were wholly dependent 
upon God's provision in Christ Jesus our Lord, 
"who gave himself a ransom for all"— a ransom-price. 
We, therefore, have none of this ransom merit in us; 
but when he gives us a share of this, or imputes 
it to us, and then, by virtue of our consecration 
and his becoming our Advocate, the Father receives us as 
members of his Body, we thus become members of the 
Ransomer, because his work of ransoming is not completed. 
He has indeed given the ransom-price, but he has 
not yet applied this price for all. We had nothing whatever 
to do with the matter at the time the price was 
laid down, but we become identified with him before 
that price is applied to the world. We have, therefore, 
that much share in the ransoming-work, because the word 
"ransom" takes the thought not only of the work that 
Jesus did in the past, but also of the whole procedure 
down to the very end of the Millennial Age. To ransom 
means, not only to purchase, but to receive or to recover 
the thing that is purchased. We have nothing to do with 
the payment of the price that secures the ransom, but we 
have something to do— and are counted in with him— in 
the work of recovering that which was bought with his 
merit. 

It will take all of the Millennial Age to recover 
mankind in the full sense of the word, to ransom them or 
to bring them back; as we read, "I will ransom them from 
the power of the grave." The ransom-price for that purpose 
was paid nearly 1 ,900 years ago, but they are not yet 
ransomed from the grave and will not be until the 
awakening time in the Millennium. Then, as they gradually 
come out of sin and death conditions, the full intent 
and purpose of that ransoming will be in process of accomplishment, 
and since the Church is to be associated 
with Christ in all the work of the Millennial Kingdom, 
therefore the Church, in that sense of the word, will be 
identified with the ransoming work, or the work of 
deliverance. 

As represented in the "sin-offering," the merit 
originally proceeded from the great High Priest, who is 
Jesus, and that merit is conferred upon the Church, his 
Body, not apart from himself, but as members of himself. 
He does not treat us as separate from himself. He 
is simply adding to himself these members, and as soon 
as we become justified through his merit and accepted of 
the Father as members of his Body, we are members of 
the great High Priest who has a great work to do; and 
when the merit that has been imputed to us, and to every 
spirit-begotten member of the household of faith, shall be 



available for disposal the second time, all the members of 
his Body will have participation in the application of his 
sacrifice, in the sprinkling of the New Covenant. 

Our Lord's present invitation is to drink with him his 
"cup," to partake of it. This is the blood of the New 
Covenant, his blood, "shed for many for the remission 
of sins," of which we are all to drink, and it takes the 
entire Gospel Age to find the proper number of those who 
are thus invited in harmony with the Father's plan, and 
who are willing to drink of this cup, to be baptized into 
his death. 



R4617 :page 168 

THE HEAVEN-PROVIDED BREAD 

-MAY 29.-MATTHEW 14:13-21; 15:29-39.- 

Golden Text:— "I am the bread of life."— John 6:35. 

THE GOSPELS give us two distinctly different 

miracles of feeding the multitude 

in the wilderness places. On one occasion 

the number fed was five thousand and in 

the other four thousand. In the one case 

it was a lad who provided five small barley 

cakes and two fishes; in the other the 

disciples themselves had seven loaves and 

a few fishes. In one instance twelve 

baskets full of fragments were gathered 

after the repast; in the other seven baskets full. St. 

Matthew's Gospel records both of these miracles. In 

each instance there was a seeming necessity for the 

miracle, and the necessity prompted our Lord's compassion 

and the use of the Divine power. It will be noticed 

that in these instances the Master used for the benefit of 

others the special powers communicated to him at the 

time of his baptism through the descent of the holy 

Spirit; but we recall that Jesus refused to use this same 

power selfishly for his own comfort, even when he hungered 

after having spent forty days in the wilderness at 

the outstart of his work, studying the Scriptures to know 

the mind of the Lord, how he should suffer and become 

the Mediator of the New Covenant. 

"BUT SOME DOUBTED" 

Not all, even of those who associated with our Lord, 
understood, appreciated, believed in his wonderful 
miracles. Where there is a desire to disbelieve there is 
also a possibility. Indeed, the Scriptures are evidently 
quite true in their assurances that faith is a difficult 
matter at the present time; and that for this very reason it 
is specially appreciated of the Lord in those who profess 



to be his followers. The Scriptures intimate that faith 
is a gift of God, while at the same time it is a matter of 
our own exercise. It is for God to set forth the facts and 
bring them to our attention. It is for us to be able to appreciate 
those facts and to exercise the corresponding 
faith. As the Scriptures declare, "All men have not faith"; 
"Without faith it is not possible to please God"; "According 
to thy faith be it unto thee." 

God has not made faith equally possible to all, in 
that he has not given mankind the same opportunities for 
exercising faith by not giving all the same degree of 
knowledge upon which to base faith. And even amongst 
those who have the necessary knowledge, faith must depend 
considerably upon the structure of the brain. Some 
people have scarcely anything of faith; others with a different 
structure of brain, are inclined to believe too much 
—to be credulous and easily hoaxed. 

While God declares that none can be of his Church 
now being called unless they have faith, including the 
necessary knowledge as a basis for it, yet he does not say 
that those who have not the knowledge and have not the 
faith will, on that account, be turned over to demons for 
eternal torture. On the contrary such already suffer a 
measure of deprivation of joy and of blessing. Failure on 
their part to exercise faith should not bring upon them 
any additional disadvantages. God has decreed that faith 
shall "come by hearing and hearing by the Word of God;" 
that none can believe except they hear, and that none 
but the believing will have part in the Church's salvation 

R4617 :page 169 

now being effected. But he has equally decreed and 
arranged for the great mass of mankind who have never 
had the sufficiency of knowledge and of faith, that all may 
yet come to a salvable condition. Indeed, God has 
specially made the way of faith in this age a "narrow" 
one, that thereby he may select a very special class. But 
these selected or elected ones, as the Scriptures show, are 
to be the Royal Priests of the next age, who will enlighten 
and instruct all the families of the earth. Then 
"all the blind eyes shall be opened and the deaf ears shall 
be unstopped." (Isa. 35:5.) Then everything in the 
Divine arrangement connected with mankind will be 
openly revealed, plain to be understood; as the Scriptures 
say of that time— then the way-faring man, though simple, 
need not err as respects the way of righteousness. Let 
us, however, rejoice if we are amongst the blessed, the 
favored ones of the present time to whom the things of 
God are not obscure— of those whose hearts are so in 
tune with the Infinite One that the things of faith revealed 
to us in the Scriptures do not seem unreasonable. 

THE LANGUAGE OF FAITH 

Approached from the Bible standpoint, these 



miracles are most rational, but not from any other 
standpoint. The power of God, which produces, in the 
recently discovered "miracle-wheat," as much as two hundred 
and fifty grains from one kernel, is surely sufficient 
to produce many times as much if the necessity occurred. 
Are we not surrounded by miracles continually? Out of 
the same ground and growing side by side we get blue, 
red, white, yellow and purple flowers from seeds which we 
could not tell apart; similarly with animal life— the oats 
which constitute the breakfast of so many humans, help 
to produce human heads and faces and hands and feet, 
hair and nails for black and white and yellow races. 
Similar oats fed to horses, mules and donkeys sustain 
very different organisms of very different shapes and 
qualities. The same oats fed to birds and chickens produce 
feathers, claws, etc. Are not these miracles which 
we do not understand? 

If the wisest and most skillful man in the world cannot 
produce a flea nor the very smallest germinating grain, 
how great must be the Creator who formed all things and 
who gave to man all that he possesses! How can we 
limit the powers of such a Creator when once we have 
recognized him? He that made the eyes, can he not see? 
He that made the arm, has he no strength? He that made 
the human brain and stamped it what it is, has he not infinitely 
greater wisdom and power? This, then, is the 
lesson to us of the loaves and fishes. 

It is the lesson of Divine power; a lesson also that 
Jesus of Nazareth was the Son of God, through whom 
that Divine power was exercised. This lesson leads us 
onward to the thought that this same Jesus is appointed 
of the Father to be the Savior of the world. Thus far 
merely the Church, the elect, his Bride, has been selected, 
along lines of faith. Shortly the new dispensation will 
usher in the reign of knowledge and glorious opportunities 
for the opening of the eyes of all to see, to know, to 
appreciate, things Divine and to come, if they will, into 
the condition in which they may enjoy "the gift of God, 
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord." 



R4618 :page 169 

ST. PETER CRIED "LORD, SAVE ME" 

-JUNE 5. -MATTHEW 14:22-36.- 

Golden Text:— "Then they that were in the ship came and worshiped 
him, saying, Of a truth thou are the Son of God." 

RESPECTING its heroes the Bible, unlike any 
other religious book, tells the naked truth. 
Today's study emphasizes both the strength 
and the weakness of St. Peter's natural disposition. 
We identify the character here 



pictured as the same which was displayed 

on other occasions— noble and courageous, 

but rather forward and boastful. Not a 

single weakness of any of the Bible 

characters seems to be smoothed down or 

cut away in the narrative. It was this same St. Peter 

who, after hearing Jesus tell of his approaching death, 

took the Master to task for it, upbraiding him for speaking 

after this manner and assuring him that he did not 

tell the truth, and that the disciple knew more than his 

Master; that the latter was either ignorant or else wilfully 

misrepresenting the future. No wonder the Master rebuked 

him, as in this matter being an adversary. 

The same courageous man afterward drew his sword 
and smote the servant of the High Priest in his Master's 
defense. Yet with all this it was only a few hours later 
when he denied him entirely with oaths and cursing. 
Nevertheless, the Master loved him; with his peculiar 
combination of weakness and strength he had, withal, a 
noble, faithful heart, even while he boastfully declared, 
"Though all men forsake thee, yet will not I." 
Our study shows us St. Peter with the other disciples in a 
fishing-boat on a boisterous sea. Jesus had declined to 
go with them in the boat, withdrawing himself to the 
mountain for a season of prayer. The boat had not yet 
reached her destination, when the disciples saw the 
Master walking upon the water and drawing near. At 
first they were all affrighted; then reassurance came from 
his word, and finally St. Peter asked the Lord's permission 
that he might walk to him on the water. This permission 
was granted, and we cannot doubt that, had the 
Apostle maintained his faith, he would have reached the 
Lord in safety, for the same power that had exercised 
itself in him and in the other disciples for the healing of 
sick and the casting out of demons was absolutely able 
to keep him from sinking into the water. 

"O THOU OF LITTLE FAITH" 

But while St. Peter's faith was stronger than that of 
the others and stronger than ours today, in that he even 
attempted to walk on the water, nevertheless it was 
not strong enough. As his eye caught a glimpse of the 
boisterousness of the sea his faith began to fail and he 
began to sink. The Master, however, caught him, saying, 
"O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt" ! 
The lesson of the occasion being ended, the wind ceased. 
All the disciples then offered the Lord their worship, 
realizing afresh that he was the Son of God in power; 
that even the winds and the waves obeyed him. 
"A hand that is not ours upstays our steps, 
A voice that is not ours commands the waves; 
Commands the waves, and whispers in our ear, 
O, thou of little faith, why didst thou doubt?" 
All are sinners. "There is none righteous; no, not 
one." Some do not realize the extent of their imperfections. 



R4618 :page 170 

Nevertheless it is safe to say that all sane people 
recognize themselves as imperfect and hence as unworthy 
the recognition of the great Creator. They cannot commend 
themselves to him as being worthy of his favor and 
life eternal. It is when this conviction of unworthiness 
becomes deep-seated; when the realization is keen that 
"the wage of sin is death," that the heart is most likely 
to realize the value of life eternal and to cry unto the 
Lord for deliverance from darkness, from sin's bondage 
and from its death sentence. To all such the Savior 
stands ready to lend a helping hand, as in St. Peter's case. 
He will not reproach such for their sins if they have repented 
of them and turned to righteousness. Rather, he 
will say, "Why did you not come sooner? I was quite 
willing to aid you as soon as you cried." 

THREATS OF TORTURE FAILED TO CONVERT THE 
WORLD 

Our forefathers used to think that they should picture 
before the sinner's mind an everlasting torture at the 
hands of devils. It seemed to them that such pictures 
would be more successful in drawing men from sin to 
righteousness than the Scripture penalty which declares 
that the wages of sin is death, "everlasting destruction." 
(2 Thess. 1:9.) But they overdid the matter. Their 
message failed to convert the world. It merely tortured 
the saintly, the loving, the Godlike. Men reasoned that 
there was probably some mistake about it, as it is contrary 
to all human experiences that life could persist in 
such untellable torture. Now, however, with the aid of 
the modern Bible, superior translations, marginal references, 
etc., the people of God are learning more and more 
that God's Word is true and that it should not be twisted 
—that when it says death it does not mean life in torture. 

Indeed, some have told us that to their minds the 
utter blotting out of existence which God has ordained 
to be the fate of those who refuse his every opportunity 
and offer of salvation is more of a terror to them than 
life in any condition would be. One reason that it has 
greater terrors undoubtedly is that it is more rational, 
and thinking people can and do receive it more earnestly 
and give it more weight. It is from everlasting destruction 
that the Savior stands ready to deliver every member 
of Adam's race from the death penalty— from the tomb 
and all the imperfections of mind and body which are 
parts of death. Jesus' death at Calvary was of sufficient 
value to cancel the sins of the first man and of all those 
who share the death penalty with him. Without 
Christ's death there would be no resurrection, no future 
life. 

A little while and the faithful ones shall come forth 
in the "first resurrection" to be Christ's Joint-heirs. Then 



will come the general uplift of mankind, including the 
awakening of those of the whole world from the sleep of 
death. Our Lord's help of Peter corresponds to that 
greater help of the whole world. It also illustrates 
how those who have already become the children of God 
would be in danger of sinning again, were it not for our 
Lord's helping hand. 



R4618 :page 170 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

THE RANSOM WORK 

QUESTION.— Were the physical sufferings of 
our Lord Jesus requisite to the ransoming 
of humanity? 

The Ransom, or corresponding price 
which our Lord Jesus gave, consisted 
in his being the Perfect Man with all the 
rights of Adam and in these being surrendered 
or given up to death regardless of 
whether his death would be an easy or 
a painful one. The Scriptures say that "it 
pleased the Father to bruise him," not indicating by this, 
however, that our Heavenly Father took pleasure in the 
sufferings of his Son, but that this was his pleasure so 
far as his Plan of Salvation, etc., were concerned. He 
put severe tests upon this One who would be the Redeemer 
of mankind, not only to develop him as the beginning 
of a new creation (Heb. 2:10) and to prove his 
character, but also to manifest to us and to angels and to 
all creatures the wonderful obedience of the Lord Jesus 
and his worthiness of the high exaltation to the divine 
nature and all the glorious offices to be accorded him. 
Hence the Father provided that he must be "led as a lamb 
to the slaughter," and he also provided, in the Jewish 
Law, that the extreme curse of that Law should be a death 
penalty on the tree. "Cursed is every one that hangeth 
on a tree." 

These provisions, we understand, were not of Divine 
necessity, but of Divine wisdom and expediency. It was 
necessary that Christ should suffer that he might enter 
into his glory— before he could be the qualified High 
Priest, and ultimately accomplish the work of Mediator 
between God and the world of mankind; hence his sufferings 
were permitted for the testing, the proving of himself. 
And so with the sufferings that come to the Body 
of Christ, the Church. They are for our own development. 
The Father deals with us as with sons. He lovingly 
chastises and corrects us that he may thereby fit and 
prepare us and demonstrate our worthiness of the glorious 
reward which he has arranged for us with our Lord, 
and under him. 



We get the right view of the entire matter, we believe, 
when we see that the death of Jesus was not the ransom; 
that it did not accomplish the ransom-work, but simply 
furnished the ransom-price; and that the ransoming with 
that price is a matter that is done in the "Most Holy"— 
in heaven. To explain: He ascended up on high, having 
to his credit the price or value sufficient to ransom the 
whole world, but none of it yet applied for any one. He 
has appropriated the merit of that ransom-price to the 
Church, imputing this merit to them during this Gospel 
Age, to cover their Adamic sins and to make good, to 
compensate for, the imperfection of their mortal bodies, 
thus enabling them to present sacrifices which God can and 
will accept through the merit of their Advocate. 

But that ransom-price, so far as the world is concerned, 
is still in reservation and will be given on behalf 
of them, as represented by the "sprinkling of the blood" 
at the end of the Day of Atonement, shortly now, in the 
beginning of the Millennial Age, to seal the New Covenant 
and to put into operation all the glorious provisions which 
God has made for the world. 

We believe it to be a very important matter to keep 
distinctly separate the work which Jesus did and the 
value of that in God's sight as an asset, something to his 
credit on the heavenly account and something which he 
now applies to us, and by and by will give in perpetuity 
to mankind as their ransom-price. 

R4619 :page 171 

OUTWARD POLISH VS. INWARD GRACE 

Question.— What constitutes the difference between the 
outward polish and politeness of some natural men 
and that polish and politeness which properly belongs to 
the New Creature, developed in the fruits and graces of 
the holy Spirit? 

Answer.— The qualities of meekness, gentleness, patience, 
etc., are qualities that belonged to the first man 
when he was created in the image and likeness of God. 
They are, therefore, human qualities that may be cultivated 
to a certain extent by any human being, and should 
be striven for by all. But, as a matter of fact, as a result 
of the fall, selfishness and general meanness have 
depraved the appetites and ways of all mankind to so 
great an extent that, as the Scriptures say, there is none 
righteous, perfect, no, not one; "from the crown of the 
head to the sole of the foot," all are imperfect. Hence 
no natural man would have these glorious traits of character 
largely and fully developed, though there certainly 
is a difference between the development of some and that 
of others. 

We see, however, that aside from these natural graces, 
some worldly people have assumed something of the 
various graces of the Spirit. In their business methods 
they attempt to be gentle, and properly so. It is considered 



a part of the proper conduct of colleges, and especially 
ladies' seminaries, to instruct the young in politeness, 
in what to say and what not to say; in how to say 
things and how not to say things; and all of this brings 
an outward smoothness to these persons in their general 
deportment. In such cases, however, the smoothness is 
cultivated because of the idea that this constitutes "good 
breeding"; that this is what any lady or gentleman should 
do or say; and thus it may be a mere veneer, not really 
effecting the sentiments of the heart. The person may 
be outwardly very calm and smooth and pleasant, and 
yet at heart feel very sour and envious and mean. 

Those who are merely outward observers might not 
be able to ascertain whether that man or woman were 
actuated by the proper spirit or not. They might not be 
able to know whether these changes were the "fruits of 
the spirit" or fruits of good education, but anyone knowing 
well the private life of such persons would be sure 
to ascertain the facts, because, as the old expression has 
it, "Murder will out"; and these persons, while they 
might preserve a smooth outward demeanor, would occasionally, 
in private at least, demonstrate that they were 
not in sympathy with the outward demeanor, but that it 
was merely a veneer, and to that extent hypocrisy. Perhaps 
a measure of hypocrisy in that sense would be advisable 
for some people; it might be better for them to 
put on a little veneer if they cannot have the genuine 
article; better that they should appear smooth rather 
than appear rough; it would at least help the world along 
a little for them to be as smooth as they are able in their 
general dealings. 

The merchant who, after pulling down large stocks 
of goods and telling a customer that it is no trouble at all 
to show goods, that he is just pleased at having the opportunity 
to do so, and that there is no obligation whatever 
in the matter, and showing the very essence of politeness, 
but who, after the lady is gone out of the store, 
stamps his foot and complains, announces thus to all in 
his company, that his politeness is merely assumed as a 
necessity in the business. He does this either for his 
own sake, if he is the proprietor of the store, or for the 
sake of his situation, if he is an employee. 

With the Christian these graces are developed from 
within. Whatever he may have been naturally, smooth 
or rough, the New Creature cultivates and approves these 
graces in the heart, and they reach from the heart 
all the way to the surface. It is the new mind that 
is regulating the New Creature, and the New Creature, 
instead of having smoothness merely on the outside, has 
it running clear through the grain from the very core. 

This New Creature that is thus developing may not at 
all times have as smooth an outward exterior as some of 
the old creatures who have the veneer for the sake of 
money or for other reasons. They may have worse 
natural dispositions; they may have naturally less 
patience, or less sympathy, or may be moved by such 



honesty as would lead them to avoid saying anything different 
from what they would feel, anything different 
from what would be their sentiments; and their sentiments, 
not having yet reached the right point, sometimes 
impel them to say the wrong thing. These, of course, 
should learn to govern the outward man even before all 
their sentiments have come into fullest sympathy with the 
Spirit of the Lord. They should recognize the proprieties 
of outward conduct, and speedily get in line with 
these proprieties, and as rapidly as possible bring every 
sentiment into full accord with the Spirit of the Lord that 
they may become more and more kind and loving and 
helpful to others and thus "show forth the praises of him 
who has called them out of darkness into his marvelous 
light." 



THE SAME VAIL UNTAKEN AWAY 

Question.— Please explain this text: "And not as 
Moses, which put a vail over his face that the children of 
Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which 
is abolished; but their minds were blinded, for until this 
day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the reading 
of the Old Testament, which vail is done away in Christ." 
-2 Cor. 3:13,14. 

Answer.— It was the intention that the Law Covenant 
should not be perpetual, because of the imperfections connected 
therewith. It has not yet been abolished, however, 
in the sense of being totally set aside. It is still 
operating and is still a condemnation upon those who 
are under it. But "to those who are in Christ Jesus," 
there is now no further condemnation; it is abolished so 
far as they are concerned. 

The thought, then, would be that the Apostle is here 
speaking of the Law Covenant being abolished in the 
sense that it is condemned or that its passing away is 
arranged for. "Christ has become the end of the Law for 
righteousness to every one that believeth," not to every 
one who has given merely an intellectual assent, but to all 
who believe in the Scriptural sense— to all those who become 
his followers, all those who so thoroughly believe 
his message as to accept the wonderful provisions he has 
offered; for it may properly be said that no one is fully a 
believer who does not accept God's offer of glory, honor 
and immortality— a proposition so wonderful that any 
one whose faith truly grasps it would sacrifice every other 
thing imaginable that he might avail himself of its offer. 

If, therefore, some obey partially, the inference is that 
they believe only partially; but if they believe fully, then 
all the arrangements are made for them whereby they 
may make their "calling and election sure"; hence the 
frequent statements that "all things" are for believers— 
those who believe in the proper, full, thorough sense. So 
"Christ is the end of the Law" to all these, and the arrangement 



is that all the world shall yet have the opportunity 
of coming to a full knowledge and full belief, 
during the Millennial Age. The whole Jewish nation 
will be granted an opportunity of transfer from the Law 

R4619 :page 172 

Covenant, under Moses, to the New [Law] Covenant, 
under the glorified Christ, in his Mediatorial Kingdom. 



SIGNIFICANCE OF THE UNDER-PRIESTS. 

Question.— In the appointment of the Aaronic priesthood, 
Aaron was the High Priest and his sons were associate 
priests. Is the fact that his sons were associated 
with him specially typical? 

Answer.— Evidently the type was intended to teach 
that these under-priests were the members, or body, of 
the High Priest, because that was the form in which the 
matter was expressed. He was to "make atonement for 
himself and his house." Now, what is the thought in this 
word "himself"? How would we most clearly express it? 
What relationship except that of a wife would more 
nearly represent one's self? The sons of Aaron, then, 
would represent him in a special manner, as though they 
were his body. A father is represented in his son in a 
particular sense. The type of the High Priest in his 
office would thus be maintained through successive 
generations. The sons were not, as sons, typical, but 
sons were in type the best representation of the body of 
the priest that could be made, and hence were representative 
of us, who are the Body of Christ. 

Question.— Are there any antitypical priests doing a 
priestly work at this time? 

Answer.— To our understanding the picture of the 
"priest" is an individual picture. It is not a work which 
priests are in a collective sense to do, but here the one 
priest is to do the work. In other words, the under-priests 
are merely recognized as representatives of the 
priest, the same as we are representatives of Christ. In 
that sense of the word it might be said that there is only 
one priest, the officiating priest, the one who does the 
particular work; but in another sense there is an under-priesthood 
—in the sense that we have a separate personality, 
as individuals, yet acting in conjunction with our 
Lord as his members. 

While recognizing the Scripture, "ye are a royal 
priesthood," let us lay stress on the Apostle's words which 
declare of our Lord, "if he were on earth he could not be 
a priest, seeing that there are priests who offer according 
to the Law." The Apostle then proceeds to prove that 
our Lord was a Priest after the order of Melchisedec, and 
that this Melchisedec priesthood was acknowledged of 
God with an oath, and that Aaron and his priesthood were 



never acknowledged thus. But respecting this man the 
Lord said, "I have sworn with an oath, thou art a Priest 
forever after the order of Melchisedec." 

Melchisedec was, of course, only the one priest, and 
that one priest, therefore, represented all our Lord's members, 
and since the great work of the antitypical Priest is 
in the future, and is not the present work, we see that 
this is the reason why Aaron is not so particularly referred 

R4620 : page 172 

to in the type of the Great Priest. The Great 
Priest will really do his great work during the Millennial 
Age, and what is done in the present time is merely a 
preparatory work, preparing himself for work. 

First, the Lord Jesus, in the three and one-half years 
of his ministry, proved himself worthy to be the Priest, 
and during the 1800 years since he is proving us worthy 
to be his members, and by the time he shall have completed 
his work of proving us all worthy, with himself, 
for this great and honorable position of Prophet, Priest, 
Mediator, King, Judge of the world, he will at the same 
time have to his credit certain merit which he can apply 
for the world and on account of which he can perform a 
priestly office for mankind. The priestly office, as before 
stated, is more that of the future than of the present. 
The present time is the sacrificing time, the time for 
making a covenant with the Lord by sacrifice. 

We agree, of course, that none of us is doing the sacrificing. 
The high priest smote the bullock and killed it, 
and the high priest, likewise, smote the goat and killed it. 
Then came the presentation; as, for instance, when the 
Apostle says, "Present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, 
acceptable unto God," etc., he is not here saying, Perform 
the work of a priest upon your body, but offer yourself 
as a sacrifice to the Lord; he may accept you; he may 
sacrifice you, and he may perform a service upon you 
which will prepare you for a share with himself, as a 
member of his Body, in the glorious work of the future, 
in the work of blessing all the families of the earth, in 
the work of ushering in the Times of Restoration which 
God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets 
since the world began.— Acts 3:19-21. 



page 172 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CONVENTIONS 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 5 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 
o'clock, in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks St. The 
evening meeting at 7:30 o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. 
Discourse for the Public at 3 p.m. in the Brooklyn 



Academy of Music, Lafayette Ave. and St. Felix St. 
Topic, "Jerusalem." 

LOUISVILLE, KY., JUNE 17-19 

Convention Hall, Scottish Rites Cathedral, Sixth and 
Walnut Sts. Services for the Public Sunday, June 19, 3 
p.m., Macauley's Theatre, Fourth and Walnut Sts. 
Bro. Russell will speak on "The Thief in Paradise; the 
Rich Man in Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." For 
particulars as to lodging, meals, etc., address Brother 
Percy McCormack, 1160 15th St., Louisville, Ky. 

CINCINNATI, OHIO, JUNE 20 

Morning meeting for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 
and afternoon meeting with address for the interested 
at 2:30 to be held in Germania Hall, 132 E. Court St., 
near Court House. Evening session at 8 o'clock at Music 
Hall, Elm St. near 12th. Discourse for the public; topic, 
"The Thief in Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell; Lazarus 
in Abraham's Bosom." 

CANTON, OHIO, JUNE 21 

Morning Rally at 10:30 o'clock. Discourse for the interested 
at 2:30 p.m. in McCurdy Block Hall, Walnut 
and East Tuscarawas Sts. Evening session for the public 
at 7:45 in the Auditorium. Subject, "Where Are the 
Dead?" 

MUNCIE, IND., JUNE 22 

Morning Rally at 10:30. Discourse for the interested 
at 3 p.m. in Red Men's Hall, High and Jackson Sts. 
Public meeting in the Wysor Grand Opera House at 8 
p.m. Subject, "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 

LIMA, OHIO, JUNE 23 

All meetings in the Auditorium of the Memorial 
Building, Elm and Elizabeth Sts. Praise, Prayer and Testimony 

page 173 

meeting, 10 a.m. Discourse for the interested at 
2:30 p.m. Meeting for the public at 7:30 p.m. Subject, 
"The Thief in Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell; 
Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." 

DAYTON, OHIO, JUNE 24 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10. Discourse 
for the interested at 2:30 p.m. in Rauh Hall, S. 
W. cor. Fourth and Jefferson Sts. Service for the public 
at 8 p.m. in Memorial Hall; topic, "The Thief in Paradise; 



the Rich Man in Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom." 

CHICAGO, ILL., JUNE 24-26 

All sessions in Orchestra Hall, Michigan Ave., between 
Jackson Boulevard and Adams St. Discourse for the 
Public Sunday, June 26, 3 p.m., by Brother Russell. 
Topic, "Hereafter." If a sufficient number of the friends 
attend this Convention, railroads have promised one and 
one-half fare for the round trip from all points except 
the extreme West and from nearby places where the 
regular fare is less than $ 1 one way. Purchase tickets 
one way only, and get a certificate, showing that you have 
paid full fare to Chicago on account of Watch Tower 
Bible & Tract Society's Convention. Notify your agent 
in advance so that he may have plenty of time to secure 
the certificate and ticket. The certificate, plus 25c, will 
entitle you to purchase your return ticket at one-half 
the regular rate. For particulars, address Brother John 
Hoskins, 418 W. 67th Blvd., Chicago, 111. 

TOLEDO, OHIO, JUNE 26 AND 27 

Morning Rally, afternoon and evening services on 
Sunday, June 26, Pythian Castle, Jefferson and Ontario 
Sts. Service for the public Monday, June 27, 7:30 
p.m., Memorial Hall, Adams and Ontario Sts. Discourse 
by Brother Russell on "The Thief in Paradise; the Rich 
Man in Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." All Monday 
meetings in the same building. For particulars, address 
Charles Moser, 842 Norwood Ave., Toledo, O. 
Come all who can and let those who cannot join us at 
these conventions in person, join us in spirit and in 
prayers, and thus participate in the showers of refreshing 
which the Lord will surely grant. 



R4620 : page 173 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION 

ON FRIDAY EVENING, April 22d, approximately 

360 celebrated our dear Redeemer's 

Memorial Supper in Brooklyn Tabernacle. 

The occasion was a very solemn and impressive 

one. It was shown that the eating 

of the bread pictured the appropriation of 

our Lord's human rights, by which we were 

justified and by which our justification or 

righteousness in God's sight is maintained, 

notwithstanding the imperfections which 

are ours through heredity. It was also shown that the 

blood represented primarily our Lord's earthly life rights 

appropriated to us, justifying us to life. 



Then the second and larger view of the matter was 
shown in the light of the Apostle's words— that all of the 
faithful, all of the Royal Priesthood, all of the members 
of the one Body of Christ, join with their Lord in becoming 
the One Loaf and join with him also in the breaking 
of that Loaf, that it may be the Bread of Restitution 
to the world of mankind. It was also shown in the light of 
the Apostle's words, that in becoming members of the 
Body of Christ we become sharers with our Lord in his 
cup of suffering, in his sacrifice of earthly life. It was 
further shown that in the Divine purpose this earthly life, 
which we surrender forever, goes under the New Covenant 
to Israel, Judah and all the families of the earth, 
while we are granted spiritual life. 

"The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion 
(fellowship-sharing) of the blood of Christ? The 
bread which we break, is it not the communion (in his 
sufferings) of the Body of Christ? For we being many 
are one bread and one Body; for we are all partakers 
(sharers) of that one Bread."— I Cor. 10:16,17. 

As a fresh glimpse was thus taken at the significance 
of the "deep things of God," the hearts of all were stirred 
to their depth. How wonderful it seems that we should 
be called to such an intimate association with our Lord 
and Redeemer, both in the sufferings of this present time 
and in the glories that shall follow, called to be "dead 
with him, that we might live with him." 

Almost all present partook of the Memorial emblems. 
The service was closed with prayer, followed by a 
hymn, after which all went out quietly, without the usual 
greetings, striving to carry, so far as possible, the precious 
thoughts of the occasion. 

Reports thus far received are that the celebration has 
been very general and the numbers participating very encouraging. 
Altogether the general interests of the harvest 
work seem to be deepening and broadening. We deeply 
appreciate the privilege of serving the Lord of the harvest 
in whatever way he may indicate. Let us all continue 
to do with our might what our hands find to do, and thus 
show forth more and more the praises of him who has 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. Let 
us resolve to keep our hearts with increasing diligence, 
recognizing that out of them are the issues of life. 

Below are some reports of the numbers participating 
in the Memorial celebration in the more prominent congregations 
which have thus far reported attendances of 
twenty and above:— 

Newark, O.; Elwood, Ind.; McLoud, Okla.; Bethlehem, 
Pa.; Kalamazoo, Mich., 20. Auburn, Ind.; Norfolk, Va.; 
Shawnee, Okla.; Abilene, Kan., 21. Rockford, 111.; Lime 
Sink, Ga.; Muncie, Ind.; Houston, Tex. (colored); Tacoma, 
Wash., 22. Colorado Springs, Colo., 23. Jacksonville, Fla.; 
Jackson, Mich., 24. Hamilton, Ont.; Cromwell, Conn.; Winnipeg, 
Man.; York, Pa., 25. Moore, Pa.; Port Huron, Mich.; 
Cohoes, N.Y.; Reading, Pa., 26. Butler, Pa.; Everett, 
Wash.; Harrisburg, Pa., 27. Dundee, Scot.; Tiffin, O.; 



New Brunswick, N.J., 28. Kewanee, 111., 29. Ashland, Ore.; 

Tampa, Fla., 30. Leicester, Eng.; New Brighton, Pa., 32. 

Johnstown, Pa., 33. New Liskeard, Ont., 34. Grand Rapids, 

Mich.; St. Petersburg, Fla.; Allentown, Pa., 35. Port Limon, 

Costa Rica, 36. Milwaukee, Wis., 37. Schenectady, N.Y., 

38. Stockholm, Sweden, 40. Atlanta, Ga., 41. Hayne, N.C., 

41. Omaha, Neb., 42. Bristol, Eng.; Lynn, Mass., 43. Denver, 

Colo.; Spokane, Wash.; Richmond, Va.; Worcester, 

Mass.; Youngstown, O.; Roseland, 111., 44. Altoona, Pa.; 

Kingston, Jamaica; Camberwell, Jamaica, 45. Houston, Tex. 

(white); Portland, Ore., 46. Bridgetown, Barbadoes, 47. 

Springfield, Mass., 50. Baltimore, Md., 51. St. Joseph, Mo.; 

Binghamton, N.Y., 52. Newark, N.J. , 53. Louisville, Ky.; 

Toledo, O., 54. Lancaster, Pa., 56. Kansas City, Mo., 57. 

Detroit, Mich., 59. Cincinnati, O., 65. Dayton, O., 67. Indianapolis, 

Ind.; San Antonio, Tex., 68. Columbus, O., 76. Toronto, 

Ont, 84. St. Louis, Mo., 96. Seattle, Wash., 103. 

Orebro, 107. Washington, D.C., 112. St. Paul and Minneapolis, 

Minn., 115. Providence, R. I., 105. Philadelphia, Pa., 

150. Chicago, 111., 275. Boston, Mass., 260. Glasgow, 308. 

Allegheny, Pa., 330. Brooklyn, N.Y., 360. 



R4620 : page 174 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

On Sunday morning thirty Sisters and fourteen 
Brothers symbolized their consecration into Christ's death 
by water immersion, and on Friday evening following partook 
of the Memorial Supper here in Glasgow; 287 in the 
Berkeley Hall, and 18 in their homes. As the time draws 
so near when the last of these Suppers will be partaken 
of by us, and when we shall "drink the wine anew" with 
our dear Lord in his Kingdom, we feel solemnized; but at 
the same time we are enabled by the Lord's grace to lift 
up our heads and rejoice, knowing that the time of our 
deliverance draweth nigh. 

While we were partaking of the Supper, we called to 
mind that several of our number had already passed beyond 
the vail since the last occasion. We remembered 
also many of our dear brothers and sisters who have 
emigrated from Scotland during the past year, and we 
prayed that the Lord would keep them faithful and continue 
to use them in his glorious service. We remembered 
also that a few of our number have ceased to meet 
with us because they differ, and we are praying that the 
Lord may open their eyes. 

We are looking forward with glad anticipation to the 
near visit of our beloved Pastor, and are preparing to distribute 
100,000 of the PEOPLES PULPIT issue, from door 
to door, in order to advertise the public meeting which 
(D.V.) he will address here on May 17. 

Requesting your prayers on our behalf, as we also 



pray for you, I am, 
Yours in our One Hope, JOHN EDGAR-Scotland. 



page 174 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

On Friday evening, April 22, 32 of the Ecclesia at 
Leicester participated in the Memorial of our Lord's 
Death. We realized that it was a privilege, not only to 
memorialize the death of our Lord, but to be counted 
worthy to suffer with him as prospective members of his 
Body, and in due time to reign with him if faithful. 

We also felt the nearness of the time when all the 
faithful ones will be gathered, and our earnest prayer 
is that we may ever abide in the "House" and have the 
"door-posts of our hearts" sprinkled with the blood, and 
be made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the 
saints in light. With much Christian love, I am, dear 
Brother, 

Sincerely yours in the Lord's grace, 

HENRY S. PORTER. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Church here celebrated the memorial of our Lord's 
death. Thirty-six partook of the supper, and pledged 
themselves anew to be "broken with him" and with each 
other, and to "drink the cup" which he drank, trusting in 
his merit and grace sufficient to help us to be faithful 
even unto death. 

On Friday morning eleven persons symbolized their 
consecration. We had a Prayer, Praise and Testimony 
Meeting and the Supper after 8 P.M. It was a glorious 
day and the Lord was with us. We remembered all in 
our prayers. With Christian love from the Church, 

Yours in fellowship and service, 

J. L. A. CONDELL-Costa Rica. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

It gives us great pleasure to be again privileged to forward 
you a report of our Memorial Service held on Friday, 
April 22. Twenty-eight brethren met in our hall, 
and a very impressive service was held, special attention 
being directed to the thought that very soon now, these 
Memorials will be at an end, and our heavenly hopes 
realized. 

Praying the Lord's rich blessing on our beloved Pastor 
in his tour among us and with continued love from us all, 

Yours in the one Hope, DON F. MURRAY-Scotland. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Knowing your interest in the reports of the Memorial 
observed by the Lord's people, I am pleased to hand in 
this report of the observance of the Ecclesia here. 

Sixteen of the class met and observed the Memorial 
according to instruction received from the Bible and 
through the DAWNS and WATCH TOWERS. The service 
was very impressive and all received a blessing in having 
our minds centered on our Passover Lamb, "who is slain 
for us," and also on our participation in the one Loaf and 
the Cup. 

This was all the more impressive as we realized the 
few remaining years in which it will be possible for us 
to observe the Memorial in this manner. Our attention 
was also called to the joy with which we expect to drink 
the Cup anew with our Head in the Kingdom. 

It was a blessed occasion. We pray that we may remain 
faithful as each year brings us nearer to the time 
when "we shall see him as he is" and be seated with him 
in his throne and commence the grand work of 
Restitution. 

During the day we were blessed by keeping our minds 
on what was occurring in Jerusalem— after sunset there. 
We were impressed with the thought that probably this 
year Brother Russell and those with him were privileged 
to observe the Memorial in that "upper room," possibly 
next after it was observed by Jesus at its institution. 

May the dear Lord continue to bless us all with "every 
good and perfect gift that cometh down from above" ! 

Your loving brother in Christ, 

C. WILBUR WILEY. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A company of consecrated followers of our dear Redeemer 
met together and partook of the Memorial Passover 
Supper. The occasion was solemn indeed. As 
each cup was drained, I am sure an appropriate prayer 
ascended from every heart that partook. We all appreciated, 
as never before, the great love of our heavenly 
Father for us, and the great privilege we have of being 
partakers of our Lord's broken body and shed blood, 
and we all went forth with renewed determination to 
follow more and more closely in the footsteps of our 
King. 

The service was conducted by our dear Brother Ganoung. 
Two of the number present came eighteen miles. 
They were Sister Lewis and Brother Schoonmaker, colporteur. 
With much love from all the class, and prayers 
always, that God will shower blessings upon you, we 
remain, 

Yours in love and fellowship, 

CLASS AT SENECA FALLS, N.Y. 



R4620 : page 174 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Our hearts were made glad as once again we celebrated 
the death of Christ, our Paschal Lamb, and our 
privilege of participation in the Body and in the death of 
The Christ, assurances of our future union with our 
living Head. The rarity of the occasion made it more 
precious. We considered that, at most, there are four 
remaining, and then we shall drink the product of the 
vine new in our Father's Kingdom. Forty-seven 
participated. 

Yours in Christ, A. T. JOHNSON-Barbadoes. 

page 175 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Memorial of our Lord's death was celebrated in 
our home, five fully consecrated persons participating. In 
the name of our Lord, the "Prince of Peace," we met. 
Brother H. F. Kuehn served the little company as we 
renewed our covenant with the Father of our Lord. 

It was a glad and solemn time: gladness for the great 
privilege of a participation in the same "loaf" and in the 
same "cup," and also for the great joy to know of the 
blessing that will come to all the families of the earth. 
We fully realized the Price which bought us, and the 
meaning of the covenant which we have made. 

Prayers were offered by all present, for all the dear 
ones "in our Lord," assembled together for this occasion; 
we also remembered you in particular, and those 
dear co-laborers with you in the Upper Room at Jerusalem. 
What a grand privilege you had! We seemed to 
realize the deep solemnity of such a great occasion, not 
only the being in the upper room, but the having one 
heart, one mind, one thought. Every heart seemed overflowing 
with love to our Heavenly Father and to our 
blessed Redeemer, Jesus Christ our Lord, and all the 
"household of faith." Our prayer is that we may be permitted 
to "die daily" in his cause, and to his honor and 
glory. 

We ask your prayers, dear Brother, and those of all 
your dear co-laborers, that we may be kept bound together 
in love, harmony and peace with God and our loving 
Master, and with each other during the coming years. 

Our dear brethren, Pilgrims A. Saphore and J. W. 
Adams, have made a very deep impression upon the hearts 
of the dear local brethren, and all present who heard their 
discourses. I hope that all present received some blessing 
through our Lord. 

May God's favor rest richly upon you and upon our 
mutual efforts to serve his cause. 

Yours in the love and service of our Lord, 
J. H. B. HOWARD-Tenn. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We know you will be interested in hearing from our 
little company regarding the celebration of the "Passover" 
Supper. Sixteen were present, and we felt the 
influence of the sweet fellowship which all of the Lord's 
people have in following the Master's instructions. It was 
a blessed thought that so many thought upon the dear 
Lord and were striving to be "broken" with him and pour 
out their lives in sacrifice. We feel sure his presence 
and Spirit were with us. We thought and spoke 
of the little company who were spending the Passover 
season amid the scenes and localities where our dear Lord 
passed the days of his earthly pilgrimage. No doubt he 
was in that "upper room" in person, even as he was so 
many years ago. 

We rejoice in the privilege of renewing our consecration 
vows and beginning another year with greater determination 
than ever to "run with patience the race set 
before us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of 
our faith." May the Lord's blessing be with you is our 
prayer. THE CHURCH AT SANTA MONICA. 



page 175 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE CREATION 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE IS 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES, VOLUME VI--STUDY I 

"In the beginning." 

JUNE 19 

(1) What is signified by the opening sentence of 
the Bible, "In the beginning God created," etc.? And 
are there other beginnings recognized in the Bible? If 
so, what? P. 17, par. 2. 

(2) Does the Genesis account relate to the creation 

of our earth? If not, why not? And what are the limitations 
of the creative work as recorded in Genesis? P. 18, 
par. 2. 

(3) Does the word day apply invariably to the 
twenty-four-hour periods generally so called? If not, 
describe other uses of the term day in the Scriptures and 
give citations. P. 19, par. 1. 

(4) How may we be sure that the Genesis days do 
not signify solar days, as in the more common usage of 
the word? P. 19, par. 1. 

(5) Should we understand that all of the days of the 
creative week are of uniform length? And if we ascertain 
the length of one of those days, would we be justified 



in assuming that the others were of similar length? 
P. 19, par. 2. 

(6) If we were to estimate those creative days as of 
seven thousand years each and the entire creative week 
as of forty-nine thousand years, how would these figures 
compare with the usual estimation of geologists? P. 19, 
par. 2. 

(7) What had Professor Dana to say on this subject? 
What were his opinions of "scientific guesses"? 

And how much must we suppose the writer of Genesis 
understood of the full import of his words? P. 20, 
par. 1,2,3. 

JUNE 26 

(8) Which is more logical, to believe as science 
teaches, that a blind and intelligent force is operative in 
the development of our planet, of which we can learn 

only by comparisons and guesses, or to suppose the manifestation 

a part of the Divine handiwork showing forth 

Divine wisdom, order and arrangement, and these items of 

the Divine Program revealed to us by a gracious Creator 

who foreknew the longings infinite of our minds? 

P. 20, par. 4. 

(9) Summarize the views of the Higher Critics and 
Evolutionists respecting creation. P. 21. 

(10) Do we object to Mr. Darwin's theory because 
he was a foolish man or on what grounds? And what 
can we say of his theory and of his test respecting 
pigeons, etc.? P. 22, par. 1,2. 

(11) What great error has helped to confuse Bible 
students and how should we understand the formation of 
our earth's crust in various layers of clay and rocks, evidently 
deposited in a liquid or plastic form? P. 22, par. 3. 

(12) Has God revealed anything respecting the 
manner in which the atoms of matter composing our 
earth were brought together? Or is there anything in 
the Bible to answer this question? P. 23, par. 2. 

(13) What is signified by basic, igneous rocks, and 
what does their location deep under the earth's surface 
indicate? And what do the higher layers of water-laid 
rocks and clays imply? P. 23, par. 3. 

(14) Explain in harmony with the Genesis account 
how the firmament or expanse or atmosphere surrounding 
our earth must have been formed and whether or not it 
probably required considerable lapse of time. P. 23, par. 3; 
P. 24, par. 1. 

(15) Explain the process by which the various strata 

of clay and sand, etc., were piled upon the igneous rocks, 
which evidently once had been in the molten condition. 
Tell why they were called rings and explain their influence. 
P. 24, par. 1,2. 



page 178 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, 
five vol.; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in Greek three vols.; in French, two vols.; 
in Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. 
each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the 
same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 
each. 



page 177 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI JUNE 1 No. 11 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Brother Russell's Foreign Tour 179 

Visit to the Pyramid 180 

Visit to Jerusalem and Vicinity 180 

Interest in the Truth Awakened in the 
Holy City 181 

Visit to Goshen and the Red Sea 182 

The Gifts and Calling to Israel 183 

How the Lord Became a Testator 184 

The Jews "Will Obtain Mercy Through 

Your Mercy" 185 

Praying for One Another 185 

"A Crumb from the Children's Table" 187 

The Fire of the Day of the Lord 188 

The New Mind vs. The Mind of the Flesh 189 

How May We Know When We Are in 

Danger 189 

When the Nations Will Seek God 190 

1910 General Convention 191 

Berean Studies on the Creation 191 

page 178 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 



not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



1910-VOLUNTEER MATTER-1910 

"What Is the Soul?" as the leading article and the entire 
"Do You Know?" Tract-both in PEOPLES PULPIT-comprise 
this year's Volunteer literature. It is awakening 
interest in many sections hitherto unheard from. 

Four million copies have been requested by the friends thus 
far— and they are being rapidly sent out. Those who have not 
yet ordered their supply, and others who require more, will 
assist us by advising at once how many required, so that we 
may have more printed. 

This blessed work of a thorough distribution is reaching 
many of the Truth-famished— those who are "hungering and 
thirsting after righteousness." Ardent letters of gratitude 
for the little paper left at their door are received daily from 
those thus refreshed. May God continue to bless the Volunteers. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR JULY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered: (1) Vow; (2) 105; (3) 49; (4) 246; (5) 
222; (6) 303; (7) 145; (8) 135; (9) 188; (10) 7; 
(11) 286; (12) 93; (13) 247; (14) 281; (15) 209; 
(16) 95; (17) 242; (18) 123; (19) 60; (20) 27; 
(21) 67; (22) 77; (23) 9; (24) 25; (25) 327; (26) 
152; (27) 107; (28) 37; (29) 113; (30) 325; (31) 216. 



R4621 : page 179 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S FOREIGN TOUR 

[LETTER DELAYED EN ROUTE.] 

TO THE FAMILY OF GOD AT BROOKLYN BETHEL AND SCATTERED 
ABROAD EVERYWHERE:- 



WHEN the announcement of our proposed tour 

of Great Britain, and, incidentally, to Palestine, 

was published, some of the friends inferred 

that it signified that there was something 

further to be brought out respecting 

the Great Pyramid and its teachings. Others 

thought that our purpose was some special 

effort to reach the Jews in connection with 

the Return of Divine Favor to Them and 

Their Land. However, we set these speculations 

at rest at once by stating that we went in the 

interest of the newspapers which are publishing our sermons 

—that the interest in the sermons might thereby 

be increased and the interest in the good tidings deepened. 

But our special object, as stated, was to visit and encourage 

and strengthen the Bible Students, especially of 

Great Britain. Our hope is that all of these objects will 

be accomplished— that the Lord will so supervise and 

direct and order our goings that his name may have 

praise and that his people may have refreshment and 

blessing. 

Upon seeing the announcement a number of friends 
in different parts of the country advised us of their desire 
to make the journey at the same time, if we were 
willing. We assured them that all had the same opportunity, 
and that we would be glad of their company, if 
the Lord's Providences seemed to open the way for them. 
Thus it happened that our company leaving New York 
numbered twenty-one, seventeen in addition to our own 
party, which consisted of Brother Driscoll, representative 
of the Press Association; Brother L. W. Jones, who 
served us as stenographer on the Atlantic, and Brother 
Rutherford, who served as stenographer on the Mediterranean, 
and who will visit the friends in Denmark, 
Sweden and Norway while we are in Great Britain and 
who will follow us in Great Britain, reaching home about 
a month or so later than we. 

The friends who accompanied us were Brother and 
Sister Davault, of Illinois; Brother and Sister Ward 
and son, of Maryland; Brother and Sister Owens, and 
Sisters Cobb and Noble, of New York; Sisters Frost, 
Paschal and Houston, of Texas; Brother Pierson, of Connecticut; 
Brothers Wilson and Young, of Oklahoma; 
Sister Jackson, of Canada; Brother Koetitz, of Germany, 
the latter joining our party in Switzerland, where, and 
subsequently, he served as our interpreter. We had the 
pleasure also of Sister Rutherford's company as far as 
Paris. 

As our vessel left her dock at New York upwards of 
one hundred and fifty of the New York Church waved us 
good-bye and sang for us several of the precious Hymns 
of Dawn. The incident was very impressive for us, as 
well as for others, and surely served to tighten the bonds 
of Christian love which unite all of our hearts. The upturned 
faces of the friends evidenced their love and 



zeal, their fellowship with the Master and with us. Our 
hearts were made glad by this manifestation of Christian 
fellowship, and we assure them all that not only they 
who were at the shore were remembered in our prayers, 
but all of the dear ones everywhere, for we well knew 
that our itinerary, having been published in THE WATCH 
TOWER, prayers would be ascending for us and for God's 
blessing upon our journey— from many hearts, from many 
lands. 

"Blest be the tie that binds 

Our hearts in Christian love; 
The fellowship of kindred minds, 
Is like to that above." 

Our journey was uneventful to Cherbourg, except that 
we had a little fog part of the way and a little rough 
weather. However, God graciously preserved us from 
any serious illness and we landed happy and well, a day 
later than anticipated, spending the night on the boat 
instead of in Paris. However, Paris had few attractions 
for us. Here, and to the end of our journey, we were 
rendered valuable assistance by the Tourist Agency of T. 
Cook & Son, through whom our tickets were purchased. 

At Berne we met some of the French and German 
friends, to whom we spoke of the gracious things of the 
Divine Plan. We noted the Covenant of Grace, under 
which the Church is being developed as the Body of 
Christ, the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, and Israel's Law 
Covenant, and also the New Covenant which will succeed it 
in due time for the blessing of Israel and through Israel 
all the families of the earth. After speaking to the 
friends for nearly four hours, and we trust proving of 
some assistance to them and comfort and joy in the Lord, 
we departed for Zurich, where we had a very pleasant 
season of fellowship with about sixty or more of German-Swiss 
friends, to whom we spoke for about two 
hours. We departed from them with many remembrances 
of their loving attention and kind words, which we understood 

R4621 :page 180 

through the interpreter, but read still more particularly 
in their eyes and general deportment. 

OUR VISIT TO THE PYRAMID 

On Wednesday we hastened through beautiful Italy 
to Naples and on board our ship. We had a delightful 
season of rest and refreshment on the sea before reaching 
Alexandria and then Cairo. The chief interest of the 
latter place centered in the Pyramid. Since we visited 
it eighteen years ago several of the casing stones have 
been found at the base of the Pyramid by the removal of 
the rubbish which had covered them for centuries. Inside 
the Pyramid there was also a change. The Brothers 
Edgar, of Scotland, visited the Pyramid last year to go 
over the measurements of its passageways, and incidentally 



they had the downward passage cleared of the rubbish 
which had accumulated in its mouth, entirely hiding 
it. The downward passage from its juncture with the 
ascending passage is now closed with an iron gate for the 
safety of those who enter the Pyramid. By the kindness 
of Dr. Edgar, who introduced us to an Arab Sheik (Judah 
Fide) of the vicinity, we were privileged to have the 
gate opened and through it to enter the subterranean 
chamber. 

We went all over the structure again— not, however, 
with the view of taking measurements, for these, we believe, 
have already been taken more accurately than instruments 
then at our command would permit. We merely 
reviewed this Great Witness to the Lord of hosts and 
recalled to mind its testimony, which we have already 
presented to our readers in the last chapter of the third 
volume of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. We again noted 
with admiration the exactness of the construction of this 
wonderful "pillar in the land of Egypt." In many places 
immense stones are so neatly joined together as to make 
it difficult to find the joint. The quarry from which these 
large lime-stones were evidently taken has been located 
to the southeast of the city of Cairo near the old city and 
citadel. But as for the immense red granite blocks used 
for the King's chamber and above it, no such stones are 
found within hundreds of miles— up the Nile. 

There was nothing else of special interest to us in that 
vicinity, except a trip a little further south in the vicinity 
of ancient Memphis, the ancient capital of Egypt, the 
ruins of which have been partially uncovered. There 
we were in the vicinity of the city of On, from which 
Joseph got his wife, and near the place of his severe 
trial, testing and exaltation. We called to mind the fact 
of his being a type of the sufferings of Christ and the 
coming exaltation of Head and members in the Kingdom 
of the Father. 

Embarking at Alexandria again, our thoughts preceded 
us to Jaffa, ancient Joppa, and to Jerusalem. But 
arriving at Jaffa we met with a great disappointment. 
The wind of the night before caused great swells of the 
sea toward the shore, which made it perilous for the 
launching of the landing boats for the passengers. The 
rockiness of the shore also added to the danger. The 
strength of the waves seemed likely to dash the boats 
against the rocks regardless of the skill of the boatmen, 
and the Jaffa boatmen are noted as being amongst the 
most skillful in the world. Arriving before noon we 
waited and waited, but no boats ventured out. The 
signals from the shore indicated that the Government 
would not permit the risk of life in landing the passengers. 
The captain of our vessel stated that he could not 
possibly delay his sailing for the next port beyond 6 p.m., 
and there were no signs that the weather would improve 
in the interim. 

Of course, this caused considerable disappointment, 
as we had earnestly desired, and surely expected, that we 



would celebrate the Lord's Memorial Supper in the Holy 
City in which the Master first broke the bread and drank 
the cup and gave to his disciples. As we thought the 
matter over, we concluded that the Lord was giving us a 
test of faith, and particularly a test of obedience. Would 
we murmur or complain if he should hinder us from 
landing, or would we be content with whatever we should 
see and realize as his guiding hand? Would we learn the 
lesson which he would teach us? We passed the word 
around amongst our company of nineteen, increased to 
twenty by Brother Hall, of the Oriental Commerce Company, 
who met us and greatly assisted in our journey 
at the suggestion of some of our mutual friends at London 

R4622:page 180 

who had written him respecting us. We all went 

to the Lord in prayer, telling him that while indeed we 

would be disappointed, we nevertheless would be submissive 

and neither murmur nor complain whatever might 

be the decision of Divine Providence, but if it pleased the 

Master to permit us to land we would accept this as a 

special mark of Divine interposition and favor and 

render thanks accordingly. You will be glad to learn that 

about 5 o'clock the captain received a signal from shore 

that if he would come a little nearer the boats would come 

to us. Thus at 6:10 p.m. we were safely on the boats, 

and half an hour later safely ashore. We all gave 

the Lord more earnest thanks and appreciated the more 

our privileges by reason of this little test of submissiveness, 

we are sure. 

OUR VISIT TO JERUSALEM AND VICINITY 

We spent the night at Jaffa and took the early morning 
train for Jerusalem, where we arrived at noon in the 
midst of a rain and hail storm, declared to be very unusual 
for the season. But the storm not only settled the 
dust, but gave us pleasant, cool weather for our visit to 
the Holy City and surroundings. Brother and Sister 
Thompson, Colporteurs, met us here. For the past two 
years they have been living in Australia, later visiting 
some of the cities of India and Egypt. They came to 
Jerusalem to Colporteur and in time to meet us. They 
will remain there for some time as representatives of the 
Society to scatter seeds of Truth and to water seeds already 
planted and in general to help forward the cause 
of the harvest work of the Great Reaper, whom we all 
love to serve. 

Of course, we visited "the Jews' wailing-place" and 
sympathized with the poor people who there were reading 
the Book of Jeremiah and the Book of Lamentations 
and "waiting for the consolation of Israel." We rejoiced 
to know from the Divine Word that their expectations 
will be more than fully realized shortly now. How glad 
we felt for them! We visited the place of Pilate's Judgment 



Hall, where our Master was tried and saw some of 
the very pavement where the Roman soldiers whiled 
away the time in playing games, the marks for the games 
being clearly legible in the cement pavement recently 
uncovered. We noted the Mohammedan Mosque which 
covers the site of the Temple, but we were not permitted 
to enter it, because the time was one of special 
religious fervor among the Mohammedans, also because of 
the fact that not long since a fanatic had done injury 
to a visitor. 

A little "baksheesh" gained us admission to some of 
the native homes, which consist usually of one or two 
rooms. We were surprised at the entire cleanliness of 
the inside, the more so because the streets are in a very 
filthy condition. A journey to Bethlehem, the place of 

R4622:page 181 

our Savior's birth, was also in order and proved of interest; 

also a visit to the Dead Sea and to the fords of 

the Jordan River, where John baptized Jesus, and then 

to the city of Jericho. On our journey we saw the Brook 

Chereth, where the Prophet Elijah hid himself for a considerable 

portion of the three and a half years in which 

the drought and famine prevailed in the land of Israel. 

The brook for a considerable distance passes between 

the high walls of the mountains, in which there are 

various cliffs and caves occupied by hermits, and at one 

point there is a Monastery of considerable size under the 

control of the Greek Catholic church. On this trip we remembered 

our Lord's parable respecting the good Samaritan 

and the man who on this road fell among thieves. 

We had frequently read with astonishment the statement 

that the Samaritan took out two pence and paid it to the 

inn-keeper for the care of the wounded man until he 

would come again. The sum seemed ridiculously small, 

but when we remember that two pence at that time 

represented two days' wages, and further when we 

noticed the character of the inns, that they are ordinary 

in the extreme, we comprehended the situation. 

Our experience on the evening of the Memorial Supper 
was most peculiar. The "upper room," which tradition 
indicates is the one which Jesus and his Apostles used 
for the celebration of the Memorial Supper, is under the 
control of Mohammedans. When the time came for us 
to occupy the room, we were first advised that no chairs 
could be brought in and that no table could be had, but 
we were promised rugs for the floor that we might recline 
after the manner of Jesus and the Apostles, for it 
would appear that the majority use no tables, but merely 
lie down upon the floor with their heads toward the center 
and rest there upon one arm while feeding themselves 
with the other from a central dish. Later word 
reached us that we must be very quiet and not indulge 
in any singing. These restrictions excited our suspicions 
that there must be a reason for all of this. Nevertheless, 



at the appointed hour we went to the place. 

OUR OBSERVANCE OF THE MEMORIAL 

Our coming attracted the attention of some of the 
Mohammedans, who rushed wildly hither and thither, 
gesticulating and objecting, not to us, but to our guide, 
who had arranged for the use of the room. Seeing the 
excitement that was being caused, we thought best to 
indicate the peaceableness of our intentions by quietly 
withdrawing. We realized that if the fanatical Mohammedans 
had shouted that the holy place of Mohammed 
was being desecrated by the Christian dogs, hundreds of 
deluded people would rush out upon us from every direction 
and without the intervention of a miracle would 
injure or kill some or all of us. 

We learned later that the room is owned by about 
fifty Moslems and only two or three had agreed to rent it 
to us, and that the objection to our presence was raised 
by others who had an interest in the property and the 
right to forbid our use of it. Explanations were made 
that the room had been used by various religious denominations 
for the commemoration of the Lord's Supper, 
but that difficulties had arisen and all had been forbidden 
further use of it years ago. To have given us the 
use of it now, they claimed, would have opened up afresh 
the controversy which had already been settled, forbidding 
the use of the room for such purposes. 

The evening was showery, but we determined, nevertheless, 
to go to the Garden of Gethsemane, where our 
Master and the Apostles were on that memorable night 
nearly nineteen centuries ago— the garden of our Master's 
agony and bloody sweat. By unanimous vote the company 
desired to partake of the Memorial emblems in that 
sacred spot, which perhaps was never used for such a 
purpose before. In a drizzling rain we considered the 
meaning of the bread, representing the broken body of 
Jesus, and secondly, as explained by the Apostle Paul, 
the entire Church which is the Body of Christ— the One 
Loaf which we break. We considered also the cup, 
which primarily represents the life which our Lord 
poured out in behalf of us and the world, and which, 
secondarily, represents to us the wonderful privilege of 
participating in the sufferings of Christ by drinking of 
his cup, in becoming partakers of the afflictions of Christ. 
We recognized also the glory that would follow in the 
drinking of the cup anew in the Father's Kingdom under 
those blessed conditions. We recounted how the Loaf 
now being broken shall in God's Providence be the bread 
for the whole world of mankind. 

Our hearts were very glad notwithstanding the inclemency 
of the weather. We offered prayer and thanks 
for the blessed occasion and the blessed things commemorated, 
remembering that the Lord's dear ones everywhere 
were similarly commemorating, or would commemorate, 
the sufferings of Christ as our Passover slain for us. 



In quiet tones we sung a verse and then departed with 
joyful, thankful hearts. The experiences of that evening 
will surely never fade from our memories, but 
always speak to us with force of the Lamb of God, who 
died for the sins of the world, and of our privilege of 
sharing with him in his sacrifice and as his members and 
of being glorified with him in the accomplishment of the 
great work secured through his death. 

Our last day in Jerusalem was Sunday, April 24th. 
It will always be green in our memories this side the 
vail and doubtless beyond. We visited the Mount of 
Olives and then traversed the Bethany road, which Jesus 
and his Apostles so often passed over. We noted the 
brook Kedron outside the city gate and crossed it. We 
were especially interested in and impressed by that particular 
part of the Bethany road where Jesus rode upon 
the ass accompanied by his disciples and the multitude 
shouting, "Hosanna to the Son of David," also in the 
spot where our Master stopped the procession when he 
came in view of the city, and there, weeping over it, 
declared that Israel's house was left unto her desolate, 
and that they should see him no more until the day when 
they would gladly acclaim him their King. Twice we 
visited this spot and rejoiced in spirit as we thought of 
the fact that the time for the opening of the eyes of Israel 
and of all the families of the earth is now at hand. Thank 
God for the assurance that "then all the blind eyes shall 
be opened and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped" ! 

INTEREST IN THE TRUTH AWAKENED IN THE 
HOLY CITY 

Mr. Hall, acting under advice and suggestions of our 
mutual friends at London, had engaged a large public 
hall and had advertised that we would speak there on 
Sunday afternoon. It should be remarked here that the 
progressive element of the population includes those of 
European birth and these and the American colony reside 
in that part of the city which is outside the wall, where 
everything is much more progressive than inside the 
wall. Our audience was composed of this progressive 
class, Catholics, Protestants, Jews and Mohammedans. 
Our hearts went out to them in sympathy as we thought 
how error has separated millions of honest-minded people 
of every nationality and class. We rejoiced in the thought 
of the coming time of Divine favor— "Times of refreshing 

R4623 : page 182 

from the presence of the Lord, when he shall send 
Jesus Christ, who before was preached, and whom the 
heavens must retain until the Times of Restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his 
holy prophets since the world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 

We spoke for awhile along the lines of the Message of 
the Angel at Bethlehem, telling of "the good tidings of 



great joy which shall be unto all people." We reverted 
to the fact that all people of all religious beliefs are looking 
for and hoping for the coming of the Great Deliverer, 
and that the great deliverance and the desire of 
all nations is near at hand. Then we spoke more particularly 
to the Jews, using as our text the "Double" 
mentioned by the Prophets Jeremiah, Zechariah and 
Isaiah, explaining how the double of Israel's experiences 
would reach full accomplishment in 1915 and that 
there Divine favor for the Jews would be manifested 
and subsequently all the gracious promises made to them 
would have fulfillment. We showed that the promises 
which belong to the Church are spiritual and separate 
and distinct from those made to Abraham, the prophets 
and Israel, but that the blessings of Israel are necessarily 
delayed until the promises made to Spiritual Israel shall 
reach accomplishment, and that this would be fulfilled 
during the time of Israel's second experience or double. 

The owner of the hall is a converted Jew. He seemed 
wonderfully interested and astonished at the simplicity of 
the Divine Program as outlined. He is the editor of a 
paper published at Jerusalem and printed in the Arabic 
language, and has received Government permission also 
to publish a paper in the Hebrew language. He has been 
waiting for this for fourteen years. He received this 
permission just in time to begin the announcement of the 
good tidings of great joy to all people through God's New 
Covenant with Israel. He will at once begin the investigation 
of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. His wife and 
another friend are deeply interested also. Another Hebrew 
Christian, formerly a minister, now superannuated, 
was present. He and his wife expressed very deep interest 
and full sympathy with all that they heard, and will 
begin reading at once along these lines. Thus with 
Brother and Sister Thompson at work, there is already 
a nucleus for the starting of a Berean Bible Class in 
the City of the Great King. 

Other influential Jews were reported present and gave 
close attention. One of these, Doctor Levy, is the general 
manager and a very leading spirit among the Zionists 
of Palestine. He expressed a very keen interest in what 
he heard and said, "Alas, few of you Christian people 
hold such kind and liberal views toward the Hebrews!" 
He declared his intention of investigating the STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES, and in various ways gave evidence of 
his earnestness and sincerity. He suggested that he 
would write to some of his Jewish friends in America and 
invite attention to the message which he had heard. He 
remarked to one of his friends, "Surely the speaker of the 
occasion is a Prophet whom the Lord has raised up to set 
forth this message." 

Leaving Jerusalem the next morning we remembered 
the words of the Psalmist, "Go about the city, mark well 
her bulwarks"; and again his words, "As the mountains 
are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about 
his people from henceforth and forever." (Psa. 125:2.) 



We can well see that the city of Jerusalem, located as it 

is, in the top of the mountains, and flanked by them 

in every direction, would be a difficult one for an enemy 

to successfully attack. The mountain roads would be 

difficult of approach because easily defended. The suggestion 

of the Prophet that the Lord is as a fortress and 

protection to his people under every adverse influence, 

is a beautiful one which all can appreciate. 

Returning to Jaffa we found time to visit the house of 
Simon the tanner by the seaside. There stood the old 
stone trough such as was used by tanners in working out 
their leather. From all appearances it may have stood 
there for centuries. The building is surely not the same 
one that Simon lived in, on the housetop of which St. 
Peter had the vision of the sheet let down full of all 
manner of four-footed creatures. Nevertheless, in all 
probability it is the old building repaired and, in general 
appearance, size, etc., its counterpart. We also visited 
the tomb of Dorcas; respecting its identity there seems 
to be comparatively little doubt.— Acts 9:36. 

We were much interested in the orange groves of 
Jaffa, which seem thrifty and prosperous. The fruit is 
among the best we have ever eaten. The demand for 
these oranges, we understand, is chiefly from Great Britain 
and Egypt. Already the country is beginning to resume 
a prosperous condition, so graphically described in 
the Bible by the words, "a land flowing with milk and 
honey." 

Mr. Hall called our attention to a new traction engine 
and gang plow which plows twelve furrows at one time 
and harrows and seeds the ground at the same time. Its 
capacity is forty acres per day and it can be used subsequently 
in connection with the reaping and the threshing 
of the grain. It seems astounding that this land, which 
at one bound emerges from the use of a crooked stick for 
plowing, takes up the most modern plow in the world, the 
cost of which is $7,500. 

OUR VISIT TO THE LAND OF GOSHEN AND THE RED 
SEA 

On our return journey the vessel stopped at Port Said, 
and we concluded to embrace the opportunity to have a 
look at the land of Goshen, and at the course which the 
Israelites took when they left there for the Promised Land. 
Our train brought us to Ismailia, formerly known as Succoth, 
one of the assembling points of the Israelites in 
their flight. The train between Ismailia and Port Abraham 
took us along the line of the Suez Canal, where evidently 
at one time the Red Sea prolonged itself into the 
Bitter Lakes. Undoubtedly we traversed the very ground 
over which the host of Israel passed in their flight from 
Pharaoh. Not yet content, we engaged passage across 
the northernmost part of the Red Sea, called the Gulf of 
Suez, and on the other side rode for about three hours on 
donkeys until we came to the springs of Moses, the traditional 



spot where the Israelites, thirsty, found brackish 
water, which Moses made sweet by thrusting a tree into 
it. How wonderful it seemed to have before our very 
eyes the corroboration of the Bible narrative! It was 
strengthening to our faith; we trust the record of it will 
be helpful to many. 

By the way, we here remark that it is not at all necessary 
to exaggerate the miracle of the crossing of the Red 
Sea by the Israelites by supposing that it was at the widest 
part, nor is it necessary to suppose that its waters 
stood up like a garden wall on either side of the Israelites' 
pathway as they crossed. A wall is a barrier, and 
anything which will serve as a barricade is properly 
enough described as a wall. The Bible record is that 
God caused a strong east wind to blow, and, standing on 
the spot, we could imagine how the sea, where the Suez 
canal now is, was once an effectual barrier to the Israelites, 
hindering their progress, and that under Divine 
Providence the wind could very easily make bare a sandbar 
and provide the necessary crossing, and that a reversal 
of the wind would cause the return of the waters 

R4623 : page 183 

to their former place, overwhelming the Egyptians. 

Alas! that humanity in general is so much more disposed 

to discredit the Bible history and accept instead, the suggestions 

of the Babylonians and Egyptians. Thus far our 

confidence in the Bible as the inspired record of the Divine 

Plan of the Ages grows stronger day by day. 

As we write we are on the Mediterranean approaching 
Naples, and have received advice informing us that we 
are advertised to speak in the city of Rome May 1st in 
the chapel of the Y.M.C.A. If such be the Divine will 
we shall be glad; if not, we shall be content and go on our 
journey seeking others who have a hearing ear, and for 
such opportunities as the Divine Providence may indicate. 
Of these we hope to write you later. 



R4623 : page 183 

THE GIFTS AND CALLING TO ISRAEL 

"For this cause he [Christ] is the Mediator of the New Testament 
[Covenant], that by means of death, for the redemption 
of the transgressions that were under the first Testament 
[Covenant], they which are called might receive 
the promise of eternal inheritance."— Heb. 9:15. 

THE APOSTLE, we must remember, was addressing 
Christian Hebrews who were in 
perplexity in respect to the Law Covenant. 
That Covenant had existed for more than 
sixteen centuries, and the Jews had supposed 



all along that under it they were to 

be God's favored people and accomplish all 

the work that was first brought to light in 

the Covenant made with Abraham. Many 

of the Hebrews, therefore, after coming 

into Christ, accepting him as the Redeemer, felt that 

somehow they must still maintain their relationship to the 

Law Covenant, its ordinances, etc. The Apostle, in his 

Epistle to the Galatians, attempted to counteract this 

erroneous theory, which he calls a Judaizing influence. 

He told them that if any of those who were Gentiles by 

R4624 : page 183 

birth should in their mistaken zeal and earnestness become 
Jews by being circumcised, thus coming under the 
domination of the Law Covenant, they would thereby 
be indicating that they had forfeited their standing in 
Christ; and, as he pronounced it, Christ would profit 
them nothing.— Gal. 5:2. 

In his Epistle to the Hebrews St. Paul wished the 
Christian Hebrew brethren to take the larger, broader, 
truer thought respecting the Law Covenant and everything 
pertaining to it— its sacrifices, its mediator, its 
Law. He wished them to recognize it as merely a typical 
Covenant; that it prefigured a New Covenant; that its 
mediator typified a better Mediator, The Christ; that its 
bulls and goats of sin-offering typified the better sacrifices 
by which the New Covenant would become operative, 
the better sacrifices being those of the better Mediator 
—Jesus the Head and the Church his Body. 

St. Paul had already pointed out that the privileges of 
this Gospel Age, so far as the Church is concerned, are 
chiefly those of sacrifice— that "if we suffer with Christ, 
we shall reign with him; if we be dead with him, we 
shall live with him"; that we must seek to copy him in 
self-denial and self-sacrifice and be baptized into his 
death, if we would share his Kingly honor, his service as 
the great Prophet, Priest, and King of the Millennial 
Age, to bless Israel and all the families of the earth. 

In his endeavor to make this matter plain (Hebrews 9:13,14), 
St. Paul points out that before the Law 
Covenant went into effect, it was necessary that blood 
should be shed; saying, "For if the blood of bulls and 
goats and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, 
sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh, how much more 
shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, 
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience 
from dead works to serve the living God?" Here 
is a contrast between the institution of the Law Dispensation, 
the Law Covenant, and the institution of the New 
Covenant. And the first effect of this better blood which 
is to seal the New Covenant is to cleanse our consciences 
from dead works. The Apostle does not here 
refer to it as having been for all Israel, but for those 
Jews who had become Christians but had been bound by 



the Law previously, that they might see that now the true 
sacrifice had come; that this was sufficient to satisfy all 
the claims of Justice and put away from their minds all 
consciousness of sin, to assure them that all of their 
sins were thus covered and that they might now render 
acceptable service to the living God. "And for this 
same cause [that is, because his blood was sufficient to 
cancel all sin] he is the Mediator of the New Testament." 
He has not only purged us from a consciousness 
of sin, that we may serve God and become members 
of the Body of Christ and accept him as our Advocate 
and trust in his finished work on our behalf, but he has by 
the same sacrifice made such an arrangement with God 
and with Justice as will constitute him the Mediator of 
the New Covenant for all Israel. The Apostle is not 
here saying that the New Covenant is operative now, 
nor that we are under this Covenant; quite to the contrary. 
He is speaking of the Jewish nation, as we shall 
see. 

The remainder of the fifteenth verse (Heb. 9) declares, 
"By means of death for the redemption of 
transgressions that were under the first Testament [or 
Law Covenant], they which are called might receive 
the promise of the eternal inheritance." We are not, 
therefore, to consider the ones here "called" as referring 
to those who receive the High Calling— joint-heirship 
with Christ, the Spiritual Seed of Abraham— but we are 
to understand the Apostle here to mean the Jewish 
nation that was called— all of this Jewish nation who 
would come into accord with the Divine arrangement. 
The same Apostle (Rom. 11:27) says, "For the gifts 
and the calling of God are not to be repented of." That 
is to say, God having called the Jewish nation to be his 
peculiar people, having made them definite promises respecting 
the blessing of all nations, has no thought or intention 
of abrogating those promises. Every Covenant, 
every promise that God has ever made and every thing 
that he has ever done, he has foreknown its full import 
and its results, and he has done nothing hastily. Israel, 
therefore, is the nation which he has foreknown to be the 
one he will use in connection with his work of blessing 
all of the families of the earth; as the Apostle says 
(Romans 1 1:27), "For this is my Covenant with them, 
when I shall take away their sins." 

THE BLINDNESS UPON THE JEWISH NATION IS A 
MYSTERY 

In the 25th verse of the same chapter he informs us 
that the blindness upon the Jewish nation, until the fulness 
of the Gospel Church has come in, is a Mystery. 

R4624 : page 184 

God is now gathering out only a special few of the 
Jews and a special few from all nations to constitute the 



Spiritual Israel, to whom appertain the highest feature 
of this Abrahamic Covenant or promise; and then, as 
soon as this Spiritual Israel, which will constitute the 
Prophet, Priest and King, is complete, the Deliverer- 
taken from Jew and Gentile— shall come forth. That 
will be the fulfillment of the promise that "the Deliverer 
shall come forth out of Zion and shall turn away 
ungodliness from Jacob," for this is God's Covenant 
with them, with the seed of Jacob; as we read (Jer. 31:31), 
"After those days, saith the Lord, I will make a 
New Covenant with the House of Israel and with the 
House of Judah." This thought is confirmed when we 
consider the fact that the Gospel Church were not all 
under the first Testament or first Covenant, but only the 
Jewish nation. 

The trend of the Apostle's argument, therefore, is 
that Christ, the Mediator of the New Testament, becomes 
such by means of death for the redemption of the transgressions 
under the first Testament, or Law Covenant. 
In other words, the Jewish nation needed to be redeemed 
in a special manner before God could use it as his channel 
for blessing the other nations. 

Since the Mediatorial work of the Millennial Kingdom 
is to be accomplished through natural Israel, and 
since all the families of the earth are to be blessed 
through them, it follows that nothing can be done until 
Israel shall have been recovered from their present outcast 
condition. Then the blessing of the Lord will go 
forth and the Mediatorial work will be accomplished 
through natural Israel. We are to distinguish between 
the work to be done through this nation and the One 
who will do that work. It will be the Mediator of the 
New Covenant who will have the power to confer the 
blessings— the Great High Priest, the Great Prophet, the 
Great King, the Great Mediator. There could be no 
blessing outside of this Great One; and this Great One, 
as the Apostle Paul and all the other Apostles clearly 
show, is composed of Jesus the Head and the Church his 
Body. 

THE NEW COVENANT TO BE MADE WITH THE JEWS 

No doubt many Jews are now faithless and unbelieving 
because of the long period of blindness upon them, 
and perhaps in their hearts are hungering after the 
promises. When the light of the New Dispensation shall 
begin to dawn upon the world; when they shall begin 
to see the resurrected Ancient Worthies as recipients of 
Divine favor; when they shall see their brethren beginning 
to be blessed under the ministration of this new 
Kingdom, then many of the Jews who are now blinded 
and unbelieving will manifest true faith and be obedient 
and turn unto the Lord. But we are not to understand 
that any one will become an Israelite unless he has the 
faith of Abraham, sincere faith, trust in God, faith that 
will be manifested by obedience. 



Then, as the people of the various nations shall gather 
themselves to the Lord and seek to come into harmony 
with him, the way of approach will be by coming into 
accord with the Holy Nation— God's representative Kingdom 
in the world— and thus they will come into harmony 
with the Spiritual Christ, the Great Prophet, Priest 
and King. Eventually, by the close of the Millennial 
Age, those who prove faithful will be turned over to 
God, even the Father. Such will then be fully in accord 
with Jehovah and fully in Covenant relationship with him. 

The New Covenant is not to be made with any others 
than the Jews, for no others were in Covenant relationship 
with God. The words "New Covenant" seem, 
therefore, to indicate the repetition of God's favor to 
Israel under the better Mediator, who will bring the 
glorious blessings that they had expected under Moses, 
but failed to obtain because of the inability of Moses to 
make satisfaction for their sins; for the blood of bulls 
and goats could never actually take away their sins. 
The antitypes of these, the sacrifice of the Lord and the 
members of his Body, must first be accomplished before 
this New Covenant with Israel could supersede the old or 
Law Covenant, which it then will do. 

Hebrews 9:16 reads: "For where a Testament is, 
there must also of necessity be the death of the testator." 
In the case of Moses the death of the Testator was represented 
by the slaying of the bullock and the goat. In 
the case of the Antitypical Moses, the death of the Testator 
is shown in the sacrifice of our Lord and the Church 
his Body. The ability of Christ to give a Testament or 
Covenant, or to make a Covenant, should also be seen. 
As the man Jesus he could not make this Covenant. 
Why? Because as a man— not spirit-begotten— he could 
merely have given his human life for mankind and then 
would have had nothing left for himself; or if he had retained 
his earthly life he could have established only an 
earthly Kingdom and never could have given eternal 
life to any one subsequently. He might have blessed 
them with wise laws and regulations and improved conditions 

R4625 : page 184 

over the present time, but never could have 

given them life and the perfections and blessings that he 

will be able to give under the New Covenant. 

HOW THE LORD BECAME A TESTATOR 

In order to be a Testator and give eternal life to the 
world, it was necessary that our Lord should carefully 
follow the Plan that God had arranged: First, by 
his own obedience he should demonstrate his loyalty to 
God and receive life on the divine plane as his reward; 
second, that then, by taking up his human life which he 
did not forfeit in anywise, he should have that human 
life and its rights to give to Israel and through them to 



all mankind. He is thus a Testator. He is thus one who 
bequeaths something to others. He bequeaths it not 
while he is alive, as a gift, but he gives it as a Testator, 
as that with which he parts in death. So our Lord Jesus, 
as the Great Mediator of the New Covenant, will give to 
mankind the human rights and privileges to which he 
had a right by virtue of his perfect obedience to the 
Divine Law. He invites us, not to share those rights 
with the world, not to come under his Mediatorial reign 
and be sharers in restitution privileges, but, according to 
the will of God, to do something else, viz., to join with 
him in becoming Testator, to lay down our lives and thus 
be sharers with him in the spirit of his great work, that 
we may also share with him in the actual features of that 
work during the Millennium. 

The very first difficulty encountered is that we, unlike 
him, have not perfect bodies that we could give as perfect 
sacrifices; hence God's arrangement for those who 
have this sacrificing attitude of mind is that they may be 
dealt with by the Lord Jesus and that he may, as their 
Advocate, impute to them his merit, his restitution rights, 
to make up for, to off-set, their blemishes and imperfections, 
that they may offer unto God a sacrifice that would 
be pleasing. We see that he does not give to these who 
are now called, either the Mediatorial blessings of the 
Millennial Age or the restitution conditions which that 
Mediatorial reign will confer. He gives to them that 
which will serve his purpose for them much better; viz., 
an imputation of his merit for past sins, to allow their 

R4625 : page 185 

sacrifice to pass the Divine propitiatory satisfactorily. 

Even then their sacrifice would prove imperfect and unsatisfactory 

because of inability to carry it out to a completion, 

did he not continue to be their Advocate. With 

every blemish and imperfection that is unwillingly theirs 

they can go to him as their Advocate and obtain mercy 

and have the cleansing from all sin through the merit 

of his sacrifice. 

THE JEWS "WILL OBTAIN MERCY THROUGH YOUR 
MERCY" 

Thus we see the great Testament which is in Christ's 
blood and to which he refers, saying, "This is my blood 
of the New Testament." Instead of applying that blood 
of the New Testament to the world or to Israel, he applied 
it first for the Church. It must all pass through 
the Church, so to speak. "Drink ye all of it"; be ye all 
sharers in my cup, for unless ye are sharers in my cup, 
ye cannot be sharers in my life. It is his cup; and he 
gives us a share of it. We are not worthy to have any 
direct dealings with the Father, but the Father, nevertheless, 
had us in mind from "before the foundation of 
the world," as the Apostle says. (Eph. 1:4.) Hence 



we are not to understand the Mystery— the selection of 
the Church, the Body of Christ— as being an amplification 
of the original Divine Plan, but merely the carrying 
out of a part of that Plan not previously disclosed or 
revealed. 

So, then, it requires all of the Gospel Age for the 
Church of Christ to drink of his "cup" and be "baptized 
into his death." When the last member shall have 
drunk of this cup and shall have been baptized into his 
death, and shall have finished his course, then all the sufferings 
of the Priest, Head and Body, will have been 
accomplished— the sufferings to which the Lord refers 
through the prophets as "the sufferings of Christ and the 
glory that shall follow." The sufferings began with the 
Head and have continued all the way down to all the 
members of the Body; and as soon as these sufferings 
shall have been finished The Christ will be crowned with 
glory, honor and immortality beyond the vail. 

When we drink of this cup of the New Testament— 
his blood or sacrificed life— we have communion [participation] 
in the death of Christ. (I Cor. 10:16,17.) 
We are also to be participants in his special life on the 
divine plane (I John 3:2), and thus sharers with him in 
this work of making the Testament, or Covenant, which 
will go to Israel and through Israel to the world. This 
is further admitted by the Apostle in Romans 1 1:25-28. 
Speaking of the time when Israel shall be recovered 
from their sins, when the Deliverer, The Christ, Head 
and Body, "shall come forth out of Zion and turn away 
ungodliness from Jacob," when God will make his 
Covenant with them and take away their sins, the 
Apostle adds, "They shall obtain mercy through your 
mercy."— Rom. 11:31. 

This will be the mercy of God operating through 
Jesus and the mercy of Jesus operating through the 
Church. So it will be God's mercy in one sense; it will 
be Jesus' mercy in another sense; and it will be the 
Church's mercy in a third sense. This mercy will go to 
the Jews. What mercy is this? It is this New Testament. 
How? Through the death of the Testator, 
Christ the Head, and the Church the Body. And what 
will Israel get by this Testament or Will? The earthly 
life and earthly rights which The Christ laid down in 
sacrifice; all will go to Israel. All those rights to life 
eternal, and all those things lost in Adam and redeemed 
by Christ, will go to Israel alone— in fact, to none of 
them but Israelites, indeed. So during the Millennial 
Age it will be necessary for all mankind to come to 
these people of God to get eternal life and to share in 
this Testament or Will of Christ— in order to become 
Israelites indeed, that they may thus be heirs of this Will, 
which gives eternal human life and all the earthly rights 
which Jesus had and sacrificed, and which he imputed to 
us, and allowed us to join in sacrificing together with 
him. 



R4625 : page 185 

PRAYING FOR ONE ANOTHER 

"If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, 
he shall ask and he shall give him life for them that sin not 
unto death. There is a sin unto death. I do not 
say that he shall pray for it." — I John 5:16. 

HERE the Apostle wishes us to understand that 

if we see a Brother who is overtaken in a 

fault and getting into difficulty which may 

lead to coldness and estrangement from the 

Lord, we should pray for such a one; we 

should ask the Lord's blessing upon him; 

we should, as a member of the Body, do all 

in our power for his assistance. If in the 

human body one hand becomes wounded or 

bruised, the other goes to its relief to allay 

the suffering and restore the member. It would care 

for and express sympathy for the wounded hand. So 

we, as members of the Body of Christ, are privileged to 

pray for one another; to pray for all those who we have 

reason to believe are fellow-members in the Body. 

This is different from praying for the world— asking 
God to accept and beget of his Spirit those who are not 
in the proper condition. We are satisfied that God has 
accepted the one class and that in going away from him 
they are doing violence to the principles of righteousness, 
and to their covenant and, therefore, are correspondingly 
going against his will. We may very properly ask 
guidance for them and wisdom for ourselves that we may 
speak and act aright. The Divine intention in suggesting 
that we should pray for one in this attitude, might be 
that it would aid in developing our sympathy for the 
various members of the Body and thus help us to 
scrutinize ourselves that we might be more sympathetic 
towards one another and have the greater care for one 
another's interests. 

Concerning that portion of the text which says, "He 
shall give him life for them that sin not unto death," in 
what sense or to what degree the Lord permits us to be 
advocates one for another is not clear; but our advocacy 
of each other would seemingly be offered more particularly 
to the Head of the Body than to the Father. But 
even if it be supposed that our advocacy of the case of a 
brother would be heard by the Father directly, it would 
still not seem to be due in any sense to worthiness on our 
part; but because of our standing in the Body of Christ 
God has arranged a method by which he is pleased to 
exercise an interest in the various members of the Body 
in harmony with prayer for such members. We might 
then ask, what would be the result if there were no members 
present to pray for a disaffected brother? Would 



God allow him to go down into the Second Death because 

R4625 :page 186 

no one living in that neighborhood knew about his case? 
The answer is that the Lord himself is the Head of the 
Body and quite probably if there were no other members 
who would be in the attitude of intercession and sympathy, 
the great Head of the Body would find some means 
of advocating the interests of the disaffected member. It 
could not be that the Lord would allow any member of his 
Body to perish simply for lack of our attention or prayers. 

THOSE GIVEN OVER TO THE ADVERSARY FOR THE 
DESTRUCTION OF THE FLESH 

We might include in this general thought the "Great 
Company" and the manner in which the Lord deals with 
them. They are really out of the way so far as the high 

R4626 : page 186 

calling is concerned, but the great Advocate has endorsed 
their case, therefore he will not suffer them to be condemned 
with the world, but instead, will provide chastening 
experiences which will, if rightly received, be helpful 
to them and ultimately bring them off conquerors. 

The Apostle brings before our attention, in speaking 
of one who had committed a serious trespass, that the 
Church should have judged him; that he should have 
been brought before the Church and been reproved for 
his course. Since the Church had failed to do its duty, 
the Apostle, being absent in person, but present in spirit, 
as one of them, had judged this individual and "delivered 
him over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, 
that his spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord 
Jesus." This saving of the spirit in the day of the 
Lord Jesus, as apparently relating to the Great Company, 
would seem to correspond with the expression in 
the text that the Lord would "give him life," would 
preserve his life. The thought then is that if he were 
in danger of going down into the Second Death the 
faithful prayer would lead to such a recovery of the individual 
as would bring him to the place where he would 
have the proper view of matters, and in that sense of the 
word would bring him back to the "life" standing, because 
life can be lost only by willfully and intentionally disobeying 
the Divine arrangements. If, therefore, the person has 
not willingly and deliberately betrayed his trust, and gone 
back on the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was once 
sanctified, there is always a possibility of recovering 
such a one to a proper view. If his heart is right, a 
proper view of the situation would be sufficient for him. 
The Lord will always be willing to help all such and we 
may reasonably suppose that he would render this aid 
whether we pray for it or not. If we neglect our interest 



in and care over the fellow-members, it is our loss; 
the Head would not neglect his interest and care over 
them; but all such as might be going in the direction of 
the Second Death would be recoverable only up to the 
point where their hearts go wrong. 

Now we come to the latter part of the verse, "There 
is a sin unto death; I do not say that he should pray for 
it." We are to understand that this sin unto death is 
something that is very specific. It is a matter of willfulness 
and is a turning again to the beggarly elements of 
the world from which we were once recovered, from 
which we once escaped. And what are the beggarly elements 
of the world? Some might suppose that the beggarly 
elements of the world are murder, robbery, etc. 
We answer, Yes. Are we to expect, then, that a Christian 
would turn to robbery and murder? And would 
this be a sign of his having lost the Lord's Spirit— not 
merely that he is losing it, but that he has lost it, that he 
is dead? We answer, Yes. And how would it manifest 
itself? We answer, our Lord gives a more refined 
definition of murder. To be angry with a brother without 
just cause— to have hatred, envy, malice, strife; these 
are the works of the flesh and the devil. Whoever has 
these— that is to say, whoever is actuated by these, not 
merely in a moment of impulse and through some oversight 
in the care of his tongue, as mentioned in an illustration 
recently, but whoever deliberately and repeatedly 
manifests these as his own spirit and thought, has certainly 
lost the Spirit of the Lord, if he ever had it, if 
he had not been merely glossed over with an outward 
veneer of meekness, gentleness, patience, long suffering, 
brotherly kindness and love. His loss of these qualities 
and his taking on of the vicious qualities, backbiting, 
slander, anger, malice, strife, etc., would indicate that he 
had lost the Spirit of the Lord. It would signify that 
he is not dying, but that he is dead.— Jude 12. 

Going back to the illustration of the dog, which we 
used in a previous issue, we see a difference between 
this condition of willfulness and the one in which the 
New Creature might be temporarily overtaken in a fault 
and his "dog," so to speak, break loose and bite 
some one. The "dog" would get a whipping, and apologies 
would be made to the person injured and things 
made good so far as possible. The one who approves of 
his dog's going out and biting his brethren or neighbors 
has evidently lost the Spirit of Christ which he once had. 

THOSE FOR WHOM WE SHOULD NOT PRAY 

Now, should we pray for such? The Apostle says, 
"I do not say that you should agonize for these." No; 
it would evidently be worse than a waste of time for 
Christians to pray and agonize and labor for such. There 
are plenty of more hopeful cases. If you had some 
trees in your yard, and you should see one looking a little 
withered or sickly, you might dig around it, fertilize it, 



water it, etc., but if, upon examination, you found it dead 

down at the roots, you would say, no need to use more 

fertilizer for it. So with this matter of prayer and 

laboring with those who have lost the Spirit of Christ 

and have developed, instead, a vicious spirit of the Adversary; 

it is worse than a waste of time to have anything 

more to do with them. 

We might ask: What would be the best evidence to 
one's self that he had not committed the "sin unto death"? 
We occasionally come across people who believe that 
they have committed the "sin unto death" and usually they 
are in a very distressed condition of mind. We cannot 
say to these positively that the mere fact that they are 
distressed in mind is a proof that they have not committed 
"the sin unto death" in view of the typical lesson 
of Esau, "that profane person who sold his birthright," 
and of whom we read that he sought it earnestly and 
with tears, but did not recover it. Similarly, in view of 
the case of Judas Iscariot: his penitence for having betrayed 
the Lord, and his return of the money and hanging 
himself as an evidence of his deep remorse. What, then, 
shall we say to such? 

In our own experience with these it has generally 
been the case that those who thought they had committed 
"the sin unto death," had really done nothing of the kind, 
so far as our judgment goes. Our method, therefore, is 
to try to show them that what they did was not done 
willfully or intelligently against God and his will. We 
ask: "Did you mean to do thus and so?" After catechising 
them along the course that seemed to them to 
constitute "the sin unto death" one will usually succeed 
in showing them that nothing that they have done was 
willfully, intentionally, knowingly done, and that the fact 
that they regret it and that the attitude of their heart 
and their intentions now is still in accord with the 
Lord, shows that the Adversary is merely endeavoring to 

R4626 : page 187 

shake their faith and confidence and to turn them aside. 

We consider that a good method of dealing further 
with such persons is to say, "Now, if you have lost the 
Lord's Spirit, you will be loveless towards those of his 
people with whom you come in contact, and if you still 
have his Spirit you will not be harsh and implacable, but 
desirous of serving them. You will be kind, gentle, long 
suffering and thus manifest that you still have the Spirit 
of Christ. If you have the Spirit of Christ, that is a 
sign that you are his. If you are without this special 
mark of the Lord's Spirit it is an evidence that you are 
not one of his." 

In some cases that we have known, the conditions 
seemed to imply that the persons had really lost the 
Lord's Spirit, for they confessed to special hardness of 
heart, no love, no sympathy, only bitter feeling. We 
could say but very little more to such, but merely advise 



them to try to take a different view of the matter and to 
progress to a better condition. We have suggested that 
perhaps they were physically impaired, or in some 
melancholy condition of mind, of which the Lord would 
not take note as being their real spirit or intention, and 
there we were obliged to leave it. 

We have been asked if we understand Esau to be a 
type of the Second Death class or of the Great Company. 
It is probable that Esau was not a type of those that go 
into the Second Death. He is spoken of as profane- 
that is, not spiritual, and the Apostle seems to use him as 
representing the natural man. In his outward appearance 
of hairiness, etc., the animal man, apparently, was 
pictured. The Lord through the Apostle may merely 
have been designing to show that though the natural Jew 
was offered these wonderful privileges of the spiritual 
things he would prefer the natural things. We know 
that the Apostle likens the whole Jewish nation to Esau 
"who sold his birthright," and yet the same Apostle proceeds 
to tell us that this whole Jewish nation will by and 
by be recovered and come into special blessings under 
the New Covenant. We may presume that these were 
not worthy of the spiritual blessings, and that this is the 
reason they were looked upon as of the Esau class and 
not of the class who get the spiritual blessings. They 
preferred the earthly, so we believe there will be earthly 
blessings for them in due time. If, when the earthly 
blessings of the Millennium are offered to this Esau class, 
they will not profit by the lessons and disciplinings and 
come to a right spirit, they will be destroyed; but if they 
do respond to the Lord's providences and the chastenings 
of the Lord in the Millennial Kingdom, they will gradually 
rise and lose their bestiality; their stony heart will 
be taken away, and instead they will receive a "heart of 
flesh." 

So in our judgment Esau represented merely the 
natural man, the natural Jew, and did not represent either 
the "Great Company" or those who will go unto the 
"Second Death" during this Gospel Age. 



R4627 : page 187 

"A CRUMB FROM THE CHILDREN'S TABLE" 

-JUNE 12.-MATTHEW 15:21-28.- 

Golden Text:— "Great is thy faith; 
be it unto thee even as thou wilt." 

GOD loves the faithful and delights to have 

them trust in him. His chiefest blessings are 

for such. By reason of various conditions connected 

with our birth, it is not alike easy to 

all to accept the Divine promises and to 



shape life according to these, trusting that 

the rewards and blessings of the future will 

more than offset the sacrifices of the present. 

However, while only the faithful will attain 

the exceeding great and precious things of 

God's promises in this present age, we are glad that the 

Creator has still in reservation an inferior blessing for 

those who cannot exercise faith now, but who must be 

dealt with during the Millennial Age more along the 

lines of sight. Our present study well illustrates the 

Lord's grace towards those who trust him. 

The Canaanitish woman was a heathen woman— one 
not an Israelite— one with whom the Lord had not entered 
into covenant relationship— one of those who at that time 
were without God and without hope, because the Divine 
provision for the blessing of the Gentiles was not yet 
opened up to them. When our Lord sent forth his 
Apostles to preach the Gospel, healing all manner of 
diseases and casting out devils, he instructed them to 
pass by all who were not Jews— Gentiles and Samaritans. 
His words were, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles 
and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not, for I 
am not sent save to the lost sheep of the house of 
Israel." With a few exceptions our Lord's miracles were 
confined to the Jews. They alone were God's covenanted 
people. For this reason Jesus ignored the petition of the 
Canaanitish woman, crying "Have mercy on me, O Lord, 
Son of David! My daughter is grievously vexed with a 
devil." And later on he explained, "I am not sent but 
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel," and "It is not 
meet to take the children's bread and cast it to the dogs." 

PRAYING FOR A BITE 

The term "dogs" was applied to the Gentiles by the 
Jews as signifying their inferiority. Our Lord merely 
made use of an expression common in his day, and still 
common in Palestine. But note the woman's faith: She 
replied, "Yea, Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which 
fall from the Master's table." What perseverance, what 
faith, was thus manifested! How evidently she believed 
the Lord to be the promised Messiah, the Heir of the 
throne of David! As Jesus intimated, she had more 
faith than a majority of the Jews. Her request was 
granted— "O woman, great is thy faith! Be it unto thee 
even as thou wilt." Her daughter was healed from that 
hour. 

There are several lessons for us in this study. However 
degraded we may be by nature, by heredity, by 
environment; however outcast from God's favor, we may 
still know of the Divine compassion. The message is, 
"God is Love." If he chose first of all to manifest his 
favor towards Abraham's children, it did not signify 
that he had no love or care for the remainder of mankind; 
merely that the Divine purpose must flow out to 
mankind through Divinely-appointed channels and in 



God's due time. We may be sure that when we get to 
the standpoint of perfect knowledge in the hereafter we 
shall see wisdom in every feature of the Divine program. 
For instance, from the human standpoint it seems strange 
that God has permitted a reign of sin and death in the 
world for 6000 years, when he has the full power to speak 
the word and to overthrow the forces of evil and to 
inaugurate gracious influences of blessing for the deliverance 

R4627 : page 188 

of mankind from the power of sin and Satan, 
ignorance and superstition; to give light for darkness; 
knowledge of God for ignorance and blindness. Studying 
the Divine Plan of the Ages, we find the lesson to be that 
God will first select a Church class and subsequently 
use the elect Church as channels of blessing toward the 
world of mankind. 

A little while, and the permission of sin and the trials 
and difficulties of the present life shall have served to 
chisel and polish the "very elect." A little while, and 
they shall be transformed to the glorious likeness of 
their Redeemer beyond the veil. And then a little while, 
and the blessings long-promised to the world in general 
will be dispensed. The children of God will first be fed 
from this table, and then not merely crumbs will fall 
for the remainder of the race, but rich and bountiful 
provision, exceedingly and abundantly more than we 
could have asked or thought. 

AFFLICTED OF THE DEVIL 

It is a great and important truth that many human 
beings are more or less completely obsessed by evil 
spirits— demons— not the spirits of human beings, but the 
fallen angels, as the Scriptures declare. Many battle for 
years against these influences of demons and, because not 
rightly informed of the Bible teaching on the subject, 
they come more and more under the occult influences with 
danger of entirely losing their reason. It was probably 
some such affliction as this which affected the daughter 
of the Canaanitess. She seemed to realize that there was 
only the one quarter from which she could get help. 
Hence her importunity, when she recognized the Lord. 

In another sense of the word all sin and sickness may 
be said to be afflictions of the devil, because all are either 
directly, or through heredity, Satan's work. Thus our 
Lord declared that Satan had murdered our race by his 
falsehood to mother Eve— "He was a murderer from the 
beginning and abode not in the Truth." Through his 
lie our race has gone down into sickness, mental, moral 
and physical, and is going down rapidly to the tomb. 
Thank God for the great Deliverer; thank God also, for 
his great day of deliverance, the Millennial Age, now nigh 
at hand! 



R4627 : page 188 

THE FIRE OF THE DAY OF THE LORD 

"The earth. ..and the works therein 
shall be burned up."— 2 Pet. 3:10. 

IF this text were the only one bearing upon 

the subject of the fire of this Day of the 

Lord we would conclude that it should be 

considered as literal; but it is not the only 

Scripture. Many other Scriptures which 

refer to this same fire show clearly that it 

is a symbolic fire of destruction that is coming. 

We can see that fire is very properly 

a symbol of destruction and is so used 

throughout the Scriptures— the lake of fire, 

for instance, "which is the Second Death." (Rev. 20:14.) 

We find that many Scriptures refer to the coming time 

of trouble. Some refer to it as a whirlwind of trouble; 

others as a tempest and flood— a flood shall sweep away 

the hiding places; mountains shall be removed and carried 

into the midst of the sea, etc.— as though there would be 

great earthquakes and sinking of the earth and flooding 

of the whole world. Yet other Scriptures speak of it as 

a burning fire. Manifestly it cannot be all three of these 

in a literal sense. Then there are other Scriptures which 

show that these expressions are used in a symbolic sense; 

for instance (Zephaniah 3:8,9), "Wait ye upon me, saith 

the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey; for 

my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble 

the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, 

even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be 

devoured with the fire of my jealousy." This seems to 

be a literal pouring out of something and a consuming 

of the earth with literal fire. But that it is not literal 

fire is proven by the very next sentence, which declares, 

"Then will I turn unto the people a pure language (message) 

that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to 

serve him with one consent." Evidently the people would 

not remain if the earth is to be consumed with literal 

fire. But if, as the Scriptures show, the fire be symbolic, 

it is plain that people will still be here after the trouble. 

Then the Lord will, according to his promise, turn to 

them the pure message. 

THE BABEL OF VOICES IN CHRISTENDOM 

At the present time the message that the people 
receive is represented in many creeds, probably hundreds 
in all; hence the message is a very indistinct one and the 
Scriptures represent it as "Babel," or confusion. One 
tongue or voice cries that the message of the Lord is 
Free Grace; another tongue or voice says it is Election; 



a third says that only a few will get salvation; while 
another declares salvation will be universal; a fifth informs 
us that election is with water, and that without 
the water no one will be saved. So a variety of voices 
is heard, and the poor world is not able to determine 
which is the Truth. As a matter of fact they all have 
so much error that they condemn themselves in the minds 
of all reasonable people who have not been born in 
prejudice and steeped in error. When the Lord will turn 
this pure message to the people, Babylon will no longer 
be. She will have come to her end. The voice of the 
Lord will be known through the glorified Church, "And 
the Spirit and the Bride shall say, 'Come'! And whosoever 
will may come and drink of the water of life freely!" 
(Rev. 22:17.) The Bride class are now on probation 
that it may be determined which will eventually be of 
that class. When the marriage of the Lamb shall have 
taken place, it will be the work of the "Spirit and the 
Bride to say 'Come'. ..and whosoever will may 
take of the water of life freely." This will be after the 

R4628 : page 188 

"burning" time is over; hence it proves that the fire 
refers to a time of trouble— a time of destruction against 
iniquity. The Lord's anger will burn against all kinds of 
injustice and inequity. Wrong doing, and wrong-doers 
will then be punished. 

The Apostle's statement respecting the Church implies 
that this judgment, or testing, or fiery trial will begin 
with the Church and extend to the world. If it "begin 
first with us" what will the end be to those who make 
no pretense of following the Gospel message? The 
Apostle again states that the "fire of that day shall try 
every man's work of what sort it is." (I Cor. 3:13.) 
This we understand to refer especially to the Church. 
Every one in the Church is to be tried; his work is to 
be tried. However, in great measure it will be a trying 
time for all the world as well; all inequity and injustice 
will be exposed, reprobated and destroyed. We see increasing 
instances of this of late— in the number of fire 
insurance presidents, for instance, who have been exposed. 
Fiery trials came upon them as the result of exposures, 

R4628 : page 189 

etc. Some of these men were undoubtedly hastened to 
the tomb, "burned" to death, we might say, by fiery trials. 
And a great deal of burning, heart-burning, and headaches 
and prostration are caused today by various exposures 
of one kind or another as the time advances. No 
doubt that Day will bring forth further developments and 
trouble until the prophecies respecting it shall have been 
completely fulfilled— until the picture of utter destruction 
of everything evil, both root and branch, is carried out.— 
Mai. 4:1. 



R4628 : page 189 

THE NEW MIND VS. THE MIND OF THE FLESH 

"To be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually 
minded is life and peace."— Rom. 8:6. 

THERE is a distinction between the New Mind 

and the New Will which we all must recognize. 

The New Will is the determination 

of the New Mind. There must be some 

mind there in order to have a will, in order 

to reach a determination, and there must be 

knowledge upon which a will can be intelligently 

exercised. We are "born in sin and 

shapen in iniquity" (Psa. 51:5); we have 

this natural tendency to begin with. 

Our minds, at first conformed to earthly things, generally 

take the earthly view of matters, the selfish 

view. Then the Lord, through his Providences, brings 

certain propositions to our attention and sets before us 

that there is another way, "a more excellent way"; that 

God is now holding out a special prize to those who will 

live contrary to the flesh and according to his will. 

When this proposition reaches the individual, our 
Lord says that he should "sit down and count the cost." 
He should not rashly say, "Yes, yes"; but he should deliberate 
as to what this means— the cost in self-denials 
and the giving up of earthly preferences. After having 
counted the cost, and after having made the consecration 
his will or determination should be so set as not to 
allow it either to favor the flesh or to be guided by the 
flesh. He should resolve that henceforth whatever is 
God's will shall be his will, whether he understand all 
about that will or not. He must, however, see the outlines 
of the Divine will and something of the advantages 
accruing, before he can form the decision. This 
is the class which the Father accepts and begets of his 
holy Spirit. 

The new mind may sometimes be misled by false 
reasoning of the flesh. Our natural minds have their 
preferences, ambitions, aims and desires and they sometimes 
argue about certain things and say, "God never intended 
that that should be given up; God would not expect 
you to do anything so unreasonable as that!" And 
so, perhaps, the New Creature is deceived, and allows the 
flesh to have its way; but just so surely as it is a New 
Mind it has not intelligently or willfully assented to a 
wrong course; but, as the Apostle says, "Sin, taking occasion 
by the commandment, deceived me." (Rom. 7:11.) 
So there is a continual battle on the part of the new will, 
the New Creature, after being begotten of the holy 
Spirit, and he must watch lest the Adversary try to make 



him think that which is wrong to be right, and that which 
is right to be wrong. These, then, are snares which 
the Adversary places for the feet of the New Creature, 
and he uses the flesh in connection with its ensnarement; 
but the New Creature in his will, his intention, must remain 
loyal to the Lord and to righteousness. If he yield 
his will to unrighteousness or ignore God's will, then he 
has ceased to be a New Creature; the new things are 
passed away and all things become old again. This is a 
condition, we understand, from which he can never be 
recovered.— Heb. 6:4-6. 

In this connection, the Apostle James, in speaking of 
saving a soul from death, is evidently referring to one 
who is going into that careless condition where the new 
mind has become, as it were, stupefied, where the old mind 
has gotten the ascendency over it. If we see one of the 
Lord's people getting into such a condition, we should 
seek to restore him, "considering ourselves, lest we also 
be tempted" (Gal. 6:1); and those who do recover such 
an one "save a soul from death." (Jas. 5:20.) Thus 
brotherly kindness and assistance are specially commended 
of the Lord. A special blessing comes to all those 
who have an earnest desire thus to save an erring brother; 
a great reward is suggested for those who are successful 
in such an attempt. 

HOW MAY WE KNOW WHEN WE ARE IN DANGER? 

It might be asked how one could know when he was 
traveling toward that point of danger, so that he might 
arrest his progress. To one not blinded by the Adversary, 
the point of deflection from harmony with God's 
will would be as easily detected as would the border line 
between two States. The only ground upon which we 
were granted our present standing was our renouncement 
of sin and our consecration to the Lord— the giving 
up of our wills, complete surrender to him; and thus 
we came into the position of having the imputation of 
Christ's merit. If we should go back again and our will 
for righteousness become dead, this, of course, would 
imply that another will is there. We must have a will 
of some kind. If our will is no longer a righteous will, 
then it has gone across the border line and, according to 
the great Apostle, such never retrace their steps. "Christ 
dieth no more." There can be no more imputation of 
Christ's merit to such. They have had their blessing 
and if they, as the Apostle says, "return like a dog to 
his vomit," the step must prove fatal.— I Pet. 2:21,22. 

True, the new mind at first is weak, undeveloped; 
and so the Scriptures represent the New Creature as being 
merely "a babe in Christ," a babe in knowledge and 
a babe in the development of grace. But the Scriptures 
tell us that just as we care for a babe— specially handle 
it, specially feed it, specially deal with it, and do not treat 
it as we would treat an adult— so the Lord proposes that 
he will deal with all those who are babes in Christ. "He 



will not suffer them to be tempted above that they are 
able to bear, but with every temptation will provide a 
way of escape." (I Cor. 10:13.) The temptations will 
be permitted only in proportion to their feeble strength. 
He will supply for them the milk of the Word, that they 
may grow thereby, and gives them the assurance that all 
things shall work together for good to them.— Rom. 8:28. 

The trials at the beginning, therefore, are commensurate 
with the weakness of the New Creatures. It is 
true in some instances, however, that the New Creature 
seems to have a great deal of courage and strength at the 
beginning— perhaps more than is ever exhibited afterward. 
This, of course, is not a satisfactory condition of 

R4628 : page 190 

things. We ought to go from grace to grace, from 
knowledge to knowledge; after a time, we ought to be 
teachers, as the Apostle says, and not need to be taught 
again the first principles of the doctrines of Christ. God 
deals with us now as New Creatures under the direction 
of the Head. He supervises all the interests of each 
member of the Body. All things, if properly accepted, 
are overruled of the Lord for good to us individually. 

This is one of the great lessons of faith that the Lord's 
people need to learn, even after they have been in the 
way a good while. There are some Christian people 
who seem to have the impression, or at least give it to 
others, that they did this and that or saw so and so by 
their own wisdom. True, we all should use all the wisdom 
and strength we have; but the Christian who is relying 
upon himself is in a very dangerous position and 
quite likely the Lord will find it necessary to give him 
a lesson. For while it is his duty to rule his life so as 
to walk in the right paths, yet he needs continually to 
exercise faith in God and in the Lord's oversight and 
direction of his affairs, for "the steps of a righteous man 
are ordered of the Lord." If, in the Father's providence, 
some of the circumstances connected with our earthly 
affairs turn in this or that direction, our hearts should 
look to the Lord for the lesson to be drawn therefrom, and 
thus be able to glorify God thereby. The Christian 
should never view any experience as being lucky or unlucky, 
but should remember that all things connected with 
him, if he be living close to the Lord, are ordered and 
directed by the Lord.— Psa. 37:23. 



R4629 : page 190 

WHEN THE NATIONS WILL SEEK GOD 

"That they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after 
him, and find him, though he be not far from every one 
of us. "-Acts 17:27. 



NEW TESTAMENT evidences on this subject 

of seeking the Lord give the thought 

that not very many are in the condition of 

heart to seek him at the present time. "The 

god of this world hath blinded the minds of 

them that believe not, lest the glorious light 

of the Gospel of Christ" and the faith of 

Jesus should shine into their hearts. (2 Cor. 4:4.) 

Nevertheless, as the Apostle 

puts it, God is "not far from every one of 

us," and every one who will seek or feel after him, he 

will be pleased to bless by a manifestation of himself. 

In fact, this is the very object of this present Gospel 

Age— to find, to enlighten, to bless and to gather into a 

special class those who "hunger and thirst after righteousness." 

Those who thus seek after the Lord he guides, 

draws, influences. He leads them to the Lord Jesus 

Christ, pointing to him as the necessary way by which 

they may approach himself and assuring them that there 

is no other name given whereby they can be saved (Acts 4:12), 

and that all who will come unto him through 

Christ will be accepted. 

Such as do come in this way, we have proven from 
our own experiences and the experiences of others, as 
well as from the Word, are met half way by the Lord. 
"Draw nigh unto me, and I will draw nigh unto you." 
(Jas. 4:8.) And as they draw nigh and continue to approach 
closer by God's grace, they are brought by and 
by to a full realization that God is willing to accept them 
as sacrificers, as "members of the Body of Christ." If 
they fall into line with the Divine provision and present 
their bodies a living sacrifice, they will be looked 
upon as holy, acceptable to God (Rom. 12:1); they will 
recognize the "high calling" to "glory and honor and immortality" 
with Christ. But if they fail to go on, they 
will thus receive the grace of God in vain.— 2 Cor. 6:1. 

The Apostle intimates, not only in the text under 
consideration, but also in his Epistle to Timothy (I Tim. 2:4), 
that God wills that all men shall be saved; wills 
it in the sense that he will awaken them all from Adamic 
death and "bring them to a knowledge of the Truth"; 
that they may be recovered entirely from all imperfections 
that belong to Adam's condemnation, and thus 
brought fully into harmony with him. Because this is 
his will, he has made ample provisions— not only in the 
arrangement by which our Lord died on behalf of all 
mankind, that he might be the Ransomer of all, but also 
in the provision that all shall have the opportunity of 
coming to this knowledge and of benefitting thereby. 

In this sermon on Mars Hill, the Apostle Paul pointed 
out to the men at Athens that this "unknown God," this 
God who was unknown to them, is the great God who 
has divided unto men their habitation and determined 
their bounds; that he is the supervisor of the nations; 
that he determines how long and under what conditions 



the nations may prosper and what liberties and opportunities 
they may have. Then he proceeds to point out that 
while God has for a long time left men in ignorance and 
winked at many of their imperfections and flagrant 
wrong-doings, as though he did not notice them all, nevertheless 
another step has now been taken in his great 
Plan: "Now he commands all men everywhere to 
repent." 

The Apostle further declares, I, Paul, have something 
to tell you about this great God and about his message- 
that all men everywhere should repent. Do you ask me 
why they should repent? I answer, for the reason that 
God is prepared to forgive them their sins, on this condition: 
He was not prepared to do this a short time ago; 
he was not prepared to do this until Christ died; 
but since Christ has died and ascended up on high and 
"appeared in the presence of God for us"— for believers 
—God is now willing to accept any who come unto him 
through Jesus. It is proper, therefore, that I should tell 
you that there is to be an opportunity of future life 
through him. 

And, furthermore, it is proper that I should tell you 
also that "God has appointed a Day [the great Millennial 
period] in which he will judge [try] the world in 
righteousness." The whole world will then have a trial, 
a righteous trial, a fair, impartial trial, a full opportunity 
"to come unto the knowledge of the Truth"; to come 
to a knowledge of right and wrong, a full opportunity to 
come to perfection of human life and to attain all that 
was lost in the fall of man. (Luke 19:10.) This message 
should, as far as possible, be made known to all 
men everywhere, because every act of their lives will 
have a bearing upon the future; it will either uplift 
them to some extent out of the depths of degradation 
into which the world has been plunged through ignorance 
and superstition and bring a development of character, 
or it will condemn them and bring a measure of retribution, 
and thus make the conditions of the future more 
difficult than they would be if righteousness were sought. 



page 191 

1910-GENERAL CONVENTION-1910 
JULY 30 TO AUGUST 7 
LAKE CHAUTAUQUA (CELERON AUDITORIUM), JAMESTOWN, N.Y. 

This is merely to remind the friends everywhere of 
the approaching Chief or General Convention of the 
year. The location is ideal for the large gathering that 
is hoped for, and the low rates will make it possible 
for many to attend even from distant points. 

As previously stated, the cheapest rate will be for 



those who will start their journey on July 29. On 
that date tickets should be bought to Chautauqua for 
one fare, plus $2, for the round trip, good for return trip 
any time within thirty days. Those who for any reason 
will find it necessary to start on some other date, should 
inquire for lowest special Chautauqua Lake (N.Y.) 
rate, or summer tourist fare TO CHAUTAUQUA 
LAKE. Those living in the Eastern and New England 
States who cannot start July 29 will be able to take 
advantage of the one-fare and one-half for the round 
trip, account Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society's 
Convention at Jamestown, N. Y., tickets on sale August 
5 and 6, affording opportunity to attend last days of 
the Convention. Specially low rates for board for the nine 
days or less can be secured at cottages and hotels on the 
lake shore— $1 per day and up. Numerous little steamers 
plying the lake will afford easy communication with the 
Auditorium. 



page 191 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE CREATION 

The Text-Book Used for this Course is 
Scripture Studies, Volume VI— Study 1 

"In the beginning." 

JULY 3 

(1) What must have been the condition of the earth 
during the long period in which the rings or water canopies 
were concentrating towards the poles before breaking 

in deluges? Was the flood in Noah's day due to the 
breaking of one of these ring-canopies, and what must 
have been its effect? And what are the evidences or 
proofs corroborative? P. 25. 

(2) What say Professor Wright and Sir T. W. Dawson 
on the subject, as reported in the New York Journal. 
Pp. 26, 27. 

(3) Did the flood of Noah's day come at just the 
right time to fit with Divine Providence respecting 
humanity, and does this prove to us Divine foreknowledge 
and arrangement in respect to man's affairs? 

(4) What conclusions may we draw from the frozen 
mammoth of Eastern Siberia? Pp. 28, 29. 

(5) From the standpoint we have assumed, how shall 

we divide the creative week into four distinct parts? Specify 
these parts. P. 29, par. 3. 

(6) What testimony loyal to the Bible does Prof. 
Silliman offer respecting the structure of our planet? 
P. 30, par. 1. 

(7) Quote Prof. Dana's comment on creation and the 
wisdom displayed in the order of creation, as outlined in 



Genesis. P. 30, par. 2,3. 
JULY 10 

(8) Give a brief synopsis of the events of the first 
creative epoch-day and show the harmony between this 
and the Scriptural declaration, "The Spirit of God was 
brooding over the face of the waters. And God said, Let 
there be light, and there was light." P. 30, par. 4; P. 31, par. 1. 

(9) Give a brief synopsis of the events of the second 
creative epoch-day, "Let there be an expanse in the midst 
of the water and let it divide the waters from the waters," 
etc. P. 31, par. 3; P. 32, par. 1. 

(10) Briefly summarize the events of the third creative 
epoch-day, "Let the waters under the heavens be gathered 
together in one place and let dry land appear. And it was 
so." Pp. 32, 33. 

JULY 17 

(11) Did the events of these great epoch-days overlap 
each other, or how can we view this matter, the falling 
of the rings, etc.? P. 34, par. 1. 

(12) Why was not the light of the sun, moon and 

stars seen until the fourth day, and what were the advantages 
and disadvantages of the cloudy, steamy conditions 
prevalent before? P. 34, par. 1. 

(13) Explain the lapping of one epoch or day upon 
another and show how much was accomplished during 
the first four epoch-days of twenty-eight thousand years. 
P. 34, par. 2. 

(14) In the record of the fifth creative epoch-day God 
said, Let the waters swarm with living creatures, etc., 
and created great whales and every living creature with 
which the waters swarm after their kind, and every winged 
fowl after its kind. Does not this seem to imply that creation 
was carried on along Evolutionary lines to an extent— in 

the development of various kinds or species? P. 35, par. 2. 

(15) And is there any evidence that these kinds did 
not thus reach a fixity or perfection from which they can 
evolute no further? Explain the entire proposition. P. 35. 

(16) To what scientific period does the fifth creative 
epoch-day correspond? P. 30, par. 1. 

JULY 24 

(17) In the description of the work of the sixth creative 
epoch-day does the expression, "Let the earth bring 
forth the living creature after its kind," etc., imply an 
evolutionary process up to a certain point and the establishment 
thereby of a fixed species? P. 37, par. 1. 

(18) Give a description of the condition of things in 
the sixth day and demonstrate if by then the earth was 
more prepared than previously for the different kinds of 
animals, etc., brought into existence. P. 36, par. 3. 

(19) How many kinds or orders of lower animal life 



do we find, and how may these be described? P. 36, par. 3. 

(20) What is the final work of the sixth creative 
epoch-day accomplished at its close? P. 37, par. 2. 

(21) In view of the evidences, should we or should 

we not presume that a measure of Evolution operated for 
the creation of man and the bringing of him up to a fixity 
of species or kind, as it operated with the lower animals? 
P. 37, par. 4. 

(22) Cite evidences showing that in man's creation 
different expressions entirely are used from those in connection 
with the development of plant life and the lower animal 

life. P. 38, par. 1-3. 

(23) How shall we explain the two different accounts 

of creation, the second beginning Genesis 2:4? P. 38, par. 4. 

JULY 31 

(24) Explain why elohim or gods are mentioned in 
connection with the first account of man's creation, and 
Jehovah in connection with the second account. P. 38, par. 5. 

(25) Why is it not said of men, as of the beasts of 
the field, "Let the earth bring forth," nor as of the sea 
creatures, "Let the sea swarm"? Why is man mentioned 
as a direct creation and one individual? P. 39, par. 2. 

(26) What are we to understand to be signified by the 
statement that man was created in God's image? Does 
this image relate to the elohim or to Jehovah? State what 
difference this would make, and why? P. 39, par. 2, 3. 

(27) Is this issue between modern scientific thought 
along Evolutionary lines and the Bible teaching considerably 
in harmony, or are they directly opposed to each other? If 
so, state how and why? P. 39, par. 3. 

(28) Does anything, aside from the Genesis records 
support the theory of man's creation as a perfect being? 
P. 40, par. 1. 

(29) Does the fact that our Lord Jesus is declared to 
be a corresponding price for man imply that the man to 
whom he corresponded was perfect, or that he was next 
to a monkey? P. 40, par. 2. 

(30) Does the fact that the Bible teaches that the 
hope of mankind is restitution or resurrection, raising up, 
up, up, out of sin and death conditions, seem an evidence 
or proof that man must have been up before he fell and is 

now down beneath his original condition in order that restitution 
might profit him? P. 40, par. 3. 

(31) How does the Bible teaching of restitution comport 
with the Evolution theory, and what conclusion must 
Bible students reach on the subject from the testimony 

of Acts 3:19-21? P. 40, par. 4. 



page 194 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, 
five vol.; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in Greek three vols.; in French, two vols.; 
in Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. 
each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the 
same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 
each. 



page 193 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI JUNE 15 No. 12 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Bro. Russell's European Tour— Sec. 2 195 

Mementos of the Darker Past 195 

"The Secret of the Lord" 197 

Does Our Lord Now Own the Human Race? 199 

The World Asleep in Jesus 200 

The Church Alone Redeemed Thus Far 200 

The Price One Thing— The Application 

of It Another Thing 201 

Good Seed for Good Ground 202 

The Wheat and the Tares 203 

"Let Both Grow Together" 203 

Pictures of the Kingdom 204 

The Pearl of Great Value 205 

The Net Gathered of Every Kind 205 

Jesus Did Not Forfeit Earthly Life 206 

Jesus Had the Right to the Earthly Nature 206 

Imputing His Merit Now to Those 

Who Covenant to Sacrifice It 206 

Letters Re Volunteer Work 207 

page 194 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 
CONVENTIONS 



For list of June Conventions see page 172. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JULY 3 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock, 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks street. The evening 
meeting at 7:30 o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. 
Discourse for the Public at 3:00 P.M. in the Brooklyn 
Academy of Music, Lafayette avenue and St. Felix street. 
Topic: "True Liberty." Visiting friends will be warmly welcomed. 

ERIE, PA., JULY 10 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:30 
o'clock, Zuck's Hall, corner 16th and Peach streets. Service 
for the public at 2:30 P.M. in the Majestic Theater, Tenth 
street, near State street. Topic: "Hereafter." Visiting 
friends will be warmly welcomed. 



R4644 : page 194 

BRO. RUSSELL FLOODED WITH LETTERS 

Brother Russell's home coming has brought to him 
thousands of congratulations and good wishes from friends 
far and near. Brother Russell appreciates greatly these 
evidences of the love of the brethren! He sends, in this 
item, his acknowledgments and thanks and good wishes. 
The general interest of the harvest work forbid any attempt 
to respond personally. Please accept his love and 

page 194 

Christian greetings! 



R4629 : page 195 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S EUROPEAN TOUR 

[SEC. II.-ROME AND HOMEWARD BOUND.] 

SUNDAY, May 1st, was spent in Rome. We 

had a public service which indicated the 

deep interest of the comparatively few 

present. Possibly as many grains of wheat 

were found as though the meeting had been 

larger. "The Lord knoweth them that are 

his." On the whole, however, the meeting 

was quite a disappointment and came far 

from fulfilling the prophesy made respecting 

the large attendance— based upon what 

were supposed to be very liberal arrangements for a large 

central auditorium and very liberal advertising. The dear 

Brother who had the matter in charge no doubt used his 

best judgment, but his experience in such matters was 

limited. We spelled our disappointment with an "H," 

and trusted that the Lord could and would overrule the 

matter according to his own wisdom. We hope to hear 

of further interest on the part of some present on that 

occasion. Our text was from Romans 1:16. 

We had no appointment at Venice or Vienna, and went 
on to Warsaw, Russia. There we had a very enjoyable 
time with the class of about twenty. Brothers Rutherford 
and Koetitz accompanied us, and the latter served as 
interpreter. The very closest attention was given while 
we endeavored to show forth various features of Present 
Truth— especially did we emphasize the doctrine of the 
Ransom. We especially endeavored to make clear how 
that Jesus gave himself sacrificially to the Father and 
what he laid down of earthly right was the Ransom Price, 
which, in due time, at the end of this age he will make 
over to justice on behalf of "the sins of all the people." 
We showed that this has not yet been done, that the world 
still "lieth in the Wicked One," and are children of wrath, 
and that only the Church has escaped. 

We pointed out that the restitution blessings which are 
to go to the world very shortly, are not the blessings 
which we seek who hope to be of the Bride-class, and to 
attain the spirit nature, and joint-heirship with our Lord. 
We pointed out that the ransom-price, not yet paid over, 
is in the hands of Justice, to our Redeemer's credit, and 
that during this Gospel Age he imputes the merit of his 
sacrifice to all who become his footstep followers. To 
these he imputes a sufficiency of merit to cover their 
blemishes that thus their sacrifices may be acceptable. 
On the basis of this imputation the sacrifices are acceptable 
with the Father, as saith the Apostle (Romans 12:1), 
"We beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable 
to God, which is your reasonable service." We spoke 
to the dear friends for about four hours, had luncheon 



with them, and took the night train for Berlin. 

At Berlin we had a similarly interesting season of fellowship 
with the friends of the Truth. We had a social 
dinner together— about two hundred. Subsequently we 
addressed them for nearly two hours, the topic being 
the same as at Warsaw. Then came a Social Tea generally 
participated in, and later our evening meeting, which 
was well attended. Many of the friends accompanied us 
to the railway station, bidding us good bye as we departed 
for the German Branch Office at Barmen. 

We had an enjoyable season at Barmen for nearly two 
days, speaking to the dear friends for nearly seven hours 
in all. One service was for the public and was attended 
by nearly 800, many of whom manifested deep interest. 
The meetings of the Church varied in number, as not all 
were able to attend all the meetings, on account of business 
and other obligations. Here again we emphasized 
the Atonement for sin, and showed the work of the Mediator 
between God and men during the Millennial Age to be 
wholly based upon the meritorious sacrifice of our Redeemer, 
begun at Jordan and finished at Calvary. We 
pointed out the gracious arrangement whereby the merit 
of that sacrifice is imputed to us who accept the Divine 
invitation to become heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ to the heavenly inheritance, and in the work 
of blessing all the families of the earth, as the Seed of 
Abraham. 

We endeavored to make very plain that the merit of the 

R4630 : page 195 

atonement lay in the Redeemer's sacrifice, and that the 
Church is honored in that she is permitted to suffer with 
her Lord, and that this is a condition without which she 
may not hope to reign with him. After a delightful 
season of fellowship and study together of the Word of 
God we parted from the dear friends, many of whom 
accompanied us to the station, singing us good bye from 
the platform. 

MEMENTOS OF THE DARKER PAST 

We reached Harwich the next morning, Sunday, May 
8th. To our pleasant surprise a committee of the London 
Church met us here and journeyed with us to the Metropolis, 
entertaining us at breakfast on the dining car, and 
on the journey pointed out items of interest. One of these 
was a place where about three centuries ago a lad of 19 
years was burned to death as a heretic because of his 
belief in the Bible and the ministry of its teaching, as opposed 
to the supposed orthodoxy of his time. At another 

R4630 : page 196 

point on the same road we passed the monument erected 
to the memory of seventeen martyrs to their loyalty to 



God's Word. And in London we noted the Memorial 
Church at Smithfield Corners which commemorates many 
martyrdoms for the Truth's sake. 

Our mental comment was that the land which had 
witnessed such loyalty to God's Word centuries ago must 
still have many inhabitants loyal to the Scriptures and 
quite unwilling to be satisfied with the "new theology" of 
our day, marked by Evolution doctrines and denial of the 
inspiration of the Scriptures by the "higher critics." 

Although we arrived at the London Station at quite 
an early hour for Sunday (eight o'clock) we found nearly 
a hundred of the dear friends of the Truth from the city 
and suburbs, awaiting with beaming eyes and cheering 
words. Amongst these was Brother Hemery, the Society's 
London representative; a number of London Elders, and 
Brothers Driscoll and Jones from America. According 
to a preconcerted arrangement the dear friends refrained 
from shaking hands at this time, lest we should be wearied, 
but when later we ascertained how eager they had all 
been, and how some of them had cycled almost thirty 
miles in order to be there to greet us, we felt sorry that 
we had not broken over the restrictions made in our 
defense— sorry that we had not shaken hands with each 
one of them individually as a token of our love and our 
great pleasure in meeting them. 

We purpose not to withhold ourselves on any future 
occasion of the kind, but to rely upon the grace and 
strength of the Lord for the occasion, and to give ourselves 
and the greeting friends the pleasure of such an occasion. 
However, we will take this opportunity to suggest to some 
of the friends that they must not attempt to demonstrate 
all their love by a handshake— that they must not squeeze 
too hard. The spirit is willing and the flesh is strong in 
many instances. The large gathering at the station to 
meet us seemed the more remarkable when we learned 
that the dear friends in the ten days previous had been 
most energetically engaged in advertising our meeting, 
which was held the night of our arrival. When we advise 
you that 750,000 copies of the PEOPLES PULPIT had been 
circulated in London by the friends in the Truth, it will 
be realized that some of them must of necessity have been 
wearied with their exertions. Hence the number at the 
station at that hour and the zeal manifested by their 
presence was the more remarkable. We may be sure 
that such love and loyalty to the Lord and to the Truth 
and to us as their servant, prepared these dear active 
friends for more of the Lord's blessings in connection 
with the meeting held. 

ROYAL ALBERT HALL 

Three public services were held in this, the greatest 
Auditorium in the world, on the three Sunday evenings of 
our stay in Great Britain. The first one was on the evening 
of our arrival, May 8th. It was a grand assemblage of 
very intelligent people, of whom the majority apparently 



were men. Brother Col. Sawyer served as Chairman. 
Our topic was "Hereafter." As the King had died the 
day previous, the subject seemed remarkably appropriate. 
We introduced our discourse with a few words referring 
to the King, as follows: 

"In Germany I learned of the death of your esteemed 
monarch, Edward VII. I realized that not only your 
nation, but all Christendom, had lost an unobtrusive but 
wise Counsellor, a power for peace and good-will amongst 
men. I take this opportunity to express to this great audience 
my sympathy, which, I assure you, is shared by the 
vast majority of my American countrymen. My first 
thought was, that out of respect for the illustrious dead, his 
family, and the nation this service should be postponed. 
But my second thought was to the contrary. Surely at 
no more fitting hour could we consider 'The Great Hereafter.' 
There is, thank God, a 'hereafter' for kings as 
well as for peasants— and Royal mourners and a mourning 
nation need the message from God's Word particularly 
now. And, since no more representative audience will 
probably assemble in this capital of the Empire, I have 
a suggestion to offer which I trust will meet with your 
approval. It is, that before offering prayer we show our 
sympathy for the Royal Family, in their bereavement, by 
standing. After a brief prayer, in which the Royal Family 
were remembered, the congregation joined in singing the 
hymn reputed to be the deceased King's favorite, 'Nearer, 
My God, to Thee.'" For a few moments before we led 
in prayer, the congregation, with bowed heads, prayed 
silently. The occasion was a very impressive one. 

In discussing the "Hereafter," we showed the generally 
accepted views of Catholics and Protestants, and then, 
in contrast with these, the Bible presentation, which we 
affirmed to be not only the true one, but the only logical 
one. We pointed out the hereafter of the Church in glory 
and the steps of patient perseverance leading thereto. 
We pointed out that while the Bible shows, and the creeds 
confess, that only a little flock will be joint-heirs in the 
Kingdom with Christ, nevertheless there is another salvation 
which is for the world. The world's earthly salvation 
we contrasted with the Church's heavenly one. We 
showed that it will be a restitution to mental, moral and 
physical perfection, to be attained during the thousand 
years of Messiah's reign in glory, for which we pray, 
"Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is 
in heaven." We showed the Divine provision for an 
earthly Paradise for such restored sons of Adam as will 
accept the Divine arrangement on their behalf, and that all 
others will be destroyed in the Second Death. 

We pointed out that this was a very different outlook 
from the one ordinarily presented in the creeds of Christendom. 
While taking no more to heaven than the saintly 
and elect, as the Bible indicates, all the creeds consign 
the remainder of mankind either to centuries of torture 
in Purgatory, or to an eternity of torture in hell. We 
pointed out the unscripturalness and unreasonableness of 



this proposition, and showed in scriptural language that 
God's provision is a resurrection of the dead as the hope 
of both the Church and the world— the Church in the 
First Resurrection to glory, honor and immortality. 

We pointed out that the glorification of the elect on the 
spirit plane, as the spiritual "Seed of Abraham," is scrip turally 
declared for the very purpose of blessing all the 
families of earth— the non-elect— giving them fullest 
opportunity to come to the knowledge of the Lord, and of 
righteousness, and to avail themselves of a share of God's 
mercy and forgiveness for all the willing and obedient 
to life everlasting. We had a good hearing for nearly 
two hours. Custodians of the hall remarked that for an 
audience to sit for so long was practically unprecedented in 
their experience. We trust that some good was accomplished, 
that some were brought nearer to the Lord, some 
made to appreciate more fully God's love, justice, wisdom 
and power. The newspapers were so full of news pertaining 
to the deceased King, Edward VII, and the 
arrangements for his funeral, and to the royalty expected 
to attend it, that very meager remarks on the sermon 
appeared. 

BRISTOL, MANCHESTER, OTLEY, NOTTINGHAM 

We spent Monday looking about London for the Lord's 
answer to our prayer that we might be directed to more 

R4630 : page 197 

suitable quarters for the London Office, and to some 
suitable place centrally located for the regular church 
services. We learned much, but accomplished nothing. 
Places suitable seem difficult to find. 

Tuesday brought us to Bristol, where there is a very 
interesting class of Bible Students in fellowship with us. 
A goodly delegation met us at the railway station, attended 
to our refreshment, and took us to the meeting place. The 
afternoon session was for the interested and we were 
pleasantly surprised to note how many were so deeply 
interested as to make arrangements to be at liberty from 
their business and household cares to attend the meetings. 
Not all, of course, were their own masters and able 
to control their own time, yet the will of many to be 
present evidently guided to the way which the Lord opened 
up for them. About 135 were present at the afternoon 
service, and 650 at the evening service, which was for the 
public. 

At the afternoon service we endeavored to point out 
the importance of standing— not falling away from the 
Lord and the Truth. We showed what were the conditions 
upon which the Lord accepted us as his children, 
inducted us into his family and to a knowledge of the 
Truth. We showed the necessity for the spirit of love and 
loyalty to continue with us, in order that we might continue 
to have Divine guidance and blessing, and that love 



is the principal thing. Incidentally we pointed out the 
relationship of the ransom-price to the world's deliverance. 
We showed that it was necessary for Jesus to die, "The 

R4631 :page 197 

just for the unjust," in order that he might have the 
ransom-price with which to redeem the Church and the 
world later on. God raised him from the dead a spirit 
being, so he might have his earthly rights to give to 
mankind. 

We also called attention to the fact that our Lord's 
obtaining the ransom-price, by the sacrifice of himself, is a 
different matter entirely from his paying that ransom-price 
over to Divine Justice on behalf of sinners. He gave 
himself to be the ransom-price for the sins of the world 
nearly nineteen centuries ago. His giving of himself was 
acceptable to the Father, and what he sacrificed became 
the ransom-price for the whole world— quite sufficient for 
Adam and all his race whenever applied. We showed that 
he had not yet applied it for the world, and that hence the 
world is still "lying in the wicked one," still under Divine 
condemnation, still unreconciled— waiting for God's "due 
time," when the ransom and its privileges will be testified 
to all. 

We showed that the testimony respecting the value of 
our Lord's death as the ransom-price had already been 
given to us— believers, the household of faith, the Church. 
We have received the testimony, and with the testimony 
God sent us an invitation to become associates with his 
Son, our Lord and Redeemer, in all of his great work of 
blessing all the families of the earth in the coming age, 
when in his Millennial Kingdom glory he shall serve the 
world as its Mediator, standing between men and God. He 
will then satisfy Divine Justice by making application of 
his merit for the sins of all the people. In consequence of 
that satisfaction, they will all be turned over to him, and 
his Millennial Kingdom will begin. The Father will put 
all things under him, accepting the ransom-price as full 
satisfaction for the sins of all. During that thousand years 
the Mediator, Christ the Head and the Church his Body, 
Christ the Bridegroom and the Church the Bride, his 
joint-heir, will reign for the uplifting of mankind out 
of sin, degradation, death— up to perfection of mind, body 
and morals. 

During all the time of the Mediatorial Kingdom the 
world of mankind will not be subjected to the Father, but 
to the go-between, the Mediator, the great Prophet, Priest, 
King, Judge, of many members. At the conclusion of the 
Mediatorial reign, when all unwilling to make progress 
shall be destroyed in the Second Death, and all willing 
and obedient shall have been brought up out of sin and 
death conditions to perfection— then The Christ, Head and 
Body, will deliver up the Kingdom to the Father. Thenceforth 
there will be no more mediation, no further mediatorial 
work or Kingdom, because the necessity will be gone. 



Every man will be perfect and able to stand the test of 
Justice, and will be required to do so from the moment the 
Mediator steps aside and turns over the Kingdom to God, 
even the Father.— I Cor. 15:24. 

We exhorted the friends to faithfulness, to loving zeal, 
to patient endurance, to the development of the fruits and 
graces of the Spirit, that they might be accounted worthy 
of association with the Redeemer, in his Kingdom work 
as antitypical priests and kings unto God, as members of 
the antitypical Mediator between God and men. The 
service for the public attendance in the evening (about 
600) was excellent indeed, when the general commotion 
incidental to the King's death and funeral is remembered; 
also remembering the fact that the meeting was on a weeknight. 
Our subject was "Man's Past, Present and Future," 
and was dealt with after our usual manner. We remained 
over night, and when we took the train Wednesday morning 
a goodly company of the friends were on the platform. 
Some of them accompanied us to our next appointment. 
Those remaining on the platform waved their good bye, 
and we bade them adieu, expressing our appreciation of 
their loving zeal manifested in so many ways and our 
hopes that they might prove faithful to the end, and receive 
the crown of life. 

THE SECRET OF THE LORD 

At Manchester we were met at the station by a considerable 
delegation of the Church and taken to dinner. 
Subsequently we addressed a gathered company of about 
300 in their usual hall. Profound attention was given, and 
subsequently we were warmly greeted. We spoke from 
the text, "The secret of the Lord is with them that fear 
(reverence) him, and he will show them his Covenant." 
(Psa. 25:14). We considered how carefully the Lord 
has guarded the secrets of his plan, so that at no time 
have they been known except to the saints, the reverential. 
We considered the matter of his Covenant and that it must 
be shown or revealed even to his saints, otherwise it 
could not be understood. We noted Israel's covenant 
made at Sinai and the fact that it is still in force; that 
it did not cease at the cross, except as St. Paul declares— 
it ceased so far as those Jews were concerned who became 
dead to the Law and married to Christ. "Christ is the 
end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believeth," 
but he is not the end of the Law to others. 

The Law Covenant has dominated the Jews and 
will continue to do so until the great antitypical Mediator 
shall step forth and inaugurate for Israel the better 
arrangement, styled the New [Law] Covenant. It will not 
have a new Law, because the Law given to Israel was just, 
and holy, and perfect, but it will have a new Mediator more 
capable than Moses, and he will be able to show mercy to 
the people more effectively because his standing and 
authority as Mediator will be based upon "better sacrifices" 
than those which the typical Moses typically offered. But 



this great antitypical Mediator cannot undertake his great 
work until his own completion by the association of the 
Church with himself as his "members," and this will not 
be completed until the "better sacrifices" are completed. 

R4631 :page 198 

We saw that this work of offering the "better sacrifices" 
is still in progress and that the Gospel Age has been the 
antitypical "Day of Atonement." At its close the Mediator, 
Head and Body, will be completed and glorified, and 
will inaugurate the New Covenant with Israel in harmony 
with the promises. The New Covenant will take over the 
Old Covenant and all the people that were under it, and 
thus alone can the Law Covenant, instituted by Moses, 
find fulfillment in its antitype. 

Thus St. Peter declared, "For Moses verily said unto 
the fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up 
unto you from amongst your brethren like unto me (I am 
his likeness or type, foreshadowing that great prophet 
in the small way), him shall ye hear in all things; and it 
shall come to pass that the soul that will not obey that 
Prophet shall be destroyed from amongst the people." 
(Acts 3:22,23.) All who will not come into line then 
with the great antitypical Mediator will perish in the 
Second Death, but first they must come to a knowledge 
of him. All the blind eyes must be opened, and all the 
deaf ears unstopped. The entire Gospel Age has been 
set apart in the Divine order for the raising up of this 
great Prophet like unto Moses— the great Mediator of the 
New Covenant. Jesus was raised up first, "Head over 
all things to the Church which is his Body." Subsequently 
the Apostles were raised up as members of his 
Body and since then selections have been made from people 
from every nation and clime. The great antitypical Mediator 
will soon be complete. 

TYPE AND ANTITYPE 

In proportion as the antitype came in the type ended, 
but only that proportion and no more. Thus the typical 
bullock of the atonement found its antitype in the "Man 
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all," and the 
typical high-priest found an antitype in Jesus Christ, "The 
high-priest of our profession" or order, and the sacrifice 
of the bullock found its antitype in the consecration and 
death of Jesus. Thus also the under-priesthood finds its 
antitype in the consecrated Church, as St. Peter declares. 
Thus also the Lord's goat on the day of atonement finds 
its antitype in the flesh of those who are now consecrated 
to walk in the footsteps of Jesus. As that goat went 
to the bullock outside the camp to be burned, so the Apostle 
exhorts us, "Let us go to him outside the camp bearing 
his reproach"— outside of human favor and esteem and 
fellowship, for "If we suffer with him we shall also reign 
with him." This last mentioned feature of the type has 



not yet been fully completed, hence the other features of 

the type incidental to the Law Covenant and its day of 

atonement have not yet found a fulfillment, but "not one 

jot or tittle shall fail." All shall be fulfilled in due time. 

The great Prophet, the antitype of Moses, will shortly 

be completed and be raised up from amongst his brethren, 

and then the second application of his blood will be made, 

"On behalf of all the people." Then, in view of that redemptive 

work— that payment of the ransom-price for all 

—the whole world will be turned over to the great Mediator, 

Priest and King. He will take unto himself his 

great mediatorial power and begin his reign for the overthrow 

of Sin and Death and for the uplifting of the willing 

and obedient of Adam's race. 

The dear friends at Manchester had made a great 
distribution of Volunteer matter— about a hundred thousand 
copies of the PEOPLES PULPIT, besides other methods 
of advertising through the newspapers, etc., etc. A fine 
audience of very intelligent people listened with rapt attention 
to our presentation of the subject of "The Great 
Hereafter." The next day, Thursday the 12th, we bade 
adieu once more and went to Otley. 

THEY HAD NOT MUCH ROOT IN THEMSELVES 

Otley is a smaller place than we usually visit on such 
occasions, but the work there had a very interesting beginning. 
Some time ago a young man, a local Elder in the 
Primitive Methodist Church, purchased a copy of the Plan 
of the Ages at a second-hand book-stall. It deeply impressed 
him and he loaned it to five of his fellow-co-laborers, 
local preachers in the same Church. All six received 
the Truth with zeal. Violent opposition and misrepresentation 
came upon them in connection with their public 
avowal of the love of God and his Divine Plan of the 

R4632 : page 198 

Ages. Under the influence of that persecution one-half of 
them repudiated the Truth much after the manner 
described by our Lord in the parable, Because they had 
not much root in themselves; when the sun of persecution 
arose they withered away. We were glad to meet the 
three who remained staunch and were glad under their 
arrangements to address the public, taking for our text 
"The Thief in Paradise, The Rich Man in Hell, and Lazarus 
in Abraham's Bosom." We had the close attention 
of a very intelligent audience. In the afternoon preceding 
we addressed the interested ones to the number of about 
sixty, some of whom came from the regions near. We 
discussed with them the glorious invitation granted to "the 
Church of the Living God" and the call which has come 
to her— to be the Bride of his Son, and joint-heir in his 
Kingdom, setting before the minds of the class the glorious 
privilege thus afforded and the riches of grace providing 
the blessing. We exhorted all to faithfulness even unto 



death, to follow in the footsteps of Jesus; and we assured 
all such, in the Master's name, of the "crown of glory that 
fadeth not away." 

Our next stop was at Nottingham. Here again we had 
a pleasant and profitable time of fellowship with the 
household of faith to the number of about ninety. Again 
we concluded that the uppermost thought of interest to 
the friends must be along the lines of our recent studies 
respecting the Covenants and their Mediators. Following 
the matter much as we did at the other places we endeavored 
to make especially clear the proper distinction between 
the meaning of an "Advocate" and a "Mediator." A Mediator 
stands between two persons with a view of reconciling 
them and bringing them together. Thus the glorified 
Christ during his Millennial Kingdom will stand between 
God and men. After satisfying Justice by the application 
of the merit of his sacrifice finished at Calvary, the great 
Mediator will undertake to open the eyes of the blind 
world, to unstop the deaf ears, and to discipline and correct 
them so that they will appreciate God and his gracious 
arrangement on their behalf, and so come into harmony 
with his Millennial Kingdom. It, by chastisement and 
rewards, will lift men up, up, up out of sin and death conditions 
to absolute human perfection. Then the obedient, 
being perfect, will be able to stand before God, and the 
Mediator will turn over to the Father all those who have 
turned from sin and through the merit of his sacrifice 
have been brought back to human perfection. Then he 
will abdicate his office as Mediator between God and men, 
for there will be none who will longer need such a 
Mediator. 

But before beginning his work of Mediator between 
God and men, our great Redeemer does a work 
for the Church in accordance with the Father's arrangement. 
During this Gospel Age he proffers himself 
as Advocate to all who may have the hearing ears and 
appreciative hearts and who may turn from sin to serve 
the living God to the best of their ability, and who may 
exercise faith in the Redeemer, and approach the Father 
through him. Such as thus approach God are approaching 

R4632 : page 199 

justification by their faith and by their obedience. To 
such God declares, "Draw nigh to me and I will draw nigh 
to you." (Jas. 4:8.) Every step that these advance from 
sin toward righteousness is a step toward God, toward 
justification, based upon their faith in God; toward Covenant 
relationship. To such God draws nigh in the same 
proportion. At first they are justified to fellowship with 
God, as Abraham was justified by his faith and obedience. 
But the call of this present time is to sonship and joint-heirship 
with Christ in his Kingdom. 

Hence the Father points these who draw nigh to him 
to Jesus as "The way, the truth and the life," and his 
message is, "No man cometh unto the Father but by me." 



Those desiring fellowship with God to the full, to have 
his blessing of eternal life, may hope to attain it only 
through accepting the merit of Christ's sacrifice by faith 
and by making a consecration of themselves to be his 
disciples, and to walk in his steps. Faith such as Abraham 
had and exercised so beautifully could not bring him nearer 
to God than justification to fellowship and to receive a 
certain blessing promised, a "better resurrection." But 
those who come now to God, in view of the sacrifice of 
Christ, may accept him as their Advocate, and through 
him have full presentation to the Father, and may enter 
fully into covenant relationship with him as sons. There 
is no other invitation at the present time than that of the 
spirit of full devotion to the Father's will; these alone are 
now sought. 

THE IMPUTATION OF HIS MERIT 

To these the appointed Advocate declares his willingness 
to be their Advocate— to undertake to be their spokesman 
with the Father, and to make good in the Father's 
sight for all their blemishes of the flesh, so as to enable 
them to offer (Mai. 3:3) a righteous sacrifice which God 
could accept. We pointed out that all these called 
to be the followers of Jesus, had, unlike their Leader, 
weak, imperfect and blemished bodies. They "were 
children of wrath even as others," but they got out of that 
condition by turning their hearts to God and away from 
sin; and by accepting his appointed way in Christ. But 
although there are many steps by which God may be 
approached quickly or slowly, nevertheless there is the 
one standard which must be attained before any can be 
accepted of the Father as members of the Body of Christ. 
That step is full consecration even unto death. Then the 
Redeemer imputes such a portion of his merit to such as 
will make good the sinner's deficiency, and thus enable 
the Father to accept him as a sacrifice. This is in accord 
with the Apostle's words in Romans 12:1. Our sacrifices 
themselves are not holy and acceptable to God, but only 
because of our relationship to the great Advocate. Our 
Advocate imputes sufficient of his merit to make good 
our deficiency. If one is deficient 50 per cent, the Lord 
imputes to him that 50 per cent. If another is deficient 
25 per cent, that amount is imputed to him. If another 
be deficient 75 per cent, that amount is imputed to him— 
to each according to his needs from the abundant sufficiency 
of him who loved us and bought us with his own 
blood. 

Just as soon as our Redeemer makes this imputation 
of his merit on our behalf we are in the Father's sight 
justified fully and completely from all things— as much 
so as though we had never committed sin. It is in view 
of this justification that the Father accepts our sacrifice 
as holy and acceptable, and begets us of his holy Spirit. 
We exhorted the friends to remember that thus it was 
that they entered into covenant relationship with God, 



and that they could maintain that relationship only by 
continuing their sacrifice on the altar— laying down their 
lives for the brethren, and in the service of God generally, 
"doing good unto all men as they have opportunity, 
especially the household of faith." We reminded them 
that this covenant relationship into which the Church has 
come is not by the Covenant of the Law of Moses, nor by 
the New [Law] Covenant, which will take the place of 
the old Law Covenant with Israel, under the better Mediator, 
and which will operate during the Millennial Age, and 
bring them into harmony with God, and into full covenant 
relationship only at the close of the Millennium. 

Our covenant relationship, which we enter into at once 
through the assistance of our great Advocate, brings us 
immediately into fellowship, into sonship; and immediately 
makes us joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord to the 
heavenly inheritance. Wherefore we are no longer aliens 
but sons. Not only does no Mediator stand between us and 
God, but no Mediator brought us to God. The Father 
himself called us and drew us, as the Scriptures declare, 
and himself pointed us to Jesus our Advocate. We called 
attention to the fact that an Advocate stands alongside 
of as a spokesman, and does not come between, as does the 
Mediator. We also drew attention to the fact that Jesus 
was not spoken of as our Mediator, but we are told that 
he is our "Advocate with the Father." 

The evening session for the public was in Mechanics 
Hall, and was well attended; our topic was, "The Thief 
in Paradise, The Rich Man in Hell, and Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom." Bidding the Nottingham friends good-bye, 
with best wishes for their eternal welfare, and accepting 
their good wishes on our behalf, we went to London 
on Saturday, there to look further respecting the 
Lord's Providence for the future housing of his work. 



R4632 : page 199 

DOES OUR LORD NOW OWN THE HUMAN RACE? 

IF A MAN were purchasing a building, had 

entered into negotiations for it, had signed 

a contract and were making arrangements 

to secure the money to apply it in payment 

for the building, it would be very appropriate, 

as soon as he had signed the contract, 

to say, this is the owner of the building. 

In the strict sense of the word, however, he 

would not be the owner until he had paid 

the price and all the receipts were properly 

given, and, instead of the contract, he had the deed. A 

contract is an agreement for the carrying out of a project; 

the deed witnesses the transaction actually accomplished. 

As far as the contract was concerned, our Lord Jesus 
entered into it with the Father; and in view of his 



having given to the Father the ransom-price— "Even 

as the Son of Man came to give his life a ransom 

for many"— he already has a claim to being Lord 

of all, in a prospective sense, not in the actual sense, 

as there are millions of people on earth today of whom 

he is not Lord; their knees have not bowed; their tongues 

have not confessed. So he is not their Lord in the absolute 

sense, but his work is progressing, and, in view 

of the authority which will yet be exercised by him and of 

the work which he will yet do, the Father speaks of 

him prophetically as "Lord of all." 

R4633 : page 200 

THE WORLD ASLEEP IN JESUS 

We will here consider certain Scriptures as having a 
bearing upon the matter. We mention first the Scripture 
which says that the world "sleep in Jesus." (I Thess. 4:14.) 
How can they sleep in Jesus, unless Jesus owns 
the world, may be asked? We answer that they sleep 
in Jesus in exactly the same way that Abraham and all 
Israel sleep and all the kings and prophets are said to 
be asleep. Not that Jesus at the time of their death had 
paid a ransom-price for mankind, nor had come into 
the world to do so, but because, in the Divine Plan, God 
had made arrangements for the entire transaction and 
had guaranteed that a Redeemer would be found, that 
a ransom-price would be given, and that all mankind 
would be recovered from the tomb. Further, God himself 
spoke from that standpoint when he said that he was 
the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, speaking 
as though they were really not dead at all, but merely 
asleep, waiting for him. 

Similarly, all who believed God could speak of and 
think of all who were dead as merely asleep for the 
time and awaiting the resurrection, even though Jesus 
had not yet come. The same is true since Jesus came 
and died. It is now still more reasonable and proper for 
us to say that all "sleep in Jesus," because now he is 
identified as the one who has given himself a ransom-price 
for all. It is not that the price has been applied 
for all, but merely that he has placed in the Father's 
hands his sacrificed life, which is his to appropriate and 
which is sufficient "for the sins of the whole world." 
(John 3:16.) It has not as yet been appropriated for 
the world, but merely for the Church, for the price is 
first a satisfaction for our sins, the Church's sins, and 
afterwards for the sins of the whole world.— I John 2:2. 

THE CHURCH ALONE REDEEMED THUS FAR 

We will next consider the text, Ye were redeemed 
with the precious blood of Christ. (I Pet. 1:18,19.) 
The reference here is to us, the Church, and does not 
extend beyond the Church to the world. It does not 



imply that the world is redeemed as yet. Jesus' merit, 
of course, is all-sufficient for the whole world, but he 
has not yet appropriated it for all men. 

We will consider another text, "Ye are bought with a 
price." (I Cor. 6:20.) This text, similarly, speaks not 
of the world, but of the Church. It is the "Ye" class 
that were bought, and even they were not bought when 
Jesus died at Calvary. There, indeed, he committed to 
the Father's hands a price (Luke 23:46) sufficient for 
all; but it was not then appropriated for anybody— not 
even for us, not until his resurrection and ascension, 
when "he appeared in the presence of God for us." (Heb. 9:24.) 
Then we were bought. "Ye were bought with 
the precious blood of Christ." His blood was made the 
offset so far as believers are concerned. 

Another text: "He is the propitiation for our sins, 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world." (I John 2:2.) We answer that he was a 
propitiation, satisfaction, for our sins, in one sense of 
the word, when he died, but the satisfaction had not then 
been applied for our sins. When he died the merit of 
his death was a satisfaction-price for the sins of the 
whole world, also, but it was not applied for the sins 
of the whole world. When he ascended up on high he 
appeared for us, the Church class, and made satisfaction 
for our sins. Therefore, as we believe and make consecration, 
our sins are remitted. His merit is additionally 
the satisfaction for the sins of the whole world; but he 
has not yet applied it for the world, hence the world 
is not free from the penalty of sin; it is still under 
condemnation. Concerning us, however, the Apostle 
says, "We have escaped the condemnation that is on the 
world." And again he says, "We were children of wrath 
even as others." The others, we see, are still children of 
wrath. Why? Because the satisfaction for their sins has 
not yet been made. The great Redeemer has the satisfaction 
price; it merely awaits the due time for application. 

Notice another passage, "Christ died and rose and 
revived that he might be Lord both of the dead and of 
the living." (Rom. 14:9.) This text very appropriately 
states the valuable transaction accomplished by our Lord. 
His death was a necessary feature of the redemptive 
work. His raising and revival were also necessary features. 
And further, he could not have been Lord in 
any other way than by the Father's proclaiming him 
"Lord of all," and "Let all the angels of God worship 
him." But while he is proclaimed to be Lord of all, it 
will take time to bring about the recognition of it. In 
harmony with this, the Apostle says, "In the fullness 
of time God will gather together under him (Jesus) all 
things in heaven and earth." But it will take the fullness 
of time, the fullness of the Millennial Age, to accomplish 
this gathering together under him and making him 
Lord of all. So we see that prophetically and by Divine 
appointment he already has that office, but now he waits 
until his enemies shall be brought under him or made 



his foot-stool, and all things shall be subjected to him. 
"A RANSOM FOR ALL" 

We next consider the text, "He gave himself a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due time." (I Tim. 2:6.) 
The giving of himself as the man Christ Jesus was 
when he presented himself at Jordan and surrendered all 
to the Father's will. This work of surrendering his 
earthly life and all his earthly rights was fully accomplished 
at Calvary when he cried, "It is finished." He 
had finished the work the Father had given him to do. 
He had given himself to be "a ransom for all," and his 
death-merit is sufficient to constitute a ransom for all, 
as soon as it shall be so appropriated. Thus far, we 
see, it has been applied only for us who believe, and 
the time for its application for the remainder of the 
world will be at the beginning of the Millennial Age; 
but it will not reach all of the human family at the 
beginning. 

While our Lord's merit is fully appropriated during 
the Gospel Age for all who come unto him, it will be 
fully set free when the last of the consecrated ones shall 
have passed beyond the vail. His merit has been imputed 
to them for the very purpose of enabling them 
to be sacrificers and when it shall have been released 
by the death of the last of the consecrated, it will be 
again at his disposal for appropriation. Then the great 
High Priest will make the second sprinkling of the blood 
—not on our behalf, because we shall have no further 
need of it, having by that time become perfect as New 
Creatures beyond the vail, members of his Body. The 
second sprinkling will be on behalf of "all the people" 
—all who will come under the New Covenant arrangement 
—"to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile"; all 
who will desire, when they come to sufficient knowledge, 
under that New Covenant, to come under the merit of 
our Lord's ransom-price; and those who will fail to 
thus come, will reject the ransom-price and hence the 
blessings of restitution. 

All these blessings will come gradually, not instantaneously, 
not by faith, but actually, by restitution processes. 
All through the Millennial Age The Christ will 

R4633 : page 201 

be giving men the benefit of our Lord's ransom or "corresponding 

price," and the full benefit of this price will 

not have been given until the work of the Millennial 

Age shall have been finished and shall have brought 

to perfection all who desire to be God's people, 

upon God's terms, as God never intended to give 

his blessings to any but those who desire to be in harmony 

with him on his terms. God never intended to do anything 

for those who are willingly and intentionally contrary, 

such as Satan. 



It may be asked how the foregoing will conform 
with the text, "That he [Jesus], by the grace of God, 
should taste death for every man." (Heb. 2:9.) We 
answer that this is God's great work which he purposed 
in himself before the foundation of the world— that the 
ransoming of Adam and all his race should be accomplished 
through the death of Christ. Thus he tasted death 
for every man, whether the benefit of it was received 
on the Day of Pentecost, or later, during the Age, or 
whether they will get it at the beginning of the Millennial 
Age. It is for every man that he "tasted death," 
that he might give them the blessings that will come to 
the world of mankind down to the completion of the 
Millennial Age, and, if obedient, to all eternity. 

"He ascended up on high and led captivity captive" 
—or, as another translation gives it, and we think more 
correctly, "He ascended up on high leading forth a 
multitude of captives." This passage shows that he was 
the leader of all the captive race. We, the Church, 
follow first; the "Great Company" follow next; the 
Ancient Worthies will follow soon afterward, and at 
the end of the Millennial Age he will bring in the remainder 
of the race. They will all be led forth, all 
delivered from the power of sin and death. 

THE PRICE ONE THING -THE APPLICATION OF IT 
ANOTHER THING 

"For when we were yet without strength, in due time 
Christ died for the ungodly." This passage does not 
state that Christ made an application of his merit for 
the ungodly; it merely states that God arranged his 
plan so that it was necessary for Christ to die for the 
ungodly. Why did God so arrange it? He arranged 
it on behalf of, or in the interest of, the ungodly— 
not merely the Jews and those who were, as some of 
us may have been, desirous of harmony with God, but 
for all the ungodly. The merit of his death was intended 
by the Father to be applicable to every member 
of the race, the ungodly race of Adam, all of them 
sinners and more or less depraved and degraded and out 
of the way. 

Now, then, the object for which the price was given 
is one thing and the application of it is another. The 
purpose of Christ's death was to redeem the world, 
to be the world's ransom-price, that he might be the 
restorer of all. But in this Plan there are time and 
order; the work progresses step by step. The first 

R4634: page 201 

step was for Christ himself to secure eternal glory by 
his own obedience to death and to have as an asset 
something that he could give away— his earthly life, 
which he had not forfeited. 
The next step was that he should ascend up on high 



and apply this price. He appeared as advocate for a 
special class of humanity. What special class? We 
answer, he appeared for all those from among men who 
should desire to come into harmony with God, who 
should desire to accept God's favor and to become members 
of the Body of Christ under an invitation or programme 
that God had arranged. When he appeared 
for these he imputed the merit of his sacrifice on their 
behalf, and thus all this merit is absorbed, so to speak, 
in this one work first undertaken, this work of justifying 
and assisting this special class who desire to walk in 
Jesus' steps, desire to suffer with him that they may 
also share with him the heavenly glory. He does this, 
not by first giving them earthly restitution, but by simply 
imputing his merit to them. 

This imputation of his merit, coming to those who 
have turned from sin, who are believing on the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and have consecrated themselves to God, 
covers their Adamic sin and makes up for all deficiencies 
of their flesh, so that they can "present their bodies 
living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God, their reasonable 
service." (Rom. 12:1.) In other words, he 
becomes endorser for these. They are not sufficient of 
themselves, but he guarantees for them that if they will 
faithfully perform this laying down of their lives, his 
merit will continue to be applied for all their imperfections. 
These are the Royal Priests, whom he in one 
picture represents as his Bride, and in another as members 
of his Body. These are "more than conquerors." 

Then comes the secondary class, not up to this 
standard— a class that does not voluntarily, heartily and 
cheerfully lay down their lives in the desire to please 
the Father and do his will. These, nevertheless, are 
loyal at heart and are restrained from full sacrifice 
only through "fear of death," through fear of what it 
will cost them. They will be tested to the point that 
they will be obliged ultimately to lay down their lives, 
and to do so with a willing mind. They fail of coming 
off more than conquerors because of permitting experiences 
designed to test them to retard their progress 
in the matter of gaining the high position offered them, 
thus they become the Second Company. There is, also, 
a third class, those who die the "Second Death," who 
"draw back unto perdition." 

By the time that these three classes shall have finished 
their course, all the merit that Christ imputed will be 
available again as at first; all will be at his disposal 
afresh. Then it will be applied in the sealing of the 
New Covenant which will be made with Israel, but 
which will be broad enough to include every individual 
of all the nations of the earth who will be willing to 
come under the same terms and to become the children 
of Abraham through faith and obedience. 

"THE REDEMPTION OF THE PURCHASED 
POSSESSION" 



In this connection let us consider the text, "In whom 
ye also trusted after that ye heard the Word of Truth, 
the Gospel of your salvation, in whom also after that 
ye believed ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of 
promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance until 
the redemption of the purchased possession."— Eph. 1:14. 

The holy Spirit now granted to the Church is the 
earnest or foretaste of our inheritance. What are we 
to inherit? We are to "inherit all things." First of 
all we are to inherit the Divine nature, and secondly, 
we are to inherit the great Abrahamic promise that 
through us, in union with our Lord Jesus, as members 
of his Body, all the families of the earth shall be blessed. 
We speak of ourselves as being of the Lord's purchased 
possession, and when we are changed to receive his 
glory, this part of his possession will be complete and 
we shall be perfected with him and be under his direct 
control. 

After this another feature of the same possession, 
and linked in as part of this same promise, will become 

R4634 : page 202 

operative. The precious blood will then be applied to 
seal the New Covenant on behalf of the sins of all the 
people and the work of recovering the still larger possession 
will progress until the close of the Millennial Age, 
when the whole possession will have been brought into line 
and everything subjected to his rule and turned over to 
the Father. 

We will also consider the passage, "For if through 
the offence of one many be dead, much more the grace 
of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, 
Christ Jesus, hath abounded unto many."— Rom. 5:15. 

In this text the Apostle evidently does not mean to 
be understood as saying that the full abundance of grace 
had then reached the many, because that would be an 
untruth. It is now 1,800 years since the Apostle's day, 
and the abundance of grace has not yet reached the 
majority of men. So we must understand him to mean 
that this abundance of grace that is in Christ according 
to the Father's plan and arrangement and purpose, is 
yet to reach the many. The world is yet in its sins, and 
Israel is yet in its sins and will not be recovered until 
after the Church shall have been glorified, as the Apostle 
says (Romans 1 1:27), "For this is my Covenant unto them, 
when I shall take away their sins." 

Since this grace has not yet gone to the Jews, nor 
to the Gentiles in general, the only way in which it 
has abounded is through the promise of God that the 
death of Christ will yet be made efficacious for all. 
Therefore, speaking from this prophetic standpoint, it is 
plain to be seen how Jesus is the Savior of the world, 
although he has not yet finished the work of saving 
the Church and will not do so until the end of this 



Age. Similarly he will not be the Savior of the world 
in the full sense until the end of the Millennial Age. 
Some he will never save, because they will refuse the 
grace of God; and yet he is, according to the Scriptures, 
the Savior of all men— the Savior of the world. 

He was the Savior of the world, according to the Scriptures, 
when he was born. The message of the angels 
was, "Unto you is born this day in the City of David 
a Savior, which is Christ the Lord." He was a Savior 
in the prospective sense— not because of what he was 
then, as a babe, and not merely because of what he 
has yet accomplished, but because, according to God's 
promise, of what he will effect up to the time when he 
shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father. 
"He is a Savior and a great one," "able to save unto 
the uttermost all that will come unto the Father through 
him." (Isa. 19:20; Heb. 7:25.) He is now saving 
us in a partial sense, by hope, because we have come 
unto the Father through him, according to the arrangement 
of this Gospel Age. He will yet save us in the 
fullest sense in the "First Resurrection." The saving 
of the world will then begin, when he shall awaken 
them from death; but they will not be fully saved, will 
not attain full restitution nor gain eternal life, except 
as they shall exercise faith and obedience. He opens 
the door. He makes the way. He provides all the 
arrangements by which they may know and obey. 

The whole earth is a part of the purchased possession 
and shall be filled with the glory of God. And if 
any knee will then refuse to bow and any tongue refuse 
to confess and any fail to accept of the favor of God, 
there will be nothing further for him. He will be 
doing "despite to the spirit of grace" and will die the 
"Second Death."-Heb. 10:29; Jude 12. 



R4634 : page 202 

GOOD SEED FOR GOOD GROUND 

-JUNE 19.-MATT. 13:l-9;18-23.~ 

Golden Text:— "Wherefore, putting away all filthiness and overflowing 
of wickedness receive with meekness the engrafted 
word which is able to save your souls."— James 1:21— R.V. 

FROM a boat our Lord taught a most wonderful 
lesson respecting the method used by 
the Almighty in the selection of the "little 
flock," whom he invites to be members with 
Christ Jesus in the administration of his 
Millennial Kingdom. The Kingdom message 
or invitation is the "seed" which is 
under consideration in the above parable, 
which, under favorable conditions, germinates 



and brings forth the required fruitage 
of character-development. Our Lord was the great Sower 
of this good seed of the Kingdom, and after him came the 
Apostles. Since then he has used all of his faithful people 
more or less in this seed-sowing. 

The fact that most of the "seed" of the Divine message 
seems wasted is no proof that the message is not 
good and desirable. This parable shows that the real 
fault lies in the soil— in the heart. If all hearts were right 
the message or seed would bring forth much fruit 
everywhere. 

WAYSIDE HEARERS. 

The parable states that not all of the soil is good or 
suitable, nevertheless, the intimation is that it is within 
the power of many to correct and offset the unfavorable 
conditions in themselves. We are not left to conjecture, 
for this is one of the few parables which our Lord himself 
interpreted— a fact which many seem not to have 
noticed. 

The "seed" is the message of the Kingdom. Many do 
not understand it. On such ears the message is lost, for 
the Adversary is on the alert to take it away, symbolized 
by the birds devouring the exposed "seed by the wayside." 

R4635 : page 202 

Such "wayside" hearers constitute the most numerous 
class in every congregation of the nominal church. They 
are merely formalists. 

STONY GROUND HEARERS. 

"Stony" ground represents another class of hearers 
of the Kingdom message. To them it sounds good; they 
are interested, but they lack depth of character. They 
make professions and for a time flourish extraordinarily, 
but they lack the depth necessary to a character development 
suitable for the Lord's use in the work of the Kingdom, 
and when the trials and testings come they stumble. 
They thought they might be carried to the Kingdom on 
"flowery beds of ease," while "others fight to win the prize 
and sail through bloody seas." There is no easy road to 
the Kingdom. The Master declares to all who would be 
of the elect "Bride," "Through much tribulation shall ye 
enter the Kingdom." 

GOOD SEED BUT THORNY GROUND. 

The ground which will produce thorns is rich and very 
suitable for the production of proper Christian character, 
but it is infested with thorn seed and the soil cannot 
successfully produce both wheat and thorns; hence, as 
the parable shows, the thorns choke out the wheat so that 



R4635 : page 203 

a sufficient crop is not produced. These thorns are not, 
as some have suggested, sensual vices and criminal appetites. 
Hearts in which sensuality dominates have no ear 
whatever for the Kingdom message, and are not mentioned 
in the parable, which refers only to those who are 
no longer willing sinners, but who are walking outwardly 
in the way of righteousness. The Master's word is, "He 
that receiveth the seed among thorns is he that heareth 
the word, and the cares of this world and the deceitfulness 
of riches choke the word and he becometh unfruitful." 
There are many noble people represented also by 
this portion of the parable. There are many who, if 
freed from the spirit of the world, from its ambitions and 
wealth and influence, its love of the good things of this 
life, would be very fruitful in righteousness. When we 
look about us and see the thrift and energy of many people 
of civilized lands, we say to ourselves, properly, if 
these lives were really turned into the way of the Lord 
and were rid of these earthly encumbrances, what grand, 
noble characters they would make. However, their 
strength, their energy, is absorbed by worldly affairs and 
cares, and they do not bring forth the fruitage demanded 
as the necessary qualification for the higher honors of a 
place with Christ in his Kingdom. The Master's message 
to such is, You cannot give your time and strength and 
influence to worldly matters and at the same time make 
your "calling and election sure" to a place with me in 
my Kingdom. Whoever would be my disciple, let him 
take up his cross and follow me. Where I am there shall 
my disciple be. 

"THAT YE BEAR MUCH FRUIT" 

"Herein is my Father glorified that ye bear much 
fruit," said our Master. In this parable the good ground 
varies in its productiveness— thirty, sixty and an hundred 
fold. The larger the returns, the greater will be the 
Father's pleasure and the Savior's glory. Nor is the statement 
an extreme one, as some might suppose. The new 
"miracle wheat" sometimes produces more than two hundred 
grains from one. This parable seems to imply that 
the responsibility for the fruitfulness of the heart and 
life and character depends very greatly upon the individual 
and how he receives the message of the Kingdom. 
Those in whom the fruits will be the most abundant will be 
such as grasp the invitation most intelligently and earnestly. 
"He that heareth the word and understandeth it" 
and whose heart is in a condition of loyalty to God and 
who frees himself from hindrances and worldly ambitions 
and aspirations and, like the Apostle Paul, can say, "This 
one thing I do," will surely gain the Kingdom. 

It is not sufficient that we hear the message of the 
Kingdom; it is not sufficient that we have good hearts or 
good intentions in respect to it; it is additionally necessary, 



as the Master says, that we should understand the 

Kingdom message; hence the need of Bible study. Intelligent 

people consider it very wise and proper that 

several years of study be devoted to preparation for the 

few years of earthly life. How much study, then, should 

be considered proper for our preparation for the eternal 

life and Kingdom blessings? The time and effort thus 

consumed in character development for the Kingdom are 

wisely spent, and the harvest of thirty, sixty or a hundred-fold 

illustrates the degree and intensity of our earnestness. 

The rewards in the Kingdom will also be proportionate. 

"As star differeth from star in glory, so 

shall it be in the resurrection of the dead." Varying degrees 

of glory in the Kingdom will be manifested, yet 

none will be acceptable to the Father who shall not have 

brought forth fruitage in good measure; the "well done" 

will never be pronounced if not merited. 



R4635 : page 203 

THE WHEAT AND THE TARES 

--JUNE 26.-MATT. 13:24-43.- 

Golden Text:— "Then shall the righteous shine forth 
as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father."— V. 43. 

HERE WE have introduced by another "Kingdom" 

parable a great prophecy. Our study 

of a week ago showed various classes of 

hearers of the truth. To-day's study ignores 

all except the "good ground" hearers, 

which shows that our Lord foreknew the 

history of the Gospel age. We are informed 

that he and his Apostles sowed none but 

good seed, but that after the Apostles had 

fallen asleep in death, the great Adversary, 

Satan, over-sowed the wheat field with tare seed, darnel. 

We are told that such spite-work is not uncommon in the 

Orient. The "darnel" seed is very different from the 

wheat, but the growing stalks look very much alike, and 

even when headed the resemblance is close, except to the 

expert, until the heads ripen; then the head of the wheat 

becomes heavy while the darnel, being light, stands upright. 

Only the expert can discern the wheat from the 

tares while growing. 

The Master gave this parable to illustrate how error 
would be brought into the Church by Satan, and that the 
children produced by the error would in many respects 
resemble or counterfeit those produced by the truth. It 
was impossible for the Adversary to corrupt the seed of 
truth which Jesus and the Apostles sowed; neither was 
he allowed to interfere with the sowing of it, but he was 
permitted to over-sow it in the field and, if possible, to 



choke the wheat, and in a general way to deceive the 
outside world respecting the true character of the wheat— 
the children of the Kingdom. 

We are to have in mind the Almighty power of God 
by which he could hinder Satan and prevent the accomplishment 
of his plans at any and all times. We are to 
remember that the Divine Plan of the Ages permits many 
things which God does not approve, but in his Word condemns. 
We are to remember that the Divine Plan spans 
several ages and that only the finished work will fully 
display the Divine Wisdom, Justice, Love and Power. 
We are to remember that, in the present time, God permits 
the wrath of demons and men to oppose his purposes, 
but only so far as he can and eventually will overrule 
these to his own glory and for the good of all in harmony 
with himself. 

"LET BOTH GROW TOGETHER" 

The parable represents the servants as asking whether 
or not the "tares" should be gathered out from the 
"wheat," and thus the enemy's work be destroyed. The 
answer is, No, because in so doing there would be such 
a commotion in the wheat field as to disturb all of the 
wheat— so intimately were the true and false associated— 
their roots intertwining in society, in the home, etc. Instead 
the Master declared that both should be allowed to 
grow together throughout the age until the harvest-time 

R4635 : page 204 

at the end of the age; then the "reapers" should be instructed 
concerning the gathering together and separating 
of the two classes. The wheat would then be gathered 
into the barn and the tares would be bundled for burning, 
to the end that none of the bad seed might affect the 
future crop. 

At the special request of the disciples the Master interpreted 
this parable also. Jesus himself was the sower 
of the good seed of the Kingdom message. Satan was the 
sower of the crop of seed of false doctrines and deception. 
The "harvest" time will be the end of this age, 
just before the inauguration of the new age of Christ's 
Millennial Kingdom. The wheat class will be those 
counted fit to be associated with Christ in the glory of 
his Millennial Kingdom, and the gathering into the "barn" 
or garner represents the resurrection change which this 
wheat will experience. The Apostle explains this, saying: 
"It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption; it 
is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown an 
animal (earthly) body, it is raised a spiritual (heavenly) 
body." This is the resurrection of the dead— the first 
resurrection.— I Cor. 15:43,44; Rev. 20:6. 

The tare class is represented as being gathered out of 
the kingdom (vs. 41), in the sense that the Church at the 
present time is God's kingdom in embryo— in a state of 



progressive development or preparation for the glory and 

work of the future. All of the Kingdom class are fully 

consecrated to God and begotten of the Spirit with a 

view to their becoming Divine spirit beings in the resurrection. 

Others who are not thus spirit-begotten have 

no right to class themselves with the "wheat" nor to consider 

R4636 : page 204 

themselves heirs of the Kingdom. Their presence 
in the Church of Christ is out of order. They have been 
permitted to commingle with the wheat for centuries, but 
with the end of the age the dispensational change will 
come, incidental to the inauguration of the Millennium. 

It would be a mistake to suppose that there are to be 
thieves and murderers of the baser sort among these offenders, 
but they include some whom the Apostle describes 
as doing the works of the flesh and the devil, namely, 
anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife. However, many 
"tares" are fine people of generous disposition, but not 
"New Creatures" in Christ Jesus. They are blame-worthy, 
not because of not being spirit-begotten, but because 
they are in the nominal church and posing as Christians. 
They are offensive in this sense in the Master's 
sight. Nor are they entirely to be blamed for thinking 
themselves Christians. They have been encouraged so 
to think and act by preachers and teachers, many of 
whom, like themselves, have no knowledge of the Kingdom 
nor of the spirit-begetting power which initiates 
into membership in it. The gathering of these into 
"bundles"— into lodges, societies, churches, sects, parties 
—will especially be an evidence of the "harvest" work 
in progress. The true are exhorted to stand fast in the 
liberty wherewith Christ has made them free, and that 
they come not into bondage to sects and parties. They 
are to avoid membership in "bundles," but stand in the 
full fellowship of all who are of the true "wheat" class. 

The casting of these bundles into the furnace will 
mean their destruction, but we are in no sense to understand 
the furnace to be a literal one, nor the fire 
which will consume the tares to be a literal fire. The 
fire with which this age will end will be a great "time 
of trouble" foretold in the Scriptures as preceding and 
introducing the Millennial Kingdom— "A time of trouble 
such as never was since there was a nation." (Daniel 12:1). 
In that time of trouble the delusions which now 
make the tares think themselves to be the true "Church" 
will all be dissolved— they will all be reduced to their 
proper plane— the earthly plane— and recognize themselves 
as merely of the earth, earthy, and not in any sense 
members of the called-out, spirit-begotten, elect "Church 
of the living God." 

THE KINGDOM OF THEIR FATHER 

Hearken now to the Master's words respecting the 



consummation of the Church's hope in the end of this 
age. He says, "Then shall the righteous shine forth as 
the sun in the kingdom of their Father" ! "He that hath 
an ear to hear let him hear." Not every one has the 
hearing ear, but this is the Lord's message to those who 
have the proper attitude of heart— to all who have the 
ability to understand spiritual things. Let such understand 
that with the close of this age the Lord's saintly 
ones, irrespective of the earthly Church systems, will be 
associated with the Redeemer in the glory of his Millennial 
Kingdom and will shine forth as the sun for the 
blessing and enlightenment and uplifting of the human 
family. 



R4636 : page 204 

PICTURES OF THE KINGDOM 

-JULY 3.-MATT. 13:31-33;44-52.~ 

Golden Text:— "The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, 
but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost." 
-Rom. 14:17. 

LET us keep in memory that the Master's 

parables of the Kingdom of Heaven relate 

to the class of people whom he is calling 

out of the world of mankind to be associated 

with him in his Millennial Kingdom soon 

to be inaugurated. Let us remember that 

sometimes this class is spoken of as including, 

nominally, not merely the saintly, 

the wheat class, but also, to some extent, 

the tares, as shown in our study of last 

week. These different parable-pictures represent the 

same subject from different standpoints, just as we take 

a photograph of a building from the north, the south, the 

east and the west, internally and externally. 

LIKE A GRAIN OF MUSTARD SEED 

As a mustard seed is very small, yet produces a large 
bush, so that the fowls of the air may lodge in its 
branches, so this illustrates how the gospel of the Kingdom 
would, from a small beginning, attain to a considerable 
size. Its size would not be great among the 
trees, but great among bushes or herbage. Thus the 
message of Christ received at first only by the poor and 
the few of Israel, has finally grown to such important 
dimensions that the fowls like to gather in its branches. 
But let us remember that the fowls, according to our 
Lord's interpretation of a previous parable, represent the 
servants of the Wicked One. So then the teaching of 
this parable would lead us to conclude that the Church of 



Christ, at one time, was so unimportant in the world 
that it was a shame and a dishonor to belong to it, but 
that ultimately it would become honorable and great and 
the Adversary's servants would have pleasure in its shade. 
This development the Scriptures represent as being Babylon, 
declaring that, as a whole, with the various branches 
and denominations, the nominal Church of Christ is 

R4636 : page 205 

Babylonish. Hearken to the Lord's words; "She has 
become the hold of every foul spirit and the cage of 
every unclean and hateful bird." The intimation is that 
there is a large outward development of the Church 
which is not to her advantage and glory but contrariwise. 
Nevertheless, this is, nominally, the Church of Christ. 
However his spirit may have been misrepresented and 
there may have been an improper development, ultimately 
the great Head of the Church will bring order out of 
chaos and confusion and will glorify and use his "elect." 

"LEAVEN HIDDEN IN THE MEAL" 

The parable of the "leaven" (v. 33) illustrates the 
process by which, as was foretold, the Church would 
get into the wrong condition. As a woman would take 
her batch of flour for baking and put leaven (yeast) 
in it and the result would be that the mass would become 
leavened, so it would be with the Church of Christ; the 
food of the entire household would become leavened or 
corrupted. Every portion would become more or less 
vitiated with the leaven of false doctrines which would 
permeate the entire mass. Thus today nearly every 
doctrine inculcated by Jesus and his Apostles has become 
more or less perverted or twisted by the errors of the 
dark ages. 

TREASURE HID IN A FIELD 

The desirability of obtaining joint-heirship with Christ 
in his Millennial Kingdom, is pictured in the parable of 
"the treasure hidden in the field." The finder, realizing 
its value, desired it for himself and had such faith in it 
that he disposed of all of his property in order to buy 
that field, which he believed to contain the precious treasure. 
Only those who will appreciate the Gospel message 
will gain its glorious promises. If we love the present life 
with its joys and prospects, its hopes and ambitions, then 
we will labor for these, but if we intelligently hear and, 
by faith, believe the Gospel offer of this age of a share 
with Christ in his Millennial Kingdom, then in proportion 
to our faith and appreciation will be our self-sacrificing 
zeal to attain that prize. Whoever believes the message 
of the Kingdom will find his faith an inspiration, indeed 
a necessary inspiration, to the attainment of the prize, for 
it will cost all that he has of earthly blessings; and unless 



he has faith that he will find the prize, he will surely 

be unwilling to sacrifice all he has for it. The field belongs 

to God. He has put the treasure there. He offers 

it for sale to any willing to pay the price. The buyer is 

the Lord and those who accept his invitation to join with 

him in the sacrifice of their earthly interests that they 

may be sharers with him in his heavenly glories— in 

the work of the Millennial Age, to unearth all that treasure 

in the blessing of the world of mankind. The hiding 

of the treasure is necessary; as our Lord said, "Cast 

not your pearls before swine"; they will not understand 

you, they will think you foolish, and in their disappointment 

may do you injury. "Hast thou faith, have it to 

thyself before God." Make your sacrifice of earthly 

things to him and he who seeth in secret will reward you 

openly. 

THE PEARL OF GREAT VALUE 

Pearls were much more in vogue in ancient times 
than now. Pearl buyers traded in these gems and carried 
them to the market, where they were highly estimated. 
The parable represents one of these pearl merchants as 
coming across the finest pearl he had ever seen. He 
considered it so priceless that he was quite rejoiced to 
sell or trade all of his other pearls and property that 
he might become the owner of that pearl. 

This parable represents the Gospel offer of a share 
with Christ in his Kingdom as being superior to all other 
propositions of the world. The honor of the world, of 
name and fame, position and wealth, are indeed desirable; 
as the Scriptures say, "A good name is rather to be 
chosen than great riches"; but when our eyes behold 
"the pearl of great price," the Kingdom offer of joint-heirship 
with our Lord Jesus in his heavenly glory and 
the association with him in his work of blessing all the 
families of the earth, we realize that this is a priceless 
thing, worth more by far than all the honors and dignities 
and pleasures of the world. Those worthy to buy this 
pearl will gladly exchange all earthly things therefor- 
even their good name, and this will be necessary, as the 
Master forewarned them, saying, "they shall say all 
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake; rejoice 
and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, 
for so persecuted they the prophets who were before you." 

R4637 : page 205 

(Matthew 5:11,12). He that is not willing to have 

the Kingdom at such a cost is not worthy of the Kingdom. 

The Apostle has said, "Through much tribulation 

must we enter the Kingdom" (Acts 14:22); and only 

those who willingly endure such tribulations for righteousness' 

sake— for the sake of the truth, in obedience to the 

Heavenly calling— are overcomers. And only to the 

"overcomers" has the Lord given "the exceeding great 



and precious promises." "To him that overcometh will 
I grant to sit with me in my throne."— Rev. 3:21. 

THE NET GATHERED OF EVERY KIND 

Another parable of the Kingdom represents the gospel 
message as a "net." Only one kind of fish is desired, 
but the net gathers every kind. Not every kind will inherit 
the Kingdom as joint-heirs with Christ Jesus, hence 
the end of this age will be a sifting, separating time, as 
represented in the parable. The desirable fish will be 
gathered into vessels, the remainder will be cast back into 
the sea as unfit for the Kingdom, but not necessarily 
unfit for any purpose. During Christ's Millennial reign 
that class unfit for the Kingdom will be dealt with and 
blessed and, if possible, made useful and fit for eternal 
life. 

Here, as in the parable of the wheat and the tares, 
the furnace of fire, and the weeping and gnashing of 
teeth in connection therewith, symbolizes the great time of 
trouble with which this age will end, giving place to the 
Millennial Kingdom, the Kingdom for the establishment of 
which upon the earth the Church has been praying so 
unceasingly for nineteen centuries, "Thy Kingdom come; 
thy will be done on earth, as it is done in heaven." What 
a Kingdom that will be! It will be a Kingdom entrusted 
to a "Little Flock"— "Fear not, little flock, it is your 
Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom"— and 
it will be fully empowered to establish the rule of heaven 
among mankind! 

Our study closes with the Lord's exhortation that all 
who are instructed respecting the things pertaining to the 
Kingdom should set their affairs in order. 

Lay down your rails, ye nations, near and far, 
Yoke your full trains to steam's triumphal car, 
Link town to town, unite in iron bands 
The long-estranged and oft-embattled lands. 
Peace, mild-eyed seraph; knowledge, light divine, 
Shall send their messengers by every line. 
Men joined in amity shall wonder long 
That hate had power to lead their fathers wrong; 
Or that false glory lured their hearts astray, 
And made it virtuous and sublime to slay. 
How grandly now these wonders of our day 
Are making preparation for Christ's royal way, 
And with what joyous hope our souls 
Do watch the ball of progress as it rolls, 
Knowing that all as yet completed or begun 
Is but the dawning that precedes the sun. 



R4637 : page 206 

JESUS DID NOT FORFEIT EARTHLY LIFE 



A FORFEITED life is not a sacrificed life. 

If our Lord had forfeited his life it would 

not have been a sacrifice. A life that is 

forfeited is a life that is taken away for 

some just cause or reason; but his was 

taken without a cause. He suffered. As 

to how he suffered and why he suffered the 

Scriptures are quite distinct in telling us 

—"he presented himself without blemish 

unto God." That is to say, he purposed to 

do God's will; he bowed to God's will; he consecrated 

his whole life to the doing of God's will. To test his 

loyalty and obedience to the full, God required that he 

should be obedient, submissive, "unto death, even the 

death of the cross." His life was not taken from him, 

either by God or by men; as he himself declared, he 

could have called for Divine aid, according to Divine arrangement, 

and more than twelve legions of angels would 

have protected his life: "No man taketh away my life; 

I lay it down of myself." So, then, in this matter of 

Jesus' sacrifice, it was neither that man took away his 

life, nor that God demanded it, but God gave him the opportunity 

of demonstrating his loyalty. This involved a 

sacrifice in that it put him into the place where to do 

what God desired to have done, meant a giving up of all 

his earthly rights and privileges. 

When he came to the time of his death he did not 
make application of his merit in advance, saying, "I do 
this for such a purpose and such a thing, and I apply 
whatever merit there is in my obedience to such a purpose." 
He did nothing of the kind. There was no such 
application made. When we speak of Christ's death as 
the Ransom-Price for the sins of the whole world; when 
we say that "he gave himself a Ransom for all," we are 
taking into consideration other features of the Divine arrangement 
by which it will be possible for the Lord Jesus 
to apply the merit of that sacrifice on behalf of the world 
of mankind as their Ransom-Price. This will be accomplished 
in its due time. (I Tim. 2:5,6.) It was not 
accomplished when he died, but was to be accomplished 
subsequently. 

After our Lord had manifested his obedience even 
unto death, the Father was well pleased to fulfil to him 
all and more than he had ever intimated or promised. 
Hence he raised him from the dead— not in the same condition 
in which he was previously— a man— but in the 
glorious condition of the divine nature, "far above angels, 
principalities and powers and every name that is named." 
It would have been possible for the Father to restore our 
Lord Jesus to the earthly nature; but that would not have 
been, as we understand it, in keeping with his promise 
that there would be a special reward for this special 
obedience— "the joy that was set before him." 

JESUS HAD THE RIGHT TO THE EARTHLY NATURE 



When our Lord Jesus, therefore, was raised from the 
dead by the Father on the third day, to this glorious 
nature which he now possesses— so much better than the 
earthly condition— he had a right also to the earthly 
nature. He would not, of course, have thought of exchanging 
the higher condition for the earthly condition; 
and especially since such a change would frustrate the 
entire plan of God. To explain: Suppose our Lord 
Jesus, having been raised from the dead to the glory of 
the Father, to the divine nature, had said, "Father, I 
greatly appreciate your kindness and favor towards me in 
thus highly exalting me; but now I prefer the human 
nature." If we could imagine his saying such a thing, 
we cannot see but that he would have had the right to it, 
as he had never forfeited his human life. He merely laid 
it down. He submitted himself in obedience to God; and 
if in his resurrection he had preferred the earthly nature, 
it would have been entirely proper that he have it back 
again. But to have taken it back would have been to 
undo all the work he had started out to do. He would 
thus have given away the heavenly nature, which was far 
more desirable, and respecting which he himself said, 
"Father, glorify me with the glory that I had with thee before 
the world was." He would in this way have ignored 
not only his own expressed preference in the matter, but 
also the Divine Plan, order and arrangement, as it was 
God's will that he should have this high nature and that 
he should also have the right to earthly life, the earthly 
nature, that he might bestow the earthly nature, with 
all of its rights and privileges, as the "Ransom," or Corresponding 
Price, for Adam's forfeited life and all of its 
earthly privileges. 

IMPUTING HIS MERIT NOW TO THOSE WHO 
COVENANT TO SACRIFICE IT 

Actually our Lord has not yet ransomed all, but he 
gave himself, in the sense of performing the sacrifice, 
more than 1800 years ago. But he has not yet applied the 
merit as the Ransom-Price for all the world. What is he 
doing with the Ransom-Price all this time? The Ransom-Price 
was placed into the hands of the Father. When Jesus 
died he said, "Into thy hands I commit my spirit." The 
Lord Jesus, therefore, as the Great Messiah, has the right 
to all those things which he intends to bestow upon the 
whole world of mankind— Adam and all his race. He 
will give them all the opportunity of becoming people of 
God. What is he doing with the merit in the meantime? 
He is imputing it to any individual from amongst Adam's 
race who desires to come into full relationship with the 
Father, on condition that such individual follow in his 
footsteps and lay down his earthly life as he laid his 
down. To each one of this kind, who comes to him, the 
Lord imputes his merit at the moment he makes his consecration 
to sacrifice, and this imputation of the Lord's 



merit makes him acceptable with the Father, who begets 
him as a New Creature. Thenceforth such are New 
Creatures, and their earthly life is given up as Jesus' life 
was given up— in sacrifice. All of these, therefore, who 
are now invited to come under this special arrangement 
through the use of the merit of Christ's death, come 
under the imputation of that merit, not the bestowment 
of it. 

There is a difference between imputing the merit and 
bestowing it. For instance, if we hand you $100 we bestow 
$100 upon you, passing it directly to you. But if we 
endorse your note for $100 we are imputing to you $100. 
In the case of the Church it is an imputation; there is 
actually no passing of the merit over. What our Lord 
has to give is the right to human life, the human privileges 
which were Adam's originally and which he lost 
—all that he had. That right to human life our Lord has 
to give away, but he is not giving it away now. He is 
keeping it to give to the world in due time. He is now 

R4638 : page 206 

merely imputing to us the merit, or that which corresponds 

to the endorsement of our contract with the 

heavenly Father, if we desire to enter into such a contract. 

THE WORLD WILL RETAIN THE EARTHLY LIFE-RIGHTS 
PURCHASED FOR THEM 

Coming back to the statement made foregoing, that 
this merit is to be given on behalf of the world, we 

R4638 : page 207 

should qualify it and say that the merit is not to be given 

for the whole world, but merely, as the Scriptures outline, 

"for all the people." "The people," however, are not 

the entire world, but all who will come into Covenant relationship 

with God during the period of the Great 

Mediatorial Kingdom. These are the only people for 

whom the merit will be applied. Whoever will reject this 

opportunity and refuse to become one of the people, rejects 

all the opportunities that are to be granted and does not, 

therefore, receive restitution to human life. Such are 

not made perfect. They do not get human rights at all. 

They will receive an awakening from death, but this will 

not be Restitution. This will be merely the first step 

from which they may, if they choose, take the further 

steps leading to the Restitution blessings. "It will come 

to pass that the soul that will not obey" that Great 

Mediator, that Great Prophet, Priest and King, the great 

"Prophet like unto Moses raised up from amongst your 

brethren"— of which Jesus is the Head and the Church of 

this Gospel Age are his Members— "the soul that will not 

obey that Prophet shall be destroyed from amongst the 

people. "-Acts 3:19-21. 



This is in harmony with the Scripture to the effect that 
"he that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the 
Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on 
him," continues on him; he never gets out from under 
the wrath of God. He had the opportunity; he was 
brought to a knowledge of the Truth; he was brought to 
the place where it was his privilege to come under the 
arrangement of the New Covenant blessings which will 
be extended to all through Israel. But if he fails to 
make use of that opportunity and to become one of God's 
people, then he does not get out from under the wrath at 
all. He dies under the original wrath of God and without 
going to the end of the Millennial Age— without becoming 
one of the restored ones. 



R4638 : page 207 

LETTERS RE VOLUNTEER WORK 

DEAR FRIENDS :- 

I happened to come across one of your tracts for 
April, 1909, and was intensely interested in the article, 
"Where Are the Dead?" It set me to thinking and 
to reading the Bible as I never did before. Finally I 
got my husband to read the tract and he said he would 
like to hear that man preach. That was a great deal 
for him to say, for he has no use for Churches and 
preachers in general. He is a good man indeed; as 
he often says, his life is superior to that of many 
Church members, some of whom go to Church just for 
style, and through habit and because their forefathers 
did. He says he would like to have you send your paper 
and he would read the sermon every Sunday, which he 
thinks would be better than going to Church. 

I am so thankful to God that my husband is at last 
interested in the things of the future. His dear, sainted 
sister once said to him that he was too good not to 
obtain heaven and that she would pray for him constantly. 
What he wants and I want is the Truth— 
not the varied opinions of men, and I know we can get 
it by searching the Scriptures. He is now even reading 
the Bible, which he says he never did before. As for 
me, I have always been a regular attendant at Church, 
being a member of the Presbyterian Church, as are all 
of my folks. As to having the holy Spirit really within 
me, I know I have not. I don't think I have ever 
grasped the fundamental Truth as yet. I have always 
believed that our beloved dead were in heaven, but as 
you say they are not judged yet, and how can they 
be there? Please send your paper to us. I understand 
it is twelve cents, but if it is more I will send it to you. 

Yours very truly for the truth, 

MRS. C. H. FULLER-Oregon. 



DEAR SIR:~ 

Please send me the PEOPLES PULPIT. I have just 
been handed a copy of "Where Are the Dead?" I have 
read it and have become very much interested in your 
good work. Please send me a copy of the "Thief in 
Paradise." Find enclosed 12 cents for a year's 
subscription. 

Yours truly, MRS. IDA ZIMMERMAN-Missouri. 



GENTLEMEN:- 

A copy of the PEOPLES PULPIT was handed to me 
last night. I cannot tell you in writing how I enjoyed 
reading it. Will you kindly forward me the sermons, 
"Where Are the Dead?" "Thieves in Paradise," and "The 
Rich Man in Hell." Would also like to receive the six 
series of "Studies in the Scriptures," as it has not been 
my good fortune to receive them. Will send 12 cents 
in the near future for PEOPLES PULPIT. May God prosper 
you. 

Very respectfully yours, C. LAWLER-N.Y. 



DEAR SIRS:- 

I found advertisement copy of PEOPLES PULPIT in our 
letter-box. I would like to have some of the books you 
speak of. I will subscribe for your paper later. I 
should like to know if you believe Calvinism to be true. 
Hoping to hear from you soon, I am, 

Truly yours, MRS. FRAYER--N.J. 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

I was handed one of your papers, PEOPLES PULPIT, 
which I prize very much for its explanations of the 
Scripture. Please find enclosed 12 cents for one year's 
subscription. 

Yours very truly, THOS. H. HARRIS-Can. 



GENTLEMEN:- 

Your monthly paper, bearing the name PEOPLES 
PULPIT, came into my hands Sunday morning. I read 
it through carefully, as it treated of a subject that must 
greatly interest all thoughtful people. I should like very 
much to read the subjects enclosed. Please find enclosed 
12 cents to pay for subscription. 

Yours sincerely, MRS. DORCAS CURNOW-Cal. 



DOCTOR EDGAR PASSED BEYOND 

By cable we learn that Brother John Edgar underwent 
a surgical operation which has resulted in 
his death. We trust for him that he has passed beyond 
the Second Vail and is now with the Master in 
glory. He was a dear, humble, faithful brother, 
whom we greatly loved. His dear family have our 
sympathy, but we know that they sorrow not as 
others who have no such hopes as those which 
buoy us up. The cablegram says that he passed 
away peacefully, a grand witness to the Truth. He 
fought a good fight. He kept the faith. He surely 
finished his work. We hope for him a crown. 



page 210 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, 
five vol.; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in Greek three vols.; in French, two vols.; 
in Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. 
each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the 
same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 
each. 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI JULY 1 No. 13 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Bro. Russell's Foreign Tour Report— Sec. 3 21 1 

The Later Pentecost 21 1 

Keep Thy Heart Diligently 212 

Our Justification to Life 213 

Israel's New Covenant to be Made With 
Mediator 213 

"The Heavens Were Opened" 214 

Life Laid Down— Not Paid Over 216 

Past Sins— Daily Trespasses 216 

"Without Spot or Wrinkle" 217 

Chautauqua Lake Convention 217 

Railroad Rates and Arrangements 218 

Without a Parable He Spake Not 218 

Confessing the Son of God 219 

"Whom Say Ye That I Am?" 219 

St. Peter-the Rock-The Keys 220 

Delivered from Satan's Snare 221 

Copy of Letter to the Seceders 222 

Berean Studies on Creation 223 

page 210 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 



not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CONVENTIONS 



BROOKLYN, N.Y., JULY 3 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 
o'clock in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks street. 
The evening meeting at 7:30 o'clock will also be in the 
Tabernacle. Discourse for the Public at 3:00 P.M. in the 
Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette avenue and St. 
Felix street. Topic: "True Liberty." Visiting friends 
will be warmly welcomed. 

ERIE, PA., JULY 10 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 
10:30 o'clock, Zuck's Hall, corner 16th and Peach streets. 
Service for the public at 2:30 P.M. in the Majestic 
Theater, Tenth street, near State street. Topic: "Hereafter.' 
Visiting friends will be warmly welcomed. 

MINNEAPOLIS, MINN., JULY 15-17 

CONVENTION HALL, AUDITORIUM ANNEX 

Discourse for the Public by Brother Russell, Sunday, 
July 17, 3:00 P.M., at the Auditorium, corner 1 1th street 
and Nicollet avenue. Topic: "Hereafter." Visiting 
friends will be warmly welcomed. 

SCRANTON AND WILKES-BARRE, PA., JULY 24 

LYNN, MASS., AUGUST 14 

UTICA, N.Y., AUGUST 21 
FALL RIVER, MASS., AUGUST 28 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., SEPTEMBER 4 



R4638 : page 211 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S FOREIGN TOUR REPORT 

SECTION III. 

SUNDAY morning, May 15, we met with the 

London friends in what is known as the 

"Whitfield Tabernacle." The present 

structure was built on the spot where the 

original Whitfield Tabernacle stood, and 

what is reputed to be Whitfield's old pulpit 

is there. We occupied it on the occasion 

mentioned and talked to the friends of the 

London Church. Our text was, "Gather 

together my saints unto me, those that have 

made a covenant with me by sacrifice." We emphasized 

the fact that we are not to be gathered to human 

teachers, nor into sects, and parties, and denominations. 

Our gathering of ourselves and our assistance to others 

is to be into membership in the Body of Christ, the 

Church of the living God whose names are written in 

heaven. Saints only are to be gathered. Others may 

be attracted to some extent and remain for some time in 

fellowship with the brethren, the Truth and the Lord; 

but ultimately persecution or ambition, or something else, 

will separate from the Lord and from those in accord 

with him, all who are not holy, saintly, fully consecrated. 

We specially emphasized that all properly drawn and 
called and united to the Lord would come into this fellowship 

R4639 : page 211 

"by sacrifice." Not only would the sacrifice of Christ 
be the basis of their acceptance with God, but they themselves 
would enter into covenant relationship with God, 
by sacrifice. We pointed out that this covenant relationship 
began upon their turning from sin and seeking the 
Lord. We endeavored also to point out that justification 
to life was not obtainable until after Christ's 
sacrifice and ascension on high. We noted the fact 
that those called during this age are merely such as 
desire fellowship with God to the degree of being 
willing to forego and sacrifice earthly interests, aims, 
ambitions and hopes, to be with Christ partakers of 
heavenly things. We urged all, in the language of the 
Apostle, to make their calling and election sure— to "present 
their bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to 
God." We had a very enjoyable session and at its close 
greeted many of the friends. The attendance was about 
one thousand, and represented not merely the City of 
London and suburbs, but many were present from a considerable 
distance, from Manchester, Bristol, Glasgow, etc. 
In the afternoon, Brother John Edgar, M.D., of Glasgow, 



addressed the friends in the Tabernacle on the subject, 
"Our Oneness in Christ." We did not have the 
pleasure of hearing him, but through others understood 
that it was a very earnest and profitable discourse. 

THE LATER PENTECOST 

The evening session was in the world-famous "Royal 
Albert Hall." The attendance was estimated at six thousand. 
It was an exceptionally intelligent audience; far 
above the average in this respect, and in years and in 
religious appearance. We had excellent attention, our 
topic being, "The Later Pentecost." We endeavored to 
show that the Times of Restitution of all things will be 
the Later Pentecost, in which God will pour out his 
spirit upon all flesh. But we need not detail the discourse 
since it is already in the hands of such as desire 
it, through the newspapers. 

On Monday there were a number of baptisms symbolized 
at two different baptistries; we did not learn the 
number who thus symbolized. In the afternoon at the 
Tabernacle we had a Question Meeting. The attendance 
was about 800. The questions propounded evidenced 
thoughtful study on the part of the friends, and we trust 
that the answers were helpful to them. Many of the 
questions appertained to the subjects which have recently 
been so interesting to us,— respecting the Advocate, 
Mediator, Ransom-price, vitalizing our Justification, etc. 

Our evening service beginning at 6:30 o'clock was 
a Love Feast— one of the most enjoyable that we have 
ever participated in. We gave a talk, taking for our subject 
a little souvenir, which we proffered to all attending the 
Convention. Indeed, we made similar offers to all the 
Convention gatherings during our tour, as we had already 
done in America, and we expect to continue the 
practice all the year. The souvenir is not of great intrinsic 
value, and yet it is priceless; it is not for sale, 
and is given in this manner only as a Convention 
souvenir. It is a book-mark made of thin celluloid, cut 
in the shape of a heart. On the one side is a wreath of 
forget-me-nots, which suggests that the Conventions and 
the subjects there discussed, and all the dear friends there 
met in fellowship, are long to be remembered. On the 
heart below the forget-me-nots is the text, "Behold, what 
manner of love the Father hath bestowed on us, that we 
should be called the Sons of God." These beautiful words 
should be fixed in our memories, and should have a 
weighty influence with us, encouraging us in our fellowship 
with the Father, with the Lord Jesus, and with each 

R4639 : page 212 

other. They should remind us of the exceeding great 
and precious promises of the Lord's Word, and of the 
glories in reservation for those who love him, and who 
attest their love by proper zeal, and thus show themselves 



copies of their Redeemer. 

Turning the book-mark over, the inside of the heart 
has a grapevine in the center which spreads around the 
top of the heart, with larger and smaller clusters of 
grapes. This reminds us of our Lord's words, "I am the 
vine and ye are the branches— herein is my Father glorified 
that ye bear much fruit"— fruits of the Spirit. In the 
center of the heart is a medallion picture of the Lord, 
about the size of a finger nail. It is traditionally the 
oldest likeness of the Master. Some time ago an emerald 
stone was found in Constantinople amongst the effects 
of the Emperors. In it was etched an intaglio likeness 
of Jesus. The tradition attached to it is that it was 
executed in the time of Tiberius Caesar and sent to him 
as a present. Whether this legend be true or not, the 
likeness is probably the oldest picture of our Lord in the 
world. Later on the intaglio was presented to the Papal 
collection at Rome, and what we have reproduced is from 
a photograph of it. We elaborate this little scrap of history, 
realizing that it will enhance the value of the memento 
in the minds of all who love the Lord, and who 
long to see his face, not in the flesh; but as the Apostle 
explains, when "changed," we shall be made like him, 
and see him as he is— rather than as he was. 

KEEP THY HEART, DILIGENTLY 

Underneath the likeness of Jesus is the text, "Keep 
thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues 
of life." This text we endeavored especially to emphasize 
as the great lesson of our lives. We pointed out that to 
all who have made consecration, and whose consecration 
the Lord has accepted, there is a test or decision. Begotten 
of the holy Spirit to the spirit nature, the issues 
are life eternal on the spirit plane, or death eternal. To 
those who have given up the human nature in consecration, 
and whose sacrifice God has accepted through the 
merit of our Advocate, there is no prospect of restitution. 
Such have received by faith one justification to life 
through the merit of Jesus' sacrifice, and it is not the 
Divine purpose to give more than one justification to life 
to anybody. Whoever therefore receives this justification 
and fails to use it to the attainment of eternal life will 
find, as the Apostle declares, that "there remaineth no 
more sacrifice for sins"; he has had his share in the one 
sacrifice. Hence in a very pronounced sense the issues 
of life are before all the spirit begotten. 

Another thought is that amongst those who will attain 
to the eternal life to which they are begotten of the Spirit, 
there will be two classes— a "little flock" of Priests, and a 
great company of Levites. The priesthood are to have 
spirit life on the highest plane, the divine nature, 
while the other overcoming ones of the Church are to 
attain life as spirit beings on a lower plane, like unto 
the angels. Hence, in this sense the spirit begotten household 
of faith have before them two issues of life. We 



exhorted all to lay aside every weight and every besetting 
sin, that by the grace of God we may make our calling 
and election sure to the highest position— to which we 
have been called— to membership in the Body of Christ— 
to membership in his Bride— to membership in the Royal 
Priesthood. 

We sought also to impress the force of the words, 
"Keep thy heart with all diligence." We are not to think 
of God as keeping our hearts, and we are not to pray 
to him to do for us what he instructs us to do for ourselves. 
To keep our hearts means to watch carefully the 
loyalty of our hearts to the Lord, to his brethren, to his 
Truth— to watch that we do not stray from our consecration 
Vow— that we do not become selfish, vainglorious, 
haughty, worldly. Our position in the universe is unique. 
We are not of the world, but have stepped out from it, 
under the Lord's calling, drawing, invitation— to joint-heirship 
with his Son. 

LOYALTY TO GOD THE TEST 

In our covenant with our Lord, we have agreed to 
give up our earthly rights and privileges and to accept 
heartily, cheerfully, whatever this may imply in the way of 
self-sacrifice and earthly losses. Our test, therefore, as 
New Creatures is whether or not we will maintain this 
spirit of loyalty, and devotion, and sacrifice, faithfully, 
through all kinds of trials and testings. If so we will 
be copies of our dear Redeemer, and just such as the 
Father desires shall be associated with him in his Kingdom 
of glory and the work of the future. If we fail to 
display our loyalty, we are failing to make our calling 
and election sure. Every yielding to selfish inclinations 
signifies a backward step, a repudiation of our covenant 
of sacrifice. Every victory over self, and sin, and error, 
signifies a step forward, a demonstration of the spirit 
which God will approve, a demonstration that we are of 
the kind who will be counted worthy to become joint-heirs 
with his only begotten Son, our Redeemer. 

We urged therefore that every attention be given to 
heart-searching, heart-keeping. We reminded the friends 
of the words of the Apostle, "Keep yourselves in the love 
of God," and that we keep ourselves in God's love by 
keeping our hearts. We reminded them also that we 
ought to keep our flesh— our bodies— under or in subjection 
to the new mind. Nevertheless the Lord's testing 
of us will be along the line of heart devotion, and not 
along the line of our fleshly imperfections. He knows 
in advance that according to the flesh there is none 
righteous, no not one. It is the loyal heart that he is 
seeking, and our partial victories over the flesh are merely 
attestations to our Lord of our loving zeal, and of our 
desire to be all that he would have us be. 

Following this parting exhortation, we had a Love 
Feast; the Elders of the London Congregation ranged 
themselves on either side of us. While the singing of 



hymns progressed, the congregation of about 1,100 filed 
past shaking hands with the representatives of the Society 
and of the London congregation. It was a blessed season 
of fellowship, and was evidently greatly enjoyed by all. 
If there were exceptions we did not note them. This 
feature of the service concluded the Whitsuntide London 
Convention for 1910. 

R4640 : page 212 

GLASGOW--DUNDEE--EDINBURGH 

The night express brought us to Glasgow, Tuesday 
morning early— not too early, however, for our dear 
Glasgow friends. About thirty-five of them met us at 
the railway station with cordial greetings. Doctor Edgar 
took us off to his home, where we were greatly refreshed, 
not only with natural food, but by spiritual fellowship. 
The City Hall had been secured for both the afternoon 
and evening meetings. In the afternoon the congregation 
consisted, as you may suppose, of the interested only, the 
number being estimated at 375. We had close attention 
while we endeavored to portray what constitutes covenant-relationship 
with God, and how the Church attains 
to this in this age; and how differently the world will 
be privileged to attain to it in the Millennium. 

We saw that Adam in his original purity and perfection 
was recognized of God as a son, and hence in covenant-relationship 

R4640 : page 213 

with him in the same sense as are the 

holy angels— in the sense of having full Divine fellowship 

and the Divine assurance of everlasting life on condition 

of continued obedience. We perceived how the fall destroyed 

that covenant-relationship and placed Adam and 

his race in the position of aliens, sinners, condemned by 

the Divine Law to death. We saw how Abel, Enoch, 

Abraham and others because of their faith and obedience 

were restored to covenant-relationship with God to the 

extent of having Divine friendship and fellowship, but 

not to the extent of being restored to perfection and 

eternal life and sonship. At very most they could be 

"friends of God" and have the prospect of "a better resurrection" 

than the remainder of the world on this account. 

We hearkened to the Apostle's words to this effect, assuring 

us that "They had this testimony that they pleased 

God," but nevertheless, "that they, without us (the 

Church) could not be made perfect"; because, God had 

provided some better thing for us— admitting us, through 

Christ, to sonship on the spirit plane. 

We perceived that this manifestation of Divine grace 
toward us was not necessarily on account of our greater 
saintliness, nor on account of our greater faith; but because 
we live in the "acceptable time." God can now 
accept such as sons, to glory and join t-heirship with Jesus, 



on the basis of his being their Advocate, and making good 
the imperfections of their offering, by the imputation of 
his own merit. Thus "we are accepted in the Beloved," 
and heirs to "an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, 
that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you who 
are kept through the power of God." On the other hand, 
we noted that the promises of the Old Testament to the 
Ancient Worthies are earthly promises, not heavenly, and 
will be realized only after the Christ, Head and Body, 
shall have been glorified on the spirit plane. 

OUR JUSTIFICATION TO LIFE 

Thus we distinguished between Abraham's justification 
by faith to a fellowship with God, as a "friend," 
waiting for the completion of his justification— to life, at 
the hands of the Redeemer— and in contradistinction, our 
own complete and actual justification to life and our own 
begetting of the holy Spirit as sons, "new creatures," 
joint-heirs with our Savior. We thus perceived that we 
not only have a faith-fellowship with God, but also 
"access into this grace wherein we now stand, rejoicing 
in the hope of the glory of God." (Romans 5:1,2.) We 
rejoice in the fact that we are already sons of God without 
rebuke, though it doth not yet appear how great, how 
wonderful we shall be after our glorious "change," which 
will make us like our Redeemer and enable us to see him 
as he is, and to share his glory, in the Kingdom which 
flesh and blood cannot inherit. 

Abraham drew nigh to God by faith without an Advocate 
or Mediator, except prospectively. We perceived 
that had he had an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ 
the righteous, Abraham might indeed have been introduced 
at once to the Father and become a son of God on 
the same terms by which we enjoy our privilege of sonship, 
through Jesus as our Advocate. 

We noted the difference between an Advocate and a 
Mediator— that an Advocate stands alongside of, as a representative, 
as a mouthpiece, as an assistant, so that those 
he represents may through him come at once into relationship 
with the Father. On the contrary, a Mediator stands 
between two who are at variance, until such time as he 
shall accomplish his work as a mediator and bring them 
fully into accord. We saw that this would be the work 
of the great Mediator, The Christ, during the Millennium. 
The Anointed of God, Head and Body, the Royal Priesthood, 
will for a thousand years occupy the position of 
Mediator between God and men— between God and the 
world. 

He will make satisfaction to Divine Justice by presenting 
his blood— the merit of his sacrifice— as a corresponding 
price for the sins of the whole world. This 
presentation will be made as soon as his elect Church 
shall be completed and with him in glory. By virtue of 
that application of the merit of his own sacrifice, the 
whole world will be turned over to The Christ of God and 



"he will take to himself his great power and reign." The 
turning over to him of the dominion of the earth by the 
Father will be in acknowledgment of his having paid the 
ransom-price over to justice for Adam and all of his race 
—"for the sins of the whole world." When Justice accepts 
of Christ's atonement "for all the people," the formal 
transfer of the kingdoms of this world will take 
place, and God will put all things in subjection, under 
his feet. 

Then for a thousand years Christ's Mediatorial Kingdom 
will put down all insubordination and destroy every 
foe of righteousness and truth that will not submit; 
the last enemy that will be destroyed is death. Simultaneously 
with the overthrow of sin and its power in 
mankind will come the uplifting of man mentally, morally 
and physically for a thousand years (up, up, up to all 
that was lost in Eden), the redemption price of whom 
was secured at Calvary by our Lord's faithful sacrifice 
of himself. Those who will refuse to obey that great 
Prophet, Priest, King, Mediator, like unto Moses, the 
typical mediator of the Law Covenant, will be destroyed 
from amongst the people in the Second Death.— Acts 3:19-23. 

NEW COVENANT TO BE MADE WITH MEDIATOR 

At the end of the Mediatorial Kingdom the whole 
world will have reached human perfection and be 
quite competent to keep every requirement of the 
Divine Law. Then the world will be ready to be turned 
over to the Father by the Mediator, who will then step 
out from between God and men, and thus bring God and 
humanity together in covenant-relationship. Whoever of 
mankind will then prove his loyalty to God may enjoy 
the Divinely provided life in fellowship and blessing 
forever. During the Millennium the world will not 
be in covenant-relationship with God except in and 
through the Mediator. All their blessing will come 
through him, and their approach to the Father and all 
their worship will be through him. In other words, the 
New Covenant with Israel will be made not with them directly, 
but with their Mediator, and he will stand between 
them and God until they are perfected by restitution, ready 
to be received as sons of God, in covenant-relationship 
with the Father, at the conclusion of the Millennium. 

We contrasted for a while this delay in the world's 
coming into personal covenant-relationship with the 
Father for a thousand years, under the Mediator, with 
the instantaneous work which the Redeemer effects for 
his Church, his members, not as their Mediator, but as 
their Advocate. He introduces us and brings us at once 
to the Father through the imputation of his own merit 
to our sacrifices. He thus makes our "sacrifices holy and 
acceptable to God," permitting their Divine acceptance as 
such, and the consequent immediate begetting of the sacrificers 
by the holy Spirit to sonship, to covenant-relationship, 
as "new creatures in Christ." 



The evening service was for the public, our topic 
being, "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire," which we 

R4640 : page 214 

treated in our usual manner. The attendance present 

was estimated at 3,300— certainly a very large showing 

for a week-night. We greatly enjoyed our Glasgow visit, 

and with deep appreciation of the manifestations of loyalty 

to the Lord and to his Truth, we left the friends for 

our next appointment, at Dundee. Quite a number accompanied 

us to the railway station, and some went on with us. 

SECURING AND GIVING THE RANSOM-PRICE 

We had two very interesting meetings at Dundee, both 
quite in contrast to those of our previous visit to the same 
place seven years ago. The class and the interest had in 
the meantime grown very encouragingly. The afternoon 
we spent with the interested who assembled to the number 
of about 175. Here again the subject of the Ransom 
seemed to be uppermost, and we had pleasure in pointing 
out the difference between our Lord's giving himself 
to be the Ransom-Price for all, and his subsequent work, 
soon to be accomplished, of applying that ransom-price 
"on behalf of all the people." We noted the largeness of 
the work of salvation, yet every part of it fitting in with 
every other part. We called to mind how our Lord left 
the heavenly glory— how he was made flesh, for our 
sakes became poor— how he took upon himself the human 
nature, in order that he might be man's Redeemer. 

We noted, however, that Jesus was not the Redeemer 
when he was born, except in a prophetic sense, the same 
sense in which he was the Savior, the Advocate, the Mediator, 
the King, the Priest, the Judge, the Prophet. Nor 
was he all of these as the lad of twelve years when he 
discussed the Law and the Prophets with the teachers 
of his day in the Temple. Nor was he all of these when 
he reached perfect manhood at the age of thirty years— 
except in a prophetic sense. His actual sacrifice took 
place when he was thirty years of age— when at Jordan 
he was baptized and symbolically represented the full surrender 
of his all to do the Father's will, as the same had 
been written aforetime in the Book, the Bible— in the 
Law and the Prophets. There it was that the prophecy 
was fulfilled of him, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, 

R4641 : page 214 

as it is written in the Book." All the things that you, 
Father, have caused to be written in the Law and in the 
Prophets respecting the Savior of mankind, I am here, 
fully consecrated to accomplish. 

At that moment our Lord sacrificed himself— laid 
down his earthly life in the Father's hands, saying: "The 
cup which my Father hath poured for me, shall I not 



drink it." At that moment of sacrifice he represented 
"the bullock of the sin-offering" and its slaying by the 
High-priest. He became the antitypical High-priest in the 
moment of his self-surrender as the sacrifice. Immediately, 
as the High-priest, he passed into the Holy a "new 
creature." There he offered for three and a half years 
the incense of his earthly life-devotion, a sacrifice well 
pleasing to the Father. At the same time, according to 
the world's estimation, his self-surrender was a stench, 
as was represented in the burning of the bullock's hide, 
etc., "outside the camp." From that moment the disciples 
beheld, in his spirit of devotion, the antitype of the burning 
of the fat on the brazen altar in the Court. 

From that same moment he was the Lamb of God slain 
—his life given up to the doing of the Father's will. We 
looked at the picture of this given in the book of Revelation. 
There we saw Jehovah upon his throne with a 
scroll in his hand, written in the inside and on the outside, 
and sealed with seven seals. No one had yet been found 
worthy to execute or even to be made acquainted with 
the Divine Purposes. In answer to the proclamation, 
"Who is worthy to take the scroll?" no one "in heaven or 
on earth was found worthy." Even our dear Redeemer 
in his previous condition was not entrusted with the scroll. 
But when he had made his consecration as the "Lamb of 
God," giving up and devoting his life without reserve to 
do the Father's will— then as a lamb freshly slain he was 
proclaimed worthy, "Worthy is the Lamb that was slain 
to receive glory, honor, dominion, might and power." 
Then the scroll was delivered to the Lamb. 

"THE HEAVENS WERE OPENED" 

We noted the correspondency to the giving of the 
scroll to the Lamb, in the fact that as soon as Jesus had 
indicated his full self-surrender to the Father's will, the 
holy Spirit came upon him begetting him as the great 
High-Priest to his great work. Then we read that as he 
went up out of the water, "the heavens were opened unto 
him"— the higher things were manifest to him, made 
clearer. As the Logos he had not been permitted to read 
the scroll; as the boy Jesus, and as the young man Jesus, 
he had not understood the deep meaning of the Scriptures. 
Even the angels, we are told, did not understand. 
The Law was so written in types, in pictures, and the 
prophecies were so given in symbolical language and illustrations 
that the Divine Plan thus presented could not be 
understood by angels or men until the "due time" when 
God would grant the influence of his holy "Spirit which 
searcheth all things, yea the deep things of God." It was 
at this moment of our Lord's consecration, the moment of 
his death as the Lamb, the moment of his begetting and 
anointing as the High-Priest, the moment of the heavens 
or higher things being opened to him— at that moment 
the scroll was handed to him by the Great Eternal One. 
Then proclamation was made, "Worthy is the Lamb ! " 



"The lion of the Tribe of Judah hath prevailed." 
Although his prevailing would not be completed until 
Calvary, the surrender of his will was complete, and it 
was accepted as the sacrifice of his all, since everything 
else that he had was included in this surrender of his will. 

We can well imagine how the only begotten of the 
Father, full of grace and truth, gave heed as the boy to 
the reading of the Law and Prophets every Sabbath in the 
synagogue. We can readily see how he knew the Scriptures 
thoroughly, and that his perfect mind enabled him 
to memorize the whole Bible from Genesis to Malachi 
speedily. How many times he must have wondered respecting 
the types of the Law, the bullock of the sin-offering, 
the incense, the sprinkling of the blood, the killing 
of the Lord's goat and the sprinkling of its blood, 
the burning of the bodies of those beasts outside the camp, 
the entering of the Holy of holies on the Atonement Day, 
and the reconciliation of "all the people" to the Almighty! 

How often he may have thought of the Passover night, 
the slain lamb, the sprinkled blood, the unleavened bread, 
the passing over of the first-borns, the exchange of the 
first-borns for the tribe of Levi, representing the Church 
of the first-borns, and the selection from these of the 
priests who sacrificed as the antitype of the Aaronic 
Priesthood! How often he must have thought of and tried 
to associate properly together the declaration of the Messiah's 
glory, and the blessing of the world through Israel, 
and every knee bowing and every tongue confessing and 
in contrast, the statement about one who would be led 
as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her 
shearers be dumb— one whom it would please the Father 
to bruise, and to put to shame; not one bone of whom 
should be broken— one who should make his grave with 
the rich, and be with the wicked in his death! 

These hitherto complicated and apparently contradictory 
presentations of the Father's Plan all became luminous 

R4641 : page 215 

to our Lord when the scroll was handed to the 
freshly slain Lamb— to the newly consecrated Jesus. The 
illumination by the holy Spirit opened before his mental 
vision the heavenly things. Type and antitype, promise 
and fulfillment, began to come together and our Lord 
hastened away from the multitude at Jordan into a solitary 
place in the wilderness, that there he might deliberate 
upon the Divine purposes as they were disclosed to him by 
his illumination. 

STUDYING TO RIGHTLY DIVINE TRUTHS 

For forty days he was rapt in study so intently that 
he forgot to eat, forgot to be hungry. He had meat to 
eat of another kind. He was absorbed in his study of the 
Father's will respecting him. At the conclusion of the 
forty days of Bible study in the wilderness he had reached 



the solution of all the problems proper for him to understand 
respecting the Divine Word. Figuratively he had 
read and comprehended all that was written on the outside 
of the scroll— all that was necessary for him to know 
prior to the time when he would complete his sacrifice 
at Calvary. 

That he had not yet broken the seals, and that he had 
not yet comprehended all the things written on the inside 
of the scroll, is evident from his words to the disciples on 
one occasion, when he said, "Of that day and hour 
knoweth no man, no nor the angels of heaven, neither the 
Son of man, but the Father only." We thus see that 
there were certain features of the Divine Plan still kept 
secret or sealed from our Master up to the time that he 
had finished his course. But, after his resurrection, we 
remember his words, "All power in heaven and earth is 
given unto me." 

It was after the forty days that the Tempter came 
unto him. His first salutation was that of a friend intent 
upon rendering assistance. He greeted our Lord as a 
friend, because they had known each other before on the 
plane of glory. Now Satan sympathized with Jesus in 
that he was hungry, and in effect said to him, You perhaps 
are not aware of the great power that came upon 
you at the time of your baptism. You now have a Divine 
power which makes it unnecessary for you to go hungry. 
You should use at once the power that you possess which 
will enable you in a word to "command these stones to 
become food." 

When recently we stood at the fords of Jordan, where 
Jesus was baptized, we looked from there to the wilderness 
of Judea into which he went on that occasion, "Led 
of the Spirit," or rather according to the Greek, "Driven 
of the Spirit (his own spirit) into the wilderness." He 
was driven by his earnest desire to know fully and completely 
the will of the Father, that he might do it. As 
we beheld the wilderness of Judea full of stones, with 
practically nothing else in view, we could understand 
why the Adversary suggested the turning of stones into 
bread, for there was nothing else to make bread of. We 
noticed that Satan took the most opportune time to make 
his attack upon the Savior— when the Master was weak 
and faint in body and mind through his long fast and 
study. 

Under the illumination of the holy Spirit Jesus had 
for the first time been able to put together all the testimonies 
of the Scripture, and had seen what great sacrifices 
were implied before he should enter into his glory, 
and be able to give to the world the blessings of eternal 
life. It was at this moment that the Adversary appeared 
and presented his temptations. But our Lord 
was proof against them. Satan left in disgust, convinced 
that further effort with the Master would be a 
waste of time. Thus we read, "Then Satan left him." 
We have no record that he ever returned to tempt him; 
angels of God then ministered to him. 



We found in all this valuable lessons to those who 
are walking in the footsteps of Jesus. Their illumination 
of the holy Spirit could not, of course, be as great 
as that of Jesus, but at their consecration, their baptism 
into death, came their spirit begetting and, as the Apostle 
declares, "a measure of the spirit is granted to every 
man (in the Church) to profit withal." The measure will 
be according to the degree possible through his infirmity 
of the flesh. But to the Master who had no infirmity, 
the Father gave his Spirit without measure, without 
limitation, fully. 

We noted also how the Adversary makes an attack 
upon all of the Lord's consecrated, seeking their weak 
points at their weakest moments. We noted the mistake 
of some in parleying with the Adversary, saying: How 
do you do it, etc., etc., and we noted that the Master's 
course was the reverse; that he parleyed not; he was 
prompt in his refusal. He left no room for the world, 
the flesh or the Adversary to gain an advantage over 
him. We noted that our success as his followers will be 
greatest along the same line of promptness and decision 

R4642 : page 215 

of character and that every time we stand firm for 
righteousness under temptation we are demonstrating our 
loyalty to God in accordance with our Covenant of 
sacrifice. We saw that the Lord proceeded along the 
same line of loyalty, fulfilling his consecration even unto 
death, the death of the cross. 

WHAT DID JESUS' DEATH EFFECT? 

Here we raised the question, What did Jesus accomplish 
by the offering of himself, begun at Jordan and 
finished at Calvary? Did he purchase the world? No. 
Did he redeem the Church? No. What did he do? He 
secured the price, the ransom-price, sufficient whenever 
applied, to effect the cancellation of the sins of the whole 
world, but he had not yet applied it. Neither the world 
nor the Church was as yet released from Divine condemnation, 
or brought into full fellowship with God. 
Although there were five hundred brethren, who had accepted 
Christ and become his followers, the Father had 
not yet accepted these. They had offered themselves in 
consecration to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, they had 
taken up their cross to follow him, they had been justified 
to fellowship with God, even as Abraham, but they 
had not been justified to sonship and life. Hence, they 
could not have earthly or restitution life. Neither 
could they present their bodies living sacrifices, 
holy and acceptable to God, because, they were still 
sinners from the Divine standpoint. No appropriation of 
Jesus' merit had yet been made in their case. When 
Jesus ascended up on high, forty days after his resurrection, 
he commanded representatives of these, about 



120, to tarry at Jerusalem in the upper-room until they 
should be endued with power from on high— until the 
Father should recognize them— until the Father should 
accept the sacrifice which they had already made. But 
first Jesus, as their Advocate, should appear in the presence 
of God for them, and make such imputation of his 
merit to them as to cover their blemishes, and permit 
Divine Justice to accept them as "living sacrifices, holy 
and acceptable to God." 

We remembered that it was on the fiftieth day that 
the holy Spirit came upon the waiting ones. That was 
the first intimation to them that the Redeemer had been 
acceptable to the Father, and that he had imputed to 
them his merit, and that the sacrifice which they had 

R4642 : page 216 

already made was acceptable to the Father in the Beloved 
One, and that they were no longer merely justified 
to friendship, but had come into the position of 
sons, into covenant relationship with the Father. Thus 
it is written of the Jews, "He came unto his own, but 
his own received him not; but to as many as received 
him, to them gave he power (privilege) to become sons 
of God, even to them that believed on his name": which 
were begotten not of man nor of the will of the flesh, 
but of God— begotten of the holy Spirit. Thus they 
became sons of God, members of the anointed Body of 
the great Messiah, Prophet, Priest, Mediator, King, Judge, 
appointed for men, on their behalf to effect reconciliation 
between God and men during his Millennial reign. 

Meantime the same work has been progressing 
throughout all these eighteen centuries. Others have 
been called, both from the Jews and from the Gentiles, 
to be the followers of Jesus, his under-priests— the Church 
of the first-borns whose names are written in heaven. 
As soon as this work shall have been accomplished, the 
great Mediator, the antitype of Moses (Acts 3:22,23), 
raised up from amongst his brethren, will be completed. 
Then the Mediatorial Kingdom will begin the blessing, 
uplifting and reconciling of the world. Meantime we 
thank God for the fact that "we have an Advocate with 
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous." Jesus as the 
perfect man, the fleshly seed of Abraham, might have 
accomplished considerable in the way of helping mankind. 
As one who committed no sin, whose life would 
have been secure to him, even though it required twelve 
legions of angels to protect him, he might have been a 
glorious earthly prince. 

But even as a great ruler amongst men, he would not 
have been able to accomplish the Divine Purpose of 
blessing mankind with full uplifting out of sin and death 
conditions to life eternal. As the man Jesus he could 
not have accomplished restitution for the race because he 
would have needed his own human life and rights for himself. 
The man Jesus, therefore, could not have been "the 



Seed of Abraham" mentioned in the Abrahamic Covenant, 

that in the Seed of Abraham all of the families of the 

earth shall be blessed. To become this Seed he must 

first attain to spirit being, just as the record shows he 

did. By virtue of his sacrifice of his earthly nature, 

and by virtue of God's having raised him from the dead 

to the heavenly plane as a reward for his obedience, 

he has his earthly rights to give to Justice as the ransom-price 

for what Adam lost. The Redeemer is the "Seed 

of Abraham" on the spirit plane, and during this Gospel 

Age he is finding his Bride and bringing her to the same 

spirit plane with himself as his associate and joint-heir 

in all the great work of the Millennium— the blessing 

of all the families of the earth. Thus it is written, 

"If ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed (spiritual) 

and heirs according to the promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

LIFE LAID DOWN, NOT PAID OVER 

Do we see clearly what Jesus sacrificed, what he laid 
down? He gave himself, he submitted himself to whatever 
might be the Father's will, but he did not forfeit 
his earthly life by committing sin so that it should be 
taken from him. Neither did he barter or exchange 
it for the heavenly nature. He merely submitted or 
laid down his earthly rights, in harmony with his own 
words, "I have power to lay down my life and to receive 
it again," authority to say this, I have obtained from my 
Father. No man took it from him, in the sense that no 
man had that power, since God had promised that, "he 
that keepeth the Law shall live by it." Therefore, our 
Lord's life would have been protected had he not voluntarily 
submitted and laid it down. 

He laid it down that he might receive it again. He 
laid it down in the Father's hands, saying: "Into thy 
hands I commit my spirit." Then Jesus' rights to earthly 
life, earthly protection, earthly honor and glory, earthly 
dominion and power all belonged to him as a New 
Creature when he arose from the dead. He had lost 
and forfeited none of his earthly rights. Those earthly 
rights are the basis of all the blessings of God through 
him to Adam and all of his race. Jesus has nothing 
else to give away. He needs nothing else; because, in the 
merit of this sacrifice there is a corresponding price for 
the first Adam, and a sufficiency for all. 

However, Jesus does not give the Church his earthly 
nature, and earthly rights, but keeps these to give to 
the world during the Millennium. Indeed, our calling 
is a heavenly one, and we should feel somewhat disappointed 
if instead of the heavenly we should receive 
the earthly or restitution blessing. But since Jesus does 
not give us these restitution blessings, and since he has 
no other merit to give to us or to anybody, what does 
he do for the Church? what is our hope in Christ? 
what is the philosophy of it? 

The answer is, that this merit which shortly is to be 



appropriated as the ransom-price for the sins of the 
whole world, was already in the hands of Divine Justice, 
unappropriated, when our Lord ascended up on high, there 
to appear in the presence of God for us, the household 
of faith— to present our cause to the Father. As our 
Advocate he declares to the Father that we are anxious 
to become members of the elect Church, his Bride, his 
Body. In harmony with the Divine arrangement he 
appropriates a share of his merit to us, so that our sacrifices 
might be acceptable to God. 

Thus, instead of giving us the restitution blessings, 
which are for the world, our Redeemer, our Advocate, 
imputes to us of his righteousness, and on the strength 
of it the Father reckons us holy and acceptable, and immediately 
accepts our sacrifices. Thenceforth we are 
dead as human beings and our only standing in God's 
sight is as "new creatures." But, we have this treasure 
in imperfect earthen vessels, in which the new creature 
cannot do all that it would. It is the new creature, however, 
that God is testing and proving— the new creature 
is on trial, not the flesh. The new creature has no 
Original Sin, nor is it responsible for the Original Sin 
of the old creature, which was justified and accepted of 
God in sacrifice and therefore gone. The responsibility 
of the new creature is that it shall keep its heart in the 
love of God, in loyalty to him. Correspondingly, of 
course, it will strive to keep the body, the flesh, in harmony 
with the Divine regulations. Its zeal and energy 
in controlling the flesh and bringing every thought and 
word and act into accord, as nearly as possible with the 
Divine will, shows the degree of its love and zeal. 

PAST SINS-DAILY TRESPASSES 

The new creature needs not to apologize, nor ever 
to remember the weaknesses and imperfections of the 
flesh appertaining to the period preceding the sacrifice. 
By faith the new creature should remember that old 
things have passed away, and all things have become 
new, for thus the Apostle declares, "There is now, therefore, 
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, 
who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit." Our 
Advocate did a thorough work as respects the sins of 
our flesh: they are past and gone through the forbearance 
of God. (Rom. 3:25.) The Father did a perfect 

R4642 : page 217 

work in reckoning us dead indeed to everything of the 
past, and in begetting us by the Spirit as new creatures 
—sons of God. It is for our faith to grasp the situation 
and to enjoy it. 

However, as new creatures we are imperfect in that 
we have only the old body with its blemishes through 
which to serve the Lord. Because of antagonism of 
the legally dead flesh, "We cannot do the things which 



we would." What shall we do as respects our failure 
to come up to all the requirements of the Lord, because 

R4643 : page 217 

of our fleshly imperfections? Shall we say to ourselves 
and to each other, God knows that these imperfect things 
of daily life are not willingly ours as new creatures, 
and therefore we need not confess them. 

We answer that this would not be the proper course. 
The imputation of Christ's merit to our consecrated sacrifice 
merely covered the blemishes against us at that time, 
but did not cover blemishes future. Hence, daily we 
should remember before the throne of heavenly grace 
the imperfections and blemishes of each day and hour, 
and should ask Divine forgiveness for these through our 
great Redeemer. Thus he taught us, "Pray ye, Forgive 
us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against 
us." This would not relate to Original Sin, which could 
not thus be forgiven. It relates to our subsequent shortcomings, 
after we have become children of God through 
the begetting of the holy Spirit. Thus, the Apostle 
writes, "If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the 
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous." 

"FORGIVE US OUR TRESPASSES" 

Our Advocate not only imputed his merit for our 
past sins, but he is still with the Father and has an 
abundance of merit. Our Advocate has merit sufficient to 
cover the sins of the whole world, and therefore to cover 
all our blemishes. Hence, when we go to the Father 
through him, we may realize that provision has already 
been made for the covering of our trespasses, but that 
we can obtain forgiveness only through prayer. God 
doubtless intended a great blessing in making this arrangement. 
He intended that each time we come to the 

throne of grace, we should earnestly repent of our imperfections, 
and earnestly promise him that we will strive 
against them in the future. He would thus encourage 
us to earnestly seek to fortify our characters along 
the line of these weaknesses, that we might become 
stronger and stronger in the power of the Lord and in his 
might, and be strengthened unto every good work. 

When thus we come to the Lord to obtain mercy 
and to find grace to help in every time of need, and 
promise continued and increased zeal in fighting the 
good fight, it puts us on our honor, as it were, and makes 
us more careful respecting our future course. If perchance 
we fail again along the same lines, we are properly 
abashed. Then comes an important testing to us. 
The suggestion comes that we should refrain from going 
to the Lord in prayer; that we should feel too much 
humiliated to go to him. If these suggestions be followed, 
the result will be alienation, coldness. The earth-born 
cloud will hide from us the heavenly Father's face. Even 



if we do not go off into greater outward sins, such a 
course would mean a loss of fellowship, which is very 
important to our growth in grace and knowledge. 

"WITHOUT SPOT OR WRINKLE" 

Every error, every slip, every mistake, is a spot upon 
our wedding garment and should be repented of and expunged. 
With great humility we should go to the Master 
that we might have such spots promptly cleansed away; 
as it is written, "The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth 
us (new creatures) from all sin." Thus we are able to 
abide in his love. Those who neglect this matter may 
find themselves increasingly careless respecting the spotlessness 
of their robes, until perhaps, if they do not fall 
completely into the Second Death, they find their garments 
bedraggled and unfit for the wedding. The Bride 
must be without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, and 
the arrangement on her behalf by her Bridegroom is 
ample to this end. Those, therefore, who for any reason 
allow the spots to accumulate, and do not have them 
cleansed, will have a further test and be obliged to decide 
to return like the sow to her wallowing in the mire 
of sin, and thus come under the condemnation of the 
Second Death, or else, as members of the Great Company, 
they must wash their robes and make them white in the 
blood of the Lamb, in the great tribulation with which 
this age will end. 

At the public session at Gilfillan Hall, our topic was, 
"The Overthrow of Satan's Empire," and notwithstanding 
the rainy weather, nearly 700 were present. We had the 
closest attention. Let us hope that some good was accomplished, 
some ears unstopped and some eyes opened 
to look further and to listen more attentively for the 
Voice of the Great Shepherd, in respect to the Divine 
Plan of the Ages, concerning which he is now instructing 
his people. 



R4643 : page 217 

CHAUTAUQUA LAKE CONVENTION 

NINE DAYS-JULY 30-AUG. 7. 

WE hereby confirm previous announcements, and 
request all who expect to attend this Convention 
to so advise us at once— particularly 
such as desire us to secure for them accommodations 
at cottages along the shores 
of Lake Chautauqua. We expect to engage 
the apartments outright for those who order 
them, paying for two days at least, in 
advance. 
We will use the large Auditorium at Celeron, 



which is an amusement place of the quieter sort. 
However, the Auditorium is far enough from the noise to 
serve our purposes. We anticipate that the friends will 
have no particular interest in the amusements. Anyway 
these are less patronized in the day time and our proposition 
is to hold Convention sessions in daylight only— 
9 a.m. to 5 p.m., with an intermission at noon for a 
plain sandwich luncheon. 

BOARDING AND LODGING 

At the cottages at various points we will arrange for 
lodging, breakfast and supper. Large and small steamers 
ply the Lake frequently and will constitute a convenient 
method of transportation. 

Our Committee in charge of arrangements is prepared 
to offer per day rates which include a boat ride to and 
from the Auditorium, a very plain noonday luncheon at 
the Auditorium and breakfast, supper and lodging at 
a cottage, all included for the following sums, which vary 
according to the accommodations and meals for the nine 

R4643 : page 218 

days, namely, $9, $11, $14. Those desirous of hotel accommodations 
can be arranged for at from two to four 
dollars per day. 

Those staying a shorter time than nine days may expect 
to pay a little more proportionately, $1.25 to $1.50 
per day, all included. We have made these arrangements, 
believing them to be specially advantageous to all concerned. 
Unless we are mistaken our Convention will take 
up nearly all the available accommodations, except at 
Jamestown hotels. 

RAILROAD RATES AND ARRANGEMENTS 

Our Convention is held under the auspices of the 
"International Bible Students' Association," but excursion 
rates have NOT been granted in this name. There 
will be three general excursion rates. The first of these 
is the regular Chautauqua excursion on July 29. It is 
the cheapest excursion. It will be good to return any 
time within thirty days and will permit those living 
in New York City and vicinity, and at points east of 
Hornell, on the Erie Railroad, as well as all whose tickets 
naturally read through Buffalo, to include a visit to 
Niagara Falls. Those who take advantage of this special 
Chautauqua rate must begin their trip on Friday, July 29, 
excepting from points in Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, 
Louisiana, Mississippi and Tennessee, from which States 
tickets will be sold only on July 28. These tickets are 
on sale at very cheap rates; usually they amount to about 
$2 more than a full single fare. Then, though you purchase 
these tickets to the Chautauqua Assembly Grounds, 
you can get off at Celeron and come direct to the Auditorium. 



We have made arrangements for having these 
tickets validated for the return journey without 
inconvenience. 

In the interest of those who cannot attend at the beginning 
of the Convention, another excursion has been 
granted in the name of The Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society to start either August 5 or 6. The rate 
is not quite so cheap, however— one fare and a half. The 
ticket is good to return so as to reach starting point not 
later than August 17, and also gives option of returning 
via Niagara Falls, as mentioned above. 

Where neither of the above rates can be secured, the 
following will apply: From practically all points in the 
United States and Canada regular summer tourist tickets 
are on sale daily to JAMESTOWN at fares approximately 
two cents per mile in each direction; or, in other 
words, about one fare and a half for the round trip; return 
limit October 3 1 . 

CONSECRATED PEOPLE OF GOD 

who trust in the Redeemer's merit for their acceptance 
with God, are cordially invited to this Convention. 
Let us gather with hearts full of gratitude to 
God and desirous of knowing and doing his will more 
perfectly as the days go by. Let us come expecting 
to receive blessings at the Lord's hand and desirous of 
being used of him to strengthen and comfort and assist 
his "brethren." 

The Railroad Company has co-operated with us in 
issuing our Program and Information Bulletin for those 
desiring to attend. On the one side of it is a picture of 
Lake Chautauqua showing the various little cities surrounding 
it, the stopping-places of the little steamers. If 
you purpose attending the Convention write us for one of 
these circulars. Determine as soon as possible and make 
your application, and, if possible, send in the money for 
your lodging, that everything may be prepared for your 
comfort in advance of your arrival. We will make no 
assignments of lodgings until July 15. Then we will 
apportion the lodgings to those ordering them and will 
serve their interests impartially to the best of our ability. 

The spending of the evenings quietly at the cottages 
will give opportunity for rest and fellowship amongst the 
friends. If at any of the cottages there is a desire for 
singing in the evening or for chart-talks or whatever, the 
opportunity should be accepted. We trust that, as usual, 
the dear friends will leave an influence for good behind 
them. We hope that the Bible Students of this Convention 
may long be remembered by the people on Chautauqua 
Lake shores as model Christians in every sense. 



R4644: page 218 



WITHOUT A PARABLE HE SPAKE NOT 

-JULY 10.- 

Golden Text:— "The words that I speak unto you, 
they are spirit, and they are life."— John 6:63. 

"WITHOUT a parable spake he not unto the 

people." What the prophet had declared 

of him was true, "He shall open his mouth 

in parables and dark sayings." It is important 

that we remember this. Many noble 

Christian people have inferred that our 

Lord's words were all simple, and that they 

presented the truth in a manner easily understood 

by everybody. Nothing is further 

from the truth. If our Lord's parables 

and dark sayings be taken as plain, literal statements 

of truth, they will lead to all kinds of errors and misapprehensions. 

Let us remember, therefore, the Apostle's 

declaration, "Without a parable spake he not unto the 

people." 

There is absolutely nothing in the words of Jesus 
without a deep significance. How many have stumbled 
over our Lord's parables by taking them to be literal 
statements of facts! How absurd the conclusion drawn 
from the parable of the rich man and Lazarus, for instance! 
How absurd to conclude that simply because 
a man was rich, fared sumptuously every day, and was 
garbed in fine linen, that he must suffer through all 
eternity! How equally absurd to interpret the poor man 
Lazarus, who lay at the rich man's gate, as representing, 
literally, poor and diseased beggars! How unreasonable 
to think that only such as have had an experience 
of this kind, with dogs to lick their sores, and 
hungering for the crumbs that fall from the rich man's 
table, would experience the joys of heaven, according 
to the Divine program! How foolish to think of Abraham's 
bosom, which could hold only two or three, as 
being the portion of blessing for only a handful of 
beggars! 

Note afresh the parable of the wheat and the tares, 
the gathering of the former into the garner and the burning 
of the latter. Neither represents literal experiences. 
In the parable the wheat is not literal wheat, the tares are 
not tares. The wheat symbolizes the inheritors of the 
Kingdom; the tares symbolize the offspring of error- 
children of the wicked one. The gathering into the barn 
of safety symbolizes the glorification of the Church on 
the spirit plane, and precedes the shining forth of the 
sons of God in the glory of the Millennial Kingdom, 
for the blessing of the groaning creation; as the Apostle 
declares, "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth 
in pain together, waiting for the manifestation of the 
sons of God." The whole creation is waiting for the 
shining forth of the sons of God in the Kingdom, and 



their shining forth in truth and righteousness will scatter 

R4644 : page 219 

all the darkness of sin and error and awaken and revivify 
the world of mankind. 

Eventually all the willingly obedient may enjoy the 
blessings of eternal life. On the other hand, the description 
of the burning of the tares, instead of referring 
to a literal burning, has, evidently, a symbolic significance; 
it means the destruction of the tare class— not 
their destruction as individuals, but as "tares," as imitations 
of the "wheat" class. 

How glad we are to find the key to these symbolic 
statements— these parables! How glad we are that by 
the use of this key the parabolic figures become reasonable 
and beautiful! What a silver lining there is to the 
dark cloud of trouble which is now looming up before 
the world! How glad God's people must be to learn 
that just beyond the clouds and shadows comes the 
glorious Millennial day! 

The parable of "the sheep and the goats," taken 
literally, has caused confusion to many. They think of 
the separation of the sheep and the goats as now in 
progress, failing to notice the Scriptural declaration that 
the parable shall find its application "when the Son of 
man shall come in his glory and all his holy angels 
(messengers) with him. Then shall he sit upon the 
throne of his glory and before him shall be gathered all 
nations, and he shall separate them one from another 
as the shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats." We 
thus see that the application of the parable belongs to 
the Millennial Age. All through that age the work of 
Christ and the Church, his Bride, seated with him upon 
his throne, will be a work of blessing to the world of 
mankind. And the manner in which those blessings will 
be received, will demonstrate the sheep-like or goat-like 
character of every individual of the human family. The 
sheep-like will come to the right hand position of favor, 
the goat-like, to the left hand position of disfavor. The 
conclusion of the thousand-year Judgment day will bring 
the expression of the Lord's favor towards the sheep-like, 
rewarding them with eternal life, and the expression 
of his disfavor towards the goat-like, destroying them in 
the "second death." This is symbolically represented by 
the statement, "Depart ye cursed into the lasting fire 
(a figure of destruction) prepared for Satan and his 
messengers (followers)." The reward of the righteous 
will thus be everlasting life. The "everlasting punishment" 
of the unrighteous will be everlasting death, for the 
"wages of sin is death and the gift of God is eternal 
life through Jesus Christ our Lord."— Rom. 6:23. 

"I THANK THEE, FATHER" 

Evidently some wise and gracious purpose stands 



connected with the hiding or secreting at present of the 
Divine purpose from mankind in general. While the 
Scriptures declare it is a mark of special favor to the 
Lord's people that they are made acquainted with the 
Divine Purposes, yet nowhere do they declare that all 
those from whom God's plans are secreted are doomed 
to eternal torture, or to everlasting destruction. Thus 
our Lord Jesus prayed: "I thank thee, Father, Lord of 
heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from 
the wise and prudent and hast revealed them unto babes. 
Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight." 

Had the hiding of the Divine counsel from mankind 
signified eternal torture for those from whom it was 
hidden, there surely would have been no ground for 
thanking the heavenly Father for this act. We can 
thank him, however, that although many of the worldly 
wise are not privileged to know of his glorious plans, 
nevertheless those plans are sure. For the world to have 
known of the Divine purposes in advance would doubtless 
have been injurious, because in their blindness they would 
have attempted to thwart these purposes and therefore 
would have gotten themselves into a worse condition of 
condemnation. 

WORDS OF SPIRIT AND OF LIFE 

Our text shows that however dark and parabolic were 
our Lord's teachings, nevertheless, rightly understood, his 
message is one that is spiritually helpful and life-giving 
to those who can and do understand it. It is this quality 
of our Lord's message which makes the religion of the 
Bible different from that of all the heathen. It is a 
message of life as well as a message of holiness. It is 
a message of forgiveness as well as a message of condemnation. 
It is a message of love as well as a message 
of justice. His wonderful words of life— they are 
charming, beautiful, forceful! We may read them over 
year after year and we see still more beauty in them, still 
deeper significance, and that in proportion to our own 
growth in grace, our growth in knowledge, and in the 
spirit of our Master. 



R4644 : page 219 

CONFESSING THE SON OF GOD 

-JULY 17.-MATT. 16:13-28.- 

Golden Text:— "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.' 

OUR Master, wisely and with becoming modesty, 
hesitated to declare his own greatness. 
He allowed his actions to speak and 
to tell to his disciples that he proceeded 



and came forth from God, and that in the 

performing of miracles, and particularly in 

his teachings, he was the Finger of God and 

his mouthpiece. John the Baptist was sent 

to be his special forerunner. It was he 

that declared that Jesus was "the Lamb of 

God which taketh away the sin of the world." It was 

he that declared that the Master was so much greater 

than himself that he was not worthy to stoop down and 

loose his sandals. 

But after John had borne him witness, testifying, 
"This is he," and had declared that he saw the holy 
Spirit descending upon Jesus like a dove, and that this 
was a sign given him whereby he might know his Messiahship, 
then came the time for the Master to bring 
the matter pointedly to the attention of his followers. 
John had been cast into prison and later had been beheaded. 
John's prophetic testimony was fulfilled, when 
he said of Jesus, "He must increase, but I must decrease." 
The mission of Jesus and his Apostles became 
more prominent every day, and those who had formerly 
talked about John were now asking respecting Jesus, 
whether he was a prophet sent of God, or could it be 
that he was the Messiah. Do the rulers indeed know 
whether this is the Messiah or not? Surely "no man 

R4645 : page 219 

could do the miracles which he doeth unless God be 
with him" in some special manner. 

"WHOM SAY YE THAT I AM" 

Our Lord first inquired respecting the general opinion 
of the people concerning himself. He did this, not 
because of his own ignorance, but that he might draw 

R4645 : page 220 

out the thoughts of his disciples. They replied that some 
thought he was John the Baptist; others supposed he was 
one of the prophets. The ideas of the heathen were 
gradually making inroads upon the Jews. The doctrine 
of reincarnation, wholly unscriptural, is suggested in these 
answers. All the answers, of course, were wrong, for 
the prophets were all dead and could not reappear until 
the resurrection. Then our Lord pointedly put the question 
to his chosen followers: "Whom do ye say that I 
am?" The courageous St. Peter promptly answered as 
spokesman for the whole company, "Thou art the Christ 
(Messiah), the Son of the living God." This was the 
very answer designed to be brought forth. It was the 
truth, but our Lord hesitated to present it, because it 
would better come from the disciples themselves and 
then have his endorsement. His answer to St. Peter was, 
"Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood 



hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is 
in heaven." 

It was not that St. Peter had experienced a special 
vision or revelation, but such a great spiritual fact as 
was then under consideration, could be duly appreciated 
only by those who were specially favored of the 
Father. Indeed, it is evident that the same principle 
still operates, for we read, "No man can come unto me, 
except the Father which sent me draw him." Our 
primary drawing and calling is of the Father up to the 
time when we accept his grace in Christ and make our 
consecration to do his will and receive the spirit of 
adoption into his family as God's children; we are then 
put into the school of Christ to learn of him. Let us 
learn the lesson that the special blessings always come, 
not only from believing in Christ, but also from confessing 
him to and before others. 

ST. PETER--THE ROCK--THE KEYS 

According to the Greek, our Lord replied to Peter, 
"Thou art a stone, and upon this rock will I build my 
Church." The rock upon which the Church is built is 
this confession which St. Peter made. St. Peter himself 
was not the rock, but he was one of the living stones 
built by faith upon the rock of truth. It was this same 
Apostle who so beautifully explained the whole matter, 
assuring us that all consecrated believers are "living 
stones" in the temple of God, whose foundation and capstone 
is Christ, in whom we are builded together through 
the operation of the holy Spirit— I Pet. 2:4-7. 

The expression, "Upon this rock I will build my 
Church and the gates of hell (hades) shall not prevail 
against it," is one that is much misunderstood. The 
gates of hell are not gates to some place of torture, 
nor gates to purgatory. They are, in the Greek, "gates 
of hades," and hades signifies a state or condition of 
death. The passage might well be translated, "The gates 
of the grave shall not prevail against it." That is to 
say, Christ Jesus invites the Church to die with him, to 
share in his sacrifice, in his death, and while, apparently, 
the gates of hades have prevailed against the Church, 
against God's people, for more than eighteen centuries, 
nevertheless, we have the assurance that they shall not 
forever prevail. The Master's assurance is that by his 
death he has become Lord of all and has the keys of 
death and hades. He has the right to open hades, the 
tomb, and to call forth all who have gone down into it. 
He assures us that he will do this, as he says, "All that 
are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of 
man and shall come forth." 

Nevertheless, for all these centuries it has required 
faith to believe that, by dying with Christ, his followers 
shall yet live with him— that sharing with him in his 
death they shall yet share with him in his resurrection 
to the glory and to the honor attaching to the divine nature. 



So, then, our Lord's words mean that there will 

be a resurrection from the grave, and since the Church 

is to be "a kind of first-fruits unto God of his creatures" 

(Jas. 1:18; Rev. 14:4), her resurrection means, indirectly, 

the uplifting of mankind, the opening of the grave 

to every member of the human family. 

The giving of the "keys" of the Kingdom to St. Peter 
has no reference to locks and bars of heaven over which 
St. Peter is the custodian. The Church in the present 
time is the Kingdom of Heaven in its preparatory or 
embryotic state, and St. Peter was privileged to do the 
opening work to the Gospel Church. He opened the door 
to the Jews at Pentecost, when, as the mouthpiece of 
the Lord, he proclaimed the meaning of the Pentecostal 
blessing and the hopes then open to every Jew coming 
individually into membership in Christ. He used the 
second "key" to open the same Kingdom privileges to 
the Gentiles, in that when the due time came for 
Cornelius, the first Gentile convert, to be received, St. 
Peter did the work. By preaching to Cornelius the 
Gospel and baptizing him into Christ he threw open 
the door to the Gentiles, as our Lord foretold in the 
words of this lesson. 

St. Peter's commission that whatever things he should 
bind on earth should be bound in heaven and what things 
he should loose on earth should be loosed in heaven, is the 
same that was given to the other Apostles. (See Matt. 18:18.) 
It does not mean, of course, that the Lord 
has turned matters over to St. Peter and made him 
Lord of heaven and earth, nor that any or all of the 
Apostles were so honored. It simply means this: God 
purposes to use his Apostles and to so hold up their 
hands, in all their affairs, that the whole Church may 
have confidence in them, and may recognize their teachings 
as of God. If they declared that certain of the 
commandments under the Jewish Law were not binding 
upon Christians, we must know that their statements 
were true, and that, similarly, in heaven, the release 
or change is recognized. And if they bound certain 
doctrines and teachings, we must know that those are 
bound and firmly established in heaven. In other words, 
we must recognize the Apostles as God's inerrant 
mouthpieces. 

The time for the proclaiming of Jesus as the Messiah 
did not come until after his death and resurrection. 
Indeed, his Messiahship properly dates from his resurrection. 
He desired his disciples to recognize him properly, 
and he explained to them about his approaching 
death and resurrection, but he did not wish them to 
proclaim this to the world until the due time. St. Peter, 
perhaps elated with the Lord's commendation of his 
previous speech, undertook now the role of teacher to 
the one whom he had just acknowledged as the Messiah. 
In this he erred. It was in sympathy that he 
urged that the Master should not think of any steps 
which would lead to death, but should think rather of 



prosperity and earthly favor, yet our Lord's reproof was 

pointed. He said: You are my adversary, Peter, when 

you thus speak to me. You would thus endeavor to dissuade 

me from doing my Father's will, to hinder me 

from drinking the cup which my Father has poured for 

me; your counsel is that common to the world and not 

of God. 

Similarly, the followers of Jesus sometimes need to 
resist their friends, who thus offer counsel contrary to 
the Divine will and Word and Providence. These should 

R4645 : page 221 

not be encouraged nor their advice followed. They need 
correction from their fellow-disciples, as did St. Peter. 

The words of Peter furnished the Master an opportunity 
for calling the attention of his followers to the 
terms of discipleship. Not only must the Master himself 
suffer, but all of his followers likewise. This course 
was provided for every one, and whoever would flee from 
it would lose the eternal life hoped for. Whoever would 
take up his cross and follow the Master to death would 
thereby make sure of his share in eternal life on the 
heavenly plane. His disciples had already pledged their 
earthly lives, and for them to withhold them for worldly 
advantage, would mean that they would lose their souls, 
their lives. This is not true of the world in general, 
but merely of the Church, called to be of the elect, 
Royal Priesthood. 

He then assured them of his second coming, and that 
he would come in the glory of the Father and with 
his angels (messengers)— not again as a man— as a 
sacrifice. At the time of his second coming he would 
reward every one of his followers according to the faithfulness 
of each. He concluded this reference to the 
coming Kingdom by the assurance that some of them 
would have an ocular demonstration of his coming power 
and glory before they would die. This we will consider 
in our next study. 



page 221 

DELIVERED FROM SATAN'S SNARE 

DEARLY Beloved Brother and Pastor:— I am 
writing to tell you how good our dear Lord 
has been to me in delivering me from the 
Power of Darkness, and restoring me to 
his favor again; and also to ask you to 
forgive me for the trial that my recent 
course must have caused you. But in order 
that you may fully realize the mercy and 
loving kindness of God toward me, I will 
briefly tell you of my experiences of the 



past few months: 

Late last summer I began to doubt the Scripturalness 
of your position on the Covenants and the Sin-Offering. 
From a small beginning, this soon grew until it included 
many other points of doctrine, and, in my conviction 
that you were wrong, I opposed your teaching, though not 
publicly. I still continued to meet with the Class, but felt 
that sooner or later a separation must come; yet I loved 
the friends so much my heart ached as I saw we were 
surely drifting apart. About the time of the Saratoga 
Springs Convention, I had become convinced that God's 
people were being misled by you, and that you were profiting 
by their blindness; that you had become unfaithful 
to your stewardship. Not only would I not go to the 
Convention myself, but was unwilling that my dear wife 
and daughter should go— both of whom are in the Truth 
and have never swerved in their loyalty to it— so I not 
only missed a blessing myself, but deprived them of one. 
But the prayers of the dear friends in my behalf prevailed, 
and my eyes were opened to see that I was 
wrong. I turned about, and peace and joy once more 
filled my heart. 

Then I began to search for the cause of my blindness, 
my unbelief, and I was sure that I found it. 
It was the Vow! What! did I oppose the Vow? No! 
Had I not taken the Vow? Yes; but with limitations. 
You know that at the time the Vow was suggested I was 
doing local Pilgrim work under the appointment of The 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, and I thought 
the Vow was only for the Pilgrims, so I took it "for 
so long as I was in the Pilgrim work." It followed, then, 
that when the local Pilgrim service was discontinued a 
year ago that my Vow expired by limitation, and the protection 
that it had afforded me against the suggestions of 
Evil Spirits was at an end. So for several months the 
barrier had been thrown down, as it were, and I believe 
Satan and his co-adjutors had seized the opportunity 
(Eph. 6:12), with the result that my faith had been 
nearly shipwrecked. Dear Brother, as soon as I saw 
this I renewed the Vow for all time. This happened 
immediately after the Saratoga Springs Convention. 
Some of the dear brethren to whom I had confided all, 
advised me to make a public statement of the facts in our 
testimony meeting, that others might be helped, and also 
write the same to you; but I said, No, only a few of 
the friends know anything of my doubts, and I will not 
tell them. I overlooked the fact that God knew, and that 
my testimony should be to his glory. Had I taken their 
advice, I believe, the remainder of this letter would never 
need be written. But this I failed to do; my stand for 
the Lord was not sufficiently firm. Is it any wonder, then, 
that Satan quickly took advantage of the loophole thus 
left open, and soon my doubts returned? Truly "every 
man's work is being tried so as by fire." 

When the article on "The Wedding Garment" came 
out in THE WATCH TOWER of December 1, 1909, implying 



that full justification was granted only those who 
agree to consecrate— to sacrifice the restitution blessings 
reckoned to them, I took exception to this teaching. You 
recall, dear Brother, our talk over these points on the 
occasion of our ride from Washington to Richmond, and 
how I disagreed with you and charged you with wresting 
the Scriptures. At first I said, "This new view of justification 
is the only thing I take exception to," but soon 
discovered that you had erred (?) on the Covenants; 
next, the Sin-Offering doctrine was an insidious denial 
of the Ransom; next, it was Baptism— that was wrong, 
too; and of course you had worked your blasphemous 
(that is what I called it) doctrine into the Memorial 
service of our Lord's death. Soon those who opposed 
you were all right, and you were wrong. I got to believe 
that you had never been "That Servant, whom the 
Lord made master of all his goods"— that Servant was 
a class; that most of those things you once had right, 
but you had changed. You see the condition my mind 
was in, and yet, I believe I was honest, and was loyal 
to the Lord in opposing what I thought was error. My 
heart was not at ease; the conflict was terrible, and I 
suffered greatly. And while I verily thought I was right 
in my course, I have prayed earnestly every day for 
guidance into the Truth, and into peace. I kept the Vow 
as best I could under such conditions. While I thought 
my faith was on a surer foundation than ever, I now 
know it was nearly gone. 

Within the last few months meetings have been established 
in Washington by those who oppose your teachings; 
and to this meeting I went, while still attending 
the regular services of those in the Truth. However, I 
soon found it impossible to partake of two tables, and 
I chose the table of error, as I now see it to be; then, 
however, I felt sure it was a purified table of the Lord. 
Such was the state of my mind when the One-Day 

page 222 

Convention was held here on March 13th, 1910. This 
was the turning point with me— the day when the Lord 
graciously showed me my true condition— that I was 
growing spiritually blind. On the Wednesday previous 
I had declared that I would never attend another "Russellite" 
meeting, and when I arose on the morning of the 
Convention I was still resolved not to go to the services. 
Then, as I saw my wife and daughter preparing to go 
I thought I would better pray over the matter; and I 
earnestly besought our dear Father for guidance— 
whether to go or to remain away. I arose from my 
knees, now undecided. I then began to arrange some 
papers in my desk, when my eyes fell on a note I had 
made on a statement in THE WATCH TOWER of March, 
1898. It read, "The armor complete in 1898 with the 
New Covenant as one of the pieces." (This is not a 
quotation, but a comment I had made.) I started to 



copy it in a "List of evidences that Brother Russell has 
changed." I see now that the knowledge that God "will 
make a New Covenant with the house of Israel and 
with the house of Judah" is a part of the armor. When 
I looked up the paragraph I happened to glance over the 
article in the same TOWER on the Memorial Service (p. 
101). Now at our "Opposition meeting" our last Bible 
study had been on the Last Supper, and we thought 
we had learned something that Brother Russell had never 
seen, viz., That the Jewish day on which our Lord instituted 
the memorial of his death was the day of preparation 
for the passover, "when the lamb should be slain." 

Judge my surprise when in a short paragraph I found 
that you had fully set forth the same thought some twelve 
years ago, together with a more important thought that 
had escaped our attention, namely, that we do not celebrate 
the passover feast, but the death of the antitypical 
Passover Lamb. I then turned to page 71 and read the 
list of questions and found in questions 5-8 a thought 
recently more clearly stated, that our Lord in dying 
"bequeathed the Restitution blessings purchased by his 
death to the fallen, dying race— as many as shall accept 
the blessings under the conditions of the New Covenant." 
But the fact that we symbolize our acceptance 
and sacrifice of these shows they will not be given directly 
to the world, but through the Church. Now this 
was the very point that I had declared "new" last year, 
when it was more plainly set forth in THE TOWER, 
and over which I had been finding so much fault, and 
getting more and more confused, until I had finally rejected 
nearly all that you had ever presented. But the most 
surprising fact that dawned on me was that for ten years 
I had been using this same article as a basis for the 
Memorial service, and had explained these same points 
each time. The alarming truth dawned on me— I was 
growing spiritually blind! I was not only forgetting the 
precious truths, but I saw that I was losing sight of the 
true import of our Lord's death. This decided me: I 
went to the Convention. I was further convinced that 
what I saw and heard was of the Lord. 

On the advice of two loving Sisters, I asked several 
Brethren to call on me and pray with me and give me 
counsel. I told them that I realized that I was spiritually 
sick from improper food, and was growing blind, so that 
my ability to appreciate the deep things of God's Word 
was slipping away. I told them how our Lord had called 
my attention to this, and now, that I saw what the trouble 
was, and while I could not even then see as they did on 
some of the points of doctrine, it was no longer a matter 
of doctrine, but a desire of getting back fully into God's 
favor; and I had confidence that I would soon get all right 
on the doctrine. After a season of prayer and counsel 
from the brethren, the Lord enabled me to make a firm 
decision as to my future course. Immediately I gathered 
up all of the literature of the Henninges, McPhail, Randall, 
et al., stamp and burned it. You can imagine how 



pleased the brethren were to see me do this, for they 
had been very cautious in advising me, rather leaving the 
Lord to guide me. On the following day I sent a letter 
to the ones with whom I had been meeting, explaining 
why I could not attend those services again. I enclose 
a copy of this letter. On the same night I made a statement 
to the Church confessing my error in my past opposition 
to the Truth, and my resolution and by the Lord's 
help to return to the clean table, where the food neither 
sickens nor blinds, and asked them to forgive me. 

I am glad to add, dear Brother, that the points of 
doctrine which had been a cause of stumbling to me 
have since become clear; the Lord has graciously healed 
my spiritual sight, and my heart is rejoicing in the sunlight 
of his favor. I want to add in behalf of my brethren 
who are still in confusion, that I believe they are honest 
in their convictions, and that there is no bitterness in 
their hearts, and I hope they will yet be recovered from 
the snare of the Adversary. I think when they show a 
disposition to return by attending the regular meetings 
in a proper spirit, they should be met with kindness and 
encouragement. With much Christian love, 

Your brother in Christ, 

CLARENCE E. FOWLER, 
Washington, D.C. 

COPY OF BRO. FOWLER'S LETTER TO THE SECEDERS 

DEAR BROTHERS AND SISTERS--LOVE AND GREETINGS IN 
CHRIST OUR REDEEMER:-Perhaps it will be a surprise to 
you to know that during the last few days I have become 
awakened as to my real spiritual condition. As I reread 
some of the views I once appreciated and rejoiced in, 
I was surprised to find that to some extent their deep 
significance seemed obscure. I also found that some of 
the things that we had labored so hard to search out, 
and thought as new, had been presented some twelve 
years ago; and I saw that I was fast becoming spiritually 
blind, and that Satan was leading me around in a circle, 
as it were. Then, at the Convention meetings last Sunday, 
the fervor, the zeal, and the love manifested by 
the brethren touched my heart, already broken. Again, 
Brother Russell's talk on "Choose you this day whom ye 
will serve," caused me to seriously ask myself, Have I 
chosen aright? Does the Lord approve my course? 
Surely this that I both see and hear is Truth, and of 
the Lord, and yet I have arrayed myself in opposition 
to it. And then I prayed our Lord (as I had been 
praying for months), to open my eyes, and I believe 
he answered my prayer. I became convinced that the 
trouble was with myself, and not with the Truth as 
Brother Russell had presented it; I had not been looking 
at it from the proper angle of vision. I have since 
prayed over the matter, and some of the points have 
become clear to me, and I have confidence that in the 
Lord's due time it will all be plain again. So I have 



resolved, by the Lord's grace, to retrace my steps ere 
it is too late— to return to my "first love"— the Table 
where we all received the Truth. 

There is no question, dear brethren, that of us who 
believe we are in the Harvest of the Gospel Age— in the 
second presence of the Lord— events of tremendous importance 
are occurring which are rapidly approaching a 
climax. Church Federation and events outside sink into 
insignificance in comparison with developments within the 
Church: "Every man's work is being tried as by fire"; 
the question is, "Who shall stand?" 

page 223 

In view of my recent positive stand in opposition to 
the teachings of THE WATCH TOWER, no doubt my present 
attitude will seem inconsistent, but, dear Brethren, we 
must each answer to his own Master, and I know your 
love for me will prompt you to wish me God's blessing, 
even though to some extent our views of doctrine 
diverge. On the other hand, dear Brethren, I wish to 
assure you that my recent experiences and associations 
with you enable me to more deeply sympathize with you, 
and love you all. And even though you cannot admire 
my vacillation, believe me to be sincere. 

As long as we stand together on "Christ, the solid 
Rock," I shall esteem you as brethren, and will daily 
pray that the mists of confusion which now threaten 
to separate us will speedily be cleared away, and then we 
will once more see "eye to eye." Meanwhile, dear 
Brethren, I trust you will see it to be the Lord's will to 
meet with us again, and can assure you a hearty welcome 
in seeking with us to know and serve the Lord. God 
bless you! With love, as ever, 

Your brother and servant in the Redeemer, 

CLARENCE E. FOWLER. 



page 223 

BEREAN STUDIES ON CREATION 

The Text-Book Used for this Course of 
Scripture-Studies is Series VI— Study I 

AUGUST 7 

(1) Is there any Scriptural foundation for the claim of 
some that original sin consisted in sexual intercourse on the 
part of our first parents? Give a full Scriptural analysis to 
this question. P. 41, par. 1,2. 

(2) How should we regard the suggestions of some that 

the Scriptures mislead us into thinking of Adam as the first "of 
the earth, earthy"? What answer shall we give to those who 
urge a pre- Adamite race of man and who claim to find proofs 



of their hypothesis in various strata of the earth's surface, 
some of which they attribute to a period long before Adam's 
creation? Give Scriptural proof texts in contradiction to this 
theory and show their consistency with scientific facts. P. 42. 

(3) State the views of Profs. Stokes, Bennett, Beale, 
Virchow and Barraude respecting the answer of geologists 
to the theory that man was developed from the lower orders 
of animals. P. 43, par. 1. 

(4) Read to the class an extract from "The Meeting 

Place of Geology and History," by Sir J. W. Dawson, LL.D., 
F.R.S. 

(5) Prof. Pasteur is recognized as having been a great 
bacteriologist. Did he favor the Darwinian theory or not? 
Quote something from him pertinent to the subject. P. 44, 
par. 1,2. 

(6) Quote the views of the Russian savant, Prof. Virchow, 
respecting the Darwinian theory of man's evolution 

from lower animal species. P. 44, par. 3. 

AUGUST 14 

(7) Should we consider the unscriptural theories of Prof. 
Darwin and those who follow his suggestions as wise and 
logical, or otherwise? What proofs can be adduced to prove 
that humanity four thousand years ago no more had tails 
than we have— nor different toes and thumbs? P. 45, par. 2. 

(8) What should be the attitude of the Lord's people in 
respect to these evolutionist propositions of our day which 

are discrediting the Bible in the eyes of the learned? P. 45, par. 3. 

(9) In view of what we have already seen respecting 
these creative epochs styled in the Scriptures "days," what 
can we say of the Sixth Day, which we are now considering? 
When was its beginning and when its close? What 

would be the date of its close, counting from the beginning 
of the ordering of creation— the putting in order of 
the earth, the time of whose creation is not stated but 
whose setting in order is being accomplished during the seven 
great epoch days? Summarize the matter. P. 45, par. 4. 

(10) We come now to the examination of the great Seventh 
Day of the creative period. Does it have an evening 

and a morning? 

(11) What should we expect of this Seventh Epoch Day 

as viewed in the light of our findings respecting the six previous 
epoch days and what is signified by the statement that 
Jehovah God rested from his creative work during this Seventh 
Epoch Day? P. 46, par. 2,3. 

(12) What has our Lord Jesus to do with this Seventh 
Epoch Day and the Father's cessation from creative work? 
Why did the Father rest? Will the Son undertake the completion 
of the Father's work? If so, why was it thus left 

to him? Make the entire matter clear. Let all of the class 
express themselves on this important question and have 
clearly in mind the matter of its great importance in God's 
Plan and therefore in the understanding of it. Pp. 47, 48. 

AUGUST 21 



(13) Did this resting on the part of the Great Creator 
from further creative work and from actively rescuing his 
creatures from sin and its penalty imply a lack of love on his 
part? Or how shall we understand it? P. 49, par. 1. 

(14) What can we know respecting the period in which 
the Creator rests from his creative work? In other words, 
according to the Scriptures, how long will this Seventh Epoch 
Day last and how do we reach information on the subject? 

P. 49, par. 2. 

(15) May we be sure that our Creator's expectations 
respecting the ultimate outcome of his purposes regarding 
the earth will be realized? Can we be sure that the Redeemer 
will accomplish all that the Father intended? P. 49, par. 2. 

(16) Quote some Scriptures showing the ultimate victory 
of Messiah and the accomplishment of the Divine purpose. 
P. 49, par. 2; P. 50, par. 1. 

(17) What grounds have we for assuming that the whole 
period in which God has been ordering the earth and developing 
it from the inert, void mass at the beginning down to the 
Paradisiacal condition at the close of the Seventh Day will 

be in all a period of 49,000 years— seven great days of 7,000 
years each? P. 50, par. 2. 

(18) Give a brief outline of this creative epoch from the 
Scriptural standpoint. Quote Scriptures applicable to the 
earliest beginning of the creative power, and other Scriptures 
showing the glorious consummation at the end of these seven 
great days. P. 51, par. 1; P. 52, par. 1,2,3. 

AUGUST 28 

(19) Does the first chapter of Genesis conflict with scientific 
discoveries, or merely with the theories of some scientific 
gentlemen? Quote the views of Prof. G. F. Wright, 

D.D., LL.D., on this subject and discuss these. P. 52, par. 5,6. 

(20) Is the Genesis account compatible with scientific 
facts? Do not these facts corroborate the Genesis records 
rather than conflict with the Divine record? What does 
Prof. Wright say for himself on this subject and what does 
he give as the opinion of the great geologist, Prof. J. D. 
Dana of Yale College? P. 52, par. 6. 

(21) We have seen that the Genesis record does not 
attempt to explain the creation of the earth as respects its 
matter— that the Genesis account merely relates that there 
was such a beginning and that the matter was created by God, 
but tells nothing whatever of the time of its creation, nor 
concerning how long a period elapsed before the ordering 
work of the seven epoch days began. Does this view 
appeal to others? Read to the class a quotation on the subject. 
P. 53, par. 1. 

(22) The Genesis record shows a progressiveness in the 
matter of bringing forth of vegetable and animal life; in part, 
perhaps, an evolutionary process. Our contention is merely 
as respects man's creation— that it was a distinctly separate 
work and in no sense an evolutionary process. What is the 
main point and argument of Prof. Darwin and his evolutionary 



followers? Read to the class what Prof. Wright has 
to say on this subject. P. 53, par. 2; P. 54; P. 55, par. 1. 

(23) Let another read Prof. Wright's suggestions as 
respects the difference between human reason and animal 
instinct. P. 55, par. 4. 

(24) Let another read to the class Prof. Wright's comment 
on man's capacity for religion in contrast with the 
incapacity of the brute. P. 55, par. 5; P. 56, par. 1,2. 

(25) Who discovered the principle of "natural selection"? 
What does Prof. Wright remark respecting his findings 
and respecting the disposition of humanity to wear 

clothing and use tools and respecting his musical capacity, etc. 
etc.? P. 56, par. 3, to P. 58. 



page 225 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI JULY 15 No. 14 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Foreign Tour Report 227 

Sacrificers Alone Attain Divine Nature 227 

All First-Borns are Antitypical Levites 229 

Harvest Work by Printing Machinery 231 

"Home, Sweet Home" 231 

Mt. Tabor's Parabolic Vision 232 

Forgiving and Being Forgiven 233 

The Memorial— How Many Celebrated 234 

The Sins Borne by the Scape-Goat 235 

The Crying of Justice for Vengeance 235 

The Kind of Atonement the Great Company 

Will Make 235 

From the Edgar Family 236 

The Glory of the Church to Be Perpetual 237 

Attending Nominal Church Services 237 

International Bible Students Association 

Convention 238 

Special Train from New York City 238 

Chicago Special Train with Sleepers 238 

Railroad Rates to Chautauqua Lake 239 

page 226 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 



N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CONVENTIONS 



MINNEAPOLIS, MINN., JULY 15-17 

CONVENTION HALL, AUDITORIUM ANNEX. 

Discourse for the Public by Brother Russell, Sunday, July 
17, 3:00 P.M., at the Auditorium, corner 1 1th street and 
Nicollet avenue. Topic: "Hereafter." 

WILKES-BARRE, PA., JULY 24 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10 
o'clock, Caledonian Hall, 9 S. Franklin street. Service for 
the Public at 3 P.M. in the Irem Temple, N. Franklin street. 
Topic: "The Thief in Paradise; The Rich Man in Hell; 
Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." 

SCRANTON, PA., JULY 24 

Discourse for the Public by Brother Russell, Lyceum 
Theater, at 8 P.M. Topic: "Hereafter." 

LYNN, MASS., AUGUST 14 



UTICA, N.Y., AUGUST 21 
FALL RIVER, MASS., AUGUST 28 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., SEPTEMBER 4 



THE "NEW YORK AMERICAN" 

Amongst the most prominent of the world's newspapers is 
the New York American. It published the weekly sermon 
on June 20 with the announcement that it would hereafter 
be a regular Monday feature. 

We hope to turn in soon to the American quite a large 
list of subscribers for its Monday issue— especially from the 
Eastern States. To this end we offer it with THE WATCH 
TOWER for one year for $1.50, or for six months for 75 cents. 
If already a WATCH TOWER subscriber you may send us the 
additional 50 cents or 25 cents. 

Do not forget to encourage the papers publishing the sermons, 
and should any discontinue their publication, promptly 
send a card of regrets and express hope that their publication 
may soon be resumed. Also advise us of such 
discontinuances. 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 

When using the above title, print it as we have it, without 
the apostrophe, and do not add "of Brooklyn." The Association 
is international and your branch of it is of your own city. 
We advise that this simple and appropriate and unsectarian 
name be not added to in any manner. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS 

The number of papers publishing the sermons is continually 
increasing, yet for lack of encouragement some are dropping 
them. Your Tract Fund contributions cannot be better used 
than in sending several of the sermon-papers to your friends 
and in writing encouraging letters frequently to the editors. 
If the sermon stops only once write to the editor of your 
disappointment. 

JEWISH HOPES AND PROSPECTS 

This little pamphlet, especially for the Jews, sells at 10c. 
per copy, including postage— three copies 25c, fifteen copies $1. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR AUGUST 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 



in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered: (1) 267; (2) 46; (3) 14; (4) 191; (5) 
167; (6) 88; (7) 176; (8) 112; (9) 145; (10) 179; 
(11) Vow; (12) 95; (13) 259; (14) 119; (15) 280; 
(16) 7; (17) 121; (18) 105; (19) 23; (20) 128; (21) 
264; (22) 194; (23) 313; (24) 229; (25) 209; (26) 
130; (27) 107; (28) 4; (29) 222; (30) 230; (31) 50. 



For other notices see foot of page 236. 

R4645 : page 227 

FOREIGN TOUR REPORT 

SECTION IV. 

AT THE Edinburgh railway station we were 

met by a delegation of friends; indeed some 

came to Dundee to meet us. We had a very 

enjoyable season. Brother John Edgar, 

M.D., addressed the Edinburgh friends in 

the forenoon on the "Ransom and Sin-Off ering." 

We were not privileged to hear 

the address, but through others learned 

that it was both interesting and instructive. 

In the afternoon we addressed the interested, 

about 140, and endeavored to point out how the 

Church enters into covenant relationship with God, not 

through the work of a mediator, but by "sacrifice." We 

pointed out that the world through the Millennium will 

have the great Mediator appointed of the Father, and 

R4646 : page 227 

promised through the Scriptures, and that the mediation 
will be based upon the New Covenant with Israel. We 
showed that the antitypical Mediator is the Christ, Head 
and Body, and that of this great One, Moses was the 
type. As Moses mediated the typical Law Covenant, so 
the antitypical Moses, The Christ, will put into operation 
the New Covenant with Israel. The Mediator will 
stand between God and the world, and will for a thousand 
years shield the people from the requirements of 
absolute justice; that through him Divine mercy may 
extend through Israel to all, for their blessing and uplifting 
to perfection. 

We showed how this same blessing will extend to all 
people, nations, tongues and kindreds, in that they will 
be permitted to come into and become members of Israel, 
and thus become members of the earthly seed of Abraham, 
and sharers of all the blessings of Israel's New 
Covenant. We showed that thus, in the end of the 



Millennial Age, all the perfect race will be "the seed of 
Abraham." We pointed out that when Satan will be 
loosed out of his prison-house, to test all of them, it will 
be Abraham's seed of all nations that will be tested as 
to worthiness or unworthiness of eternal life, and that 
the whole number of these is to be "as the sands of the 
sea-shore for multitude." We reminded our hearers that 
thus it was written of Abraham, "Thy seed shall be as 
the sands of the sea-shore for multitude." Thus eventually 
all the families of the earth shall be blessed through 
Abraham; as it is written, "I have constituted thee father 
of many nations."— Romans 4:17. 

"AS THE STARS OF HEAVEN" 

Then we looked at the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, 
likened unto the stars of heaven. We perceived that 
Jesus was the first, the Captain, the Forerunner of these. 
We saw that he became the Spiritual Seed of Abraham 
by the sacrifice of himself, as the man Jesus. We heard 
the Apostle urging all of us desiring to be his joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom, saying, "I beseech you therefore, brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies 
a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God." (Rom. 12:1.) 
We noted the fact that only by sacrifice could 
any come into this spirit-begotten relationship with God 
as "new creatures in Christ Jesus." We turned to the 
Scriptures which foretold the gathering of the elect 
Church in these words, "Gather together my saints unto 
me, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice"; 
"They shall be mine, saith the Lord, when I make 
up my jewels." Here we saw the Church class, the 
jewel class, those being gathered now. 

We noted next the harmony between the Apostle's 
exhortation, that we present our bodies a living sacrifice 
holy and acceptable to God, and the statement of the 
Prophet that all of these enter into covenant relationship 
with God through sacrifice. We noted the fact that none 
except sacrificers can come into this covenant relationship 
with God now; "Now is the acceptable time" when 
such sacrifices will be received by the Lord through, and 
under, and by the imputation of the grace of our great 
Advocate. The world is not accepted in this manner, 
but reversely: Instead of being invited to sacrifice their 
earthly natures, they will be given the privilege of restitution 
to perfection. (Acts 3:19-21.) The privilege of 
sacrifice, therefore, is unique to this age. The Church 
of the First-borns present their bodies living sacrifices, 
accepting the services of the great Advocate, whom God 
has appointed for this very service, and who gladly 
accepts the sacrifices as members of his Body, his Bride, 
his Church, the "First-borns, whose names are written 
in heaven." 

SACRIFICERS ALONE ATTAIN DIVINE NATURE 



This acceptance of the sacrifice of the Church is the 
basis of our acceptance as new creatures, spiritual, and 
these with the Lord constitute spiritual Israel, the spiritual 
or heavenly Seed of Abraham. We noted the fact 
that this Spiritual Seed in no sense took the place of the 

R4646 : page 228 

natural seed of Abraham. Indeed, neither Abraham, nor 
any for four thousand years knew anything about the 
Divine plan in respect to a Spiritual Seed. All the promises 
made to them were earthly. Hence, as the Apostle 
says, the Gospel invitation to become the Spiritual Seed 
by faith was entirely a new proposition— "The Mystery 
hidden from past ages and dispensations, but now 
revealed unto the saints." We saw that the entire matter 
of the Gospel Age and its call might be viewed as an 
interruption in the Divine plan and purpose for Israel 
and the world. This Gospel Age, therefore, is to be seen 
as a parenthesis. As soon as it shall be finished, God's 
dealings with natural Israel will again be resumed, only 
on a higher and loftier plane, through the antitypical 
Mediator, The Christ, as taking the place of the typical 
Mediator, Moses. We reminded the friends that thus it 
is written by the Apostle in Romans 1 1:25-32; 
Acts 3:22,23. 

Israel noted its failure to attain eternal life under 
the Law Covenant. God acknowledged the failure, and 
encouraged them to look forward to the time when Messiah 
would take the place of Moses and institute for them 
an antitypical New Covenant. This New Covenant 
was foretold (Jeremiah 31:31), saying: "After those 
days, saith the Lord, I will make a New Covenant with 
the house of Israel and with the house of Judah." Moses 
prophetically foretold the great Mediator and the better 
work he would accomplish for the people, renewing or 
making new their Covenant. St. Peter calls attention 
to his words, saying, "Moses verily said unto the fathers, 
a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you 
from amongst your brethren like unto me." I am the 
type on a small scale; I am the mediator of this Law 
Covenant, but ineffective. When the antitype shall 
come, the covenant shall be put upon a higher footing by 
means of his better sacrifice, and that will make of it 
really the New Law Covenant. 

Hence the Israelites began to look forward to the 
Messiah who would thus transmute their Law Covenant, 
which they found to be unto death, into a New Law 
Covenant, which would mean to them eternal life and 
all the blessings they had been led to hope for. Eagerly, 
therefore, they watched for the Messiah, but they knew 
not that when he would come he would be a Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham, composed of many members. This 
was the Mystery not permitted to be known to them, or 
to others— and even yet, made known only to the saints. 
They knew not that the development of this antitypical 



Moses would require nearly nineteen centuries for its 
accomplishment. How could they? The mystery was 
not revealed. Nevertheless this was the Lord's message 
to them through the last of their prophets, "Behold I 
send my Messenger,. ..the Messenger of the Covenant, 
whom ye delight in. [You have been hoping for him 
this long time. He it is, who as the Servant of the Law 
Covenant, will make it really effective to you in a manner 
that Moses could not do.] But who may abide the 
day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appears? 
For he is like fuller's soap, and like a refiner's fire. He 
shall sit as a refiner to purify the sons of Levi, that they 
may offer unto the Lord an acceptable sacrifice."— 
Malachi3:3. 

PURIFYING ANTFTYPICAL LEVITES 

We pointed out that our Lord came in accordance 
with this prophecy; that he was present with the Jews as 
the Reaper, and with the winnowing-fan he separated the 
chaff from the wheat. As the Refiner he has throughout 
this entire Gospel Age been seeing to it that those who 
came unto the Father, through him, should pass through 
fiery trials and experiences, which would fully test their 
loyalty and their fitness to be associated with him in the 
great Kingdom of Glory as members of his Body, as 
members of his Bride, as members of the great antitypical 
Prophet, Priest, Mediator, King. 

We traced the matter in St. Paul's words in Romans 1 1:27, 
where he assures us that as soon as the Church, 
the Body of Christ, is completed, God's Covenant with 
Israel, the New Covenant, will be instituted. Then their 
sins will be forgiven, their iniquities pardoned, and they 
as God's people will be received back into Divine fellowship, 
through the great Mediator. We pointed out the 
Apostle's words— "They shall obtain mercy through your 
mercy"; that it is God's mercy; that it comes primarily 
through the Lord Jesus. Yet it is "your mercy," the 
Church's mercy— the mercy of God and Christ through 
you to natural Israel and through natural Israel for the 
blessing of whosoever wills of all the families of the 
earth. Oh, the lengths and breadths, and the heights and 
depths of the love of God; how unsearchable are his 
riches, and his secrets past finding out! And yet his 
secrets, his plans are all glorious, generous, loving and 
just. Well may we rejoice, not only in the share which 
the Church will have in the glorious plan of God, but also 
rejoice in the share which Israel restored to Divine favor 
will have, and in the blessings which then will flow to 
all the families of the earth. 

The evening session for the public was in "Queen's 
Rooms." Again the weather was unfavorable, but notwithstanding 
there was a good attendance of about 600. 
We had excellent attention; our topic was, "Where are 
the Dead?" 

On account of the King's funeral, the running of 



trains was disturbed and thus our purposed visit to Middlesborough 

was interfered with. We regretted the disappointment, 

yet could readily see in it the Divine 

providence, for the day was quite needful to us in London 

to get caught up with some of our literary work for the 

press. 

PREACHING FROM WHITEFIELD'S PULPIT 

On Sunday morning, May 22, we again occupied the 
old pulpit of George Whitefield at the "Whitefield Tabernacle," 

R4647 : page 228 

London. About 700 of the friends were present. 

These included London friends and some who had come 

considerable distances. Our text was found in Colossians 2:6-8. 

We exhorted the friends to faithfulness, and 

reminded them that the great test of our Lord Jesus 

was his loyalty to the Father— to the Father's will— to the 

Father's way— to the Father's time— to all of the Father's 

arrangements. We reminded them that Jesus showed 

his own loyalty in that he ignored his own preference 

that in everything he might know and do the will of the 

Father who sent him. We pointed out that we needed to 

be rooted, grounded and built up in our Lord and Master 

in all these respects. We showed that the various tests 

permitted to come upon the Church of God from time 

to time, from first to last, will be tests of these various 

qualities of heart and mind— tests of heart loyalty. 

Obedience to the Lord in thought as well as in word and 

in deed means overcoming selfish propensities or tendencies, 

which are ours in common with the whole world 

of mankind in its fallen condition. We pointed out that 

this involves a battle, a strife, and the battle is not 

against the Father, nor against the Brethren, nor against 

the Truth, nor against the Lord, nor against the World, 

nor against the Devil. The fight is against the old nature 

with its perverted tastes, appetites and will. As new 

creatures we are to fight the good fight of faith against 

R4647 : page 229 

our natural tendencies, and to keep ourselves in the love 
of God, fully submissive to his will. 

In the evening the third and last of the London public 
meetings was held in the Royal Albert Hall. In respect 
to the audience, judged by its appearance, there was 
a steady improvement in the three Sundays— good, better, 
best. The numbers, however, were in the reverse ratio, 
7,500, 6,000 and 5,000. Considering the excitement in 
the city incidental to the King's death and funeral 
obsequies, and the public agitation connected therewith, 
we think the results were remarkable. 

Liberal extracts from the sermons were published in 
several of the large journals, and reached probably a 



million people. Responses to the "Peoples Pulpits" given 
our amounted to about a thousand, while the responses 
from the readers of the newspapers amounted to over 
four thousand, before we left for home, with heavy mails 
still coming in. Altogether we considered that the Lord 
greatly blessed the ministry of his Truth in connection 
with the London and associated meetings. We cannot, 
of course, hope for many more thousands to be reached 
with "Present Truth," but we were quite content to 
colabor with our British friends to the extent of our 
ability, and to leave the results with the Chief Reaper. 
We doubt not he will bless his message of Grace and 
Truth to all who are in condition of heart-readiness 
for it. 

On Monday, May 23, we visited Luton, and had a 
very enjoyable afternoon with the friends of the Truth 
there to the number of about 50, discussing with them the 
terms of the high calling, the value of it, the conditions 
upon which we are accepted of God in Christ, as members 
of his Body, and granted covenant relationship as 
"new creatures in Christ." We pointed out that this 
condition must be maintained by patient perseverance in 
well doing and watching unto prayer; and that failure 
to develop the fruits and graces of the Spirit, and to 
become "copies of God's dear Son," would mean the 
loss of everything. Thus God's message of grace once 
accepted must be considered either a message "of life 
unto life or of death unto death." In the evening we 
had a public service which was well attended by a very 
intelligent class of people to the number of about 650. 
Our topic was, "Man's Past, Present and Future in the 
Light of the Bible." We discussed it after the usual 
manner. Many gave close attention and evidenced considerable 
interest. May the Lord bless the interests of 
his cause there! 

OUR FAREWELL AT LONDON 

We spent Tuesday, the 24th, in further search for 
suitable quarters for the London Church and the Society's 
Offices, with apparent success, but nothing definite. 

As per appointment we met with the London Church 
in the afternoon. At our invitation the congregation took 
Tea with us, as our guests, dividing the number among 
various Tea-Rooms in the vicinity. Subsequently we 
regathered at the Whitefield Tabernacle. There we gave 
the friends a family talk, telling them of our appreciation 
of their efforts in connection with the meetings 
recently concluded; telling them also what we knew of 
the results, and expressing our hopes for the future— 
that some others might be found, and that at all events 
the activities of the Church had surely drawn all of its 
members still more closely together in love and unity of 
the spirit and in the bonds of peace. 

After an address of about an hour, as we were closing 
the session, one of the Elders of the congregation 



remarked that while all of them recognized Brother Russell 

as a Pastor, and indeed voted for him every year, 

when they subscribed for THE WATCH TOWER, nevertheless 

he thought it would be both wise and proper to nominate 

him and elect him in a formal manner as Pastor 

of the London Assembly. The matter was seconded, 

and when the vote was put, by Brother Hemery, it was 

unanimously carried. We thanked the congregation for 

this another evidence of their love and confidence, and 

assured them that we always had their interests close to 

our heart, and doubted if we could do more for them as 

Pastor than we had already previously done, but that 

in any event they might be sure that they would continue 

to have our love and prayers and best endeavors. 

We knew not whether the Lord would now permit us to 

see them twice a year or not, but would leave that to his 

Providential guidance of the interests of his work. At 

our request the Elders and Deacons met with us at the 

Society's Offices from ten to eleven p.m., during which 

time we came more closely into touch with the various 

meetings of the London Church, and their leaders. Our 

session closed with prayer for the Lord's blessing upon 

his work everywhere, and particularly in the metropolis 

of Great Britain. 

LIVERPOOL-BELFAST-DUBLIN 

Although the Truth had been established in Liverpool 
for some years, it never seemed to properly flourish until 
quite recently. The cause of this was apparently an 
attempt to run the meetings on the lines of "mission 
work," rather than as Bible Study Classes. Considerable 
progress has been made within the past two years, until 
now the class averages about sixty, well informed, consecrated, 
and, so far as we could judge, "Sound in the 
faith." At the afternoon session about 1 10 were present, 
and we had the closest attention while we endeavored to 
set forth some features of "the Mystery, hidden from 
past ages and dispensations"— Christ in you [the Church] 
the hope of glory, and you, the Church, in Christ, as 
members, heirs of glory. 

We endeavored to make clear the fact that the entire 
Church of the First-borns includes the "Little Flock," 
the "Royal Priesthood," and also the "Great Company," 
who will be their companions on the spirit plane in the 
Kingdom work. All of these, we showed, belonged to 
"the Church of the First-borns," and were typified in 
Israel's first-borns who were passed over, or spared "in 
that night," when the first-borns of the Egyptians were 
slain. We showed that the night preceding the day of 
their deliverance from Egypt typified this Gospel Age, 
which precedes the Millennial Day of deliverance. All 
people of God will be fully delivered from the power of 
Sin and Death, and from the power of Satan, and from 
all of his malevolent hosts in the coming Millennial Day. 
But now, in advance, the first-borns are passed over and 



spared. The antitype of those first-borns of Israel, or 
the Church of the First-borns, have all been begotten 
of the holy Spirit to spirit nature and sonship during 
this Gospel Age. 

ALL FIRST-BORNS ARE ANTITYPICAL LEVITES 

As God caused the first-borns of Israel to be exchanged 
for the one tribe of Levi, so thereafter all Levites represented 
"the household of faith"— the spirit begotten 
ones of this age. We showed that these in the antitype 
divided into two classes— a "Little Flock" of priests, 
the "Royal Priesthood" under Jesus, and a "Great Company," 
who will eventually come up out of great tribulation, 
washing their robes and making them white in the 

R4647 : page 230 

blood of the Lamb. The latter will be the associates of 
the Church in the Heavenly Kingdom, though without 
the crown and seat of honor in the throne. They will 
be "before the throne" and have palm branches of victory. 
We saw these also in Psalm 45, where the Bride of 
Christ is pictured as being brought in before the King 
in raiment of fine needle-work and gold, and then following 
her into his presence "the virgins her companions." 
We saw the same class pictured in Revelations 19. At 
the fall of Babylon they will be fully set free from the 
timidity which has restrained them, and be glad to acclaim 
the Bride, and to say, "Let us be glad and rejoice, and 
give glory to God, because the marriage of the Lamb has 
come and his Bride hath made herself ready." More 
than this, they will hear eventually an invitation that 
they may participate in the glorious celebration or 
Nuptial Feast or "Marriage Supper." Again we saw 
these represented in Rebecca and her damsels, or maids, 
who accompanied her, when she went to become the 
bride of Isaac. 

We noted that those received of God during this 
Gospel Age are "all called in the one hope of their 
calling," all drawn in one manner; the terms for each and 
all are the same, namely, "If any man will be my disciple, 
let him deny himself, take up his cross and follow me." 
Let him present his body a living sacrifice, holy and 
acceptable to God. Thus all now called and received of 
the Lord enter into covenant relationship with the Father 
by sacrifice, to follow the example of the dear Redeemer. 

R4648 : page 230 

To each and every one of these covenanters by sacrifice 
Jesus as their Advocate first of all appropriated a 
sufficiency of his merit to cover their blemishes. 

The difference between those who will constitute the 
great mass of the household of faith and the "Little 
Flock" of the "Royal Priesthood" will be that the latter 



will manifest more zeal, more of the spirit of the Head 
in their faithfulness to lay down their lives in the service 
of the Lord, the Truth and the brethren. All must 
prove loyal in the end, else they will not be in either 
class, but die the Second Death. We are not to esteem 
the "Great Company" ignoble and traitorous toward 
the Lord and his cause, for none such will be acceptable 
for eternal life on any plane. They have the 
same love for truth and righteousness and for the brethren 
as the "Little Flock," the "Royal Priesthood" have, 
but in less degree; they show less zeal. Hence "through 
fear of death they are all their lifetime subject to bondage"; 
for fear of the cost, they hold back their sacrifice 
until too late. Finally the test will come to determine 
whether or not they will repudiate the Lord, the Truth, 
and the Brethren. Such as will be unwilling to repudiate 
their earthly rights will be unworthy of further covenant 
sonship under any condition. But such as will, when put 
to the test, prove loyal, will be counted as companions, 
servants of the Bride, and be her associates in the work 
of the Kingdom. 

NOT JUSTIFIED BY THE PHILOSOPHY 

We urged the friends, however, to remember that 
many of us were justified and in fellowship with 
God, and had presented our bodies living sacrifices, had 
received an imputation of Christ's merit, and our sacrifices 
had been accepted of the Father and the holy Spirit 
of adoption had been imparted, before we understood 
much of anything concerning the philosophy of the 
Atonement or the significance of the Ransom, or anything 
about its application. Not only was this true of us, but 
it has been true of all Christians during this Gospel Age 
for centuries. We exhorted, therefore, that none consider 
the mere knowledge of the Ransom and the philosophy 
of the Atonement as the all-important matter. 
Rather we should recognize that our trust in Christ, and 
our consecration to do the Father's will and our faithfulness 
in so doing, even unto death, constitute the terms 
of our acceptableness and the basis of our hope of joint-heirship 
with our Lord in his Kingdom. 

We are now granted special light from the Word of 
God on the Philosophy of the Atonement, as an offset to 
the vain philosophies of human tradition, which are 
springing up around us— Theosophy, Christian Science, 
Evolution, etc. Were it not for this God-given Light in 
the harvest time, many of us might have fallen away 
from the Lord and his gracious arrangements entirely. 
Our knowledge of the Ransom is to be esteemed a special 
and very great blessing of the Lord to his people during 
this harvest time. But, while we are to esteem the knowledge 
of the Ransom a special mark of Divine favor and 
guidance and blessing in connection with the Truth, we 
should not think of making that knowledge a test of 
brotherhood or fellowship. For aught we know, some of 



the Lord's people today may be as fully in God's fellowship, 

as fully in covenant relationship with him, without 

an appreciation of this philosophy, as were some of our 

forefathers. 

Likewise, let us beware of how the Adversary might 
seek to ensnare us and to mislead us in the study in 
respect to the Great Company. If he could get us sufficiently 
interested in this, or in any similar question, so 
as to make of it a point of dispute in the Church and to 
cause a division amongst the brethren and the stumbling 
of some, we may be sure that it would be pleasing to our 
Adversary in proportion as it would be injurious to God's 
people. If, therefore, some say to us that they cannot 
see the "Great Company" as we do— that it is a spirit 
class, spirit-begotten, etc.— we answer, "Very well, you 
cannot be blamed for what you do not see! If later the 
Lord shall grant you a still further opening of your eyes 
of understanding that will be a cause for still further 
rejoicing, but now rejoice in what you can see." 

In any case, let us remember that no one was "called" 
to be of the "Great Company" Class. Let us remember 
that we were called in the one hope of our calling, namely, 
to the Bride class. Let us seek to make our calling 
and election sure. Let us know assuredly that we shall 
never advance our interests as new creatures by contentions 
and divisions amongst the Body-members of Christ, 
the "little flock," the self-sacrificing priests. Doubtless 
there are many points similar to this which the Adversary 
has endeavored to make stones of stumbling and 
rocks of offence for the separating of the Lord's people. 
"We are not ignorant of his devices," and to be forewarned 
is to be forearmed against them. It is ours to 
preserve the unity of the spirit in the bonds of peace. 

Let us be thankful for whatever things God in his 
providence has revealed to us; and "let us all mind the 
same things," as the Apostle urges, and be knit together 
in love and make increase of the Body. Those whom the 
Adversary is turning aside from the harvest work to 
dispute over who found the jewels of truth and who 
showed them most to others are not wise, neither can 
they be happy. The harvest work is great, the laborers 
are few, the Master has consented that we may serve! 
What a privilege is ours! How we should rejoice in the 
opportunity afforded us for manifesting to our Lord and 
to our Redeemer our love and our zeal for Him, for the 
Truth, for the Brethren who are in the light of the 
Truth, and for still others who are yet in Babylon and 
darkness! 

R4648 : page 231 

HARVEST WORK BY PRINTING MACHINERY 

We called attention to the fact that the harvest work 
for a time was confined almost exclusively to the Brethren, 
but that latterly the Lord is opening up other channels. 



For instance, he is using the newspapers in all 
parts of the world, as his agencies for carrying the message 
of glad tidings to all who are still in darkness, but 
who are really at heart, and through consecration, his 
people. To us this indicates that the supply of consecrated 
harvesters is not sufficiently large, or that the 
Lord's people, blessed with a knowledge of "Present 
Truth," are not as zealous as they should be. For one 
of these reasons, doubtless, God is using unconsecrated 
talents and channels, rather than allow the harvest time 
to go by— rather than allow any of the brethren to be 
without the necessary light and assistance. We urged 
more love, more zeal, more of the spirit of self-sacrifice 
and devotion to the Lord, and to our precious privileges 
as co -laborers with him. 

The evening service at Liverpool was extremely well 
attended for a week-night meeting, the number being estimated 
at 1,600. Had the large hall been more centrally 
located doubtless many more would have been present. 
The attention was excellent, the faces earnest and intelligent. 
Our topic was "Man's Past, Present and 
Future." The results are with the Lord. The literature 
at the door was taken with great avidity. 

The dear friends to the number of about sixty sang 
to us from the pier, and waved to us goodbye, as we journeyed 
by the night boat to Belfast, Ireland. Our recollections 
of our visit are very precious and stimulating. 

At Belfast about a dozen awaited our arrival. We 
were most hospitably entertained and enjoyed the meetings 
there. In the afternoon we met with the little class 
of about twenty, and spoke to them along the same lines 
as at our other stops, showing the difference between 
God's dealings with the Church during this age, introduced 
into covenant relationship to the Father by the 
great Advocate, and his dealings with Israel and the world 
during the thousand years of the great Mediatorial Kingdom 
and his ultimate acceptance of all the perfected and 
worthy of humanity to be his sons in full covenant relationship 
for eternity. 

In the evening we addressed about 400 very intelligent-appearing 
people of reverent and Christian demeanor, 
the majority of whom were men. Our topic 
was "The Thief in Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell; 
Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." We had a most earnest 
and attentive hearing, and, knowing that an opportunity 
for questions would surely be desired, we opened the 
way. Fully one half of the audience remained, for the 
questions were good ones, well to the point, and indicated 
earnestness and thoughtfulness respecting the subject 
discussed. The Lord blessed us in the answers to 
these questions by refreshing our memory with the appropriate 
Scriptures, which seemed to be convincing to 
the hearers. 

The next morning we took the train for Dublin, accompanied 
by several of the brethren. At Dublin we 
were welcomed by as many of the friends there as could 



be spared from their business engagements— about eight. 
Soon we were with them in the little hall. About thirty 
were present. Again we rehearsed the precious things 
of the Divine Plan, especially the terms and conditions 
of our high calling to joint-heirship with our Redeemer 
in his Kingdom. Subsequently many of our number took 
tea together at a restaurant. From thence we went to 
the public service at the Ancient Concert Rooms, where 
an audience of about 400 assembled. Our topic was, 
"Man's Past, Present and Future in the Light of the 
Bible." Many evidently were quite deeply interested. 
We trust that some hearts were touched with a greater 
appreciation of the "love Divine, all love excelling," and 
that to these the Father's character was to some degree 
cleared of the aspersion cast upon it by the creeds of the 
dark ages. 
After the meeting closed an opportunity was granted 

R4649 : page 23 1 

for questions. The secretary of the Y.M.C.A., who 

was present at our meeting a year ago, was present this 

time also, and with more questions, and with about half 

a dozen ministerial looking associates. They all gave 

precedence, however, to a Dublin rector widely known 

as a man of ability, we were told, and also a College Professor, 

and also a religious disputer. He plied us with 

a number of questions, which we were very glad to answer. 

The force of our answers lay in their Scripturalness, 

and indeed, so far as possible, we answered in 

Scripture language. The questions continued for about 

an hour, and the entire service for about three hours. 

We considered that the Truth had vindication, and that 

the eyes of some were more widely opened. We thanked 

the Lord for the ministry of his Word, and thus closed 

our last discourse on British soil. 

The next day, Saturday, we left for Liverpool, reaching 
our homeward-bound steamer in ample time. About 
thirty of the friends got passes to come aboard the vessel, 
but about ten others failed to get them and waved 
us goodbye from the landing. As our vessel steamed 
seaward, the company of about fifty joined in singing, 
"Blest be the Tie that Binds," and "God be with you 
till we meet again"— a happy and inspiring conclusion 
to our European visit! 



R4649 : page 231 

HOME, SWEET HOME 

SECTION V. 

OUR homeward journey was uneventful. It 
afforded opportunity for literary work in 



conjunction with Brother Jones, our faithful 
stenographer. Such of you as desired 
have already through the newspapers a report 
of our sermon for the Sunday we were 
on the Atlantic. 

Arriving at the pier early Friday morning, 
June 3d, we were warmly greeted, 
especially by the Bethel family. (We learn 
that the date of our arrival was measurably kept 
secret from others.) Our attention was drawn to a 
schooner yacht, "The Angel." As soon as possible we 
were taken on board of her. In a brief and neat speech 
the vessel was presented to us and the papers handed over. 
We replied briefly, expressing our appreciation of the 
gift and accepting it as Trustee for the Peoples Pulpit 
Association. We expressed a hope that the vessel might 
be used and blessed of the Lord in connection with the 
service of the Truth in New York Harbor. There is 
room on the deck for an audience of about one hundred 
and, in stormy weather, the cabin will accommodate about 
seventy. The vessel is fitted with sails and also with 
gasoline engines and an electric light plant. Her outfitting 

R4649 : page 232 

was not quite complete at the time of presentation. 

It is hoped that she will be ready for service soon. The 

endeavor will be to use her for the preaching of the 

Gospel in various languages to the sailors from all parts 

of the world, to whom also literature will be freely supplied. 

The different evenings of the week will be divided 

amongst the various nationalities of the port, "The Angel" 

lying at some suitable dock convenient for those of the 

nationality to be addressed. Pray for the Lord's blessing 

upon this, another opening for the service of the 

Truth. 

We were glad to get back to "Bethel" and to the 
Tabernacle. Prior to our arrival the New York congregation 
arranged to give us a reception on Saturday evening, 
June 4, at the Tabernacle. The house was well filled. 
The congregation included some from surrounding cities. 
We had a happy time together. We rehearsed some of 
our foreign experiences. Next we showed that the evidences 
on every hand indicated that the harvest work is 
nearly completed, but that, nevertheless, more remains 
for willing reapers to do. In conclusion we shook hands 
with the friends and they were careful not to demonstrate 
all of their good wishes by pressure of the hand. 

On the Sunday following, June 5, we had a grand 
public service at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. The 
attendance was estimated at 2,800. Several hundred 
more waited in vain in the corridors, hoping for a chance 
to get a seat. Other hundreds were turned away, but 
received literature. As our topic was "Jerusalem," quite 
a number of Jews attended. Indeed, a great amount of 
interest seems to be stirring amongst the Hebrews. They 



are surprised to have kind words from Christians, and 
especially surprised that we should proclaim the ultimate 
realization of their hopes as to Messiah's Kingdom and 
channel of blessing for the world. Reports of our discourse 
were published in prominent Jewish papers and 
went all over the world. One thing which seemed to 
astonish the Jews was the fact that we made such particular 
reference to the writings of their prophets. Many 
Jews have become Higher Critics and lost all their faith 
in the Bible. One of these, a prominent newspaper man, 
called at our study to inquire our motive for kind words 
to his people. We told him that it was not because we 
appreciated the Jews as better or nobler than the remainder 
of mankind, but our loyalty to God's Word, 
which we believe makes us proclaim its testimonies. We 
recited to him some of the prophecies showing the restoration 
blessings soon to come to his people. We pointed out 
to him that we were not endeavoring nor expecting to 
make Christians of the Jews; that to our understanding 
the Bible teaches that God has an earthly blessing in 
reservation for the seed of Abraham— not a heavenly one 
—although a few have accepted Christ and been begotten 
of the holy Spirit to the spiritual inheritance. We 
pointed out that God's blessings mentioned to Israel 
from Genesis to Malachi are all earthly and they are 
shortly to begin to be fulfilled. Upon leaving the study 
the gentleman said that he had entered it an agnostic, but 
that he left it contrariwise, a believer in the inspiration of 
the Bible. 



R4649 : page 232 

MOUNT TABOR'S PARABOLIC VISION 

-MATTHEW 17:l-8;14-20.-JULY 24.- 

Golden Text:— "This is my beloved Son, in 
whom I am well pleased; hear ye him." 

CONCLUDING our last study, our Lord, 

six days afterward, took Peter, James and 

John, three of his favorites among the 

disciples, into a high mountain. There he 

was transfigured before them; that is to 

say, his appearance changed, his face shone 

like the sun, his garments were white like 

the light. Then the vision grew and Moses 

and Elijah appeared to be holding conversation 

with the transfigured Jesus. The impulsive 

St. Peter, anxious to serve, inquired whether or 

not it was the Master's will that they build three tabernacles, 

one for him, one for Moses and one for Elijah, on 

the top of the mountain. One of the evangelists says, 

"He knew not what he said." Another account shows that 



the three disciples were for a time overwhelmed by something 
like drowsiness but later became fully awake. 

It was on this occasion that they heard a voice from 
the heavens, saying, "This is my beloved Son in whom I 
am well pleased, hear ye him." It required our Lord's 
kind words and touch to relieve the Apostles of their 
fright, and looking up they saw no one but Jesus. His 
transfiguration had vanished, and it was the Master, just 
as before. If, momentarily, they thought that Jesus had 
entered into glory, they now perceived that they were mistaken. 
Another account tells us that as they were coming 
down the mountain side Jesus charged them that they 
should not tell the vision to any one until after his resurrection 
from the dead. He thus explained to them that 
the whole matter was a vision, an apparition. This was 
a fulfillment of what he had told them in his last words 
of our lesson of a week ago, "There be some standing 
here which shall not taste of death till they see the Son of 
man coming in his Kingdom." These three disciples had 
been standing in his presence at the time those words were 
uttered, and now they had seen the Son of man in his 
Kingdom glory— in vision. The reality of that vision has 
not yet come to pass, although it is surely nigh, even at 
the door. 

St. Peter himself declares that they accepted the vision 
as a corroboration of our Lord's assurance of his coming 
Kingdom. In his Epistle he says, "We have not followed 
cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you 
the power and coming of our Lord Jesus, but were eye 
witnesses of his majesty (his Kingdom), when we were 
with him in the holy mount. (2 Peter 1:16,18.) Yet 
the Apostle proceeds to tell us that this vision, helpful as 
it was at the time, became secondary as he came to a 
better understanding of the prophecy which more particularly 
describes our Lord's second coming and Kingdom. 
He says, "We have a more sure word of prophecy 
[a more sure evidence than the vision] to which we do 
well to take heed as unto a lamp that shines in a dark 
place until the day dawn"— until the Millennial morning 
dawn.— 2 Peter 1:19. 

Before leaving the story of the transfiguration, which 
symbolized our Lord's Kingdom glory, we note his 
gracious words to the affrighted disciples, "Arise, and be 
not afraid." On several occasions he thus addressed 
them. It would appear that by nature many of us have a 
consciousness of our own imperfections and a realization 
of our unworthiness of Divine favor, and fears are likely 

R4650 : page 233 

to grasp us and torture us. This is because we do not 
know our heavenly Father. The more we learn of him 
the more does the love of God cast out fear from our 
hearts, and assure us that he who created us is sympathetic 
towards all who are striving for righteousness. He is a 
great God, not a little one. True, he will not give his 



greatest blessings to any except those who come into harmony 
with him, but, on the other hand, he is not a demon 
that he should be feared as such. He takes no pleasure 
in the suffering of his creatures and will not permit that 
any should suffer eternally, therefore his provision that all 
shall have, through Christ, an opportunity for regaining 
perfection and eternal life, and that whosoever will not 
avail himself of this great privilege must die the second 
death— must be annihilated. 

While Jesus and the three favored Apostles were in 
the mount of transfiguration, supposed to have been Mount 
Tabor, at the foot of the mountain was a man whose son 
was a lunatic, whom he had brought that the Lord might 
expel the demon. The Apostles had already been out, as 
the Lord's representatives, in various parts of the country 
of Palestine, curing the sick and expelling demons in his 
name, so they assayed to cast out this demon, but could 
not. The Revised Version speaks of the sufferer as an 
epileptic. Indeed, all higher criticism disputes that there 
is such a thing as obsession by evil spirits. It is a common 
saying today among the Higher Critics that what 
our Lord and the Apostles mistook for demon possession 
was merely insanity, epilepsy, etc. Of course, the word 
disease is broad enough to cover any kind of ailment, 
whether it be a direct affection from the Adversary, or an 
indirect one through heredity. In either case there is loss 
of ease, dis-ease, discomfort. We, however, have more 
confidence in the wisdom of the Lord and his chosen 
Apostles and mouthpieces than we have in all the doctors 
of theology and doctors of medicine in the whole 
earth. We therefore accept this narrative just as it reads, 
that Jesus rebuked the "devil" and cast him out of the 
boy, who was cured from that very hour. 

The disciples who had been unsuccessful in casting out 
this demon, called the Master away from the hearing of 
the multitude and asked him why they had failed when 
they attempted to cast out the demon. He replied, Because 
of your little faith. Another account says that he 
stated, "This kind cometh not out except by fasting and 
prayer." In other words, the lesson to the Apostles was 
that their greatest power would result from their living 
very near to God, living lives of self-denial and prayer. 
Of course, fasting to be seen of men is not here inculcated, 
nor do we suggest that the works of penance on the part 
of disciples would make them more efficient in the understanding 
of the Lord's mystery; rather the thought is, the 
nearer one lives to God the more of the Divine power may 
be exercised by and through him. 

It is perhaps difficult for us to understand our Lord's 
reference to their having little faith, for they surely 
exercised considerable faith in making an attempt to cast 
out the demon. Faith, to be successful, must be backed 
by spiritual power, and our Lord assures us that even with 
a small amount of faith we would be able to remove a 
mountain and nothing would be impossible. We are not 
to suppose that our Lord meant that his followers should 



try to remove mountains as a diversion, nor as a proof of 

their faith, for by so doing they would be seriously interfering 

with the interests of others who would be more 

convenienced by having the mountain remain. This they 

would have no right to do. We assume, therefore, that 

the thought must be that if in the fulfillment of the 

Divine command it should be necessary to have a mountain 

removed, and if the commission had been given to 

one of the Lord's followers to remove the mountain, and 

if he could exercise the faith to obey the command, the result 

would correspond to the faith exercised. All that 

the majority of us could do would be to exercise as much 

faith as possible and ask the Lord for more, and also seek 

to cultivate a greater degree of faith. 



R4650 : page 233 

FORGIVING AND BEING FORGIVEN 

--MATTHEW 18:21-35.~JULY31.~ 

"If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly 
Father will also forgive you."— Matthew 6:14. 

ST. PETER'S query, "Lord, how often shall my 

brother sin against me and I forgive him; 

until seven times?" is a query that comes to 

many. It is a question that at some time and 

in some manner or form is quite sure to 

come to all the followers of Christ. Imperfect 

ourselves and surrounded by others who 

are imperfect, we continually have need to 

exercise mercy, benevolence, forgiveness. 

There is something in the human mind which 

naturally appreciates justice and takes special note of injustice 

done toward us. It is also remarkable how many 

people take a delight in meting out justice to an offender 

against the law. It is this spirit which has been noted in 

mobs. Men and women and children work themselves 

into a very frenzy, as advocates of justice, in expressions 

against a guilty wretch who escapes the clutches of the 

law and a just penalty, and insist upon taking vengeance 

into their own hands. It would appear that many of those 

who participate in mobs have at times been guilty of 

nearly or quite as great crimes as those which they reprehend 

in another and would punish. It would appear that 

there is a craving in the fallen flesh to do violence to 

another, or to see violence done, if only there could be an 

excuse for it on the score of justice. Alas, poor creatures, 

how wrong such a condition of heart, how reprehensible 

in the sight of God! And yet those who thus wrongfully 

give loose rein to their passions, quiet their own consciences, 

at least, by concluding that they are viewing the 

matter like God, loving justice and hating iniquity. 



It is true that Justice is the foundation of Divine 
Government— that God is just; but it is also true that God 
is loving and kind, and that he accepts to himself the very 
name of love, for "God is love." Such should learn that 
to be in the Divine likeness is to govern one's self and 
one's course by the rules of justice, but to measure the 
course of others by the rule of love and sympathy, generosity 
and forgiveness. 

In answer to St. Peter's question, our Lord said that 
we should forgive a brother not only seven times, but 
seventy times seven. What a breadth of generosity is 
here suggested! How it tells us of the loving mercy and 
forgiveness of him with whom we have to do! But let 
us remember another statement of this same matter, where 
it is implied that before the forgiveness is granted, it is 
to be at least desired, if not sought. "If thy brother 
trespass against thee seven times in a day and seven times 
a day shall say, I repent'; thou shalt forgive him"— or 

R4650 : page 234 

to the extent of seventy times seven. We must even assume 
that the Lord meant that in our hearts we should 
already forgive the brother his trespasses, even though we 
might wisely wait to express our forgiveness until his attitude 
manifested some desire for it. The disciples of 
Christ are to be continually in the attitude of generosity 
and filled with the spirit of forgiveness as is the heavenly 
Father— ready and waiting to be gracious, and under 
proper conditions, to manifest that readiness. 

To illustrate this matter the Master spoke a parable. 
He said, "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain 
King which would take account of his servants" (v. 23). 
But, as we understand him, he meant that the church at 
the present time is the embryotic Kingdom and is being 
dealt with by the Lord after the manner of the illustration 
in this parable. It is not therefore an illustration of 
God's dealing with the world. He is not dealing with the 
world at all. He is not calling them his servants in any 
sense of the word— only believers, consecrated ones, 
occupy this favorable position of Divine relationship and 
only these are meant in the parable. Furthermore, the 
parable does not even consider the church on the score 
of original sin. It is not the thought that original sin 
may be cancelled on account of prayer. The penalty for 
original sin needed to be satisfied, not by the prayer of the 
sinners, but by the precious blood of Christ. But after 
having our sins forgiven through turning from sin and 
faith in Christ, and through consecration to the Lord and 
begetting of the holy spirit, then we are his servants, and 
the parable relates to these only. 

The first servant mentioned in the parable had been 
very derelict as a servant of God. As a follower of 
Christ he had come far short. The time of reckoning 
came. He realized it and besought Divine favor and 
mercy, promising to do all he could to make up for the 



deficiencies. He was heard; the sentence upon him was 

stayed. But when he went forth to find a fellow-servant 

who owed him a trifling sum and would have no mercy 

upon him, his master was very angry and declared that he, 

too, must be harshly dealt with and receive no mercy, because 

he had shown none to his fellow-servant. His 

Lord's words were, "Shouldest not thou also have had 

compassion (mercy) upon thy fellow-servant even as I 

had mercy on thee?" And he "delivered him to the tormentors 

until he should pay all that was due." The 

amount due would not include any part of the penalty of 

R4651 : page 234 

original sin, but merely the penalty for the shortcomings 
of the transgressor as respects his covenant relationship, 
as a servant who was also a debtor from the time he became 
a servant. 

The Lord's words concluding the parable are, "So shall 
also my heavenly Father do unto you, if ye from your 
hearts forgive not every one his brother his trespasses." 
In another text our Lord inculcates the same thought in 
different words, saying: "If ye forgive men their trespasses 
your heavenly Father will also forgive you." 

The purpose and object of our heavenly Father in thus 
dealing with us seems not clear to all. It is not that he 
wishes to retaliate. It is not that he would say to us, "If 
you are mean towards others I will be mean towards you." 
Rather the lesson is this, "I am kind to the unthankful; I 
have been very gracious to you in the forgiveness of your 
original sin and in accepting your consecration to be my 
servant and in bringing you into my family, but I have 
called you into this position for a special purpose and you 
will not be fit nor be prepared for the service I desire for 
you unless you learn the lesson of forgiveness and generosity; 
hence, for your sake I make the rule that I will 
be no more generous to you and your imperfections than 
you are generous toward your brethren in their imperfections. 
I do this in order to teach you a great lesson which 
cannot be so well learned in any other way. What I am 
seeking in you as my servant is perfection in my 
character-likeness. 

You are too inclined to look at the justice of my 
character and to copy it and to deal severely with others 
who are your debtors. I wish to make clear to you that 
the grandest elements of my character are illustrated from 
the standpoint of my love and sympathy, my kindness and 
forbearance. Because I desire you to progress in this 
character-likeness and so come to the position where I can 
use you in my service more abundantly, therefore I rule 
that you must be forgiving and gracious one toward 
another even as I have already been gracious toward you, 
and even as I propose yet further to be gracious to you, if 
you will abide in harmony with my spirit of love and seek 
to walk in my way. I am ready to forgive the loving and 
generous who are seeking to copy my character; I am 



ready to be kind and generous and forgiving to the greatest 
degree." 



R4651 : page 234 

THE MEMORIAL--HOW MANY CELEBRATED 

THE number reported to have participated in 

the Memorial Supper this year amounts to 

9,664. We confess some disappointment of 

this, for it is only 419 more than is reported 

for 1909. At first we were disposed to 

think that many had neglected to send the 

post-card with particulars, as requested. 

But we afterward concluded that quite probably 

all in full harmony with THE WATCH 

TOWER presentations of the Truth responded. 

Anyway we are glad to note that there are 

"more than 7,000 who have not bowed the knee to Baal." 

We would not be misunderstood. It is not our thought 
that all who are the Lord's people, that all who have 
been begotten of the holy Spirit, have already come to 
a knowledge of the Present Truth to the extent of fully 
appreciating it. Daily we are finding these— or rather 
the Lord is finding them. Indeed, never since the harvest 
began has the outlook for the spread of the Truth 
throughout Christendom been so grand and so hope-inspiring 
as now. Thousands are getting their eyes of 
understanding opened and making rapid progress towards 
the light. Nor do we think that these thousands on the 
way are to take the crowns of those who held the Truth 
for a time without proper appreciation. On the contrary, 
it is our understanding that the majority of those who 
will constitute the "great company," losing the crowns 
and getting instead palm branches, have been in Babylon 
and under Divine inspection for years as to their worthiness 
of greater light. 

We are free to confess, however, a measure of disappointment 
in connection with this matter. Our list 
of nearly 30,000 TOWER subscribers should represent twice 
that number of deeply interested readers— 60,000. And 
we would expect that every one of these would have been 
anxious to celebrate the Memorial of the Redeemer's 
sacrifice and his own consecration to participate in the 
same. 

We are not forgetting that the standard lifted in these 
columns is a very high one; that not many could be 

R4651 : page 235 

expected to leave all and take up the cross and follow 
in the Master's footsteps; not many could be expected to 
present their bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable 
to God; not many could be expected to appreciate the 



privilege of being members of the one loaf, the one body 
now being broken; not many could be expected to rejoice 
in the privilege of sharing in "his cup." We surely were 
disappointed in that there were not more than reported. 



R4651 : page 235 

THE SINS BORNE BY THE SCAPE-GOAT 

"The Scape-Goat shall be presented alive before the 
Lord to make an atonement with him."— Lev. 16:10. 

NOT fully may we comprehend the method by 

which the accounts of Justice are kept, but 

apparently murder, the taking of life, is 

one of the most serious of crimes from the 

Divine standpoint, whether this be murder 

in the actual sense, or only the hatred of 

another, which the Lord denominates to be 

murder of the heart. He declares that 

"precious in his sight is the death of his 

saints." This means that he takes special 

note of their death. Throughout the period preceding 

our Lord's first advent righteous blood was shed, from 

Abel down to Zachariah. 

So far as Cain is concerned, he was guilty of his 
brother's death, guilty of his brother's blood; others who 
slew righteous people whom God approved were held 
guilty of their death; and those who slew Jesus were held 
guilty of the blood of Christ. God's proposition is that 
through the merit of Christ, he purposes a general forgiveness 
of all Adamic sin; but there is a measure of 
sin which is beyond anything that could properly be considered 
as resulting from Adamic weakness, and for 
which there is a measure of responsibility. 

THE CRYING OF JUSTICE FOR VENGEANCE 

According to the Scriptures the blood of Abel "cried" 
from the ground to the Lord. In other words, Justice 
cried out for vengeance. The merit of the death of 
Christ, which will ultimately be applied as the redemption-price 
for the sins of the world, would apparently not 
cover such transgression to the full. It would cover 
such portion as belonged to Adamic weakness or heredity, 
but a certain portion would be uncovered. We may presume, 
therefore, that a certain amount of obligation would 
continue to attach to those individuals who committed 
the murders, and that more or less retribution will be due 
them on account of their wrong-doing and misdeeds. But 
apparently the Lord has purposed that, since some needed 
to suffer, he would allow a certain liquidation of this 
murder account, as we may call it, to be visited upon the 
Jews in the end of the Jewish Age. Since they would, at 



the close of their Age, have a great time of trouble anyway, 
he purposed to allow this added suffering to come 
upon them, even upon many that were innocent. 

It would seem that he permitted this punishment of innocent 
ones to offset in a measure the account of Justice 
against those who had committed special murders, etc., 
and in this light we would understand the statement, "At 
the hands of this generation will I require all the righteous 
blood which was shed on the earth from the days 
of righteous Abel down to the days of Zacharias, the son 
of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the 
altar." (Matt. 23:45.) This was the "wrath to the uttermost" 
which came upon Jerusalem and that seems to 
have squared up the account so far as the past was concerned. 
A new beginning was made there, just as a new 
dispensation began. The Antitypical Priesthood and the 
Antitypical Levites then came on the scene, and throughout 
this Gospel Age also the Lord has taken cognizance 
of the death of all his consecrated people. If anyone is 
guilty of the death of one of the Lord's saintly, consecrated 
ones, he brings himself under a special obligation 
and responsibility. There seems to be a special charge of 
Justice against whoever is culpable, or responsible for the 
death or persecution of his saints. There is a suggestion 
along this line (Rev. 6:9,10), where the souls of those 
who were beheaded for the witness of Jesus and the testimony 
of the Word of God are said to cry out, "How long! 
How long! oh Lord, dost thou not judge and avenge our 
blood on them that dwell on the earth." This seems to 
symbolically picture, not the crying of any individual, for 
these individuals were dead and had no knowledge, no appreciation 
of the things at all— "the dead know not any 
thing"— but it was justice that cried, as in Abel's case, 
after he was dead. They had nothing to do with the crying 
of their blood. It was the voice of Justice. 

That there has been quite a large class of this kind 
all through this Gospel Age of more than 1,800 years, will 
be freely admitted by all. Many suffered for the cause of 

R4652 : page 235 

righteousness, for the namesake of the Lord; and apparently 

the Lord purposes that in the end of this Age 

he will do as he did in the end of the Jewish Age— have 

a summing up or accounting, as it were, and a satisfaction 

of Justice. This is not the satisfaction of Justice 

which Jesus will accomplish with the merit of his own 

blood, satisfying all claims that would come under the 

head of Adamic condemnation and weakness, but a satisfaction 

of Justice as respects these special trespasses 

against "the Body of Christ, which is the Church"— 

"Whosoever shall offend one of the least of these, my little 

ones, it were better that a millstone were hanged about his 

neck and he were drowned in the depths of the sea." 

THE KIND OF ATONEMENT THE GREAT COMPANY 



WILL EFFECT 

In the end of this age, there will be a class, which we 
term the Great Company, which must needs die, because 
it was their covenant that they would do so. It is on this 
condition that they received the begetting of the holy 
Spirit. Hence, if God will complete this work of grace 
in them by giving them a spirit nature, the death of the 
flesh must take place. There is no alternative, no escape 
from it; and since they have failed to carry out the sacrifice 
in the full sense, failed to go forward with the zeal 
and alacrity that would be required of such as would be 
footstep followers of him, they are disassociated from 
the Little Flock class; but instead of being cast into the 
Second Death, they are allowed to complete their death. 
And since their death is not applied, as is the death of the 
members of the Body of Christ— in the sacrificial sense, 
as it was originally proposed that it should be— the arrangement 
seems to be that these will go into death in a 
kind of substitutionary way, as an offset to some of the 
trespasses of those who did violence to the members of 
the Body of Christ throughout the age. And thus the accounts 
of Justice will be in part squared by these and to 
a certain extent, therefore, there will be a corresponding 
release granted, we may say, to those who have committed 
murder in the past. 

R4652 : page 236 

For instance, the words of the angel to Daniel (Dan. 12:2) 
imply that when Nero will come forth in the resurrection 
he will come forth to shame and lasting contempt. 
All will know about the details of the man's life; it will 
be an open book to the whole world. People will say, 
"That is Nero! There he is!" It will be a terrible ordeal 
to be thus looked upon as the murderer of his own 
mother and the murderer of hundreds of God's saints; and 
his shame and contempt will continue until he shall have 
risen out of that condition of degradation and shall have 
shown by a reformation of character that he is a 
thoroughly changed man. But there will be a certain 
great responsibility against Nero because of the death 
of all those saints of the Lord; this we might think would 
almost preclude any possibility of his having mercy from 
God. If the death of one saint would bring a punishment, 
the death of many saints would, we think, properly bring 
much punishment. We may suppose, therefore, that he 
will have a great deal of shame and contempt; but nevertheless, 
the merit of Christ's death will apply to Nero as 
well as to the remainder of mankind. 

Possibly many people have lived in the world who had 
minds and hearts no better than Nero's, but who did not 
have the same opportunity for manifestation of this 
wicked propensity. Perhaps there were many they 
would have liked to kill, but since they were not emperors, 
they would themselves have been amenable to the 



law and to punishment, and were thereby deterred. We 
are, therefore, not competent to judge how particularly 
responsible Nero was for all his course or how much more 
guilty he was than some others of the race. 

The suffering and death of the Great Company is, 
we have seen, necessary, and the application of this suffering 
and death in a substitutionary manner for the 
special transgressions against the "Body of Christ" seems 
to be a particular provision on the Lord's part. In this 
way the "souls under the altar" and their blood cry for 
vengeance; and in this way the vengeance will be met. 
The cry of Justice will be satisfied in connection with the 
death of these innocent persons of the Great Company 
class in the time of trouble. The death of Nero's victims 
will be recompensed, we may suppose, by those who 
may suffer innocently. The accounts of Justice, in this 
respect, will be satisfied. 



R4652 : page 236 

FROM THE EDGAR FAMILY 

Glasgow, June, 1910. 

BELOVED BROTHERS AND SISTERS IN CHRIST: 

—It is with feelings of deep gratitude 

to you that we write to thank you for 

your many comforting messages, tokens and 

letters of love and sympathy with us in 

our great trial. We not only thank you all 

warmly but also desire to praise and thank 

our Heavenly Father for the precious bonds 

of love in which all the members of the 

body are bound one to the other, and which 

in a time of mutual sorrow like this we are enabled the 

more highly to appreciate. Your prayers on our behalf 

are answered— God has sustained us all by His grace. 

Though our hearts are sore because we miss the 
loved one's presence in the flesh, yet we have a deep joy 
in the assurance that he has entered into that presence 
where there is fulness of joy and pleasures for evermore. 
Throughout his brief illness our dear one was blessed 
with the confident hope that he was so soon to see his 
blessed Lord face to face, and he urged us, if we loved 
him, to rejoice because he was going to the Father. 

The night before he died he requested his love to be 
sent to all the Churches, not only in this country, but 
elsewhere, and to each member of the Church, "without 
one exception." 

He spent his last remnants of strength in exhorting, 
counselling, and comforting us all. If the Lord will, we 
hope to give you more details of his last hours, but would 
now repeat the main thought he impressed upon us with 
his dying breath: "Daily renew your covenant of sacrifice 
to the Lord, and daily seek to fulfil it. God will 



strengthen you daily not only to will to do, but to do this 
one thing— sacrifice daily your all to the Lord." "What a 
glorious day is this to me!" he said, while his eyes shone 
like stars of blue, "so soon to see my Lord face to face, 
and our dear God! So soon to enter into my reward!" 

Dear Brothers and Sisters, Our earnest prayer for 
you and ourselves is that the memory of his sacrifice, so 
joyfully consummated on 9th June, 1910, may be blessed 
of God to us all in encouraging us to press on in the race, 
delighting to do, daily, the Father's will. 

With much love in the Lord. 

Yours in our Glorious Hope, THE EDGAR FAMILY. 



R4652 : page 236 

ITEMS TO BE REMEMBERED 

THE LAW RE DISTRIBUTION OF PEOPLES PULPIT 

We must be law-abiding regardless of whether we 
consider the laws just or unjust, wise or unwise. In 
many cities there are laws against the distribution of 
handbills, etc., because, thrown away, they litter the 
streets. This law should not, however, be construed to include 
PEOPLES PULPIT, which is a regular monthly religious 
newspaper and entitled to any respect and privilege 
accorded secular journals. However, if interfered 
with, after doing all in our power to secure just rights 
from officials, and being refused, it is generally wise to 
submit to those in position of authority, rather than to 
challenge their interpretations of the law by a suit in 
court. In some cities there is a law hindering the placing 
of any matter in private mail boxes unless the same bear 
the address of the box-owner. The janitor acting for the 
box-owner may be willing to place these for you, but 
otherwise, they would best be folded to a proper size and 
have the address written upon them on the spot, before 
putting into the box. 

SMALL CONVENTIONS NOT ADVERTISED 

The newspaper syndicate handling Brother Russell's 
sermons advise that it would be unwise for him to attend 
any small local conventions that are advertised as such. 
They may be conventions in the sense that they would be 
gatherings of the friends, but may not be advertised to 
the public as such, because they would appear too insignificant. 
The only public advertising sanctioned on 
such occasions would be Brother Russell's one public address. 
Please remember, therefore, that it would be 
necessary to cancel any of Brother Russell's appointments 
not in line with this suggestion. The general interests of 
the work demand it. 



R4652 : page 237 

THE GLORY OF THE CHURCH TO BE PERPETUAL 

IT IS our thought that the divine nature, the 
divine plane, has been promised only to the 
Anointed One, and when the Anointed 
One shall be complete it will be impossible 
to add to his members. To suppose additions 
would be as unreasonable in our judgment, 
as to think that after a man had 
grown up and become a king he should 
develop another foot. When the Body of 

R4653 : page 237 

Christ shall be complete— when the "Elect" 
number shall be full— we understand there will be no 
additions to it, just as there will be no deficiency in that 
Body when it shall be glorified. This nature of glory, 
honor and immortality of the Kingdom plane seems to 
appertain only to the Father, to the Son and to the 
"Bride, the Lamb's Wife." We know of nothing in the 
Scriptures nor in analogy that would imply that it could 
be shared by any others at any time; but of course what 
God has not clearly revealed we may not know of a 
certainty. We may be sure of one thing, however, and 
that is that Christ will always be "Head over the Church 
which is his Body"; that he will always be Head over 
all things. 

Another thing we may be quite sure of is that the 
Church thus honored by the Father as members of The 
Christ will have still other glories; as the Apostle declares, 
"that in the Ages to come, God might show the 
exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us 
through Christ" (Eph. 2:6,7), implying not only that the 
glory of Christ is to be perpetual, but that the glory of the 
Church is also to be perpetual— not confined to the Millennial 
Age. 

DOES THE DEGREE OF SUFFERING DETERMINE 
THE DEGREE OF REWARD? 

We agree that our Lord's statement respecting John 
the Baptist, "He that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven 
is greater than he" (Luke 7:28), applies to the entire 
class of Ancient Worthies; and further, that it refers 
not merely to the earthly status of the Gospel Church as 
being superior, but marks the Church as a superior class 
in the future. 

This question might arise: In view of the statement 
of the Apostle James, "Take, my brethren, the Prophets, 
as an example of suffering affliction and of patience" 
(Jas. 5:10), and in view also of our Lord's words referring 



to the suffering of the Church, "So persecuted they 

the Prophets which were before you," and also of the detailed 

statement of these sufferings of the Ancient 

Worthies furnished us by the Apostle Paul (Hebrews 11), 

what should we say as to the degree of their sufferings 

in comparison with those of the Church and the reward 

that would justly be due them as compared with the 

reward of the Church? 

THE GOSPEL AGE THE "ACCEPTABLE DAY" FOR 
SACRIFICES 

We answer that if the Lord intends to reward his 
people in proportion to their suffering, some of us seemingly 
will get a very small reward. We have neither 
been stoned to death, nor sawn asunder, nor have we 
wandered in sheepskins and goatskins; nor have we been 
without any place to lay our head. We might say, however, 
that some of our sufferings may be of a different 
kind from theirs: It is possible to endure figurative 
scorching or stoning, and to have our names cast out 
as evil, etc. But on the whole we cannot say that, so 
far as merit is concerned in the matter of suffering, there 
is any advantage that the Church can claim over the 
Ancient Worthies even among those of our number who, 
in the early Church, were burned as torches by Nero. 
It would seem that we must make allowance for Divine 
"election"; that it pleased God to call us with this High 
Calling. During the Millennial Age even some may perhaps 
become as loyal to the principles of righteousness 
as any of the Ancient Worthies or any of the Church, 
and yet not be rewarded with either their distinction 
or ours. We are favored, we believe, only in that we 
live at this particular time of blessing— "the acceptable 
day of the Lord"— in which the Lord is ready and willing 
to accept our sacrifices; and this acceptable day could not 
begin until our Lord Jesus had made his sacrifice and 
opened up "the new and living way," whereby we might 
follow in his steps. 

John the Baptist had a very honorable work to perform, 
but that work was to be accomplished before our 
Lord's death and before the opening of this "acceptable 
day." Therefore he could not be of the Gospel Age 
Church and did not come under our "High Calling"— 
joint-heirship with our Lord in the Kingdom of Heaven. 



R4653 : page 237 

ATTENDING NOMINAL CHURCH SERVICES 

WE INFER that our suggestion relative to attendance 

at nominal church services was not 

fully grasped by some of our readers. We 

had no thought to encourage membership in 



any human institution. We had no thought 

to encourage in any manner these institutions. 

We merely wished to suggest that 

some dear friends, in our judgment, incline 

to go to an extreme in that they fear to 

set foot inside nominal church edifices. 

Our thought is that these should be recognized as gathering 

places of those who profess some knowledge of and 

some love for our Savior— the world's Savior. While 

we cannot agree with all that they stipulate in their creeds, 

we can sympathize with them in the sense that we realize 

how they got into the darkness and bondage they are 

in, because we were once in the same ourselves. We 

have reason to believe that some of them are as honest 

as were we. 

Our suggestion is that while the first duty of the 
Lord's people who are in the light is to "forget not the 
assembling of themselves together"; while it is their 
duty to "build one another up in the most holy faith" 
and to "grow in grace" themselves; while, therefore, it is 
their duty to attend to their own spiritual nourishment by 
Scripture study, etc., nevertheless there may be times 
when nothing more important or more pressing or more 
opportune would present than a visit to some prayer-meeting 
or other meeting of Christian friends of the 
nominal systems. Our suggestion was not so much that 
nominal churches should be attended, but rather that none 
of us should feel afraid to attend one if favorable opportunity 
offered, peradventure we might there find some 
truth-hungry, and some good might be accomplished. 
These remarks are specially applicable to such as have 
husbands or wives who would desire their company occasionally, 
and be willing in return to accompany them to 
International Bible Students Meetings. 



page 238 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CONVENTION 

CELORON, NEAR JAMESTOWN, N.Y.-JULY 30-AUGUST 7 

WE ANTICIPATE a large attendance at this 

Convention, and advise friends intending to 

be present to send at once to us for reservations 

at the rate of $9, $1 1, or $14 each, 

for food, shelter and electric car or steamboat 

service to and from Celoron Auditorium. 

The $9 rate is usually for four in 

a room. Where a room is occupied by but 

two the rate will be not less than $11 each. 

Those paying in advance for the full nine 

days will naturally have the preference over those making 

a shorter stay. Remit to us at once. For less than 

the nine days the rate will be a little higher, $ 1 .25 to 



$1.50 per day inclusive. The higher prices represent 
choicer accommodations, with only one or two in a room. 
The cheaper terms represent generally four in a room. 
Hotel accommodations at Jamestown will be scarce at 
any price. We have adopted the plan of making all the 
arrangements, believing it will be to the comfort and 
advantage of those in attendance, who will be considered 
as the Society's guests. Following will be found a table 
of rates showing cost of railway transportation which, 
from some points, is very reasonable. 

Write to us at Brooklyn what accommodations you desire, 
and for how many, enclosing money order or draft 
for the same. We will immediately forward to you a 
memorandum with full description of the cottage, room, 
etc., apportioned to you, so that, on your arrival, you 
can proceed forthwith to your lodging place and find it 
ready and waiting for you. Along with this receipt 
and order we will send you programme for the Convention 
and a map showing the Lake, etc., and such further 
particulars as may seem necessary for your guidance. 

On the list following, the cities marked * have regular 
Summer Excursion rates. These tickets should be purchased 
to Jamestown, N.Y. Other quotations noted are 
for the "Chautauqua Excursion," July 29. If you come 
from the West continue in the electric car to Celoron, 
paying an additional fare. If you come from Eastern 
points via Jamestown, get off at that place or at Celoron, 
about five miles westward, and do not go on to Chautauqua. 
Chautauqua tickets needing endorsement will be 
attended to by our Committee at Celoron. 

It appears that there is no very special rate granted 
from Washington, D.C., Baltimore, Philadelphia, Harrisburg, 
Savannah, Jacksonville, etc. We believe that 
friends in those parts will do well to purchase their tickets 
to New York City via Penna. R.R.— on the customary 
"ten-or-more-to-the-party" plan, or on New York 
excursion plan— whichever is the cheaper. Then in 
New York they can easily transfer by the Subway to the 
Erie R.R. station and there secure the very favorable 
terms mentioned in our list as the rate from New York 
(July 29) to Jamestown and return ($1 1.75). 

The "party-of-ten-or-more" rate is always available on 
all railroads. One ticket is sold for an entire party at an 
excursion rate. This is known as a theatrical rate. 
Friends in various parts of Northern Pennsylvania, not 
far from the Erie R.R. lines, will find it to their advantage 
to buy their tickets to some point on the Erie R.R. 
From points on the Erie R.R. there are special excursion 
rates to Chautauqua on July 29. 

SPECIAL TRAIN FROM NEW YORK CITY 

A special daylight train has been arranged for friends 
of New York City and vicinity, Friday, July 29, leaving 
via 23rd Street Erie Ferry at 7:40 a.m., Chambers 
Street Erie Ferry at 8 a.m. From Brooklyn take the 



Perm. R.R. Annex Ferry (at the foot of Fulton Street) 
at 7:15 a.m. for Jersey City. From the Pennsylvania 
Railroad Station in Jersey City take the Hudson Terminal 
Subway for the Erie Railroad Station. 

The train starts from Erie Railroad Station in Jersey 
City, N.J., at 8:15 a.m., arriving in Jamestown at 7 p.m. 

All who desire to be accommodated on this train, or 
would care to join the party from intermediate points 
between Jersey City and Jamestown, should at once communicate 
with the Celoron Convention Committee, 17 
Hicks Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 

CHICAGO SPECIAL TRAIN WITH SLEEPERS 

On Friday, July 29, at 6 p.m., a special train over 
the Erie R.R. will leave the depot, corner Dearborn and 
Polk Streets, Chicago, due to arrive at Celoron 7 a.m., 
July 30. The train will be composed of day coaches and 
Standard and Tourist sleeping cars. A berth in the 
Tourist Sleeper will cost $1.25; in the Standard Sleeper, 
$2.50. Two moderate-sized persons could occupy a lower 
berth comfortably. 

Friends from beyond Chicago desiring to join this 
Excursion Train should at once notify Brother Dr. Jones, 
3003 Walnut Street, Chicago, so that sufficient car space 
may be secured early, and should see to it that their tickets 
from Chicago read via the Erie Ry. Such as desire 
sleeping car accommodations should enclose the money at 
the above-mentioned rates. 

OTHER SPECIAL TRAINS 

There will probably also be special trains from points 
mentioned below, and inquiries should be made at once of 
those whose addresses are given:— 

Pittsburg, Pa., N. S., Dr. W. E. Spill, 1002 Cedar Ave. 

East St. Louis, 111., Horace E. Hollister, Box 54. 

St. Paul, Minn., Charles L. Dick, 515 Charles Street. 

Cincinnati, Ohio, Horace K. Blinn, 228 E. 4th St. 

Cleveland, Ohio, W. D. Soper, 5647 Broadway, S. E. 

Toledo, Ohio, Ernest Kuehn, 24 Produce Exchange. 

Columbus, Ohio, C. B. Shull, 170 North 22nd Street. 

Indianapolis, Ind., C. A. Owens, 1 1 19 West 29th Street. 

Baltimore, Md., C. H. Anderson, 119 S. Calvert St. 

Washington, D.C., J. T. D. Pyles, 1727 Columbia Rd., 
N.W. 

Boston, Mass., A. M. Graham, 165 Tremont Street. 

Philadelphia, Pa., N. F. Sears, 3038 North Darien St. 

MAKING MELODY IN YOUR HEARTS 

All who have learned the New Song of Moses and 
the Lamb are earnestly invited to come to this Convention, 
"Singing and making melody in their hearts unto 
the Lord." Thankful for the blessings already received 
from the hand of the Lord, let us come together glad to 



communicate to others of that grace which we have so 
freely received of our Father through our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ— our Advocate. Let us leave the 
world behind and enjoy a season of spiritual fellowship 
and refreshment— in considering the "things freely given 
to us of God," and the "things which God hath in reservation 
for them that love him, which eye hath not seen 
nor ear heard, neither hath entered into the heart of 
man." Whoever thus comes is sure to receive a blessing, 
as well as sure to dispense one. 

Decide promptly what you believe will be to your advantage 
and the Lord's will concerning you in respect to 
attending this Convention. If you decide to come, secure 
accommodations through us promptly; for the outlook 
is that otherwise there will be confusion and trouble for 
both you and us. 

page 239 

RAILROAD RATES TO CHAUTAUQUA LAKE 

The following is a list of railroad fares to "Chautauqua" 
and return, on sale Friday, July 29, only, excepting 
from points in Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, 
Louisiana, Mississippi and Tennessee, from which States 
tickets will be sold on July 28. Tickets are good returning 
at any time within thirty days of the date on 
which they were purchased. 

Rates marked with a * are Summer-Tourist fares, on 
sale any day with return limit October 3 1 , and should 
be purchased direct to Jamestown. All tickets permit 
those from New York City and vicinity and from points 
east of Hornell on the Erie Railroad, as well as all 
whose tickets naturally read through Buffalo, to include a 
visit to Niagara Falls without extra charge:— 

ALABAMA Terre Haute $13.95 

Anniston $25.25 Wabash 10.90 

Birmingham 26.00 

Boaz 24.30 IOWA 

Carbonhill 26.45 Burlington 25.80* 

Mobile 31.30 Cedar Rapids 26.80* 

Montgomery 28.90 Clinton 23.30* 

Pell City 26.10 Council Bluffs 37.00* 

Piedmont 25.15 Davenport 24.50* 

Sulligent 26.45 Des Moines 31.50* 

Dubuque 24.90* 

ARKANSAS Keokuk 20.15 

Fort Smith 36.90 Sioux City 38.00* 

Little Rock 34.40 

Pine Bluff 35.90 KANSAS 

Fort Scott 32.50 

CALIFORNIA Leavenworth 29.40 

Los Angeles 90.00* Wichita 36.80 

San Francisco 90.00* 

KENTUCKY 



COLORADO Bowling Green 18.45 

Denver 54.40 Burnside 16.60 

Hopkinsville 20.20 

CONNECTICUT Lexington 14.00 

Bridgeport via New York. 12.95 Louisville 15.50 

Hartford via Owensboro 16.75 

Springfield 12.50 Paducah 19.60 

New Haven via 

Springfield 13.25 LOUISIANA 

New Haven via New York.. 13.30 Baton Rouge 32.55 

Waterbury via Shreveport 46.70* 

Springfield 13.35 New Orleans 32.55 

Waterbury via N.Y 13.60 

MARYLAND 

DELAWARE Annapolis 18.50 

Wilmington 18.00* Baltimore 18.00* 

Cumberland 14.00* 

DISTRICT COLUMBIA 

Washington 20.00* MASSACHUSETTS 

Boston 12.70 

FLORIDA Fall River via Fall 

Jacksonville to New York 35.00* River Line and New 

New York to Jamestown... 11.75 York 14.75 

St. Petersburg 58.05* North Adams 11.95 

Tampa 58.05* Springfield 10.60 

Worcester 11.95 

GEORGIA 

Atlanta 25.80 MICHIGAN 

Augusta 40.25* 

Cedartown 24.60 Ann Arbor 11.35* 

Rockmart 24.70 Detroit 18.65 

Rome 24.05 Grand Rapids 12.40 

Savannah 43.85* Jackson 9.40 

Muskegon 17.43* 

ILLINOIS Saginaw 13.70* 

Bloomington 15.55 

Cairo 19.60 MINNESOTA 

Chicago 14.00 Duluth 34.70 

Danville 13.65 Mankato 34.30* 

Decatur 16.10 Minneapolis 32.50* 

East St. Louis 18.75 St. Paul 32.50* 

Jacksonville 18.35 

Peoria 16.10 MISSISSIPPI 

Springfield 17.35 Biloxi 32.55 

Gulfport 32.55 

INDIANA Jackson 31.00 

Anderson 11.00 Meridian 30.55 

Evansville 18.80 Vicksburg 31.40 

Fort Wayne 9.65 

Frankfort 12.30 MISSOURI 

Hammond 13.35 Carthage 32.80 

Huntington 10.35 Hannibal 20.25 

Indianapolis 12.00 Kansas City 32.50* 

Lafayette 12.35 Sedalia 27.90 

Muncie 10.50 St. Joseph 29.40 

Rochester 11.30 St. Louis 19.25 



SouthBend 11.60 Springfield 29.95 

NEBRASKA Dubois $5.50* 

Lincoln $31.80 Easton 11.75 

Omaha 29.60 Erie 1.85* 

Harrisburg 14.75* 

NEW JERSEY Indiana 6.75 

Newark 11.75 Johnstown 9.25* 

Paterson 11.75 McKeesport 6.50 

Mauch Chunk 11.10 

NEW YORK Pittsburg 8.00* 

Albany 9.90 Pittsburg 16 Day Ex. 

Auburn 6.65 (Tues., Fri., Sat.).... 6.00 

Binghamton 8.35 (Fri. or Sat. until 

Buffalo 3.00 Monday) 4.00 

Elmira 6.85 Philadelphia 17.00* 

Goshen 11.45 Scranton 9.75 

Ithaca 7.05 York 16.10* 

Malone 12.00 

Newburgh 11.75 RHODE ISLAND 

New York City 11.75 Providence via 

Oneonta 12.35 Worcester 13.95 

Oswego 7.40 

Plattsburg 14.33 SOUTH CAROLINA 

PortKent 13.91 Charleston 44.15* 

Poughkeepsie 10.75 Columbia 40.25* 

Saratoga Springs 11.07 Greenville 40.25* 

Syracuse 6.75 

Utica 7.85 SOUTH DAKOTA 

Westport 13.13 Sioux Falls 39.10* 

Watertown 8.60 

TENNESSEE 

NORTH CAROLINA Chattanooga 21.70 

Charlotte 37.85* Knoxville 19.90 

Fayetteville 36.30* Memphis 24.80 

Henderson 30.95* Murfreesboro 21.55 

Raleigh 33.30* Nashville 20.55 

Wilmington 38.00* 

TEXAS 

NORTH DAKOTA Austin 53.40* 

Fargo 42.80* Dallas 47.10 

Grand Forks 46.40* Galveston 49.10 

Houston 47.10 

OHIO San Antonio 56.35* 

Akron 4.70 Waco 52.30* 

Ashtabula 3.50* 

Canton 6.20* UTAH 

Cincinnati 11.30 Ogden 87.50* 

Cleveland 4.25 

Columbus 7.95 VIRGINIA 

Dayton 9.60 Alexandria 20.30* 

Elyria 5.05 Charlottsville 23.45* 

Findlay 7.50 Fredericksburg 22.65* 

Galion 6.55 Lynchburg 26.45* 

Kent 4.40 Norfolk 32.00* 

Kenton 7.90 Richmond 25.60 



Lima 8.40 

Mansfield 6.55 WASHINGTON 

Marion 7.15 Seattle 90.00* 

Miamisburg 9.85 Tacoma 90.00* 

Springfield 9.00 

Toledo 7.45 WEST VIRGINIA 

Zanesville 9.70* Wheeling 9.30 

(See Pittsburg.) 
OKLAHOMA 

Guthrie 42.50 WISCONSIN 

Muskogee 37.60 Fon du lac 23.50* 

Oklahoma City 41.10 La Cross 28.40* 

Milwaukee 20.90* 

OREGON Oshkosh 24.20* 

Portland 93.50* 

WYOMING 

PENNSYLVANIA Cheyenne 57.50* 

Allentown 11.75 CANADA 

Bethlehem 11.75 Hamilton, Ont 5.60 

Braddock 6.40 London, Ont 9.70* 

Bradford 3.15* Montreal, Ont 20.60* 

Carbondale 9.75 Ottawa, Ont 19.10* 

Clearfield 6.90* Toronto, Ont 6.25* 



page 239 

RAILROAD RATES TO AHAUTAUQUA LAKE 

The following is a list of railroad fares to "Chautauqua" 
and return, on sale Friday, July 29, only, excepting 
from points in Alabama, Georgia, Kenticky, 
Louisiana, Mississippi and Tennessee, from which States 
tickets willbe sold on July 28. Tickets are good returning 
at any time within thirty days of the date on 
which they were purchased. 

Rates marked with a * are Summer-Tourist fares, on 
sale any day with return limit October 31, and should 
be purchased direct to Jamestown. All tickets permit 
those from new York City and vicinity and from points 
east of Hornell on th Erie Railroad, as well as all 
whose tickets naturally read through Buffalo, to inlcude a 
visit to Niagara Falls without extra charge: - 

ALABAMA Terre Haute $13.95 

Wabash 10.90 

Anniston $25.25 

Birmingham 26.00 IOWA 

Boaz 24.30 

Carbonhill 26.45 Burlington 25.80* 

Mobile 31.30 Cedar Rapids 26.80* 

Montgomery 28.90 Clinton 23.30* 

Pell City 26.10 Council Bluffs 37.00* 

Piedmont 25.15 Davenport 24.50* 

Sulligent 26.45 Des Moines 31.50* 



Dubuque 24.90* 

ARKANSAS Keokuk 20.15 

Sioux City 38.00* 

Fort Smith 36.90 

Little Rock 34.40 KANSAS 

Pine Bluff 35.90 Fort Scott 32.50 

Leavenworth 29.40 

CALIFORNIA Wichita 36.80 

Los Angeles 90.00* KENTUCKY 

San Francisco 90.00* 

Bowling Green 18.45 

COLORADO Burnside 16.60 

Hopkinsville 20.20 

Denver 54.40 Lexington 14.00 

Louisville 15.50 

CONNECTICUT Owensboro 16.75 

Paducah 19.60 

Bridgeport via New York. 12.95 

Hartford via Springfield 12.50 LOUISIANA 

New Haven via 

Springfield 13.25 Baton Rouge 32.55 

New Haven via New York.. 13.30 Shreveport 46.70* 

Waterbury via Springfieldl3.35 New Orleans 32.55 

DELAWARE MARYLAND 

Wilmington 18.00* Annapolis 18.50 

Baltimore 18.00* 

DISTRICT COLUMBIA Cumberland 14.00* 

Washington 20.00* MASSACHUSETTS 

FLORIDA Boston 12.70 

Fall River via Fall 
Jacksonville to New York 35.00* River Line and New 

New York to Jamestown .. 11.75 York 14.75 

St. Petersburg 58.05* North Adams 1 1.95 

Tampa 58.05* Springfield 10.60 

Worcester 11.95 

GEORGIA 

MICHIGAN 

Atlanta 25.80 

Augusta 40.25* Ann Arbor 11.35* 

Cedartown 24.60 Detroit 18.65 

Rockmart 24.70 Grand Rapids 12.40 

Rome 24.05 Jackson 9.40 

Savannah 43.85* Muskegon 17.43* 

Saginaw 13.70* 

ILLINOIS 

MINNESOTA 

Bloomington 15.55 

Cairo 19.60 Duluth 34.70 

Chicago 14.00 Mankato 34.30* 

Danville 13.65 Minneapolis 32.50* 

Decatur 16.10 St. Paul 32.50* 



East St. Louis 18.75 

Jacksonville 18.35 MISSISSIPPI 

Peoria 16.10 

Springfield 17.35 Biloxi 32.55 

Gulfport 32.55 

INDIANA Jackson 31.00 

Meridian 30.55 

Anderson 11.00 Vicksburg 31.40 

Evansville 18.80 

Fort Wayne 9.65 MISSOURI 

Frankfort 12.30 

Hammond 13.35 Carthage 32.80 

Huntington 10.35 Hannibal 20.25 

Indianapolis 12.00 Kansas City 32.50* 

Lafayette 12.35 Sedalia 27.90 

Muncie 10.50 St. Joseph 29.40 

Rochester 11.30 St. Louis 19.25 

South Bend 11.60 Springfield 29.95 

NEBRASKA Dubois $5.50* 

Easton 11.75 

Lincoln $31.80 Erie 1.85* 

Omaha 29.60 Harrisburg 14.75* 

Indiana 6.75 

NEW JERSEY Johnstown 9.25* 

McKeesport 6.50 

Newark 11.75 Mauch Chunk 11.10 

Paterson 11.75 Pittsburg 8.00* 

Pittsburg 16 Day Ex. 
NEW YORK (Tues., Fri., Sat.).... 6.00 

(Fri. or Sat. until 

Albany 9.90 Monday) 4.00 

Auburn 6.65 Philadelphia 17.00* 

Binghamton 8.35 Scranton 9.75 

Buffalo 3.00* York 16.10* 

Elmira 6.85 

Goshen 11.45 RHODE ISLAND 

Ithaca 7.05 

Malone 12.00 Providence via Worcester 13. 95 

Newburgh 11.75 

New York City 11.75 SOUTH CAROLINA 

Oneonta 12.35 

Oswego 7.40 Charleston 44.15* 

Plattsburg 14.33 Columbia 40.25* 

Port Kent 13.91 Greenville 40.25* 

Poughkeepsie 10.75 

Saratoga Springs 11.07 SOUTH DAKOTA 

Syracuse 6.75 

Utica 7.85 Sioux Falls 39.10* 

Westport 13.13 

Watertown 8.60 TENNESSEE 

NORTH CAROLINA Chattanooga 21.70 

Knoxville 19.90 

Charlotte 37.85* Memphis 24.80 

Fayetteville 36.30* Murfreesboro 21.55 



Henderson 30.95* Nashville 20.55 

Raleigh 33.30* 

Wilmington 38.00* TEXAS 

NORTH DAKOTA Austin 53.40* 

Dallas 47.10 

Fargo 42.80* Galveston 49.10 

Grand Forks 46.40* Houston 47.10 

San Antonio 56.35* 

OHIO Waco 52.30* 

Akron 4.70 UTAH 

Ashtabula 3.50* 

Canton 6.20* Ogden 87.50* 

Cincinnati 11.30 

Cleveland 4.25 VIRGINIA 

Columbus 7.95 

Dayton 9.60 Alexandria 20.30* 

Elyria 5.05 Charlottsville 23.45* 

Findlay 7.50 Fredericksburg 22.65* 

Galion 6.55 Lynchburg 26.45* 

Kent 4.40 Norfolk 32.00* 

Kenton 7.90 Richmond 25.60 

Lima 8.40 

Mansfield 6.55 WASHINGTON 

Marion 7.15 

Miamisburg 9.85 Seattle 90.00* 

Springfield 9.00 Tacoma 90.00* 

Toledo 7.45 

Zanesville 9.70* WEST VIRGINIA 

OKLAHOMA Wheeling 9.30 

(See Pittsburg.) 

Guthrie 42.50 

Muskogee 37.60 WISCONSIN 

Oklahoma City 41.10 

Fondulac 23.50* 

OREGON La Cross 28.40* 

Milwaukee 20.90* 

Portland 93.50* Oshkosh 24.20* 

PENNSYLVANIA WYOMING 

Allentown 11.75 Cheyenne 57.50* 

Bethlehem 11.75 

Braddock 6.40 CANADA 

Bradford 3.15* 

Carbondale 9.75 Hamilton, Ont 5.60 

Clearfield 6.90* London, Ont 9.70* 

Montreal, Ont 20.60* 

Ottawa, Ont 19.10* 

Toronto, Ont 6.25* 



page 242 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). India paper edition 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, 
five volumes; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in Greek, three vols.; French, two vols.; 
in Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. 
each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the 
same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 
each. 



page 241 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Members of Christ's Household 243 

Those Who Constitute the Church of 
the Present Time 243 

Those Who Will Have Their Portion 

With the Hypocrites 244 

Progressive and Completed Justification 246 

"Calleth Those Things Which Be Not 

as Though They Were" 247 

"The Better Sacrifices" 247 

Is Death Extinction? 248 

The Camel and the Needle's Eye 249 

The Blotting Out of Sins 250 

"The Parable of the Talents" 251 

Keeping Ourselves in the Love of God 252 

"Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled" 253 

Brother Russell's Reply to the Slander 253 

Some Interesting Letters 254 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 255 

page 242 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, NY., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CONVENTIONS 



LYNN, MASS., AUGUST 14 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10 
o'clock. Discourse for the interested at 7:30 in the evening 
in Castle Hall, opposite City Hall. Discourse for the Public 
by Brother Russell, Olympia Theater, Washington street and 
Central avenue, at 2:30 P.M. Topic: "Hereafter." 

UTICA, N.Y., AUGUST 21 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:30 
o'clock. Discourse for the interested at 7:30 in the evening 
in Genesee Hall, corner Oneida and Square. Discourse for 
the Public by Bro. Russell at Shubert Theater at 3 P.M. 
Topic: "Hereafter." 

FALL RIVER, MASS., AUGUST 28 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., SEPTEMBER 4 

OLD ORCHARD, ME., SEPTEMBER 11 

DETROIT, MICH., SEPTEMBER 18 



SWEET BRIER ROSE BOOKLET 

These attractive little booklets are specially appropriate 
for enclosing with your correspondence. They contain a 
beautiful commendation of "The Divine Plan of the Ages." 
To facilitate their wide circulation we offer them at an extremely 
low price, $1 (4s. 4d.) per hundred, postpaid. Order 
now! 



R4653 : page 243 



MEMBERS OF CHRIST'S HOUSEHOLD 

THE Church of Christ is an aggregation of individuals 

which may be viewed from different 

standpoints. In the "Divine Plan of 

the Ages" we show on a chart the Gospel 

Age and its various united elements. Above 

the line of consecration are two classes, 

representing the Great Company and the 

Little Flock. Below the line of consecration 

there is another class shown, the justified, 

who do not go on to complete their 

justification by consecration. Under the line or plane of 

justification is shown another class— hangers-on, denominated 

hypocrites. In the further development of the 

chart we show these last two classes— the justified, who 

do not go on to consecration, and the "tares" or hypocrites 

—both as falling away in this day of trouble, called 

the time of the harvest, being separated from the spiritual 

classes, the Little Flock and the Great Company. 

However, during the Gospel Age, the "wheat" and the 
"tares" grow together, and together they represent the 
Kingdom of God, as the Lord Jesus shows in the parable. 
(Matthew 13.) In other words, God speaks of the 
Church as a whole, including in the appellation the baser 
adherents as well as the fully consecrated. 

This is shown again in Revelation, where the Lord 
addresses the Laodicean Church, "Be zealous, therefore, 
and repent. Behold, I stand at the door and knock." 
(Rev. 3:19,20.) He thus indicates that from his viewpoint, 
which is all wisdom, he discerns in his Church 
what we may perhaps partially discern, but could not 
definitely determine and would not be allowed to specify. 
He sees, he determines, which are the fully consecrated, 
and which are not fully consecrated. We could ascertain 
that condition only by inquiry of the individual, and even 
then if he chose to misrepresent his position and to claim 
that he is a consecrated believer, we should not be in 
a position to judge him or decide against his expression, 
except his fruitage betray his words; as the Lord says, 
"By their fruits shall ye know them"— not merely by 
their professions, but by their fruits. But aside from 
any fruits that would be injurious, we are to accept the 
profession of all who claim to be believers and consecrated. 
Hence, if there is an election in the Church, in 
which only the consecrated would be invited to participate 
—and if there are any whose outward conduct is 
moral and who make profession of being consecrated— it 
would not be within our province to sit in judgment upon 
them and condemn them and say that they are not of the 
Church. Rather we should be obligated to accept their 
vote the same as any other. 

THOSE WHO CONSTITUTE THE CHURCH OF THE 
PRESENT TIME 



In a complimentary sense all believers in Christ, who 
are approaching the Lord and who have turned from the 
world and have professed to have fellowship with God's 
consecrated people and who are giving indications of 

R4654 : page 243 

progress in that direction, and to whom the Lord is drawing 
near, may be considered probationary members of the 
Church. So the Lord says unto these, "Draw nigh unto 
me, and I will draw nigh unto you." (Jas. 4:8.) If they 
come together, then, with the Lord's people, the result 
may be their full consecration to the Lord and their begetting 
of the holy Spirit, thereby constituting them New 
Creatures in Christ. If they fail to go on, they fail to 
obtain full justification and the seal of sonship and covenant 
relationship with the Lord. Such will eventually be 
discarded entirely. The Harvest and the sifting process 
—the winnowing of the "chaff" from the "wheat"— will 
blow these away, as the Lord represented in the parable, 
and they will no longer even pretend to be of the true 
Church. The line of demarcation, before the close of the 
Harvest time, will become so distinct that it will leave 
no question as to who are and who are not of the 
Church. 

Coming down, then, more particularly to the difference 
between "the more than conquerors," the "Little 
Flock," and the conquerors, the "Great Company," we recognize 
both of these as being of the Church of Christ, both 
as being represented in the original and preliminary type 
of the Church, viz., the Passover. On that night of passing 
over, which typified this Gospel Age and the passing over 
of "the Church of the First-borns," we find that all the 
first-born of Israel were passed over, and that subsequently 
the Lord exchanged these first-borns for the 
tribe of Levi, including not only the first-born of every 
family of that tribe, but all the Levites; and so all of the 
Levite class are passed over. And the types further 
show us that both the Little Flock, the Royal Priesthood, 
and the Great Company, the antitypical Levites, are "the 
household of faith," both constituting the "Church of the 
First-born, which are written in heaven" (Hebrews 12:23); 

R4654 : page 244 

and, if not blotted out, their names will continue 

there, and they will have part in the heavenly inheritance. 

THE ANTITYPICAL TWELVE TRIBES OF ISRAEL 

The share of each of the above classes in the heavenly 
inheritance is shown in Revelation 7, where, first, the 
Little Flock is spoken of as constituting Israel— the 
twelve tribes of Israel. Those of the Jewish nation who 
maintained their relationship with God were not broken 



off from that position, but instead, were transferred from 
natural Israel and became the nucleus of spiritual Israel. 
Inasmuch as this left many of the designed number yet 
to be provided for, God arranged, as had been shown 
through the prophets would be done, that the deficiency 
should be supplied from amongst the Gentiles. So, then, 
the work of this Gospel Age has been to fill up those 
twelve tribes with Gentiles to take the places of the Jews 
who were broken off from that special place or plane of 
privilege. And we, if we make our calling and election 
sure, shall be of these twelve tribes, though we may not 
know to which tribe we shall be assigned. 

To illustrate: A man enlisting here in New York 
for military service might be sent to one or another of 
the different regiments to be filled up from time to time; 
so with us. The Lord in his providence fills up these 
tribes of Israel, the whole number being stipulated to be 
12,000 for each tribe, or 144,000 altogether. It might 
make no particular difference to us to which tribe we belong, 
and yet there is a bare possibility that since our 
Lord is "the Lion of the Tribe of Judah," there may be 
some special gradation suggested in this tribe; so this 
Royal Priesthood may be divided into twelve different 
classes. 

There is no revelation on this subject, and it behooves 
us "not to be wise above that which is written"; 
but since these tribes had different standings, as shown 
in the prophecies made respecting them, so there is 
seemingly quite a possibility that there will be twelve different 
stations or ranks among the saints. 

THE GREAT COMPANY 

Aside from the special class of overcomers, the "more 
than conquerors," as the Apostle calls them, those who 
voluntarily and willingly lay down their lives, presenting 
their bodies living sacrifices, and carrying out that consecration 
to sacrifice— aside from these, there is a large 
number of consecrated people of God. We do not know 
their number, which has not been predestinated, as is 
shown in Revelation— "Whose number no man knoweth." 
All are called to the Priesthood; all consecrate to be 
priests, but failing to make their calling and election sure 
as Priests, many of these fall back into this Great Company 
class, who not only made a consecration, but were 
begotten of the holy Spirit, and are, therefore, the Lord's, 
his children on the spirit plane. These are such as did 
not draw back in the sense in which the Apostle speaks 
when he says, "If any man draw back, my soul shall have 
no pleasure in him." We understand the Apostle here to 
mean a drawing back unto perdition— the words, "draw 
back," signifying to do despite to all the favors of God, 
to lose all relationship with the Lord, to turn back to 
wallowing in the mire of sin and to take pleasure in the 
works of the flesh and the devil— anger, malice, hatred, 
envy, strife. 



This Great Company, however, while failing to go 
forward voluntarily and gladly to perform their sacrifices, 
as they had covenanted to do, will not be cast away, because 
they are still at heart faithful to the Lord; but they 
will be dealt with in a special manner by the great Redeemer, 
the Head of the Church. His dealing with them 
will be, as Scripturally shown, to send them away "into 
the wilderness," into a great "time of trouble," where 
they will have special and severe testings, which will 
demonstrate their character definitely; and where they 
must give up their lives. Either they will renounce the 
things of the Lord and forsake him, or they will desire 
to be faithful to the Lord and to hold fast to him. If 
they thus hold fast they will be counted of that Great 
Company of whom the Revelator says (Rev. 7), "After 
this I beheld and, lo, a Great Company out of all nations 
and peoples and kindreds and tongues, stood before 
the throne. And the angel said unto me, Who are 
these? And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest; and he 
said, These are they which have come up out of the 
great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made 
them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are 
they before the throne of God and serve him day and 
night in his temple"; and palm branches were given unto 
them. 

Here we see a wide distinction between this Great 
Company of spirit-begotten ones, ultimately overcomers, 
who will be "before the throne" and have palm branches, 
palms of victory, and who will have washed their robes 
and made them white during the time of trouble, and 
the Little Flock who will sit with the Lord in his throne 
and who, instead of bearing palm branches of victory, 
will have the crowns of glory; and, instead of serving 
in the Temple, will be the Temple itself. As it is written 
of the "more than conquerors," "I will make him a pillar 
in the temple of my God."— Rev. 3:12. 

The differentiation, or separation, between these two 
classes in the "Church of the First-born" is marked, as 
indicated by the Lord's parable of the Wise and Foolish 
Virgins— a parable which, by the description, we see is 
applicable in the end of this Age. According to this 
parable certain tests will come and some will be found 
"watching" with their lamps trimmed and burning, and 
will be listening to hear the Bridegroom's call, and will 
go forth, braving opposition and hostility and darkness 
of the night through which they must pass, to go with 
their beloved Bridegroom to his home and enter in. 
When the last one of these Wise Virgins shall have gone 
in, we are told that the door will be shut, by which we 
understand that the door of privilege to enter that class 
will be closed to all the rest of mankind. But we are to 
remember that the entire ten virgins represent the Kingdom 
of Heaven, or, in other words, the Church. Hence 
a part of that Church is shut out when the door is closed. 
Not merely is the world shut out, but the Foolish Virgins 
also, who, however, are not to be counted with the 



world, because they are "Virgins." They are Virgins who 
have been associated with the Wise Virgins, and for a 
time without any distinction being apparent, but who 
in the testing time are not found worthy to be of the 
Bride class. 

THOSE WHO WILL HAVE THEIR PORTION WITH 
THE HYPOCRITES 

These Foolish Virgins, the parable shows us, will 
finally learn the way. They will get the oil and will trim 
their lamps. In other words, they will receive a larger 
measure of the holy Spirit, represented by the oil, and 
will have clearer enlightenment from the Word of God, 
represented by the lamp. They will trim their lamps and 
go forth then, that they, also, may enter into the Marriage; 
but they will find that the Wise Virgins have all 
gone in and that the door is shut. Then they will stand 

R4654 : page 245 

without and knock, saying, "Lord, Lord, open unto us" 
(Matt. 25: 1 1); we desire also to be of the Bride class; 
we desire also to enter the heavenly glory. The Lord will 
answer them, however, and say, "I know you not." I 
do not recognize you. I recognize only one "Bride." 
My Bride class has already entered in, and I cannot 
recognize others as the Bride. These shall then go away 
into the time of trouble to wash their soiled robes and 
make them white. 

This time of trouble, we understand, is the great 
"time of trouble" that is coming upon the world. It will 
also be upon this Great Company class, which will not 
"be accounted worthy to escape those things coming upon 
the earth." The Lord admonishes us prophetically that 
there would be some such; and he warns us saying, "Pray 
that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all those 
things that shall come to pass and to stand before the 
Son of Man." (Luke 21:36.) The Little Flock watches 
and escapes and will stand before the Son of Man approved 
and will be received as the Bride of Christ. But 
this Great Company, although they are consecrated and 
spirit-begotten, and have never denied the Lord, have not, 
nevertheless, the proper zeal and spirit of self-sacrifice 
and will not be permitted to enter in with the Bride class, 

R4655 : page 245 

but will be thrust out and "have their portion with the 
hypocrites." 

These are not hypocrites, however, but since the time 
of trouble is properly for hypocrites, they will have their 
portion with the hypocrites. The parable shows us nothing 
further respecting these, but we are shown elsewhere 
(Rev. 7) that in that time of trouble they "will wash 
their robes and make them white in the blood of the 



Lamb." As a result they will be granted the palm 
branches and the place before the throne, to serve God in 
his Temple. 

"THE KING'S DAUGHTER--THE VIRGINS, HER COMPANIONS, 
THAT FOLLOW" 

The same thought we find given us in Psalm 45, where 
the end of this age is pictured. There our Lord is shown 
as the great King in glory. The Church, the Little Flock, 
is pictured as the Bride, and the Great Company, as her 
virgin companions, that follow her. We are also told in 
that connection that the Bride will have special adornment, 
special beauty, and will have the special place of 
preference. Another Scripture tells us that there is but 
one Bride of Christ, saying, "My dove, my undefiled, is 
but one; she is the only one of her Mother." (Cant. 6:9.) 
Reverting to Psalm 45 again: We are told that 
after the Bride, adorned in golden raiment and fine linen, 
is received by the King, the Virgins, her companions, 
shall also be brought before the King and shall enter into 
the Palace. This is in perfect agreement with the custom 
of olden times, that when a wife was taken, the 
father would present with the wife, a maid-servant, who 
would accompany her mistress and would necessarily be 
associated with her. Sometimes more than one maid-servant 
would be presented, as pictured in this Psalm. 
Now, if a Bridegroom were alluding to his family, while 
he would speak of only the one person as his wife, he 
would include as a part of his family or household her 
maid-servants. So likewise in this family of Christ. 
Not only is the Bride to be the Body of Christ, the 
Bride of Christ, and joint-heir with him, but the Virgins, 
her companions that follow her, will be members 
of his general family or household, honorable servants, 
but not on the plane of the Bride, who will share the glory, 
the honor and the nature of the Bridegroom. 

NEITHER PRIESTS NOR LEVITES HAD INHERITANCE 
IN THE LAND 

In the type of the Priesthood, and the Levites, Aaron 
and his sons constituted the Priesthood, and only these 
had to do with the offering on the Day of Atonement, and 
only these had special rights and privileges. Neither 
Priests nor Levites, however, had inheritance in the land 
with the others. (Num. 18:20; Deut. 18:1,2). Thus again 
was shown the fact that this Great Company, represented by 
the Levites, as well as the Little Flock, represented by the 
Priests, will have no inheritance in the earthly promises, 
in the earthly possession, in the earthly restitution. 
Their inheritance will be on the spirit plane, separate and 
distinct from all the remainder of the world, which will 
then come into blessing under the Royal Priesthood and 
this company of Levites or instructors. In the case of the 
Levites, we remember that they were set apart to serve 



the Tabernacle. The Great Company are said to serve in 
the Temple, and the Priest Class, the Little Flock, we 
have said before, are the Temple. In other words, the 
Great Company class will be the servant-class on the 
spirit plane; so it was in the type. The Lord said to Aaron 
that he had given all the Levites to be servants of the 
priests in their ministry; so the two figures correspond. 

Coming down then finally to the question, we see that 
in the present time it is not pertinent for us to attempt too 
closely to decide who will be of the Bride Class and who 
will be of the Great Company, as all are of the Ecclesia; 
but, as the Scriptures say, to "walk humbly," lest we ourselves 
should not be accounted worthy of the great prize. 
It is for us to trust that we may be amongst those "more 
than conquerors," who by zealously laying down their 
lives in a sacrificial manner shall be reckoned worthy to 
be of the Royal Priesthood— to "sit with him in his throne, 
even as he also overcame and is set down with the Father 
in his throne." 

Considering the Church, then, as those who will ultimately 
be accepted as of the Priesthood, it consists of the 
Bride class alone and no others; however, from another 
viewpoint, we may speak of the entire household of faith, 
including both the Great Company and the Little Flock, 
the real Church of the First-born, as an ti typical Levites. 
The Apostle speaks of the Church in its present condition, 
saying, "Ye are a Royal Priesthood," referring, of course, 
to what is the ultimate aim, the ultimate hope set before 
us all, whether we make our "election sure" or not. 
Again the Apostle Paul speaks of the Church and likens 
it to the members of the human body, saying, "The eye 
cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; neither 
the head to the foot, I have no need of thee"; for every 
member is necessary. (I Cor. 12:21.) We understand 
the Apostle here to be speaking of all of the consecrated, 
and not specially differentiating between the Little Flock 
and the Great Company. Indeed, we are not at present 
competent to form such a distinction or such a classification. 
That is decidedly the Lord's work during this 
time in which we are living, the harvest time, and he will 
separate those who are sacrificers from those who are 
not sacrificers. 

"Up, then, and linger not, thou saint of God, 
Fling from thy shoulders each impeding load; 
Be brave and wise, shake off earth's soil and sin, 
That with the Bridegroom thou mayest enter in. 
O watch and pray! 

"Gird on thy armor; face each weaponed foe; 
Deal with the sword of heaven the deadly blow; 
Forward, still forward, till the prize divine 
Rewards thy zeal, and victory is thine; 
Win thou the crown!" 



R4656 : page 246 

PROGRESSIVE AND COMPLETED JUSTIFICATION 

THE Court and the Tabernacle may properly 
be viewed from two different standpoints, 
the one representing the final accomplishment 
of the things typified and the other 
representing the tentative accomplishment 
of those things and the progress toward 
their full attainment. For instance, not 
every one who makes the consecration to 
death and passes beyond the first vail of 
consecration into the holy or spirit-begotten 
condition will be a Priest, and yet only the Priests were 
allowed in the Tabernacle. Those who come into this 
Tabernacle now by consecration and fail to become 
Priests will fail to keep their standing in this place. They 
purpose to live up to their consecration, but come short; 
hence they fail to maintain their standing as Priests, but 
fall back and become Levites. 

Likewise some come into the Court and essay to 
be antitypical Levites who do not attain to all the privileges 
of Levites because they do not conform their lives 
fully to all that is required of Levites. Such are reckoned 
as coming into the Court condition for a time, but, failing 
to go on and make consecration, lose their standing, the 
prospective standing of Levites. As it is only a tentative 
standing, originally, they must come up to certain requirements 
to make it sure, to make their selection as Levites 
firm, positive, lasting. 

STEPS NECESSARY TO BECOME A LEVITE 

Whoever takes the first step of belief and turns from 
sin and approaches the altar, and then goes on toward 
the laver, is certainly evidencing the fact that he desires 
to be one of the Levite class; but he is a member of this 
Levite class, as yet, only in this tentative or prospective 
sense. The Levites must go further than merely believing 
in Christ and turning from sin. Every Levite must figuratively 
receive the anointing oil on his ear, his thumb 
and the great toe of his right foot. He must make his 
consecration the same as that of the priests; he must be 
fully consecrated in order to serve. The person, therefore, 
who has merely turned away from sin and has 
in antitype received no recognition of the holy Spirit either 
upon his ear, thumb or toe, has not become, in the fullest 
sense, a Levite and if he does not go on and become a 
Levite in full he will not, by and by, have a right to 
any place in the Court condition— when the testing time 
shall prove that he has not gone on to make good, to 
accomplish, his consecration as a Levite. 

What, then, is necessary to become a Levite? We 
answer: The same consecration is necessary to a Levite 



that is necessary to a Priest, and those who will become 

Levites must make the consecration even unto death, and, 

if they fail to become Priests, it is because they do not 

carry out that consecration unto death. But though 

losing their position as Priests, if they still maintain 

their faith and a measure of obedience, they are counted 

as of the household of faith, typified by the Levites. In 

other words, the "Great Company" class is the Levite class, 

and no one can be of the "Great Company" class unless 

he has made a consecration; and he is counted an antitypical 

Levite only because of his failure to be of the 

priestly class, the sacrificing class. Those who never 

go on so far as to make a consecration, never get justification 

in full in the present life. Their hope will be 

the same as that of the remainder of the world, viz., a 

hope of actual justification during the Millennial Age 

—Restitution. In other words, this matter of faith-justification 

is merely an incidental feature connected with 

the consecration to death— for the selection of this special 

class which is now being called. To impute justification 

to any except these would be greatly to their 

disadvantage. 

CHRIST'S MERIT NOT IMPUTED BEFORE 
CONSECRATION 

To use an illustration: Suppose that Brother A had 
full justification accounted to him and was introduced 
to the Father, and suppose that Brother A then failed 
to maintain his justified standing; the result would be that 
he would fall into the Second Death, because he had had, 
in this faith-justification, all that Christ could give him; 
there would be nothing more to give him by and by. He 
could not come in with the world and get a share in the 
world's justification. Therefore the Lord has arranged 
that none shall have this complete faith-justification now 
except those who first turn from sin and believe in the 
Lord Jesus Christ and who, on the strength of that turning 
from sin and faith in Christ, present their bodies 
living sacrifices to God. God's arrangement for such is 
that Christ shall then step in, and that which they had 
been enjoying in a measure, previously, as regards relationship 
to God, etc., is brought to its actual fulness when 
Christ imputes his merit to that which they have fully 
consecrated to death— their earthly life, their earthly 
nature. He imputes his merit to them at the moment of 
their having presented themselves; and at that moment 
the Father accepts the sacrifice and seals or shows his 
acceptance by the impartation of the holy Spirit, begetting 
them to the new nature. So, then, none now get justification 
in this full sense except those who have made the 
consecration and been accepted, and they can never regain 
the earthly rights because these were given up. 

To suppose that any during this age would be justified 
and maintain merely justification, while others would be 
sanctified, would be to suppose that God had called two 



classes, which he has not done— "Ye are all called in the 
one hope of your calling" and that one hope and that one 
calling of the Church is to membership in Christ, to be 
of the Royal Priesthood. 

Those who merely believe and fail to lay down their 
earthly life, their earthly nature, will not get the new 
nature, and therefore will have all the rights of that 
earthly nature by and by, during the Millennial Age, 
under the terms and conditions that God has provided for 
all mankind. They still belong to the human family, for 
whom Christ died. When the time shall come for him 
to make application of his merit on behalf of Israel, and 
all the families of the earth who become Israelites, these 
will be included. The only ones not included in this will 
be those who during this Gospel Age have accepted Christ 
by faith and have made consecration of themselves and, 
having died to all earthly interests, are begotten of the 
holy Spirit. Everyone else will have a share in the 
Restitution provisions of God's great plan, which will go 
into effect as soon as the High Priest shall make the 
second sprinkling of blood antitypically on behalf of 
Israel and the world. 

Is it not true, then, someone may ask, that no one 
passes from death unto life until he has made his consecration 
and has his justification vitalized? Yes, we 
answer. No one passes "from death unto life" until 
he makes his consecration and until Christ imputes his 
merit to that consecration and the Father accepts it. 
Then he passes "from death unto life." As the Apostle 
says, "Hereby we know that we have passed from death 
unto life, because we love the brethren" and he evidently 
is speaking of the Church class exclusively. 

R4657 : page 247 

"CALLETH THOSE THINGS WHICH BE NOT AS 
THOUGH THEY WERE" 

And, again, someone may ask, how can we understand 
the following in connection with the foregoing— "God is 
not the God of the dead but of the living"? (Luke 20:38.) 
Our Lord was not speaking of things as they are actually, 
but he was looking down prophetically to the end of the 
Age. At the time this was said, we remember, the Lord was 
referring to God's statement that he was "the God of 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob." (Rom. 4:17.) Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob were dead; they were members of Adam's 
condemned race and were in the tomb and Christ had not 
yet died; therefore, they had not been justified to life 
and Jehovah's words were to be understood merely in a 
prophetic sense— that, in view of what he intended to do, 
these would have life and that he was their God, for he 
could not speak of himself as being the God of any who 
would be destroyed in the Second Death, those who would 
die like a brute beast.— 2 Pet. 2:12. 

From the time we begin to approach God we may have 



proportionately a sense of relief, because we realize that 

he is merciful and gracious; and the Scriptures assure us 

that in proportion as we draw near to him, he will draw 

near to us. This is the attitude of all those who are 

approaching God, "feeling after God if haply they may 

find him," and who desire to know God and to do his will 

and to be in harmony with him. They have a measure of 

peace, a measure of joy, a measure of blessing. They are 

going in the right direction; but it is one thing to go in 

the right direction and another to reach the right spot; 

they do not reach the right spot until they have gone all 

the way to full faith and full obedience and the acceptance 

of the Lord's provision, that if they would be his disciples, 

followers of him, they must "take up their cross" and 

walk in his steps, and, as the Apostle says, present their 

bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable unto God, 

their reasonable service. Of this class it could be truly 

said, "There is, therefore, now no condemnation to them 

that are in Christ Jesus." (Rom. 8:1.) They are in 

Christ Jesus in the sense of coming into this relationship 

of begetting of the Spirit and of being members of his 

Body. These are walking, not after the flesh, but after 

the Spirit, because they have been begotten of the holy 

Spirit. The others who turn from sin to God, but who 

never make consecration, are still under the Adamic condemnation 

because they have never "escaped the condemnation 

that is on the world," for there is only one way 

now in which we can escape and that is through the 

arrangement of this Gospel Age that we shall not only 

believe but consecrate. Thus we have the impartation of 

Christ's merit. 



R4655 : page 247 

"THE BETTER SACRIFICES" 



"For if the blood of bulls and of goats and the ashes of an heifer 
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the 
flesh; how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through 
the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, 
purge your conscience from dead works 
to serve the living God?"— Heb. 13:14. 

MOSES took the blood and sprinkled it both 
upon the Book of the Law and upon all 
the people, for the institution of the Law 
Covenant. And this was repeated year by 
year, the repetition being necessary to 
maintain the cleansing and their Covenant 
relationship with God. 

That a cleansing of a certain kind was 
accomplished is evident, because the nation 
which at the beginning of the Day of 
Atonement was counted unclean— the people being commanded 



to repent in sackcloth and ashes and to fast and 
to "eat no pleasant food"— were thus symbolically represented 
as being in great distress through sin and Divine 
condemnation until the close of this day, when the High 
Priest came out and blessed the prostrated multitudes and 
they arose with a shout of joy. This institution of the 
Law Covenant at the hand of Moses and the repetition 
of it year by year by the priests of Israel, produced a 
cleansing effect in the sense that as a nation they were 
reckoned clean, as being justified for that year, which 
began with the Day of Atonement and would last 360 
days, or until the following Day of Atonement. 

But all the while the people of Israel realized that 
they were not actually cleansed from sin; that there was 
merely a covering of their sins for the year, and that this 
was the reason why, when the year was past, it was necessary 
for them to recognize again their defilement, individually 
and collectively, and to make use afresh of the 
provisions for sin-cleansing. 

THE GREATER SACRIFICES THAN THOSE OF BULLS 
AND GOATS 

The Apostle here goes on to show that the basis for 
that reconciliation was the sacrifice represented by the 
blood, and that this, being efficacious with God— a certain 
typical merit attaching to that typical sacrifice— it 
would be an easy matter for them to understand that he 
had now, as shown in the text, provided a better sacrifice; 
that a larger value attached to this greater sacrifice, 
and that this would be sufficient— not to typically cleanse 
the people and bring them back into a temporary reconciliation 
with God, but sufficient also to establish them 
fully and completely in the Divine favor. 

This greater arrangement, then, is that Christ had 
offered himself through the eternal spirit to God, and 
this, to all who rightly accept him, cleanses from all consciousness 
of sin. We realize that it is not a covering 
for a moment, or for a day, or for a year, but a permanent 
covering, through faith, of all of our sins that are 
past. We have the basis for this in the fact that we are 
drawn of the Father and invited to approach him. When 
we do this and believe in Christ, God approaches us and 
thus he recognizes our step of justification; and when 
we come fully to him and give him our hearts, this Great 
One, who has offered himself as a Better Sacrifice, 
appears as our Advocate, to the intent that we may be 
accepted of the Father as members of Christ's Body- 
as members of the Bride class. He then applies the merit 
of his sacrifice on our behalf to make up for our Adamic 

R4656 : page 247 

sin and imperfection, that we may be acceptable sacrifices. 
Thenceforth our flesh, which is reckoned justified 
fully and freely through faith in Christ and consecration, 



is considered dead— "Ye are dead, and your life is 
hid with Christ in God."— Col. 3:3. 

And not only is the flesh counted dead, but the New 
Creature alone is thenceforth recognized of God. The 
New Creature is not the old creature; it has a new 
standing and is not responsible for the sins that are past, 
because those were all canceled when the old creature 
was accepted as a "living sacrifice" in conjunction with 
the merit of the Advocate. Hence the New Creature has 

R4656 : page 248 

a consciousness of absolute forgiveness of the sins of his 
mortal flesh reckoned dead— for "there is no condemnation 
to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after 
the flesh but after the spirit."— Rom. 8:1. 

If he should turn again to walk after the flesh he 
would incur condemnation as a New Creature. For the 
New Mind to turn wilfully to sin would imply that it had 
died, and that the Old Mind had come to life again. Such 
are "twice dead— plucked up by the roots," as the Apostle 
says (Jude 12); they have ceased to have any relationship 
with God. All who are consecrated and begotten of the 
holy Spirit and who are abiding in the Lord Jesus through 
faith, seeking to walk in his footsteps, are privileged to 
know that their sins are forgiven and that nothing in the 
past can in any sense stand against them. As the Apostle 
says, "Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that 
died;" yea, "It is God that justifieth." (Rom. 8:34,33.) 
The very One who "condemned sin in the flesh" has 
accepted us as New Creatures, has justified us and admitted 
us to his family as members (prospectively) of 
the Royal Priesthood. 

The typical yearly cleansing of the Jews was not a 
faith-cleansing; it was an actual condition of things. God 
treated them, as a people, from that standpoint. They 
had privileges and favors which they would not have had, 
had they been Gentiles. "What advantage hath the Jew? 
Much every way, but chiefly because to them were committed 
the oracles of God" (Rom. 3:1,2), and because of 
God's arrangement that if they committed a trespass the 
priest would offer a peace offering for them and cleanse 
them. All these were blessings and opportunities which 
they had as Jews by virtue of their covenant relationship 
established through Moses. But since their rejection of 
the Messiah that nation has had no relationship with 
God. They have been cut off completely from favor and 
"wrath has come upon this people to the uttermost."— 
I Thess. 2:16. 

But, God be thanked, we now see that their long period 
of disfavor and casting off is about ended, and they 
will soon be re-engrafted into the olive tree, from which, 
through unbelief, they were broken off (Rom. 1 1:17-24), 
and shall again share the fatness thereof, and, under the 
Christ glorified, will bring blessings to all the families of 
the earth. 



R4657 : page 248 

IS DEATH EXTINCTION? 

THE spark of animal energy which God supplied 

to Adam and which he in turn dispensed 

to his offspring and which was forfeited 

for him and his posterity by his act 

of disobedience, passes at death from the 

individual, as absolutely as it does from a 

brute beast. But the word "life" as used in 

a large number of instances does not stand 

merely for the spark of animal energy, but 

is a synonym for soul or being. 

In God's purpose and arrangement this being has not 
in death become extinct, because he has provided for it a 
future. There is, however, no sentient being in the sense 
of consciousness, or knowledge, or appreciation of pain or 
joy, or of any other experience, but the Divine Creator 
who first gave being has declared that in the case of Adam 
and his children it is his purpose to provide a Redeemer 
through whom all may be restored as completely as before 
they came under the death sentence. The world, 
which does not recognize God or his power, and which 
has no knowledge of the promise of resurrection through 
the merit of Christ's redemptive work, might properly 
enough speak of one in death as being as extinct as a 
dead animal; and this is the standpoint of the agnostic; 
but by believers instructed of God respecting his purpose 
in Christ, and the resurrection of the dead, eventually, 
and the opportunity of eternal life to every one, this matter 
is to be viewed from the same standpoint that our 
Lord viewed it when he said, "To God all are alive"— 
that is, God purposes their awakening, and speaks of the 
present condition of Adamic death as merely a suspension 
of life, and not as extinction. 

WAS CHRIST EXTINCT DURING THE PERIOD OF 
HIS DEATH? 

It may be asked, Was not our Lord extinct from the 
time of his death until his resurrection? The Scriptures 
tell us that the man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom 
for all— a corresponding price. Again they tell us that 
"Christ died for our sins," and that he "arose again on 
the third day." But we do not understand that the One 
who arose was the same in all particulars as the One who 
died. He was "put to death in flesh"; he was "quickened 
(made alive) in spirit." In his case, therefore, the matter 
may be viewed from these two standpoints, viz., he died 
in the flesh, as a man, and as a man has never come to 
life again, and he never intends to use again, for himself, 
those manhood qualities. He has been raised from the 



dead a Spirit— "Now the Lord is that Spirit"— and this 
glorious Spirit Being whom "God has highly exalted and 
given a name above every name," is the One who will 
ultimately bless the world; he has the authority to do this 
great work in due time. 

This power and authority rest in the fact of his sacrifice. 
The manhood that he laid down, in death, relinquished, 
he is to give ultimately to Adam and all his race 
in harmony with the Apostle's statement that "as by man 
came death, by man will come also the resurrection of the 
dead," and "as all in Adam die, even so all in Christ shall 
be made alive," all who will come into relationship and 
harmony with God, through Christ, during this age or 
the Millennial Age. 

We see that the Church, the Body of Christ, has now 
the imputed merit of his sacrifice to cover all its imperfections 
and blemishes, enabling them to offer a sacrifice 
acceptable to God, holy in his sight, that we, by suffering 
with our Lord, might be accounted worthy to reign with 
him. 

We see that God's arrangement was that our Lord 
Jesus should first sacrifice his human nature at Jordan. 
He was reckoned dead from that time forward, throughout 
the three and a half years of his ministry, as well as 
during the three days he was in the tomb. He was dead 
so far as his earthly life was concerned, for he had fully 
surrendered this. At the time he made his consecration 
God gave him the holy Spirit and the Scriptures explain 
that this impartation of the holy Spirit signified a 
begetting of the spirit to a new life; in other words, that 
a new life there began. That new life developed during 
the three and a half years; and so with us. From the time 
we make our consecration and receive the begettal of the 
holy Spirit, this new life develops and progresses, only 
that with our Lord the progress was much more rapid 
in the graces, in all knowledge and harmony with the 
Father and in the development of himself as a New 
Creature and in enduring all the necessary tests and 
trials, because we are handicapped by the imperfections 
of the flesh, while he was perfect. 

R4657 : page 249 

THE LIFE OF THE FLESH VS. THE LIFE OF THE NEW 
CREATURE 

But as it is true with us that the New Creature thrives 
in proportion as the old creature dies, so it was with our 
Lord Jesus. He was coming nearer to perfection as a 
New Creature with every trial and every victory. He 
was approaching that standard which the Father would 
approve in the great High Priest and Head of the New 
Creation, until, at the time of his death, his words were, 
"It is finished"— his sacrificing of the flesh was finished, 
and that life which he had consecrated to sacrifice three 
and one-half years before and which was reckoned as 



passed away at that time, actually ceased on the cross. 
The New Creature was not brought forth in the birth of 
the resurrection, until the third day, but it was there in 
the Divine sight; it was "not possible that he should 
be holden of death." The whole matter was in harmony 
with the Divine plan. As he was born from the dead on 
the third day he must have been begotten previous to that 
birth, and his begetting was, as we have seen, at Jordan, 
when the Spirit of God was seen descending in the form 
of a dove. 

So, then, coming to the direct question, there are two 
standpoints of viewing the whole matter and to ignore 
either would not be wise. That physically our Lord died, 
lost the spark of life and all conscious existence as absolutely 
as any others lose it, or as any brute beast ever lost 
it, there can be no doubt. But the important point is as 
respects his soul or being. He never forfeited his right 
to life and it was when he made a consecration of it to 
death that the Father gave him the new life, and this 
resurrection life he lived during the three and one-half 
years of his ministry. The New Creature was counted 
alive from the Divine standpoint, as in the type he is 
pictured as the great High Priest in the Holy, offering 
incense. Just so it is with us, his followers. We are 
counted as risen with him from the time we make our 
consecration and are begotten of the holy Spirit. We are 
not only dead with him, but we shall reign with him, and 
we are risen with him through faith in the operation of 
God's power. If we were to lose faith in this operation 
of God's power we would then be taking our place with 
the world, for they ignore this power. It is for us to 
maintain the standpoint of faith, and, while recognizing 
the facts as respects the real spark of life and its extinction, 
to recognize also the Lord's Word and to count, 
as does God, the things that are not yet completed as 
though they were accomplished. 

page 249 

"God moves in a mysterious way 

His wonders to perform; 
He plants his footsteps in the sea, 

And rides upon the storm. 

Deep in unfathomable mines 

Of never failing skill, 
He treasures up his bright designs 

And works his sovereign will. 

His purposes will ripen fast, 

Unfolding every hour; 
The bud may have a bitter taste, 

But sweet will be the flower. 

Blind unbelief is sure to err, 
And scan his work in vain; 



God is his own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain. 



R4658 : page 249 

THE CAMEL AND THE NEEDLE'S EYE 

--AUG. 7.-MATT. 19:13-26.- 

Golden Text:— "Jesus said, Suffer little children to come unto me 
and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven." 

EN ROUTE toward Jerusalem the Master was 

met by mothers desiring to have his blessing 

upon their children. The Apostles, 

realizing the greatness of their Master and 

the importance of his time, forbade this 

and rebuked the mothers. When Jesus 

heard, he called them and said: "Suffer 

little children, and forbid them not, to come 

unto me; for such is the kingdom of 

heaven," and he put his hands in blessing upon their 

heads. 

From this we are not to understand that the Kingdom 
of Heaven will be composed of little children. This 
erroneous idea has gone broadcast, and such an impression 
respecting the Kingdom has thus resulted. On the 
contrary, no little children can get into the Kingdom. 
Only those who have the hearing of faith are even 
"called" to the Kingdom and its glories. Our Lord's 
blessing upon little children merely signified his sympathy 
and love and his appreciation of the purity and innocence 
of childhood. Those who will be of the Kingdom 
of God must be like little children in the sense of being 
simple hearted, true, honest and trustful of their heavenly 
Father— of such-like will be the inheritors of the 
Kingdom. 

Another account tells us of Jesus' further words to 
the effect that all who would be his disciples must become 
as little children— must be like little children in 
guilelessness, faith, etc. But those who will be heirs of 
the Kingdom will all be "overcomers." Such take up 
their cross and follow the Lord whithersoever he leadeth. 
As our Lord could not have taken up his cross when he 
was a boy of nine, so likewise children cannot become the 
followers of Christ in the Scriptural sense until they 
have reached the age of discretion, which with some 
may occur much earlier than with others. We have 
known children of twelve years or thereabouts to give 
excellent evidence of faith, obedience and consecration 
to the Lord's will and evidence of being begotten of the 
holy Spirit. These, of course, but no other children, 
could have hope of sharing with Christ in his Millennial 
Kingdom. 



THE YOUNG NOBLEMAN'S TEST 

On his journey our Lord was accosted by one who 
said, "Good Master, what good things shall I do that I 
may have eternal life?" He had the right idea, namely, 
that eternal life is the grand desideratum, the grand 
hope of all hopes before the human family. We are glad 
of the question, for it brought forth the inspired answer, 
in which everybody is interested. What is the value of 
the present life, except as it leads us up the passageway 
to eternal life? How utterly lost we should feel if assured 
that at death we would be blotted out forever! 
How little in this life would be worth consideration- 
how little it could do toward filling the longing of our 
hearts, which yearn for eternal life! 

Our Lord parried the question, in order to draw out 
the young man and make him commit himself. "Why 

R4658 : page 250 

do you call me good?" Why do you acknowledge me as 
a good teacher? I am either the Messiah, as I claim, or 
else an impostor and far from good. Do you accept my 
Messiahship? If you do not, how can you call me good 
or acknowledge that anything could be good that does 
not proceed from God, the Fountain of all goodness? 
But answering your question; if you would enter into 
eternal life, keep the commandments. The young man 
replied, Which? The Master answered, "Thou shalt do 
no murder, nor commit adultery, nor steal, nor bear false 
witness, but honor thy father and thy mother and love 
thy neighbor as thyself." The young man replied, "All 
these things have I observed from my youth. What 
lack I yet?" 

He was a model young man and Jesus loved him. 
Evidently he was keeping the Jewish Law to the extent 
of his knowledge and ability. He thought that he was 
loving his neighbor as himself; but this was a mistake 
which the Lord disclosed to him by the following suggestion: 
"If thou wouldest be perfect, go sell all that 
thou hast and give to the poor and thou shalt have treasure 
in heaven" instead of on earth; sacrifice also your 
earthly reputation and become my follower. 

Ah, how the Lord knew to put his finger on the sore 
spot! The young man had come to him very boastful, 
very sure that if any one in the world was seeking to be 
in harmony with the Divine arrangement he was that 
one. He came for the Master's approval, that he might 
hear him say, "You are the one exception to the rule." 
The Lord did not say, "If you love your neighbor as you 
love yourself you will at least put forth an effort to 
make that neighbor as comfortable as you desire to be 
comfortable." He was content to be very rich, while 
some of his neighbors whom he thought he loved as he 
loved himself were very poor— abjectly, sorrowfully so. 



When Jesus discovered to him the difficulty of his situation, 
he grasped it at once. He saw himself as never 
before. It became a new test with him. Thus it is with 
all. A previous lesson showed us the Kingdom as a 
great prize, a pearl of great value, a treasure, which to 
possess, will cost all that we have; and this lesson points 
out the same fact. 

Let us not make the mistake made by some, and suppose 
that the young man who lived so honorable a life 
and failed to gain heaven, would be thrust down into 
eternal torment because he did not sacrifice his all to 
become the Lord's disciple. His loss of the Kingdom 
was a sufficient penalty without suffering eternal torment 
in the future. Such members of the human family, 
under the blessed conditions of the Millennial Kingdom, 
will doubtless make very rapid progress and will obtain 
eternal life on the plane of human perfection, though 
not worthy of the Kingdom honors which belong only 
to the elect. And the elect are those only who are gladly 
sacrificing their lives and their all to gain the great prize. 

PASSING THROUGH THE NEEDLE'S EYE 

Our Lord commented upon the matter to his disciples 
and added that the rich must have great difficulty in connection 
with their endeavor to enter the Kingdom. He 
said, sympathetically, rather than in a denunciatory manner, 
"It is easier for a camel to go through the needle's 
eye than for the rich to enter the kingdom of God." This 
astonished the disciples very greatly, for they knew that 
the majority of the religionists of their day belonged to 
the wealthy class, the Scribes and the Pharisees. They replied, 
"Who, then, can get into the Kingdom, if these 
cannot?" Our Lord's reply was, "With men this is impossible, 
but not with God." Men would be inclined to 
say that God would find no one for the Kingdom at all 
if he rejected the rich. 

In a word, no rich man can get into the Kingdom. He 
must give up everything to the Lord or else be barred 
from a place in the Kingdom. The terms of acceptance 
are the same to the rich as to the poor. He who would 
have the "pearl of great price" must sell all that he has 
in order that he may obtain it. The rich must give up all 
to the Lord, and then as stewards of their riches will be 
held responsible for their stewardship. 

The following little poem describes the needle's eye, 
or small gate beside the larger gate, through which the 
camels might pass into the walled city after sundown 
and without any of their burden. So the rich by unloading 
and becoming poor may get into the Kingdom:— 

THROUGH THE NEEDLE'S EYE 

"Tall was my camel and laden high, 
And small the gate as a needle's eye. 



"The city within was very fair, 

And I and my camel would enter there. 

'"You must lower your load,' the porter cried, 
'You must throw away that bundle of pride.' 

"This I did, but the load was great, 
Far too wide for the narrow gate. 

"'Now,' said the porter, 'to make it less, 
Discard that hamper of selfishness.' 

"I obeyed, though with much ado, 
Yet still nor camel nor I got through. 

"'Ah,' said the porter, 'your load must hold 
Some little package of trust-in-gold.' 

"The merest handful was all I had, 
Yet 'Throw it away,' the porter bade. 

"Then lo, a marvel! the camel tall 
Shrank to the size of the portal small, 

"And all my riches, a vast estate, 
Easily passed through the narrow gate!" 



R4659 : page 250 

THE BLOTTING OUT OF SINS 

"Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted 
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the 
presence of the Lord."— Acts 3:19. 

ALL WHO have turned from sin and accepted 

Christ and made a full consecration of 

themselves to the Divine will, and have been 

accepted of God by the begetting of the 

Spirit, have their sins reckoned as covered 

or put away from Divine sight. So far as 

the New Creature is concerned, they commit 

no sin; but so far as their flesh is concerned, 

through which alone they can at 

present have conscious being, they are imperfect. 

These imperfections of the flesh, unwillingly 

theirs, are figuratively said to be covered with the Wedding 

Robe of Christ's Righteousness, imputed to them. 

The Church, however, hopes not to continue always in 

this merely imputed condition of righteousness, but to 

obtain eventually an actual righteousness. The Lord's 

Word guarantees that this shall be the Church's portion 

by virtue of a share in the "First Resurrection," "his 

resurrection." 



When that which is sown in weakness shall have been 
raised in power; when that which is sown in dishonor 
shall have been raised in glory; when that which is sown 

R4659 : page 251 

an animal body shall have been raised a spiritual body, 
then, so far as the Church is concerned, the blotting out 
of sin in the most absolute and complete sense will have 
been effected— but not until then. At present the Church's 
sins are covered, by Divine arrangement, through the 
great Advocate, Jesus. So, then, we see that this blotting 
out of the Church's sins will give her precedence over all 
the world of mankind; and following the blotting out 
of her sins in the "First Resurrection," will begin the 
Restitution work for all Israel and through them for all 
mankind. 

THE NEW COVENANT ISRAELITISH 

It might be asked, would the two texts (Romans 11:27; 
Acts 3: 19,20) prove that the New Covenant will not be 
made until the completion of the sacrifice of all the 
members of the Body of Christ, until after the merit of 
Christ's sacrifice shall have been applied, at the end of the 
Gospel Age, on behalf of the world? 

It is most conclusively proved in these texts, as well 
as in many others, that the New Covenant cannot go 
into effect with the people of Israel until the end of 
this Gospel Age. We are to remember, however, that 
the Lord has made a distinct provision by which all 
the "called" ones of this Gospel Age may come into 
Covenant relationship with him through Christ, through 
faith in the precious blood and consecration unto death, 
through justification by the merit of the great Advocate. 
These, however, could not maintain their Covenant relationship 
with God were it not for their privilege of 
going to the Throne of heavenly grace and there receiving 
mercy through the intercession of their Advocate 
for those trespasses which are unwillingly theirs as New 
Creatures. 

This expression, New Covenant, is not used in connection 
with any others of mankind than the Jews, because 
it is not true that God will make a New Covenant 
with the remainder of mankind. As the Apostle suggests, 
the word "New" here implies a previous Covenant which 
was counted Old, and this Old Covenant was not made 
with other nations or peoples than the Jews, of whom 
God declared that he "took them by the hand to lead them 
out of Egypt, which my Covenant they brake." (Jer. 31:32.) 
Hence, we should understand that all references 
to the New Covenant are references to God's arrangement 
with the Jewish people to supplant the old arrangement 
under Moses, under the conditions of which they 
are still condemned and bound. By this New, substitutionary 
Covenant, God will shortly release the Jew from 



the condemnation of the Old Covenant. 

It will be in an incidental way that other nations will 
be granted the privilege of coming under the same laws 
and arrangements with natural Israel, and of sharing 
with Israel in the blotting out of sin and in being restored 
to the Divine image and thus to full harmony and fellowship 
and Covenant relationship with God, which relationship 
all may maintain, if they will, throughout eternity. 
But we see that some of these who will thus be brought 
into Covenant relationship and turned over to God at the 
end of the Millennial Age will fail to maintain that relationship; 
and that under the testing incidental to the 
release of Satan at the end of the thousand years, some 
will manifest disloyalty and lose this standing and again 
fall into the condemnation of death— the "Second Death." 

THE BLOTTING OUT OF SINS 

We are not necessarily to understand the blotting out 
of sin to signify the blotting out of the recognition of 
sin. We may rather assume that through all eternity this 
great insurrection or rebellion— the reign of sin and death 
for 6,000 years upon this earth— will be a standing lesson 
to all of God's creatures throughout his Universe. True, 
it is said of Israel, "Your sins and iniquities will I remember 
no more," but this should be understood as signifying 
that their sins will be remembered no more against 
them in a condemnatory sense. In that sense of the 
word, and in every evil and unsatisfactory sense, these 
sins will be remembered no more; but as lessons of the 
exceeding sinfulness of sin and of the Justice of God in 
punishing it, and of the love of God in providing redemption 
from it— in this sense sin will doubtless always be 
remembered. 

The sense, then, in which this text applies to the blotting 
out of sins would be this: Sin and imperfection are 
written in all our mortal bodies. Not only does sin put 
its heavy hand upon us through death— the destruction of 
our physical frame in general— but it specially leaves its 
mark upon the mind, and upon the face— the index of 
the character. The blotting out of sin, therefore, or the 
lifting of individuals out of sin, out of imperfection, out 
of their blemished condition, will signify their uplifting 
to all those glorious qualities of heart and mind and body 
which were Father Adam's portion in the beginning, when 
he was in the image and likeness of God. 

In the case of the Church and her change in the 
"First Resurrection" the blotting out will not be a slow 
and gradual process, but an instantaneous blotting out. 
Her change will be "in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye, at the last trump." The Apostle tells us that the 
change effected thus in the Church will be glorious; that 
we shall be made like him who is the "express image of 
the Father's person." We shall see him as he is and 
share his glory. 



R4659 : page 251 

"THE PARABLE OF THE TALENTS" 

IT IS supposable that some of the Lord's 

people may not be what is termed talented, 

in the sense of possessing large talents or 

many talents, but it is not supposable that 

any one in the Body of Christ would be 

without some talent, some opportunity for 

service. This parable of the Talents implies 

it. (Matthew 25:14-30.) Every one of 

these servants was called; every one of 

them received either one or more talents— 

and the parable did not apply merely to the beginning 

of the age, to the Apostles, etc., but evidently was intended 

to be applicable down to the end of the age, until 

the Lord should return from the "far country." As those 

who lived at that time did not remain until the Lord's 

coming, therefore the parable must include all who would 

become his disciples down to his second advent. Otherwise 

we could not be viewed as "co-workers together with 

God." 

We cannot be servants if we have nothing wherewith 
to serve; we could not bring forth fruitage, either in 
ourselves or others, without some ability and opportunity. 
It therefore becomes an important matter to each to 
recognize the fact that he must have had given him at 
least one talent, and that he will be held responsible for 
the use of what he has. 

page 252 

NOT MANY WISE, MIGHTY, NOBLE CALLED 

R4659 : page 252 

In the case of some of the Lord's people it would 
seem wise to call attention to the propriety of making 
sure what talent they have, and to make sure that they 
are not trying to use one that they have not. It seems 
to be a general weakness or failing amongst mankind 
to try to do something they cannot do, and to scorn that 
which they are able to do. The Apostle Paul (I Cor. 1:26) 
said, "Not many wise, not many mighty, not many 
noble are called"— not that God objects to those having 
many talents serving his cause, but not many of these 
accept his call. Those who have many talents find many 
ways of using them and many people in the world to 
desire them; and, ambitious for place and preferment, 
they have an abundance of opportunity to shine before 
men; but in the Lord's service they would not, perhaps, 
find so good an opportunity for the display of their 
talents and, therefore, they would not gain the renown 



that might be theirs in the earthly pursuits. They would 
be accounted foolish by the world should they be very 
energetic in serving the Lord and seeking to glorify his 
name. "Why do you not become rich? Why do you not 
live in style and hold up your head among men and get 
a great name, etc.?" are suggestions which attract those 
who have many talents; therefore few of that class are 
disposed to accept the Lord's call; while those who realize 
that they never could make a name for themselves in 
the world, appreciate more, perhaps, the great "High 
Calling." 

However, many of these of small talents increase them 
by use and become quite proficient in the Truth in various 
lines in proportion as they are faithful in the use of the 
talents they possess. The Truth seems to have a brightening 
and clarifying effect upon all minds, great and 
small. 

One of the important lessons, then, for the Lord's 
people to learn is to notice what talents the Lord has 

R4660 : page 252 

given them, whether time, or education, or special opportunities 

for service; and to keep them in use, that 

their brilliancy may increase and not become dimmed by 

neglect. 

We can readily see that there would be, as already 
expressed, more difficulty with one of five talents, in 
making a consecration, than in the case of a one-talent 
man, although the man of one talent might have much 
cause for discouragement in feeling that his gift is insignificant 
and poor in proportion to what many others 
have. The man of five talents would have the opposite 
experience and be in danger of being puffed up, "heady 
and high minded." We might well reason that the Lord 
in these varying conditions would make his grace sufficient; 
indeed, he has promised so to do for all those 
who put their trust in him. 

"GIVE ME NEITHER POVERTY NOR RICHES" 

The man with the one talent has in some respects a 
better opportunity for making his "calling and election 
sure." However, Solomon undoubtedly was wise in requesting 
of the Lord, "Give me neither poverty nor 
riches." (Prov. 30:8.) In other words, probably the 
two-talent man would have a natural advantage, in 
that he would be neither so likely to be discouraged nor 
to be puffed up. 

These conditions are not of the Lord's making. If 
the Lord made a man with one talent, and made another 
with two talents, and another with five talents, he would 
in some way doubtless have equalized the matter so that 
the talents of one would offset those of another. But 
he has not given our talents in such a way. These are 
merely what we have by nature and what we bring to 



the Lord in consecration and devote to him, though they 
are, in another sense, all his gifts. The Lord, therefore, 
is not responsible for a man's having but one talent, nor 
for his having five, but at his consecration the Lord 
makes him steward over his possessions to do the best he 
can with them. 

The force of the argument would be, then, that the 
man with the five talents would have more difficulty in 
keeping them fully employed, fully devoted and fully 
separated from worldly ambitions, etc., than would the 
man who had fewer. So if any of us were given a choice, 
it would, perhaps, be wise to choose the medium, because 
of the increase of responsibilities to those possessing 
more. 



R4660 : page 252 

KEEPING OURSELVES IN THE LOVE OF GOD 

THIS thought of the responsibility of each 
child of God to keep himself, is set forth in 
various terms throughout the Scriptures. 
Our Lord said, "Watch and pray, lest ye 
enter into temptation." Our part is to do 
the watching and praying; to do our very 
best, and then it is God's part to overrule 
and direct and supervise our affairs so that 
all things shall work together for good to 
us, because we have come into this proper 
relationship with the Father. 

We recognize that this Scripture and other Scriptures 
are not given to the world, but are addressed only to 
God's people, to "the sanctified in Christ Jesus." It is 
these sanctified ones who are to keep themselves. The 
unsanctified, unholy, have not made any start toward the 
Lord, and are not, therefore, in a place which they 
should wish to keep; they are rather in an undesirable 
place which they should seek to abandon. But those who 
have accepted God's terms, and have been begotten of 
the holy Spirit, and have experienced an entrance into 
this "grace wherein we stand, rejoicing in the hope of 
the glory of God," are admonished that they must keep 
this place, must preserve themselves in this position, must 
"keep themselves in the love of God." If they do not 
thus keep themselves, do not keep their hearts with all 
diligence, they are not of the kind that God designs to 
keep; they are the kind that he designs shall fall, and for 
whom he has provided special snares and difficulties that 
they may fall— not into eternal torment, as some of us 
formerly thought— but fall away from the promises of 
God and the particular favors provided for the Elect. 

The Lord has not predetermined what place we shall 
occupy in the future, but he is allowing our course to be 
influenced by conditions of the present life, so that all 



those who choose to be in harmony with God may follow 
in the footsteps of Jesus. There are outward manifestations 
by which the Lord's people may know their own 
standing, and to some extent may be able to know of 
their progress. In proportion as one realizes the Spirit 
of Christ developed in himself, in proportion as he 
sees the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit, he may 
know of his own progress in the love of God, and may 
know also that unless he keep himself in the love of God, 

R4660 : page 253 

he will not stand, will not maintain his place, but will 
fall; as the Apostle Peter says: "If ye do these things ye 
shall never fall." If we conform to the Divine arrangement, 
if we keep ourselves in the love of God, we shall, 
therefore, be preserved. 

All those who are thus in Divine favor have the Divine 
promise and all the Divine power behind the promise, 
necessary to keep them. So, then, our text is in full 
accord with other texts bearing upon this subject. Those 
who are begotten of the holy Spirit have the responsibility 
of keeping themselves in that holy condition of heart. 
They may not be responsible for some of the outward 
circumstances that beset them, nor for the condition of 
others, nor for the temptations that come to them. They 
may not in the fullest degree be responsible for all of their 
own course, because of the imperfections of the "earthen 
vessel"; but under the Lord's providential arrangement, 
if they keep their hearts, "that Wicked One toucheth 
them not," will not injure them, will not harm them. 
His besetments may serve to test, may be permitted of 
God to work out for them, if properly exercised thereby, 
"a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory"; but 
the Adversary can do them no harm, because they belong 
to God, and he is pledged to defend in the highest sense 
the best interests of all those who have given their hearts 
to him in full consecration. 



R4660 : page 253 

"LET NOT YOUR HEART BE TROUBLED" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Of course 

you know that you have enemies and warm 

enemies as well as warm friends; and that 

the former manifest an evil, slanderous and 

back-biting spirit is only what we might 

expect, for thus we were forewarned of the 

Lord. I write you respecting one of these 

malicious endeavors to injure you and discredit 

the Lord's work which you are doing. 

The slander is that you inveigled a large 

sum of money, in some fraudulent manner, from a brother 



named Hope Hay. Indistinctly I remember some years 
ago the statement published in THE WATCH TOWER that 
Brother Hay had donated to THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
AND TRACT SOCIETY $10,000, and I infer that this is the 
transaction they have in mind. 

I am sure, dear Brother Russell, that this is merely 
another endeavor of the Adversary to poison the minds 
of some against you and against the Truth, of which you 
are the prominent representative. I am not, therefore, 
asking on my own account, but merely seeking advice as to 
what reply I should make to those who thus slander you. 
I know very well that you never so much as solicit money 
of anybody; and hence, that nothing could be further from 
your course than to obtain money under false pretense of 
any kind. In strong bonds of Christian love, 

Your brother in the dear Redeemer, C. A. OWEN. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S REPLY TO THE SLANDER 

DEAR BROTHER:-I am glad to have your letter. How 
sorry we feel for those enemies of righteousness who in 
bitterness of spirit lend themselves as tools to the Adversary 
in an endeavor to oppose the harvest work! I 
presume that the Lord permits such things as tests of 
faith and loyalty to him, and tests to his people as to what 
spirit they are of. Anyway, dear Brother, you will be 
glad to know that the more my enemies assail and falsely 
charge me with evil, the more the Lord blesses me and his 
work under my care. I am reminded here of the words 
of St. Paul respecting the thorn in the flesh which the 
Lord permitted him to have, but which he assured him 
would do him no injury, saying, "My grace is sufficient 
for thee." I answer, therefore, with St. Paul, "Most 
gladly will I rather glory in my afflictions that the power 
of Christ may rest upon me."— 2 Cor. 12:9. 

Your recollection that the matter of Brother Hay's 
donation to the Tract Fund was published in THE WATCH 
TOWER years ago is quite correct. Dear Brother Hay 
called upon me personally, saying that he had received a 
legacy of $20,000 and that, as he had a pension from the 
Canadian Government, he thought he could not do better 
than donate the entire legacy to the Lord's cause— as a 
donation to the funds of THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY. 

I replied that I appreciated very highly his generous 
spirit and that as the President of the Society I would not 
feel at liberty to refuse any gifts voluntarily tendered to it. 
However, as he had not yet made the donation and had 
asked my opinion respecting it, I gave that opinion. I 
said that if I were in his stead I would prefer to give 
only one-half of the sum at the time, and to retain possession 

R4661 : page 253 

of the remainder, with a view to using it so as to 
permit greater personal activities in the harvest field. 



Brother Hay thanked me for the advice and said he 
thought it to be good and that he would follow it. 

The Society's books show that from time to time subsequently 
he sent to us in all $9,500. They also show that 
this donation was specially used in harmony with Brother 
Hay's knowledge and wishes for the relief of some of the 
hundreds of Colporteurs who had gotten into debt in their 
endeavor to serve the Truth. Credits were given to these 
harvest workers in Brother Hay's name and many of them, 
we know, acknowledged the matter directly to him. The 
entire matter was published in THE WATCH TOWER 
columns that all of the dear friends might know of 
Brother Hay's generous course. Since then we have 
abandoned everything akin to publicity in respect to those 
who make donations to the Society's funds, deeming this 
to be the wiser course— the Lord's will. 

Brother Hay has been an invalid for several years. 
And we understand that he lost in various ways nearly all 
of the remainder of his legacy. Since we have none of 
Brother Hay's money in our possession, having expended 
every dollar of it in harmony with his wishes, we 
have not felt it to be our duty to take money contributed 
by others for the promotion of Christian knowledge to 
reimburse Brother Hay's losses. The Society has felt 
content in assuming the full responsibility of Brother Hay 
at a Canadian Sanitarium— selected by himself and his 
wife— paying all the charges of the same. This we did, 
not on the score of his donation to the Tract Fund, but 
on account of his having served in the Pilgrim work. We 
have assumed that his government pension, the amount 
of which we do not know, has been sufficient for the 
maintenance of his family, and that possibly the amount 
of the pension has been increased on account of his more 
serious illness. 

We are glad to make these explanations, dear Brother, 
but you can readily see how useless it would be for us to 

R4661 : page 254 

attempt to chase after all the mean and contemptible 
slanders and misrepresentations which the Adversary 
could find people mean enough to scatter. To chase 
slanders would waste our time and hinder the Lord's work 
—the very thing the Adversary would like to accomplish. 
We have given ourself fully and unreservedly to 
the Lord. This includes not only all of our powers and 
talents, but also amongst these our reputation. 
Yours in the love and service of the Redeemer, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



R4661 : page 254 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 



MY DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

Father Time has tolled off another year for you— a 
year of living, loving, sacrificial service for our Father 
and the brethren. How we wish we could show forth 
our appreciation for that service! Our Father has certainly 
blessed us through you. And at this time— when 
many who once walked with us, no longer walk 
with us, but vilify and persecute and misrepresent your 
teachings— we are especially grateful to our Heavenly 
Father because we still have a hearing ear and can still 
see more wondrous beauty in the Divine Plan, as shown 
us through his own appointed channel. 

In closing I desire to mention the Vow. When first 
you suggested it I resented it. One clause (which one 
I will not say) stood out before me in all prominence. At 
that time it was all that I saw in it; and, frankly, I opposed 
it and told myself and others also that I did not 
need it. Some months later, while in another city, I was 
walking along the street with a brother from a distant 
city and our conversation turned toward the Vow. Well, 
that night I made the Vow my own, and since then I find 
that above all things I needed most that particular clause 
that I objected to so strenuously. I thank God for the 
Vow. I desire an interest in your prayers to the end that 
I may be better able to keep it. 

And now, dear Brother, as you have entered into 
another year of service, may the Lord bless your efforts; 
may he give you grace abundant for every time of need; 
may he give you much joy; may he strengthen you and 
keep you faithful unto the end, and finally may you be 
among those whom he is pleased to call "more than conquerors" 
in and through our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ. 

Your brother only by his grace, H. W. MCALLISTER. 

IN REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I find your letter of the 13th ultimo awaiting me on 
my return from the Convention trip, and take this opportunity 
to reply. 

Your kind words of love and fellowship in our dear 
Redeemer are very especially appreciated and reciprocated. 
The confidence and co-operation of all the fellow-members 
in the Body is a very valued aid to me. 

I rejoice with you that the Lord graciously delivered 
you from any entanglement of thought in opposing the 
Vow, and that having made it to the Lord and acknowledged 
it in the presence of all his people you have found 
especial blessing therein. With the Psalmist we can say, 
"For thou, O God, hast heard my Vow; thou hast given 
me the heritage of those that fear thy name." 

Very sincerely your brother and fellow-servant. 



GENTLEMEN:- 

I found a copy of your PEOPLES PULPIT on my porch 
and am much interested in it. Enclosed find twelve cents, 
for which please send me the publication for one year. 
Also will you kindly send me sample copies containing 
the sermons, "Thieves in Paradise," "The Rich Man in 
Hell," and "Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." These you 
say are free. 

Yours truly, FRED S. LACKEY--N.J. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am requested to inform you of the number who 
memorialized at this place the death of our dear Lord. 

I wish to tell you what a blessed time we had. I believe 
it was because we had all been praying for the 
presence of the Master. In the afternoon we had a 
prayer, praise and testimony meeting. The evening meeting 
commenced with a song service. As we looked at 
the faces of the dear friends we could see joy mingled 
with sorrow. We tried in our weak way to show the 
oneness of our Lord and his Church. Then Brother 
Durant addressed us on the Bread and Brother Jackson 
on the Cup. I think I can speak for all the friends when 
I say that we deem it an unspeakable privilege to be 
counted worthy to drink of his Cup, and by and by to 
share his glory. 

We all pray for you, dear Brother, that the richest 
blessing of God may continue with you unto the end. 

Yours in the One blessed Hope, 

GEORGE LEE.-Fla. 



DEAR SIR:- 

I found one of the copies of PEOPLES PULPIT on a car 
one night on my way home and was so much impressed 
that I thought it wise to subscribe for it. Enclosed find 
12 cents for one year, and send me the following sermons, 
"Gathering the Lord's Jewels," "The Most Precious 
Text," "Liberty, Liberty, Liberty," "Sin's Small Beginnings, 
"Sin Atonement," "The Value of Toil," "Foreordination, 
Predestination and Election," "The Rich Man 
in Hell," "Where Are the Dead?" "Thieves in Paradise." 

A Brother in Christ, ROBT. COOPER.-I11. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have been thinking for some time that I would write 
to you and tell you how much I appreciate "Present 
Truth." I have been in the Truth two years, through 
the volunteer work of some of the brethren; chiefly 
Brother Seth Moore of this town. 

I had been a Baptist for twenty years and had been 



ordained to the ministry of that Church. I withdrew 
from that denomination eight years ago, and began a 
prayerful search for the Church of Christ. God answered 
my prayer, and now I love my God, my Saviour and my 
Bible better than I ever did before, and I have felt more 
real satisfaction and joy in two years than in all my past 
life put together. 

It was some time before I could get my own consent 
to send my name as one having taken the "Vow," but 
that "Vow" contains the sentiments of my heart, and 
may God help me to keep it! 

I am praying for the good work at Brooklyn and all 

R4661 : page 255 

over the world. Find enclosed 50 cts. for which please 
send me ten copies of "The Plan of the Ages," WATCH 
TOWER form. I want to do a little volunteer work myself. 
With much love, I am, 
Your Brother in Christ, J. W. WILSON.-Texas. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Realizing that I owe you many thanks, and out of a 
motive of love to you, I will give you a little of my testimony. 
I have been a peculiar fellow— first, a Lutheran, 

R4662 : page 255 

then an Infidel and the last thing an Evolutionist; but 
now, thanks to the Lord and you and Brother Senger, I 
am a Christian and am rejoicing in the Truth. 

Praying for you, dear Brother, that our heavenly 
Father will continue his care over you, I am 

Yours in Christ to the Glory of God, E. SNYDER. 



DEAR SIRS:- 

We were very much interested in the copy of the 
PEOPLES PULPIT, which was delivered at our door, and 
would like to have the issues which contained "Where 
Are the Dead?" and "The Rich Man in Hell," as these 
are subjects of great importance to us and our friends. 
Wishing you success in your undertaking, I remain 
Respectfully, J. A. SLOCUM,-N.Y. 



page 255 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI. Study II: The New Creation. 



SEPTEMBER 4 

(1) What terms are Scripturally applied to the Church 
of the Gospel Age and its ultimate members? P. 59. 

(2) Why have these terms not been appreciated by the 
majority of Christians? P. 59. 

(3) May we suppose the popular misconstructions of the 
Divine Word to be intentional? If not, how may we account 
for them? P. 60, par. 1, first half. 

(4) What were the "Dark Ages," and why so called? 
P. 60, par. 1. 

(5) What has been the difficulty amongst the followers 

of the Reformers during the past three centuries? P. 60, par. 2, 
first part. 

(6) What divinely appointed guides should the Church 
recognize and follow? P. 61. 

(7) What assistance should the Church now expect and 
accept from human instrumentalities? P. 61. 

(8) Give a resume of previous studies, leading up to our 
present topic, the New Creation. P. 61, par. 1. 

SEPTEMBER 1 1 

(9) Does the creation of various orders of beings signify 
a dissatisfaction on the part of the Creator? P. 62, 7th 
line to end of par. 

(10) Will there exist jealousies or covetousness among 
the creations on the several planes of being? P. 62, par. 1. 

(11) When Jehovah purposed the New Creation, what 
did he determine respecting those who should constitute its 
members? P. 63, par. 1, first part. 

(12) Why are these "New Creatures" not created on the 
Divine plane, and subsequently tried and tested? Why so 
separate and distinct from all others? P. 63. 

(13) Trace the philosophy of the Divine arrangement for 
the selection of the New Creation. P. 64. 

(14) What was the Divine pre-arranged privilege and 
test imposed upon the "Only Begotten"? P. 65, par. 1. 

(15) What was the exceeding great reward, "the joy that 
was set before" our Redeemer? P. 65, par. 2. 

(16) Why are the "brethren" of Christ selected from 
among the human creation, rather than from others? 
P. 66, par. 1. 

SEPTEMBER 18 

(17) What fact in the New Testament writings has 
caused many to infer, contrary to the Scriptures in general, 
that God's purposes are the same with respect to all mankind? 
P. 67, par. 1. 

(18) What are the "two salvations," and what confusion 
of thought results from failure to recognize the difference 
between these? P. 67, par. 2. 

(19) Aside from making their own calling and election 
sure, what two-fold work have the prospective New Creation 
to do in connection with the human family? P. 68, par. 1. 



(20) Explain why no other class of beings could be 
found so well adapted to ruling and blessing the world. 
P. 69, par. 1. 

(21) Is the work of uplifting, ruling, blessing and judging 
mankind the entire mission of the New Creation? P. 69, par. 2. 

(22) Although the Scriptures do not explicitly declare 
the future activities of the New Creation, what may we 
reasonably infer or anticipate regarding them? P. 70, par. 1,2. 

SEPTEMBER 25 

(23) What constitutes these New Creatures "priests"? 
P. 71, par. 1, first part. 

(24) What represents the new nature of these priests, 
and how is the victory of the New Creature attained? 
P. 71, par. 1. 

(25) Explain in detail how the Aaronic priesthood of 
Israel typified the present condition of the New Creation, 

and Melchizedek, their future priesthood. P. 72, top of page, par. 1. 

(26) Mention the apparent reason why the intimate relationship 
between the Only Begotten and the elect Church 

is so frequently referred to under various figures, and explain 
the significance of the "top-stone," as a figure. P. 72, par. 2. 

(27) Explain the "temple" figure. P. 73, par. 1. 

(28) Explain the beautiful illustration of the "human body 
with its various members." P. 73, par. 2. 

(29) Give numerous other figures showing this relationship 
of Christ and the Church. 

(30) What is perhaps the most perfect and complete figure 
of our Master's interest in and love for his brethren? 
Explain in detail. P. 74, par. 1. 



page 255 

ITEMS TO BE REMEMBERED 

EXCURSION-JAMESTOWN TO NIAGARA FALLS 

We have already advised that all who would like to visit 
Niagara Falls should wherever possible buy tickets via the 
same. However, in the interests of others who might like 
to visit the Falls, we have special arrangements for a Round 
Trip excursion for $1.50. Those desirous of making the 
excursion will please leave their addresses at Information 
Bureau, Celoron, on August 1. 



SEND FULL PAY OR NOTHING 

Conventioners are requested to send full payment for their 
accommodations or else send nothing. We cannot keep accounts 
with so many. 



R4662 : page 255 

AN IMPOSTOR NOTED 

A man considerably below average height, slightly built, 
small, dark mustache, and with a noticeably crooked left 
leg, and walking with limp, good talker and well posted doctrinally 
and knowing names of many brethren, has been imposing 
upon the friends in many places. He is skillful. He 
tells of needs, but refuses money at first. Later he accepts 
money with many thanks and promises, and proceeds to look 
for other victims. Letters, especially from Ohio and Pennsylvania, 
tell of his good success as an impostor. Usually he 
wants a railway ticket, then later sells it. We should not be 
suspicious of everybody in distress; but we should generally 
content ourselves with supplying food or raiment needed. 



R4658 : page 255 

BROTHER EDGAR'S BOOK 

Brother John Edgar, M.D., whose decease was mentioned 
in the July 1 issue and again referred to in the July 15 TOWER, 
a year ago, in company with his Brother Morton, visited the 
Great Pyramid and took measurements, photographs, etc. 
The result was the preparation of a book, of which we have 
seen a portion. It is gotten up in good style, good paper. 
Doubtless some of our readers will be interested in having it. 
We have placed orders for a quantity as soon as possible. 
The price will be $1.35, postage prepaid, and it can be ordered 
through either our Brooklyn or our London office. 



page 258 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 



edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The Atonement Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-1/2.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, five 
vol.; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, four vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish, 
Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform 
with English edition, prices the same. 

Vol. 6 German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 each. 



page 257 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI AUGUST 15 No. 16 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

"That He May Establish Your Hearts" 259 

How to Increase and Abound in Love 260 

The Object and Necessity for Such 

Development 261 

That We May Be Established (Fixed) 

in the Presence of Our Lord 261 

Did Our Lord Die for the Fallen Angels? 262 

Are We Begotten to the Divine Nature? 263 

"Go Ye Also Into the Vineyard" 264 

The Greatest— The Servant 265 



Israel's King Rejected 266 

"Your House Is Left Desolate" 267 

Some Interesting Questions 267 

"Thy Dead Men-My Dead Body" 268 

When Did Our Lord Become the Express 
Image of the Father? 268 

The Great Company or the Ancient 
Worthies 268 

Beginning of Melchisedec Priesthood 270 

Some Interesting Letters 270 

page 258 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CONVENTIONS 



UTICA, N.Y., AUGUST 21 



Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:30 
o'clock. Discourse for the interested at 7:30 in the evening 
in Genesee Hall, corner Oneida and Square. Discourse for 
the Public by Bro. Russell at Shubert Theater at 3 P.M. 
Topic: "Hereafter." 

FALL RIVER, MASS., AUGUST 28 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., SEPTEMBER 4 

OLD ORCHARD, ME., SEPTEMBER 11 

DETROIT, MICH., SEPTEMBER 18 



35 CENTS--ANY VOLUME, ANY LANGUAGE--35 CENTS 

Hereafter this will be the Office price of DAWN-STUDIES by 
mail or express, prepaid. The colporteurs are authorized to 
charge 5 cents additional on Volumes IV., V. and VI. WATCH 
TOWER subscribers are granted a wholesale rate on books for 
their own use or to give away or to sell as sharp-shooters at 
the regular rates. This wholesale price is 25 cents for Volumes 
I, II., III. and 30 cents for the others, IV., V., VI.- 
postage or express prepaid. 

The prices in Great Britain will be corresponding— to the 
public, Is. 6d., any volume, any language; to WATCH TOWER 
subscribers, Is. Id. for Volumes I., II., III., and Is. 3d. for 
Volumes IV., V. and VI.— each. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR SEPTEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family 
listens to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," 
then joins in prayer. At the breakfast table the 
MANNA text is considered: (1) 4; (2) 61; (3) 236; 
(4) 280; (5) 215; (6) 9; (7) 286; (8) 152; (9) 110; 
(10) 334; (11) 105; (12) 141; (13) 139; (14) 328; (15) 
155; (16) 117; (17) 119; (18) 8; (19) 35; (20) 130; 
(21) 47; (22) 273; (23) 7; (24) 125; (25) 246; (26) 
19; (27) 194; (28) 14; (29) 88; (30) 71; (31) 325. 



R4662 : page 259 

"THAT HE MAY ESTABLISH YOUR HEARTS" 

"The Lord makes you to increase and abound in love one toward 
another, and toward all men, even as we do toward 
you; to the end he may establish your hearts unblamable 
in holiness before God, even our Father, at [in] the 
presence [parousia] of our Lord Jesus 



Christ, with all saints."— I Thess. 3:12,13. 

NOT TO SINNERS are these words addressed, 

but to saints. Not those who have not the 

Spirit of Christ, the spirit of love, and who 

therefore, are none of his, does the Apostle 

exhort; but those who already have been 

begotten of the holy Spirit of love. Increase 

in love signifies that love already 

has attained an ascendancy in the heart, a 

mastery in the mind, by which it is progressing, 

conquering and bringing into subjection 

all the thoughts and conduct of life. And this 

thought, that love is to increase in the hearts of God's 

people, is in full accord with the general testimony of 

the Scriptures, that we are to grow in grace and in 

knowledge and in love; approaching more and more and 

attaining and maintaining the "mark" which God hath 

set before us as the standard of character for which he 

will be pleased to award the prize in due time. It is as 

though a cistern were being filled more and more with 

pure water from hidden springs, until, increasing and increasing 

it overflows with its abundance. Thus the 

Lord's people are to increase in love continually, until 

the love abounds or overflows in all the thoughts and 

words and conduct of life; not only carrying blessings 

to their own refreshment and to the refreshment of all 

with whom they come in contact, but also redounding to 

the glory and praise of God from whom this blessing is 

derived. 

The Apostle specifies only abounding love toward the 
brethren and toward all, but this presupposes the love 
which, first of all, is due to God our Father. Nor is 
it to be expected that any man will love his fellow-creatures 
to the extent indicated, unless he has first learned 
to love his Creator, has been taught of him, and has to 
some extent become a copy of his dear Son. This is in 
thorough accord with the Lord's statement of the full 
meaning of the Law, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with all thy mind, heart, soul [being], and strength, 
and [then] thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." No 
man can love his neighbor in this Scriptural sense, until 
he has first loved his God to such a degree as to be not 
only willing but anxious to do those things which are 
pleasing in his sight; for God is love, and he that dwelleth 
in love, dwelleth in God.— I John 4:16. 

One reason why love does not increase more rapidly, 
and abound more thoroughly amongst God's people, is 
that so many of them have been blinded by the Adversary 
to the real character of God, and under the misrepresentations 
of his character have been unable to worship 
and love him in spirit and in truth. Thank God for the 
light of the knowledge of himself now scattering the darkness 
and permitting his children to see him in his true 
light, in his glorious character! Thank God, the eyes of 
our understanding have been opened so that we can now 



see through the deceptions of the Adversary!— Rev. 20:3. 
The Apostle's words, "Even as we do toward you," are 
full of meaning and force. Paul and his associates were 
not teaching a Gospel which they did not appreciate and 
practise; on the contrary, they were exemplifying in their 
daily course of life this very abounding love, which, overflowing 
was leading them to sacrifice their own interests 
and rights and privileges for the sake of the Lord's people 
everywhere. They were laying down their lives for 
the brethren— daily, hourly; they were sacrificing for the 
sake of others, opportunities and privileges as respected 
their earthly life, earthly pleasures, etc. It is with particular 
force, therefore, that they exhort fellow-Christians 
to follow after them in the same way of self-sacrificing, 
loving obedience, as imitators of Jesus. And so 
it should be with all who exhort others to walk in the 
way of righteousness and love: In order that their words 
may have force and meaning they must exemplify them 
in their own lives. As they point to the "mark" of perfect 
love they must approximate that mark in their own 
daily lives, and certainly possess it in their hearts, their 
wills, their intentions. So whether they occupy pulpits, 
or whether they exhort others merely by the influence of 
their daily lives, they are living epistles read and known 
of all men who come in contact with them. The darkness 
may hate them, and say all manner of evil against 
them falsely, yet it must "take knowledge of them that 
they have been with Jesus" and have learned of him; 
that they have the same spirit, the same disposition of 
heart, however crooked their natural dispositions may be. 

R4662 : page 260 

HOW TO INCREASE AND ABOUND IN LOVE 

Ah, says one, I have been desiring to increase in love 
and to overflow it upon others for these many years; 
but I know not how to cultivate it. What shall I do that 
I may have this overflowing love? The Apostle impliedly 
answers this question— that it is not what we can do, 
but what the Lord can do in us and for us. His words 
are, "The Lord make you to increase and abound in love." 
It is the Lord's doing; we can accomplish very little for 
ourselves, and the sooner we learn this the better. The 
springs of our love must come from the fountain of love 
and grace and truth— from God, for "God is love." We 
began to receive of his spirit of love from the time we 
made our consecration to him, and began to live unto him, 
and not unto the flesh. He has various agencies and 
channels through which he is pleased to increase our 
love, and to cause it to abound and overflow and cleanse 
away the natural selfishness against which we, like all 
others, must contend. 

These channels of grace are represented to us under 
various figures in the Scriptures. One channel or 
agency is the Word of God; another is Divine Providence; 



another is the fellowship of the Body of Christ, 
the saints. The Lord uses all of these agencies in causing 
our love to increase and to abound. First, his Word, the 
basis of our faith and hopes, is also the basis of our 
love; for by giving ear to his Word, we taste and see 
that the Lord is gracious; that the Lord is loving; and in 
proportion as we see his love manifested, and discern his 
gracious character, in that same proportion we have before 
us the pattern toward which we are to aim, and love 
serves as the incentive to our emulation; as our Lord 
expressed it, "Be ye holy, even as your Father, which is 
in heaven, is holy." He is the pattern, and we are to 
copy that pattern as much as possible in our daily lives; 
but especially are we to have it as the accepted standard 
of our wills, our minds. 

The Apostle refers to the Word of God as water 
which cleanses us from defilements of sin and selfishness; 
speaking of "the washing of water through the Word," 
by which the Bride is to be cleansed and made fit for 
joint-heirship with the heavenly Bridegroom. (Eph. 5:25-27.) 
The Word of Truth cleanses our hearts by 
showing us our imperfections, in contrast with the divine 
perfections. And more than this, it encourages us with 

R4663 : page 260 

certain promises, the object of which the Apostle Peter 

declares, saying, "Whereby are given unto us exceeding 

great and precious promises, that by these we might become 

partakers of the divine nature." Were it not for 

these promises, these hopes held out, our strivings for increasing 

and abounding love would no doubt succumb 

before the adverse influences of selfishness and sin in the 

present time; but by these promises of the Word the 

Lord incites us to press along the line "toward the mark 

for the prize." 

Divine Providence comes to our aid at various times, 
to assist us in making progress "toward the mark"; to 
assist us in increasing and abounding in love; for if, peradventure, 
one who at heart is fully consecrated to the 
Lord should tarry by the way, and become overcharged 
with the cares of this life, the Lord, in much mercy and 
love, will perhaps permit affliction or disaster of some 
kind to overtake him, to be a chastisement, a lesson, an 
assistance, and thus, as the Psalmist expresses it, "His 
rod and his staff they comfort us." (Psa. 23:4.) It is by 
these providences of God that we are frequently taught 
lessons which we could never learn from the instructions 
of his Word alone. The lessons are impressed, or embossed, 
so to speak, upon the tablet of our hearts, and 
do us lasting good. 

Another channel of blessing and instruction which the 
Lord has provided and commended for the saints, and 
which surely has proven a blessing to all of the household 
of faith in running for the "mark," is the assistance 
which the Lord supplies to us through the "brethren." 



Sometimes it is "A word in season; how good it is!"— 
perhaps a word of counsel, perhaps a word of reproof, 
perhaps a word of instruction. Perhaps it is merely the 
testimony of daily lives of the brethren, as we see them 
patiently enduring hardness as good soldiers, without 
murmuring— taking with joy, with thankfulness, with 
faith, with confidence, all things which Divine providence 
may permit, assured that they are all working out future 
blessing. Although this channel of blessing might at 
first seem to be of the brethren, we are sure, nevertheless, 
that it is of the Lord, though through the brethren. It 
is because the brethren who render such assistance in 
the way are the brethren who themselves are receiving 
assistance from the Lord; and so it has been from first 
to last; the Elder Brother, and all the brethren, as they 
become advanced members of the Body of Christ, joyfully 
assist, even to the extent of laying down their lives 
for the brethren, and all this is the work of God— the 
effect of his spirit. By all these various agencies God is 
working in us to will, and working in us to do his good 
pleasure— that we may increase and abound in love. 
But who are the "you" referred to by the Apostle? 
Does he mean that God makes all men to increase and 
abound in love? Surely not. The vast majority of men 
have no knowledge of the love of God here referred 
to. At the very most they know only the 
natural love, and frequently very little of that. 
When the Apostle says, "The Lord make you 
to increase and abound in love," he refers to the Church; 
not nominal Church members, but the members of the 
true Church, "whose names are written in heaven"; those 
who trust in the precious blood of Christ, and have made 
a full consecration of themselves to the Lord, and been 
begotten again by the holy Spirit of love. These, and 
these only, are referred to. So long as we continue to 
be in and of this class we will be subject to the Father's 
discipline and instructions, for "What son is he that the 
Father chasteneth not? If any be without chastisement 
...then are they spurious and not sons." 

WE NOW JOIN THE CHURCH-THE BODY OF CHRIST 
-ON PROBATION 

These chastenings, providences, disciplines, instructions 
in the word of righteousness, and assistances 
through the brethren, will be ours as long as we are 
members of the Body of Christ; and here we are to distinguish 
between the Body of Christ in its embryo condition 
in the present life, and the Body of Christ in its perfected 
condition in the resurrection. We now join the 
Body of Christ, the Church, on probation; with the understanding 
that if we are faithful we shall be accepted 
fully, and be members of the Body of Christ in glory; 
and that if unfaithful to our vows, our covenants, we 
cannot be members of that glorified Church. We are 
pupils in the School of Christ, and it is necessary for us 



to proceed to learn all the lessons appointed of the 
Father, else we shall never be permitted to graduate- 
to enter into all the rewards which he has promised to 
those who attain to the character-likeness of his dear 
Son. 

It is to this end that we are all exhorted to make increase 
of love, until it shall abound in our hearts. Any 

R4663 : page 261 

who refuse to make increase in love and to permit it to 
abound, will necessarily be cut off from this Body of 
Christ, whatever portion theirs may be. As the Lord 
explains in his parable of the Vine and the Branches: 
every branch, every individual member of Christ, that 
beareth fruit, the fruit of the spirit love— will be pruned 
of the Father that it may bring forth more and more of 
this precious fruit; and every branch that fails to bring 
forth the fruitage of love within a reasonable time, will 
be cut off and no longer be recognized as a branch of 
the Vine, as a member of the Body, and will have no 
opportunity of participating in the glories of those who 
make their calling and election sure. 

It is very important, therefore, that we not only become 
members of the class here addressed as "you," but 
that we continue in this class, and maintain our standing 
by faithfulness and progress under the Lord's leading 
and instruction. We are to remember that our part in 
the work is to fully submit ourselves, our wills; and to let 
the Lord work in us to will and to do his good pleasure. 
Submitting our wills does not mean stupor or indifference; 
but the setting of our energies in line with the direction 
which the Lord from time to time will give us 
through his Word, through the brethren, and through 
his providences, which shall shape our ways. We do not 
need to take anxious thought as though the Lord might 
forget to give us the needed lessons and experiences to 
bring us on, and to cause us to abound in love. All we 
need to do is to remember that he is faithful, and to seek 
grace and strength to walk in his way, as we shall see it 
pointed out to us by his providence and Word, step by 
step. "Thy Word is a lamp to my feet; a lantern to my 
footsteps." 

THE OBJECT AND NECESSITY FOR SUCH DEVELOPMENT 

The Apostle in our text tells us why it is necessary 
that we progress. It is "to the end," or with the object 
in view, of our hearts being established, fixed, settled, 
rooted, grounded in holiness. It is not sufficient, from 
the Divine standpoint, that we learn something about 
love, and have the feeling of love thrilling our hearts, 
and that generous emotions shall occasionally be ours; 
what the Lord seeks is "a peculiar people," "a royal 
priesthood," thoroughly established, firmly fixed in love 
for righteousness— so that all unrighteousness, all sin, 



all injustice, would be an abomination to them. Not only 

will they not love iniquity, but, as the Scriptures declare, 

they will hate iniquity. And whoever truly loves righteousness 

must in the same proportion hate iniquity. But 

this is only the result of fixed character, and time and experience 

and many lessons from the Word of God and 

from the book of experience are necessary before character 

becomes so settled, so crystalized, that it is fixed and 

unwavering in its loyalty to righteousness. It is for this 

reason that the Lord has hedged up the way of his people 

during this Gospel Age, and made the way of life, the 

way to the Kingdom, a "narrow" one, full of difficulties, 

full of trials, which thereby become tests, and sift out 

those who do not develop the character which the Lord 

approves, and for which he promises a share with Christ 

in his Kingdom. 

Some may say, Alas! If the standard of character 
is so high as to be unblamable before God, who is perfect, 
how can I ever hope to attain it? And so all 
of us might say, if the perfect standard were a standard 
for the flesh; for all of us have learned, as did the 
Apostle, that "In my flesh dwelleth no good [perfect] 
thing"; and we have the inspired Word for it that "There 
is none righteous; no, not one." So, then, we may rest 
assured that God is not seeking to find in any a perfection 
of the flesh, and that if he should seek perfection in 
the flesh he would not find it. It is not such an unreasonable 
and impossible thing that the Apostle teaches; but 
something quite reasonable, viz., as he says, that our hearts 
may be established, fixed, in holiness before God our 
Father. Ah, yes! To have a heart [will— motive— intention] 
that is blameless, is a very different thing from 
having flesh that is blameless. The heart standing for the 
will, the intention, the desire, represents the "new creature." 
The flesh stands for itself. In its imperfection and 
its six thousand years of degradation as the slave and 
servant of sin, the flesh has become so imperfect that it is 
impossible to have it serve the law of God perfectly; impossible 
to have it obey all the good desires of our consecrated 
hearts unblamably. It is the new creature, the 
new mind, that must reach this stage of development 
where it will be unblamable before the Father. 

Not only is this a possible attainment, but we cannot 
conceive of any other condition being acceptable to God, 
in harmony with our calling. He has called us to be his 
Church, his Royal Priesthood, that he might fit and prepare 
us for the great work of blessing all the families of 
the earth as members of the Body of Christ, otherwise 
called the Bride, called to association with the heavenly 
Bridegroom during his Millennial Kingdom. Surely God 
could ask nothing less than that our hearts, our intentions, 
should be in accord with the principles of righteousness, 

R4664 : page 261 

and that these principles should control our 



daily lives to the extent of our ability; and that thus we 

should seek to put away all filthiness of the flesh and of 

the spirit, and to perfect holiness in the reverence of the 

Lord. (2 Cor. 7:1.) Anything less than this good desire 

and endeavor could not possibly be acceptable in the 

sight of God; without these we could not hope to be of 

the finally acceptable elect Church. But how reasonable 

is this arrangement! How gladly do we accept the Divine 

will! How earnestly we wish that every imperfection 

and blemish of the flesh were done with, that the testings 

of our new minds were accomplished in their full establishment 

in righteousness! How we long to have our 

new bodies, promised to us in the "first resurrection" 

—bodies in which the new mind can act perfectly, 

without hindrance, without restraint, and glorify God 

perfectly in every act and word, as well as in our hearts, 

intentions! This is acceptable to God. He counts it, 

through the merit of Christ, exactly as though we were 

absolutely perfect in word and in deed, since such a condition 

is the desire of our hearts, our wills; he is merely 

waiting until this character is fixed, permanent. 

THAT WE MAY BE ESTABLISHED-FIXED-IN THE 
PRESENCE OF OUR LORD 

We perceive that this lesson comes up to date, in the 
sense that while it has been applicable to the Lord's people 
all through this Gospel Age, it is specially applicable 
to us who are now living in the "harvest" time, in the time 
of the presence of the Son of man. For mark the Apostle's 
words in our text, that all this development in the 
spirit of love is to the end that we may be established, 
fixed, "in the presence [parousia] of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, with all saints." We are now in this time of his 
presence, and it behooves us to inquire carefully of our 
hearts to what extent we are established in righteousness, 
in love for it, or to what extent our loyalty to righteousness 
is still unsettled— wavering. 

We may be sure that all who do not speedily come to 
this condition of establishment in righteousness will be 

R4664 : page 262 

tested, sifted and rejected; for the time for the completion 
of the Body of Christ is at hand. The Apostle asks, 
"Who shall be able to stand?" This is the question: 
Who shall be so thoroughly established in love that the 
trials and testings, necessary to prove him so, will be 
passed successfully? According to this we are not to 
wonder if various special trials are permitted now to 
come, thick and fast— trials which will test and prove our 
loyalty to the Lord and to the principles of love. Yet we 
are not to be discouraged with this thought of testing, but 
are to remember that he who began the good work in our 
hearts, began while we were yet sinners, by giving for 
us the great ransom price; that if he so loved us then, 



while we were yet sinners, much more does he love us 
now that we have accepted his grace, and are justified 
from all sin by faith in his blood, and are seeking to walk 
in his footsteps. And all who have this desire to receive 
the Lord's lessons, and to profit by them, and to become 
more and more copies of Jesus— all such have the assurance 
that it comes, not by their strength, but by the Lord's 
strength; and that if they submit themselves to him, he 
will perfect in them his spirit of love and righteousness 
and holiness; that they may be "meet for the inheritance 
of the saints in light." 



R4664 : page 262 

DID OUR LORD DIE FOR THE FALLEN ANGELS? 

THE expression, "The wages of sin is death," 

is one which refers to the Divine Law in its 

general application. These words are not 

applied to angels, but to the children of 

men. To them, "The wages of sin is death, 

but the gift of God is eternal life through 

Jesus Christ our Lord." (Rom. 6:23.) This 

sentence or penalty of death was not pronounced 

against the angels, either before 

their sin or subsequently, so far as the records 

show. They, therefore, are not under such a sentence. 

The only sentence placed upon them was exclusion 

from God's favor and from the company of the holy 

angels, and to be restricted in their intercourse with humanity. 

They are now suffering the penalty put upon 

them. 

If we should inquire the reason why God should deal 
differently with the angels than with mankind, we might 
say that, evidently, he has been making a great example 
or setting a lesson in his dealings with the human race, 
showing what would constitute the extreme penalty of 
wilful sin— a sin against light and the Divine command. 
No such Divine command, so far as we know, was given 
to the angels. They received a law in their nature; they 
perverted that law; they were created on the heavenly 
plane and they used their power for another purpose 
than that for which it was given. But in man's case matters 
were different: Adam knew definitely what was the 
command of the Lord— that he should not partake of the 
forbidden fruit; if he did partake of it the penalty would 
be death. This was a fair proposition and well 
understood. 

GOD'S DEALINGS NOT MORE SEVERE WITH MEN 
THAN WITH ANGELS 

However, God is not unkind or unjust toward men, 
and we may in some respects say that the dealings of 



the Almighty with the human family have been more 

gracious than with the fallen angels. Let us see: These 

angels, condemned to exclusion from the righteous, have 

undoubtedly had a terrible time for the past 4,000 years. 

At least, any of them who had any love for righteousness 

or sympathy with righteousness and preserved to any 

extent their proper standard of character, must have had 

a fearful time in their intercourse and dealings with 

those more depraved or fallen. We must assume that 

some of them, especially since our Lord's death on the 

cross and his resurrection, have striven to do God's will 

and have been opposed to everything that would be contrary 

to his will, and that they would be subjected to 

severe torment from the others, to all sorts of evil communications, 

etc. We know that some of these wicked 

spirits take opportunity to exercise themselves thus toward 

those of humanity who come under their power, and 

so we must suppose that these same evil, fallen spirits 

would be against those who would favor righteousness. 

We must suppose, therefore, that for several hundreds 
of years at least, some of these angels have been 
suffering severely for their attempt to obey God under 
the conditions in which they have been for so long. 
Even though they are blameworthy, we think they are 
suffering a great deal more than humanity, because in 
Father Adam's case it was a matter of more or less suffering 
for 930 years, but at the close of the 930 years his 
sufferings were at an end; neither did he have to endure 
torment from demons during the 930 years. Now if we 
would compare 930 years of the angels' experience with 
Adam's 930 years, we would think that his experience 
was the more preferable. Adam was given to understand, 
too, vaguely, that a Redeemer would be provided, while 
the angels were kept in suspense and did not know what 
was God's purpose respecting them, and for more than 
4,000 years they could but wonder what the outcome 
would be. During all this long period they have suffered 
more than any human being could suffer. God thus shows 
the variety of his wisdom and his knowledge and power 
under various circumstances and conditions. 

He could have dealt with mankind in a somewhat 
similar way as with the angels, and merely put certain 
restrictions upon them, but he chose to make an illustration 
in mankind, for the benefit of angels and men, to 
show what would ultimately be the character of his dealings 
with all his creatures. And now since these repentant 
angels have had a sufficiency of punishment for their 
disobedience, an opportunity for release is to be granted 
to such as will stand their test faithfully, in the 
"Judgment of the Great Day." We understand that those 
angels who will not then desire to live righteously, will 
be cut off in death, the Second Death, and those who 
remain faithful will be restored to their former standing. 
Thus God's wisdom is manifest in the whole transaction. 

Now regarding the second part of the question, as to 
our Lord's death having any effect relative to these 



angels: We see no way in which the redemption provided 

by God through Christ applies to the angels, as 

Jesus died for the race of Adam only. Justice never pronounced 

a sentence of death against the angels as far as 

any record shows, but merely pronounced a certain penalty 

against them for the course they took, and God will 

not restore them to his favor without a full, complete test. 

They will never recover their former standing otherwise, 

and those who do not stand the test will, in the end, 

receive the death penalty. 

So, then, our thought is that the only way in which 
Christ's life had any effect upon them was as an illustration 

R4664 : page 263 

of the principles of Divine dealing. They have had 

the opportunity to see that God is just and by no means 

clears the guilty; and they can see, too, that in the case 

of the guilty race of man God has had mercy, has provided 

for them a Redeemer, and that all who are under 

condemnation of death are to be released from that sentence. 

This is all a provision of the grace of God in that 

he sent his Son to be the Redeemer of the world of mankind 

and to give them an opportunity of being restored to 

his favor. 

R4665 : page 263 

FALLEN ANGELS NO SHARE IN THE SUFFERINGS OF 
CHRIST 

The question is suggested, could it be said that any of 
those fallen angels who have for a time, some perhaps 
for many centuries, lived separate from sin and striven to 
do God's will and suffered persecution from the wicked 
spirits, have a share in the sufferings of Christ? 

We answer that they could not be said to be sharing 
the sufferings of Christ, because only the Body of Christ 
can share in these sufferings. It might, perhaps, be said 
that they have, in a way, been suffering for the sake of 
righteousness, but that would not be the proper expression, 
we think, but, rather they are suffering on account 
of their sins. If they had been righteous they would 
not have needed to suffer, but it was because they did 
wrong— because they sinned— that these sufferings were 
brought upon them. 

A question might present itself in respect to this text. 
"For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness 
dwell; and having made peace through the blood of his 
cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself; by 
him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in 
heaven." (Col. 1:19,20.) We do not understand this 
passage to intimate, in any sense of the word, that "the 
blood of the cross" had anything to do with the salvation 
of the angels. It was the Father's good pleasure that in 
Christ all fulness should dwell, in the sense that he 



should have complete authority— not merely authority 
over man, but over all things— both heavenly and earthly. 
It was the Father's pleasure, originally, that through him 
he would reconcile all things unto himself. Man was out 
of harmony with God. It was God's will that Christ 
should harmonize man with God. And these fallen angels 
were out of harmony with God and it was God's will 
that they also should be brought into harmony. Everything 
out of order was to be placed in order. Jehovah has 
entrusted it all to Christ to set right, just as a King might 
say to his Minister of State or his General, "Now you 
attend to this whole matter, putting down all insurrection 
wherever it is; see that no rebellion is left; bring everything 
into subjection, so that there will be peace and 
order throughout my entire domain." So likewise the 
Father tells the Lord Jesus to put everything in order as 
his representative, in respect to things earthly and things 
heavenly. 

This work of reconciliation was made possible only 
"through the blood of his cross"; not that the blood of 
his cross was necessary for the effecting of all this reconciliation, 
but the blood of his cross was necessary so far as 
he was concerned; only by his proving faithful unto 
death, the death of the cross; only by such display of 
faithfulness, could our Lord be determined to be the 
right one to accomplish all these things. So, then, the 
blood of the cross had not merely its effect upon mankind, 
but the primary effect was upon the Lord Jesus 
himself, because he received the first blessing from the 
blood of his cross. 

Another blessing from the blood of the cross was its 
imputation to the Church, the household of faith, to enable 
them to become join t-sacrificers with him, by participating 
in his sufferings; and the third blessing from this 
blood will be as respects the world of mankind during 
the Millennial Age. And it is his own exaltation through 
this that gives him rightful authority in God's Plan to be 
the one to execute God's purposes during the Millennial 
Age. This is the One who is to be the blesser of angels 
and men; he is to have full control of things both heavenly 
and earthly. 



R4665 : page 263 

ARE WE BEGOTTEN TO THE DIVINE NATURE? 

IN THE WORDS "beget" and "begetting," 
which are frequently used in the Scriptures, 
an analogy is drawn between the spiritual 
begetting and birth and the human begetting 
and birth. We are not, however, to 
understand the spiritual begetting and birth 
to be like the natural in every particular. 
It is merely an illustrative figure to give 



us a thought. The thought is that we are 
begotten of the holy Spirit of God with a 
view to our becoming partakers of the divine nature and 
that all who are spirit-begotten in the present time are 
begotten with that hope, with that object and end in 
view. It is to this end that the Apostle Peter says, God 
"has given us exceeding great and precious promises, 
that by these we might become partakers of the divine 
nature." 

We see the great Pattern, our Lord Jesus, in whom 
was illustrated all these various features that are applicable 
to us. We ask ourselves, To what was he begotten? 
The answer is that undoubtedly he was begotten to the 
divine nature; that he could not have reached perfection 
on any lower spirit plane; that if he had not come off 
"conqueror" in the fullest sense of the word he would 
have had nothing; and only those who attain his character-likeness 
and are overcomers— conquerors in the highest 
sense of the word— will be with him to share his 
glory and partake of his divine nature. Those who will 
constitute the "great company" class are such as fail to 
come off "more than conquerors"; they are those who, in 
other words, would have made "shipwreck" of the whole 
matter had it not been for the Divine provision which we 
find outlined in the Word of God to the effect that these, 
"who through fear of death are all their lifetime subject 
to bondage," and who therefore fail to go on in the most 
approved manner, courageously, in the footsteps of Jesus, 
"shall be saved so as by fire"; they shall be saved by being 
forced to the point where they must either deny the 
Lord or else battle for righteousness. 

We find this "great multitude" accorded the name of 
"overcomers," victors, as the palm branches granted to 
them indicates (Rev. 7:9), and we read that "they washed 
their robes and made them white in the blood of the 
Lamb." They attain to a lower station than the divine. 
Evidently they attain that station through stress rather 
than through the voluntary walking in the footsteps of 
Jesus. Had Jesus been in their position; had he not come 
off "more than a conqueror," he would have made failure 
altogether, because there was no provision made to force 
him into anything or to make good for any lack of zeal 
on his part. Hence he was begotten to the divine nature 
and could not have received anything else. But what he 

R4665 : page 264 

does for the "great company" class is something aside 
entirely from that to which they were called and to 
which it was their privilege to attain had they reached 
this fullest degree of character-likeness to their Lord. 

WERE ALL THE CONSECRATED BEGOTTEN TO THE 
DIVINE NATURE? 

We answer, we might use an illustration from the 



earthly plane that would help us to some extent. We 
might say that a father desired to beget a son in his own 
likeness, his own nature; and in the begetting of this son, 
suppose that there were also begotten two other children. 
We will suppose that the birth was a birth of triplets- 
one son and two daughters. The son, we will suppose, 
was the objective point, the desire, the intention, at the 
time of the begetting, but the result yielded more than 
this. Now, the two female children thus born were born 
of the same begettal and were begotten to the same nature, 
and yet there is a difference between these in the 
birth. Just so in the spiritual birth. The begetting of 
each was to the divine nature. In the original purpose 
the "great company" did not enter in. They were, of 
course, foreknown, but they were not of the original design, 
if you please. 

Now what constituted the difference between the birth 
of the male and of the female child? We realize that 
this is dealing with a delicate subject which is little understood, 
and which is considerably in question, but as 
far as we understand the latest deductions of Science, 
they teach that the nourishment of the newly begotten 
infant, during the early portion of the period of gestation, 
decides as to whether it will develop as a male or a 
female, and for a certain time nothing can be determined 
as to the sex; but as time goes on the development takes 
one or the other form. As to what may be the elements 
that would tend to produce the one more than the other 
or the kind of food that would be best suited to produce 
either kind, we need not discuss, but we can see from this 
an illustration of the spirit plane and can see that those 
who partake most abundantly of the grace of God ministered 
to us through the Truth will be the ones who will 
be born on the divine plane. These exceeding great and 
precious promises that are given to us are the spiritual 
food upon which we, as embryotic New Creatures, must 
feed. No matter how much food may be supplied, if, for 
any reason, we fail to appropriate the necessary spiritual 
nourishment, we will be deficient to some extent. The 
Apostle's words seem to corroborate this thought— "To 
us are given exceeding great and precious promises that 
by these we might become partakers of the divine nature" 
—that is to say, If we do not use these we will not 
be partakers of this nature, but by the use of these exceeding 
great and precious promises we may "make our 
calling and election sure" and become joint-heirs with 
Christ on this highest plane and not on the lower plane. 

We will supplement the thought respecting the begetting 
and birth of two different classes during the present 
time— the "little flock" and the "great company"— and 
suggest two other illustrations that have been brought to 
our attention as illustrating the possibility of differing 
results from similar begettings, depending upon the 
nourishment. 

R4666 : page 264 



One of these illustrations is in the case of bees and 
the other in the case of ants: In the case of bees, from 
the same begetting come three different classes— the queen 
bee, the working bee and the drone bee— and the difference 
seems to be in the amount of feeding that each class 
gets. Those which are intended to be queen bees are 
specially fed, and those which are to be the working bees 
have another kind of food, and similarly with the drones. 

There are also three classes of ants, and it is supposed 
that while all the eggs have the same appearance 
and there seems to be no difference whatever in these, 
the various results seem to be produced to some extent 
by the different feeding of the larva during their development. 

Both of these illustrate very well what we are speaking 
of respecting the Church and the Great Company. 
The Church class is specially fed on the Truth of God's 
Word, the great and precious promises. Such as feed 
upon these may be developed to the highest plane, the 
divine nature, while others not so fed, not so nourished, 
will be born on the lower plane. 



R4666 : page 264 

"GO YE ALSO INTO THE VINEYARD" 

-MATTHEW 20: 1-16. -AUGUST 14.- 

Golden Text:— "Many that are first shall be last; 
and the last shall be first."-Matt. 19:30. 

GRAPE CULTURE was one of the main industries 

of the days of the Great Teacher. The 

stony hillsides of Palestine were once terraced 

and extensively used as vineyards. 

On our recent visit we noted with particular 

interest the revival of this custom, as one 

of the evidences of the beginning of restitution 

in the Holy Land. -Acts 3:19-21. 

The grapevine was honored of the Master, 
in that he used it in a parable to symbolize 
himself and the Church, saying, "I am the Vine, 
ye are the branches"; "My Father is the husbandman"; 
"Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit"; 
"Every branch in me which beareth fruit he pruneth it 
that it may bring forth more fruit"; "Every branch in me 
that beareth not fruit he taketh away." 

Our present study, The Parable of the Laborers, is 
in full accord with the foregoing, but shows the matter 
from a different standpoint. It shows how each one of the 
Lord's consecrated Church, each heir of the Messianic 
Kingdom shortly to be established, is privileged to be a co-laborer 
with his Lord and Master, and with the Heavenly 
Father in the vineyard work— tending the vine, looking 



out for the injurious pests, keeping the soil in good condition, 
assisting every way in the production of "much 
fruit" and of fine quality. Evidently many Christian 
people do not appreciate the privilege of being laborers 
in the Church of Christ— "building one another up in the 
most holy faith" until we all come to the full stature of 
a man in the Anointed One. 

St. Paul appreciated this privilege greatly, saying, 
God hath made us qualified servants of the New Covenant. 
So then we, as ambassadors for God, beseech 
men, be ye reconciled to God. (2 Cor. 5:20.) 
Whoever is negligent of his opportunities to serve others 
who manifest a hearing ear, a humble heart and a 
teachable spirit shows his own lack of appreciation of 
God's message. 

He thus indicates that he has not fully come to a 
knowledge of God nor to a knowledge of the Truth 

R4666 : page 265 

respecting the Divine Plan. And, indeed, the Scriptures 
declare that a deep knowledge of God, his Word and his 
purposes, is attained only as a gift of God, bestowed 
only upon those who are in a humble, faithful, zealous 
attitude of mind— "To you it is given to know the 
mysteries of the Kingdom of God." 

The things pertaining to God's Kingdom, in its future 
operation toward the world for a thousand years, will be 
openly manifested to every creature, shortly. But now 
it is appropriate, and is the Divine will, that these things 
should be known only to the Church, the consecrated, 
the spirit-begotten sons of God. Likewise there are important 
truths pertaining to the Kingdom class, the 
Church, which is being prepared to be the Bride of 
Christ and his joint-heir in the Kingdom. And these 
things are likewise intended to be comparatively secret— 
to be clearly and fully understood only by such as have 
made a covenant with the Lord by sacrifice. (Psalm 50:5.) 
"The Secret of the Lord is with them that reverence 
him, and he will show them his Covenant." 
(Psalm 25:14.) All such in close sympathy with the Divine 
purposes will be anxious to serve the Lord, the 
Truth and the brethren. And such from time to time 
will be specially sent into the Vineyard, and will be specially 
used of the Lord for the assistance of his consecrated 
people in various ways. 

AGREED FOR A PENNY A DAY 

The word "penny" here is from the Greek denarius, 
a silver coin of about 17 cents value. But the value of 
money has so changed in recent years that today a laborer's 
wage in proportion to other things would be considerably 
more. The denarius was the Roman standard of 
that time, as the lira is the Italian standard, the mark 
the German standard, the franc the French standard, 



the shilling the English standard, and the dollar the American 
standard. It is worthy of note that in one of the fine 
old English cathedrals the records show that its excellent 
chisel work, superior to anything of today, cost "a penny 
a day and a bag of meal for each laborer." The parable 
of our lesson is evidently intended to teach that God will 
give all that he has agreed to all who labor— that he in 
generosity gives more than he has stipulated. 

At the close of the day we read that those first hired 
murmured against their lord. We cannot suppose that 
any who would be counted worthy of a share in the 
Kingdom would murmur against the Giver of all Good. 
The rewarding is to be expected at the close of the harvest 
day and the murmuring may be expected there also. 
The "penny" or reward would thus seem to be something 
of the joys, blessings, honors and privileges of God's people 
in the present life, at the close of this age. Those 
who murmur that they do not receive a sufficiency of 
honor and distinction and of Divine acknowledgment will 
be thereby proving themselves unfit for the future service 
"beyond the veil," as members of the Church in glory. 
This would seem to point a warning to those of God's 
people who have been long in the Truth, and who have had 
great privileges of service, that if they murmur against 
the blessings and rewards coming to them, it will mean 
that they were laboring for the reward merely and not 
appreciating the privilege of being laborers with Christ 
and with the Father; it would imply that they had failed 
to enter into the spirit of the wonderful privileges granted 
them of serving the Lord, the Truth and the brethren. 
The right spirit, the proper interest in the Father's work 
and in the brethren should prompt all to rejoice with 
every new laborer and to be glad that all such should 
receive of the Lord's favors, blessings and enlightenment 
as fully, as freely, as themselves. Surely any who have 
not this spirit have not the Spirit of Christ on this subject 
at least. 

The general lesson is that God is so just, so generous, 
so bountiful, in his dealings that all those who appreciate 
matters from his standpoint will rejoice in the blessings 
which overflow upon others. A failure to appreciate the 
Lord's generosity was one cause of stumbling to the Jews 
eighteen centuries ago— they were offended that the Gospel 
message should go out beyond them to the Gentiles. 
Similarly today some Christian people are stumbling over 
the fact that the Word of God shows that, whereas Divine 
blessings are now confined to the Church, "the elect," 
the servants and hand-maidens of the Gospel Age, yet 
the time is near at hand when "God will pour out his spirit 
upon all flesh," and when all the families of the earth 
shall be blessed. 

All who have the privilege of bearing the labor and 
heat of the day in the Lord's service must be glad of the 
privilege, in order to be worthy of participation in the 
Kingdom. Thus some who seem to be first in their 
promptness to respond to the Lord's call for laborers may 



be amongst the last to receive special blessings of grace 
and Truth, and this may serve as a special test upon 
them— as respects their loyalty, and the motives which 
actuated them in engaging in the Vineyard work. "Let 
us take heed, lest a promise having been left us any 
should seem to come short." 



R4668 : page 265 

THE GREATEST-THE SERVANT 

-MATTHEW 20:17-34.-AUGUST 21.- 

Golden Text:— "The Son of man came not to be ministered 
unto, but to minister and to give his life a ransom for many." 

AMBITION moves the world— selfish ambition. 
A certain kind of ambition— to please God 
and to have his rewards, is encouraged by 
the exceeding great and precious promises 
of God's Word. Think of the promise held 
out to the consecrated, self-sacrificing followers 
of Jesus— that, if faithful unto 
death, they shall receive the "crown of life," 
immortality, and attain a place with their 

R4669 : page 265 

Master in his Throne— as participants in 
the glories and honors of his Kingdom! There is no 
earthly appeal to ambition so strong as this, which comes 
from the Creator to such as have the hearing ear of faith. 
Nevertheless, the ambitions awakened by these promises, 
we are warned, might become our snares. The very condition 
upon which we may attain the Kingdom is our 
faithful endurance of shame, contempt, misunderstanding, 
and our demonstration to the last of humility and absolute 
loyalty to God and full resignation to his providences. 
Whoever would reign with Messiah in his approaching 
Kingdom, for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come, thy 
will be done on earth as in heaven," must humble himself 
under the mighty hand of God, that he may be exalted in 
due time.— I Peter 5:6. 

The prospect of the Kingdom was bright before the 
minds of the Apostles, even when Jesus was foretelling 

R4669 : page 266 

his ignominious sufferings and death; so that two of his 
beloved followers, James and John, through their mother, 
importuned a promise that they should sit, the one on 
the right hand and the other on the left hand of the 
Great King when his Kingdom should be established. 
This request drew from the Great Teacher the suggestion 



that his loving and ambitious disciples had, perhaps, 
not fully counted the cost of such exaltation. He inquired 
if they were willing to drink of his cup of ignominy and 
reproach, and if they were willing to be baptized with his 
baptism, into his death— the sacrifice of all earthly interests. 
They had counted the cost, and promptly responded 
as to their willingness. They had learned well the lessons 
of the Great Teacher. He assured them that with this 
willingness of mind the privilege would be theirs of 
sharing his ignominy and his death and of sitting with 
him on his Throne. But as respects the chief positions, 
they were not at his disposal. At the conclusion of the 
testings of his people, those positions of highest honor 
in the Kingdom next to himself will be given according 
to the just standards which the Father has prepared and 
established. How we can rejoice with those Apostles in 
the fullness of their consecration and in the assurance of 
the Master! And we also should strive by faithfulness 
to attain a place with the Master in his Throne, as members 
of his Body, the Church. 

The ambition of James and John was shown in their 
desire for places of special nearness to the Lord. Jesus 
did not reprove them specifically, but indirectly. When 
the other ten heard how these two had sought to bespeak 
the chief places of honor they were indignant. The Master 
took advantage of the incident to show how different 
is God's judgment from that of men. With men the aggressive 
and powerful hold the lordship and dominion 
over the others, but in the Divine arrangement the order 
is reversed. God will honor most and put in the highest 
positions, the humble, the submissive, the meek. On this 
incident the Lord based a general instruction to his followers 
on the necessity for humility. We are to take the 
Divine standpoint and honor most in the Church those 
who most serve the Church, and not those who demand 
service and honors and seek self-exaltation. Our Lord 
pointed to his own course as an illustration: they acknowledged 
him as their Master, and yet no one served 
them so much as did he. Indeed, he came into the world 
not to be served, but to serve others, even to the extent 
of laying down his life as the ransom price for many, for 
the world, to be applied for their release from sin and 
death condemnation in God's time— during the Messianic 
Kingdom. 

BLESSING THE BLIND AND THE POOR 

Journeying on the Master had an opportunity of exemplifying 
his position as a servant. Two blind men, 
learning that he was passing, exercised such faith that 
they hailed him as the Messiah, the Son of David, entreating 
Mercy, Help, Relief. Instead of passing them 
by, saying, You are only blind beggars, anyway, the Master 
stopped and called them to him and, in response to 
their request, touched their eyes, and immediately they 
received sight. Other Scriptures indicate that the Great 



Teacher's miracles were not performed without cost to 
himself, "Virtue (vitality) went out of him and healed 
them all. "--Luke 6:19. 

He who was rich, for our sakes became poor, humbling 
himself to serve the humblest and poorest unfortunates! 
Here we have an illustration of the spirit of meekness, 
the spirit of service, which must characterize the hearts, 
and, in some degree, control the lives of all true followers, 
disciples, of the Great Teacher. If it is not in our 
power to open the eyes of the physically blind, it is in 
our power to help many to a clearer insight into the 
things of God which the natural eye hath not seen, nor 
ear heard— the things which God hath in reservation for 
them that love him and that, loving him, follow in the 
footsteps of Jesus. (I Cor. 2:9.) Let us, then, seek the 
true, God-given ambition; but let us specially seek to 
know and to do the will of our Father in heaven. 



R4669 : page 266 

ISRAEL'S KING REJECTED 

-MATTHEW 21: 1-17. -AUGUST 28.- 

Golden Text:— "Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is he that 
cometh in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the Highest!" 

WHILE God foreknew and the prophets 

foretold that the Jewish nation would reject 

Jesus and not receive him as their King, 

nevertheless, everything was done as though 

the results were not foreknown and foretold. 

The prophecies were fulfilled. Today's 

study illustrates this. Jesus offered 

himself to Israel as their Messianic King, 

just five days before his crucifixion, and on 

the exact day upon which, as the Lamb of 

God, he should have been received by them, in order that 

they might have been "passed over" and, as a nation, become 

the antitypical Levites from amongst whom would 

have been selected the antitypical priests. Their failure 

to receive Jesus at the appointed time did not at all interfere 

with the Divine arrangement, for all of the Jews 

found worthy to be of the spiritual Levites and spiritual 

priests were selected, although the nation was rejected. 

The remainder of those spiritual, antitypical priests and 

Levites God has been gathering from amongst the Gentiles 

ever since. By and by all these, of whom Jesus is 

the Chief Priest, will be glorified on the spirit plane. 

Then will begin the great Messianic work for Israel, and 

through Israel for all the nations of the world. Thus in 

due time Israel's expectations will be realized on a 

grander scale than they ever dreamed of. Abraham, 

Isaac and all the prophets shall be made princes or rulers 



in all the earth. Israel restored to Divine favor shall 
"obtain mercy" of God through the glorified Church, and 
shall become the channel of God's favor for pouring out 
upon mankind riches of grace. 

SABBATH AT BETHANY 

The Sabbath day prior to his crucifixion was spent by 
the Great Teacher at the home of Lazarus and Martha 
and Mary. His fame had spread by reason of the miracle 
performed upon Lazarus. A feast was given in his honor 
on Sabbath night after sundown. It was then that Mary 
anointed him with the precious perfume which Jesus 
said was an anointing for his burial. The fragrance of 
this perfume has come down to us through the ages. 
The next morning, to fulfill the Scriptures, Jesus sent for 
the ass and its little colt to be brought. The ass was 
probably a white one, for it is reputed to have been the 
custom of the kings of Israel to ride upon white asses. 
The multitude who had come to see Jesus, and Lazarus 

R4669 : page 267 

whom he had brought from the tomb, filled with admiration, 
hailed Jesus with shouts, as "The Son of David!" 
The Great King ! The Messiah! Certain Scribes and 
Pharisees called attention to this and suggested that Jesus 
rebuke them. His answer was that, had the people refused 
to acclaim him, the stones would have cried out; 
because it had been prophesied centuries before, "Shout, 
O daughter of Jerusalem! Behold thy King cometh unto 
thee. He is meek and having salvation; lowly, and sitting 
upon an ass, with its colt, the foal of an ass." The little 
procession headed for Jerusalem, the multitude shouting 
and strewing their clothing and palm branches for the 
ass to tread upon, as marks of honor to the great King 
whom they imperfectly, indistinctly, recognized— not realizing 
the still greater glory and honor of his later revealing 
in the end of this Age, when "every knee shall bow 
and every tongue confess to him." 

"YOUR HOUSE IS LEFT DESOLATE" 

Four months ago— on April 24— we passed over the 
historic road from Bethlehem to Jerusalem, thinking the 
while of the great incident of this lesson. The road 
sweeps around the side of the Mount of Olives on a 
reasonable grade until suddenly a turn of the road and 
the sharp declivity of the Valley of Hinnom (Gehenna) 
brings Jerusalem into full view in a moment. Time and 
again we walked over part of the road and noted where 
the Master halted the little procession and wept over the 
city, saying, "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest 
the prophets and stonest them which are sent unto thee, 
how often would I have gathered thy children together, 
even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings 



[for safety], and ye would not! Behold, your house is 
left unto you desolate. For I say unto you, Ye shall not 
see me henceforth, till [that day when] ye shall say, 
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord."— 
Matt. 23:37-39. 

R4670 : page 267 

Our heart went out in sympathy for the Jewish people. 
We recalled how they have been nationally "left 
desolate" for eighteen centuries, and have been persecuted, 
even, alas, by those who have named the name of 
Christ! We specially rejoiced to think that "the time of 
Jacob's trouble" will soon be over— that the time when 
they will enter into the New Covenant relationship with 
God will soon be at hand. (Jer. 31:31; Rom. 11:27.) 
We rejoiced to think that soon Immanuel in the glory of 
his Kingdom will be revealed, and that all flesh shall behold 
the glory of that Kingdom. Then the Lord will pour 
upon Israel the spirit of prayer and of supplication, and 
they shall look upon him whom they pierced. (Zech. 12:10.) 
We rejoice to think that "that day" when they 
shall say, "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the 
Lord," is nigh at hand. But, we reflect, that the time of 
special favor to spiritual Israel must be correspondingly 
drawing to a close. 

That spot where Jesus stopped to prophesy Israel's 
future was the same one over which, a little later, the 
army of Titus marched to the destruction of Jerusalem, 
and, amidst famine, finally accomplished the destruction 
of the city, taking, according to records, ninety-seven 
thousand prisoners. One million, one hundred thousand 
were said to have perished through famine and war. The 
ground around the City of Jerusalem the Romans planted 
thick with crosses, on which Jews were crucified, until 
there was room for no more, says history. 

CLEANSING THE TYPICAL TEMPLE 

The Great Teacher's entry into Jerusalem caused considerable 
commotion. He went directly to the Temple 
and ordered from it the money-changers and dove-sellers, 
who had no right within its hallowed precincts. Thus was 
fulfilled the prophecy, "The zeal of thine house has consumed 
me." The poor, the blind, the lame, again had his 
ministries. Again the chief religionists of the times were 
vexed and considered him an intruder upon their arrangements, 
and were displeased with the multitude's shouting 
his praise as the Messiah, the Son of David. They rebuked 
the Teacher, who answered, Scripturally, "Out of 
the mouths of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected 
praise. "-Matt. 21:16; Psalm 8:2. 



R4666 : page 267 



SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

WHY WERE NOT JOB AND OTHERS PRIESTS? 

QUESTION.— Since it was the priests who 
were to offer the sacrifices and since no one 
could be a priest except he was called of 
God, how was it that some of the Ancient 
Worthies, Job and others, who were not 
priests, offered up sacrifices? 

Answer.— The sacrifices which these 
offered were not sin offerings. They did 
not offer up sacrifices according to the types 
of the Law, as the Day of Atonement sacrifices, 
for instance. This whole arrangement of the Jewish 
Law, by which the sacrificing was taken out of the individual's 
hands and put into the hands of the priests, was 

R4667 : page 267 

a new departure in God's dealings. 

Abraham, we know, presented offerings before the 
establishment of the Priesthood. The exact time in which 
Job lived we do not know. We merely know that he was 
Job of Uz, and walked before God with a perfect heart; 
but we think we are justified in supposing that he did 
not live during the Law dispensation, with its typical 
sacrifices. If this be true, his course was in full line 
with Abraham's course when he offered up sacrifices. 
When Abraham was stayed from offering his son, he 
offered up the ram caught in the thicket, as the Lord directed. 

What these patriarchs did in the matter of offering up 
sacrifices was evidently a token on their part of appreciation 
of God and of the fact that a sacrifice for sins 
was necessary, just as Abel brought the firstlings of his 
flock and offered them to God, though he was not called 
to be a priest; but none of these sacrifices was accepted 
in the same sense that the sacrifices were accepted under 
the Law. None of these sacrifices ever made the offerers 
themselves perfect, nor did they atone for anyone else; 
they were merely the same as a prayer would be, a manifestation 
of a good desire of heart and of appreciation 
of God and a desire to reverence him, and a recognition of 
the fact that sin required some atonement. So when the 
Lord showed how this sin-atonement was to be made 
he pictured the work of this Gospel Age. He appointed 
a priest to represent the Lord Jesus, and under-priests to 
represent the Church. A work of sacrifice was done on 
a particular day of the year— the Atonement Day— representing 
the work of this Gospel Age in which these 
"better sacrifices" for sin are offered; and under this 
larger arrangement no one is permitted to offer the sacrifice 

R4667 : page 268 



except a priest, God thus indicating that the work is 
entirely under his supervision and direction. 



"THY DEAD MEN--MY DEAD BODY" 

Question.— What is meant by "Thy dead men shall 
live; together with my dead body shall they arise."— 
Isa. 26:19. 

Answer.— Seemingly the addition of a few words by 
the translators has caused difficulty in connection with 
this text. They inserted the words to make the passage 
clear, as they thought, but instead they obscured it, 
through failure to see that God's dead men are those who 
are members of the Body of Christ. 

Omitting the words "together with," and "men," the 
passage reads properly enough? "Thy dead shall live; 
my dead Body, they shall arise," thus referring, we believe, 
to the resurrection of the Church, the Body of 
Christ, the Lord's peculiar people. And this is a general 
signal, as it were, for the blessing of all mankind. In 
due time all the dead shall be awakened. Moreover, they 
awaken not to suffering and to torment, but to sing. 
They shall come forth to learn of the goodness of God, 
his merciful provisions, and shall avail themselves of 
these provisions, in the "Times of Restitution of all 
things." "Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust" of 
the earth. 



WHEN DID OUR LORD BECOME THE EXPRESS 
IMAGE OF THE FATHER 

Question.— When did Christ become the express image 
of God, as recorded?— Hebrews 1:3. 

Answer.— Surely our Lord Jesus was an express likeness 
of the Father's person before he came into the world; 
he left that glory, however; he became a man— "he humbled 
himself." It was from this standpoint that he prayed, 
"Glorify thou me with the glory which I had with thee 
before the world was." There is a glory of human nature 
which our Lord possessed while he was a man, "the man 
Christ Jesus"— a perfect man in the likeness of God. 
However, the Apostle's reference in the above text was 
not to his prehuman existence nor to his earthly glory as 
a perfect man, but to the glory which he attained in his 
resurrection, as the Apostle declares, saying, "Wherefore, 
God also hath highly exalted him and given him a name 
that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every 
knee should bow, of things on earth and things under the 
earth." (Phil. 2:9,10.) This, we believe, was the particular 
time to which the Apostle referred. 

We are not to understand that he began to purge our 
sins when he left the heavenly glory nor when he made 



his consecration, nor when he died on the cross. In all 
these sufferings our Lord was demonstrating his worthiness 
of the high exaltation. Having fulfilled the Law 
and laid down his life, our Lord had the human life, the 
earthly nature and earthly rights, to dispose of. He had 
not forfeited these by sin. They were his, therefore, to 
give away. When "he ascended up on high" he presented 
this merit of his as the satisfaction for our sins, the sins 
of his followers, to purge or cleanse, not only those who 
were waiting in the upper room at Pentecost, but also 
all others of the same class down through this Gospel 
Age, till the full number of the "elect" should be found. 



THE GREAT COMPANY OR THE ANCIENT WORTHIES 

Question.— Will the Ancient Worthies have precedence 
of resurrection over the "Great Company" class of 
this Gospel Age? 

Answer.— In the light of what we have been discussing 
of late in THE WATCH TOWER, it is evident that the 
merit of Christ is applied, on behalf of the Church during 
this Gospel Age— on behalf of all who essay to be of the 
Church; it is used to impute to those who desire to become 
sacrificers and who consecrate themselves to God 
that they may present an acceptable sacrifice and thus 
become members of the spiritual class and joint-heirs 
with Christ. This applies to the "great company" as 
well as to the "little flock." It applies to all who are begotten 
of the holy Spirit because they could not be begotten 
of the Spirit except by the imputation of Christ's 
merit to their earthly sacrifice. 

It follows, then, as a matter of necessity that before 
the merit of Christ's death could be applied on behalf of 
the Ancient Worthies or Israel, under the New Covenant 
arrangement for Israel and the world, it must be 
released as respects all those to whom it is now imputed 
for the purpose of giving them the opportunity of attaining 
the spiritual station. This would prove conclusively, 
we think, that the "great company" class will be 
resurrected before the Ancient Worthies will be brought 
forth. 



"GIRD UP THE LOINS OF YOUR MIND" 

Question.— What does this text signify? 

Answer.— In olden times when they wore flowing garments, 
girdles were constantly worn for two purposes; 
one was to gird up their garments— as, for instance, we 
sometimes sing, "Gird thy bridal robes around thee." The 
girdle, therefore, was useful in keeping the garments in 
their proper place, or position, so that they would not 
be disordered in appearance, nor cause one to trip and 



fall. Then, secondly, the girdle was used for its effect 
upon the loins during active labor. For instance, when 
one was engaged in a strenuous occupation, such as lifting 
a heavy weight or carrying a heavy burden or running 
a race, the muscles of the abdomen would play an 
important part. 

Even in speaking we find the muscles of the abdomen 
contract, and thus give us the more force and strength 
of voice. In any kind of manual labor this is found to be 
the case, and these muscles become comparatively rigid. 
It is the custom, therefore, among workmen, even 
today, to wear a belt. When they have particularly 
severe tasks they take another "hitch" in their belt— that 
is, they pull it up a few notches more, making it a little 
tighter around the waist, the object being to support the 
muscles of the abdomen and to enable them to accomplish 
more labor with less fatigue; and when they are at rest 
they slacken the belt. 

This seems to be the special thought of the Apostle 
here— "Gird up the loins of your mind." As there are 
loins in the body and they have their important part to 
perform and we strengthen them in time of exercise, or 
necessity, so with our minds. We who have devoted ourselves 
to be the Lord's people, to do his service, realize 
that our minds need to be strengthened. We need to be 
of good courage. We need to be fortified against all disposition 
to lassitude. 

When we undertake to gird up the loins of our 
minds it signifies that we have determined upon a course 
of activity; that rest and ease are put aside and that we 
are now engaging in an important work which we realize 
requires all the strength that we possess. The Christian 
has a great task before him, to lay down his life in the 
Lord's service, to accomplish all that he may be able to 
accomplish in respect to the use of opportunities which 

R4667 : page 269 

the Lord has provided us as his servants, his followers, 
that we may have a good report to give when he calls us 
to render our account; that we may say, Thou gavest me 
two; or, Thou gavest me five talents and I have gained, 
two; or, thou gavest me five talents and I have gained, 
beside, other five. 



WHY FORBID GOD'S SERVICE? 

Question.— Why did the disciples forbid the man 
whom they found casting out devils? Why did they not 
allow him to go on and do the best he could in casting 
them out? What was the ground of their objection? 

Answer.— Evidently the Apostles when sent forth had 
very similar sentiments to those which prevail today. Our 
Catholic friends, for instance, would say, You do not 



have the Apostolic ordination; therefore, you cannot 
preach. You cannot serve in any religious capacity. Our 
Episcopalian friends would seem to say, No, you did not 
have the holy hands of the Episcopal Bishop laid 
upon you. 

A little disposition of the same nature is manifested 
by nearly all of the denominations— What authority have 

R4668 : page 269 

you? So the disciples, finding a man who was casting 
out devils in Jesus' name, said, What authority have you 
to cast out devils? Jesus did not send you out as one of 
the twelve; he did not send you out as one of the seventy. 
You have no business in this work. 

Our Lord's answer to them showed that they were 
laboring under a mistaken view. While they were specially 
commissioned to perform miracles, yet if anyone 
else could do the same things, it was not their province 
to hinder or object in any sense of the word, but rather 
they should have taken the broad, sympathetic view, and 
said, My dear friend, I see you are casting out devils. 
You are doing a good work. We are glad you can cast 
them out because of all the poor people you can 
relieve. The fact that you have not followed with us 
indicates that you do not know our Master, and we should 
be glad to have you come and get acquainted with 
him, too. 

And so, we think, it should be with us. Whenever 
we find anyone doing a good work, helping the world in 
any sense of the word, whether it be by keeping a mission 
or helping the heathen or helping a newsboy, or by some 
other work, to oppose sin or relieve suffering, we should 
be sympathetic to the extent that we see they have good 
hearts, good intentions, good desires. Instead of working 
against them or hindering them in any manner, we 
should speak an encouraging word and endeavor to lead 
them to fuller light. This does not mean that we should 
follow with them and leave our special commission of 
teaching the Truth which the Lord has given us, but that 
we should not object to the Lord's using various agencies 
for accomplishing his work. We should not think that we 
alone have the privilege of engaging in his work; that we 
have patent rights on his work, and can hinder others 
from doing what they may be able to do and take pleasure 
in doing. 



UNACCEPTABLE WORKERS FOR JESUS 

Question.— Our Lord declared that many in that day 
shall say, "Lord, Lord, have we not taught in thy name, 
and in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name 
done many wonderful works?" And his declaration continues 
that he will then say to such, "I never knew you. 



Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity." (Matt. 7:22,23.) 
How shall we understand this in harmony with the 
above statement of our Lord that his disciples should not 
forbid him who followed not with them, but who cast out 
devils in his name? 

Answer.— We would understand that God may permit 
people to do certain good works who are not fit for the 
Kingdom class, who are not fully submissive to the Lord 
Jesus and his Headship, who are not fully taught and 
used of him. They may be exercising a certain amount 
of faith and the Lord may recognize them to that extent, 
but he will not guarantee that anybody who has power 
to work miracles and preach publicly, will be granted a 
place in the Kingdom. We are therefore not at liberty 
to say that everyone who is engaged in mission work or 
slum work will be in the Kingdom. He may be doing a 
good work; but he may not be of that special class which 
the Lord is now seeking. We are not to object to his 
work, if it is a good work. It is not ours to interfere 
with him, for the Lord is able to take care of his own 
work. It is our work to take care of ourselves, although 
we are not to acknowledge or co-operate with those who 
we believe are associating error even with good works. 
We should not in any sense lend our influence to the 
assistance of evil. 

We are to take the standpoint of leaving to the Lord 
the management of his own affairs, the interests of his 
cause in general. He is abundantly able to attend to the 
whole matter. We are to see to it that our hearts are 
fully submissive, and that our heads, our wills, are under 
the Headship, Leadership of the Lord; that his will is 
done in us, and that our sacrifices are not made to be 
seen of men, but are made as unto God; thus we shall 
have his approval in that day. To such he says he will 
be glad to give acknowledgment, and to confess them before 
the Father and his holy angels. 



DOES CHARACTER DETERMINE THE KIND OF 
RESURRECTION? 

Question.— From the Scriptural standpoint, does the 
character of the individual's death indicate the kind of 
his resurrection? 

Answer.— The Apostle's argument (I Cor. 15) respecting 
the resurrection is that God will give to every seed 
its own kind of body. "There is a natural body and there 
is a spiritual body." Mankind in general, therefore, in 
the resurrection, will come forth with natural bodies— 
"that which is born of the flesh is flesh" and that which 
is born of the flesh dies or "sleeps" for a time, and will 
be awakened "flesh." That which is born of the flesh and 
subsequently begotten of the holy Spirit is reckoned as a 
New Creature, and when the New Creature falls asleep, 
it is asleep as a spirit being— is asleep waiting for the 



resurrection change. In this case the resurrection change 
is thus expressed by the Apostle: "Sown in dishonor, 
raised in glory; sown in weakness, raised in power; 
sown an animal body, raised a spirit body"; but anyone 
not begotten of the holy Spirit will, of course, not change 
his nature in the grave. There is no change in the grave 
either for good or evil: "As the tree falleth so shall it 
lie"; the awakening will be according to the character of 
the individual. If he has become a New Creature in 
Christ he will be raised or perfected as a New Creature, 
in the resurrection. If he is a good natural man he will 
be awakened a good natural man; if he is a bad natural 
man he will be awakened a bad natural man; if he is one 
of the Ancient Worthies, we understand he will be awakened 
a perfect man. 

R4668 : page 270 

BEGINNING OF MELCHISEDEC PRIESTHOOD 

Question.— When did our Lord become a Priest after 
the order of Melchisedec? 

Answer.— Our Lord entered upon his Melchisedec 
priesthood individually, personally, at the time of his 
resurrection, when, as the Apostle declares, God announced, 
"Let all the angels of God worship him." In 
this individual sense he became the Melchisedec Priest, 
although only the "Head" was yet formed. Since the intelligence 
is in the head, we can see how the head might 
stand for the body, as could no other member of the 
body. A hand stretched forth might represent the body, 
but it could not have the intelligence of the head, and we 
could not say that the presence was there, but as soon as 
the Head was born from the dead, as soon as the Head 
was accepted as the Melchisedec Priest, that soon the 
whole matter would have a standing with God, the intelligence 
residing in the Head. We agree, however, that we 
shall not exercise our full office as a Melchisedec Priest 
until the whole Church shall be with their Head in glory, 
members of his Body. A Melchisedec Priest is a blessing 
Priest, a Priest who has the power to bless. Melchisedec 
was able to bless Abraham. Far superior, therefore, to 
the Aaronic priesthood is the Melchisedec priesthood. 

Our Lord could not have been this Melchisedec Priest 
until his resurrection, evidently, because he had nothing 
with which to bless. Before he could do any blessing 
he must himself lay down his life, and by laying down his 
human life in obedience to the Father, he would thus receive 
or have to his credit the merit which he could draw 
upon in the blessing of us, and ultimately all the families 
of the earth. 

Question.— How long will this Priesthood of the order 
of Melchisedec last? 

Answer.— "Thou art a Priest for the age," or rather, 
a Priest ever, an ever-Priest, a lasting Priest; not one 
who would pass away by death; not one who would drop 



his office in some unsatisfactory manner, but one who 
would fully accomplish all the purposes for which he was 
appointed as a Priest. Our Lord was appointed a Priest 
because there was necessity for a Priest. It is not an 
office that would be necessary amongst the angels, 
who are perfect, but it is an office necessary amongst 
men, because of their imperfection. To be a Priest, 
therefore, to the end or completion, would mean that he 
would be a Priest, Mediator, Reconciler, Harmonizer in 
this matter of estrangement between God and man. 
Therefore, this office will end with the Millennial Age, 
when he shall have accomplished all this work and will 
deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father. Then 
he will be a Priest no more. There will be no need of a 
Priest of any kind, sacrificing or reigning. The very 
significance of the office is that of intercessor or mediator, 
or assister in some manner of those who are in some 
difficulty. 



R4670 : page 270 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We have had a very delightful visit from our dear 
Brother Bundy, who stopped with us for several days in 
Jacksonville, and I am writing to say that the Lord has 
blessed his visit greatly— to me at least. 

As you know, I have not been in harmony with the 
Class here for more than two and one-half years; had 
many objections to many things, "the Vow" included, 
and now, after this long and unpleasant experience, 
through which the Lord has brought me, and from which 
he has saved me, I may be qualified to sound a note of 
warning to some others who, perhaps, are now under a 
similar cloud, or who may be harboring in their hearts 
some wrong thoughts that may sooner or later develop 
and blind them, and God only knows what the result 
may be. 

Satan succeeded in getting a kind of sugar-coated 
poison in my heart, but the sugar coat soon wore off, and 
I found myself in mighty bad company— people whose 
principal business seems to be not to advance the Lord's 
cause and to develop the Christ-like character with the 
fruits of the Spirit, being more and more manifest; people 
whose business seems to be the destruction of the faith 
of the Lord's "little flock" and the discrediting, to say the 
least, of the one whom the Lord has been pleased to use 
in bringing us all into the light of the "Present Truth," 
even yourself, dear Brother. And only to think, I found 
myself, when I was roused to the fact, in this company, 
and I praise the Lord that he enabled me to get a good 
square look at myself and then at the company I was in, 
and I saw the positive earmarks in myself, as well as in 



them, of an unclean and unholy spirit, which, however 
well concealed, savored not of the sweet, kind, humble 
spirit of our Lord and his true followers. 

After the Lord had opened my eyes to see the great 
danger that I was in, I went back to the Class and tried 
real hard to be sweet and to take up things where I had 
left off. It was a hard task and crucifying, indeed, to the 
flesh. I made a clean, frank statement, as honest as I 
knew how to make, and the Lord blessed it to my good. 
But the weeks that have followed have been weeks of 
veritable torture. Satan has withstood me to my very 
face and has tortured me through both men and women 
who are under his control, even using some of the Lord's 
own people to this end along almost every line. I have 
faced financial ruin as well, and from worse to worse 
until I thought I would lose my mind— driven almost to 
the very verge of suicide, Satan daring to take liberties 
with me that he never thought of taking before; but the 
Lord did not let me go. He has used our dear Brother 
Walter Bundy to show me (and, strange to say, against 
my will), that, as peculiar as it might seem to me, there 
was really a blessing, and not only so, but a positive 
means of safety, in that little "Vow." It had been the 
experience of many others, as well as his own, he said. 
After twenty-four hours of real struggle the Lord showed 
this to me very clearly. And now, dear Brother, if you 
would care to have it there, I want you to put my name 
on that Vow list, for I have made "the Vow" my own before 
the Lord and for the first time in nearly three years 
I have peace. Praise His Name! 

I am now able to see how foolish I was, and how I 
presumed to criticise you and tried to disprove some of 
the things which you taught— you, whom the Lord had 
used to teach me all the real knowledge that I ever had 
concerning the Scriptures! You, who are so far ahead of 
me in every respect! Could I possibly have been in my 
right mind to thus presume? 

I do not consider you infallible, dear Brother, and I 
and I am sure that you do not so consider yourself, but 
I am very sure that you are a mighty safe one to follow, 
and by the Grace and help of the Lord I am going to 

R4670 : page 271 

humbly follow until the Lord shows me positively that I 
should cease. Am trusting that I shall never again be 
deceived by the Adversary or listen to any of those whom 
he may be using in trying to injure the Lord's dear 
servant— no matter who they may be or how well they 
may mean in their own poor, deceived hearts. 
Yours in the Precious Name, 

J. J. MCNAMARA.-Fla. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



I have wanted so often to write and tell you how 
much I appreciate and enjoy the Lord's blessings through 
the precious WATCH TOWER visits. My heart is full to 
overflowing with gratitude and praise to note how our 
great Captain is gloriously leading his people on safely 
even in the midst of Satan's oppositions and misrepresentations. 
And, dear Brother, you don't know how 
much I am rejoicing as I see your loving zeal and faithful 
care for the best interests of the Lord's true sheep. 

I am glad to say I have always recognized in you the 
Lord's chosen servant to give us the meat in due season. 
Some who have once rejoiced with us, but see 
no beauty now that they might desire, are watching your 
every word that they might accuse you, but we know 
why Satan is so vigorously opposing you. It is because 
of your loyalty to God and his Truth. Your face is set 
as a flint to do his will, and you shall not be ashamed. 
(Isa. 50:7.) So, dear Brother and Pastor, accept my 
humble appreciation of your faithfulness and zeal in 
serving the great Captain's orders. 

Faithfully yours in our Redeemer and Advocate, 
MRS. LYDIA MESSNER. 



page 271 

BELOVED PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

With sweet recollections of the refreshment enjoyed 
at the Chicago Convention I am daily plodding away 
at the accumulated work on my desk. I was fortunate 
in taking some notes at the Convention, as it gives us a 
second course in reviewing the discourses, etc. 

In presenting a partial review of the Convention to 
the ecclesia here last Sunday, I stated your kind offer 
of sending one of the little heart souvenirs to each of 
the Lord's people present, or represented at the Convention. 
I therefore asked each one desiring one of these 
emblems to indicate by raising the hand. Nineteen 
expressed such desire, and we shall indeed be pleased to 
have you send that number. 

It was a pleasure to observe the spirit of love manifested 
at the Convention, although some thoughts presented 
were not accepted by all. It was considered, 
however, that the invisible Lord, now present, would 
overrule all to the upbuilding of the saints. We were 
particularly pleased to see and hear you, and trust that 
the good words heard may remain with us to our spiritual 
development. 

It was also a sweet occasion for me to see my dear 
wife and daughter symbolize their consecration. Our son 
Edwin was also along, but he has not been able to see 
these things to the point of consecration, but he is, no 
doubt, doing a great deal of thinking. 

I was very glad to read in the last TOWER Brother 
Clarence E. Fowler's letter. May the dear Lord bless 



him, and may he help others also who at heart mean to 
do right; want to see this error. I am from time to time 
troubled with some of the seceders' literature. What I 
cannot harmonize is this: If they are earnest, why should 
they be afraid or ashamed to have their names attached 
to their publications. 

My earnest prayer is that the love of Christ may 
always fill my heart, and that I may grow in grace and 
knowledge in the School of Christ. Pray for me, dear 
Brother; I always remember you at the throne of Grace. 

Congress has passed the Postal Savings Bank bill. 
At first thought, it would seem to be an expected check 
on panics, but in giving the matter further thought, it 
is possibly right along the line of adding fuel to the fire, 
when a panic is once started. I passed through the 1893 
panic as a bank teller, and was lately associated with the 
accountings of the Government. Its necessarily slow 
workings convince me that the effects of the Postal 
Savings Banks in time of panic will prove disastrous. 
Suppose, for instance, in our city the banks having on 
deposit some $22,000,000, the U.S. Depositories preparing 
to receive deposits from the local Post Office, would in all 
probability not expect 5 per cent, of this amount to be 
deposited through the Post Office, and would, no doubt, 
consider a guarantee deposit with the Government to such 
an amount more than ample for the expected deposit. 

It should be noted that the matter of approving presented 
securities takes considerable time. Suppose "a 
run" made on the banks, the money redeposited with the 
Post Office, and in turn redeposited with the bank by 
the Post Office, the guarantee deposit limit would soon 
be reached, and the matter of presenting and approving 
additional securities, especially when the same conditions 
prevail at hundreds of places, would take weeks. 
A day or two sometimes with a bank will play havoc. 
The Post Office would not have sufficient vault capacity 
for the deposits, so it would prove an incentive for burglaries, 
etc. So we see how unsatisfactorily it might 
work. 

Praying the Lord's continued favor, upon you, dear 
Brother, and all interested in the setting up of the Kingdom 
of God's Son, and that his grace may be sufficient 
for us in all of life's varied, and sometimes trying experiences, 
is the earnest desire of the writer. With sincere 
greetings from my family and self, I am, 

Yours in the love of the Master. 



R4670 : page 271 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Although it is several months since we appropriated 
to ourselves a share in "the Vow," we are reminded that 
we had not written you to that effect, and believing that 
it will be pleasing to you, we proceed to do so now. 



While from the first we believed "the Vow" to be of the 
Lord, we were inclined to look upon it as simply a test 
of our love for each other, because of the conflicting 
opinions of many. 

Believing beyond doubt that we were safe on that 
score, we tried to dismiss the matter from our minds 
without making a very careful study of it. We were, 
however, led to consider it more seriously by your comments 
in THE TOWERS. Then it dawned upon us that we 
should not treat lightly anything which we believed came 
from the Lord. We are happy to say that we now understand 
what are some of the blessings experienced by those 
who have taken "the Vow." 

Assuring you, dear brother, of our increasing love 
for you as we become better acquainted, and witness your 
unselfish zeal and devotion to the Lord, the Truth and 
the friends, and wishing you our Heavenly Father's continued 
blessings, we are by his grace, 

Yours in Christ, 

J. L. CAIN, WIFE AND DAUGHTER. 



page 274 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The Atonement Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-1/2.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 273 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 



Int. Bible Students Assn. Special Meetings 274 

Views From The Watch Tower 275 

Rich Man Prophesies Panic 275 

Secretary Knox Sees Millennium 276 

The Chautauqua Lake Convention 277 

Largest and Finest Convention Ever 
Held on the Lake 277 

Six Receptions at the Mayville Inn 278 

Restitution Work Begun 279 

What Heaven Is Like 281 

"The General Assembly of the Church 
of the First-Borns" 282 

The First-Borns Passed Over 283 

Bible Students in Palestine 284 

Misimproved Opportunities Taken Away 285 

"Many Are Called But Few Are Chosen" 286 

Without a Wedding Garment 286 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 287 

Some Interesting Letters 287 

page 274 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



It is considered desirable that the general public be not 
invited to these meetings— except to the public one, addressed 
by Brother Russell. 

PORTLAND, ME., SEPT. 10-12. 

Portland has been substituted for "Old Orchard." Brother 
Russell's address on "WHERE ARE THE DEAD?" will be 
delivered in Jefferson Theatre, Sunday, Sept. 1 1, at 3 p.m. 

Other meetings have been arranged for in Hoegg's Hall, 
Deering Centre, Portland. There will be three services daily 
and six or eight speakers. Opportunity for Baptism will be 
afforded. Quite reasonably priced accommodations will be 
obtainable. 

The Maine Central Railroad Company announces a rate of 
one fare and one-third for the round trip. Tickets will be 
on sale Sept. 10, 11 and 12, return limit, Sept. 14. 

NORRISTOWN, PA., AUGUST 28 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10 
o'clock in Historical Hall, Penn St. and Public Square. 
Discourse for the public at 2.30 o'clock by Brother Russell in 
Grand Opera House, Main St., above De Kalb St. Topic, 
"Hereafter." Visiting friends heartily welcomed. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., SEPT. 4 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock, 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks St. The evening 
meeting at 7:30 o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse 
for the Public at 3 p.m. in the Brooklyn Academy of 
Music, Lafayette Ave. and St. Felix St. Topic, "Messiah's 
Coming Kingdom." 

DETROIT, MICH., SEPT. 18 

Morning Rally, 9:30 o'clock at Vermont Hall, Grand River 
and Trumbull avenues. Discourse for the Public by Brother 
Russell at Light Guard Armory 2:30 p.m. Topic "Hereafter." 

KNOXVILLE, TENN, SEPT. 24, 25, 26. 

Railroads have granted the very low rate of one cent per 
mile during the Appalachian Exposition now being held in 
Knoxville. This rate is open to all and good for the dates of 
the convention. 

Many of the friends throughout the South who could not 



go to Jamestown because of the great distance, will rejoice 
to know of a convention so much nearer home. For particulars 
as to lodging, meals, etc., address Brother R. A. Parham, 
5 Maloney avenue, S. Knoxville, Tenn. 

Brother Russell's topic for the Public discourse will be 
"Hereafter." It is expected that Brothers Stevens, Bohnet, 
Raymond and Rutherford will also be speakers. 



R4671 : page 275 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
RICH MAN PROPHESIES PANIC 



A MULTI-MILLIONAIRE sugar manufacturer 

of California, Mr. Rudolph Spreckels, recently 

returned from a European trip. In 

New York City he was interviewed by a 

newspaper reporter and is quoted as having 

made the statements below. Without endorsing 

his conclusions, we state them. His 

large wealth gives him opportunity for information 

respecting monetary affairs, 

which would not be open to ordinary men 

of small capital and lesser influence. We quote the interview 

from the Springfield Union of July 31st, as 

follows:— 

TERRIBLE TIMES BEFORE US 

"The financial control of the country is today centered 
in the hands of two great interests. When the two men 
in control of these interests engage in battle with each 
other for the supremacy a revolution, the most destructive 
the world has ever seen, will follow— a revolution that 
will not only paralyze or wreck many of our great 
industries and overthrow unnumbered financial institutions, 
but will imperil the safety of the Government itself. 
The only force that can prevent such a disaster is the 
people themselves, whose good sense and patriotism on 
many occasions heretofore have rescued the country from 
threatened destruction. 

"I have been engaged in business since I was 17, and 
have noticed year by year a gradual reduction in the 
number of firms handling large industries or engaged in 
banking, until today the reduction must excite alarm. It 
is a significant commentary on business conditions that 
two men have it in their power to embarrass the United 
States Government. The concentration of wealth is the 
great evil of modern times, for it places in a few hands 
the power to precipitate panics and control legislation. 

"Each time one of these panics has occurred certain 



interests have come forward to relieve the situation by 

the releasing of large amounts of money. If men can 

break a panic by bringing forward their hoarded millions, 

it is evident they can cause a panic by withdrawing from 

circulation a few hundred millions of dollars. From observations 

made in the last few months I am convinced 

that certain great financial interests now are perfecting 

plans for the precipitation of one of these business upheavals 

this fall. 

"The panic of 1907 was 'organized,' if I may use the 
term, for the purpose of discrediting Theodore Roosevelt 
and his administration. The panic of 1910 is being hatched 
to furnish material for the approaching political campaigns. 
Those who are engineering it do not care how 
many enterprises may be wrecked, how many men may 
be thrown out of employment, or how many suicides may 
follow, so long as they succeed in their purposes. If 
stocks are hammered down to the bottom, they stand ready 
to make millions out of the necessities of those who are 
driven to sacrifice their holdings." 

Spreckels announced that he proposed to devote the 
rest of his life to the reform of "conditions that already 
are intolerable," in order to head off, if possible, the impending 
revolution. Asked as to the remedy for the evils 
complained of, he said:— 

"The elimination of dishonesty in corporate matters, 
the quickening of business conscience, the banishment of 
graft, the readjustment of capitalization by the squeezing 
out of water and the adoption of the Golden Rule as a 
fundamental principle of business. How these reforms 
can be effected is the important question of the times. 
What is needed today is a quickening of the conscience 
of the great wealth holders. One trouble with the trusts 
is that the men whose capital is invested in them are not 
sufficiently concerned to take an active interest in their 
management. So long as they continue to receive large 
dividends they wink at practises in a corporation that 
they would not countenance in their own personal 
business." 

Without endorsing Mr. Spreckels' prophecy we can 
say that it is well-known amongst financial institutions of 
the country that all our banking interests are 
practically in the hands of a very few wealthy men. It 
is not, however, generally believed that the interests of 
these men would be better served by panics. On the contrary, 
the general estimation of business people is that 
these capitalists are conservative and that in seeking to 
guard their own interests against catastrophe they are 
really protecting others from financial disaster. Some of 
these very people have boasted of late that their hold upon 
the financial situation is so strong that panics will henceforth 
be impossible. 

R4671 : page 276 

Nevertheless selfishness and ambition are the foundation 



of the present structure of society. And Mr. 

Spreckels may be right in his assumption of a great 

financial duel between our financial potentates. It was 

just such a duel that produced our last panic. One combination 

of capitalists attempted to take by the throat 

another combination, but failed and was crushed. The 

public was not made to suffer more than was necessary 

in the matter; but, so powerful were the antagonists, that 

the entire financial world received a shock which brought 

loss to many far removed from the principals and the 

scene of their conflict. 

But aside from Mr. Spreckels' prophecy respecting a 
panic this year our readers know from the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES to expect ere long the fulfillment of the great 
Redeemer's words, "There shall be a time of trouble such 
as never was since there was a nation— no, nor ever shall 
be after." (Dan. 12:1; Matt. 24:21.) That awful trouble, 
however, we do not expect before October, 1914. Whatever 
may come in the interim will be but the rumblings 
preceding the great climacteric shock, before which will 
fall all earthly institutions; as St. Paul declares, Everything 
that can be shaken will be shaken. And the only 
thing that cannot be shaken will be the Kingdom which 
God's faithful ones will receive about that time.— 
Heb. 12:27,28. 

Meantime we advise that no attempt be made by any 
of our readers to alarm the world. Humanity will be 
alarmed enough in due time. Rather it should be our aim 
to console, to comfort, to bind up the broken-hearted, to 
pour in the oil and the wine, to show the good things 
which God has in reservation for the saints and the 
restitution blessings which then will begin to be dispensed 
to Israel and to all the families of the earth through 
Israel. 

Mr. Spreckels is to be admired for his courage. He 
fully demonstrated it some years ago in his attack upon 
financial corruption and graft in the politics of San Francisco. 
The above interview shows the man's fearless 
courage as he looks into the future. He hopes to be able 
to stem the tide of political and financial corruption. He 
hopes for the establishment of the Golden Rule in business 
and in politics. We admire his courage and hopefulness, 
even while we know that his expectations will all fail. 
The world is not getting nearer to the Golden Rule. Our 
great institutions of learning are turning out infidels by 
the thousands— turning them into influential and predominant 
strata and currents of life— financial, political 
and religious. They fear neither God nor the devil. They 
scorn the Bible and its precepts as "old wives' fables." 
They have a standing of honor and a business integrity, 
but it is not of the Golden Rule kind. It is of the kind 
that merely keeps within the lines of legal requirement, 
and not always that, as was evidenced by the court exposures 
of illegalities in connection with some of the great 
insurance companies a few years ago and railroad mismanagement 
and land frauds and bribery by bankers, etc. 



Nor should we be harsh in our judgment of millionaires 
as a whole, nor even of those who have been convicted of 
financial briberies. Rather our moderation should be 
known to all men. As peacemakers we should sympathetically 
point out on proper occasions that much of 
the difficulty arises from the fact that individual responsibility 
is overwhelmed by corporation associations— by 
the seeming necessity of an unlawful act to accomplish 
an end believed to be wise, benevolent or just. In other 
words, we are living in the day controlled by systems, of 
which individuals are merely atoms, even when they 
occupy influential positions in the systems. 

How glad we are that, as Bible Students, we are 
obtaining from the Divine Word "meat in due season," 
which not only nourishes us, but makes us strong in the 
Lord to know and to do his will and to be assistful to all 
with whom we are in contact. Let us not forget that if 
we belong to the Lord we are of the "royal priesthood" and 
that now is the time, in the dawning of the great antitypical 
Jubilee, when all the priests are to blow upon the 
silver trumpets, making known to the world the riches of 
God's grace about to be revealed in Messiah's Kingdom, 
for which still we pray, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will be 
done on earth as it is done in heaven." 



SECRETARY KNOX SEES MILLENNIUM 

P. C. Knox, Secretary of State in President Taft's 
Cabinet, in concluding a stirring address before the graduating 
students of the University of Pennsylvania, speaks 
as follows: 

"We have reached a point where it is evident that the 
future holds in store a time when wars shall cease; when 
the nations of the world shall realize a federation as real 
and vital as that now subsisting between the component 
parts of a single state; when by deliberate international 
conjunction the strong shall universally help the weak, 
and when the corporate righteousness of the world shall 
compel unrighteousness to disappear and shall destroy the 
habitations of cruelty still lingering in the dark places of 

R4672 : page 276 

the earth. This is 'the spirit of the wide world brooding 
on things to come.' That day will be the Millennium, of 
course; but in some sense and degree it will surely be 
realized in this dispensation of mortal time." 



JEWISH PERSECUTION 

Shocking reports are coming from Russia about the 
expulsion of the Jews in masses. As lightning out of a 



clear sky, thousands of Jewish families are being turned 
unexpectedly out of their homes, and as often brought to 
the beggar's staff. From a suburb of Kiev there have 
been banished Jews who have lived there for decades. 
This, however, does not hinder a part of the Jewish 
"upper-crust" from holding its hand over Russian bonds 
with a view of protecting themselves. If all the rich 
Jewish financiers in Germany and France possessed 
enough feeling of honor to oppose this Jewish persecution 
in Russia by a campaign against Russian stocks, then the 
Barbaric vassals of the Czar would soon be brought to 
fear in this, their "religious fervor." By this it is not intended 
to be said that every respectable person has not a 
duty to boycott Russian bonds, until Russia has adapted 
herself to the ways of civilization. But we do mean to 
say that Jewish capitalists should be in the lead with their 
good example. They are certainly, in the end, the closest 
to the situation.— From the German Press. 



NEED FOR THE KINGDOM 

Doctor MacGillvary, Professor of Etymology in Cornell 
University, lecturing recently, said, "Insects at the moment 
have an enormous influence on the life and health 
of mankind. The number of species of insects which are 
known to science at the present time is estimated at one 
hundred millions. Knowledge of the place of insects in 
disease is of recent acquisition. Not until 1880 was it 
known that malaria was produced by a parasite. Not 
until fifteen years later was the part which mosquitos play 
in its spread discovered. Not until 1 890 was yellow fever 
known to be an insect-carried disease." 



R4672 : page 277 

THE CHAUTAUQUA LAKE CONVENTION 

THERE has just been concluded, under the title 

of International Bible Students Association 

Convention, a most interesting and profitable 

meeting of the Lord's people. Not only 

were there one thousand more in attendance 

than ever before, but the sweet Spirit of the 

Lord was more abundantly manifest than 

ever— which is saying a great deal, for all 

of our conventions have been excellent in 

this very particular. It is but what we 

should expect, however, that each year would develop the 

Lord's people more fully in the fruits and graces of his 

holy Spirit— in meekness, gentleness, long suffering, brotherly 

kindness, love. The attendance was surely in excess 

of four thousand, but how many more it is difficult to 



determine, as not all could be present at one time. The 
Bible Students crowded the accommodations along both 
sides of the lake from Jamestown to Mayville— twenty-five 
miles. The boat rides were found very restful and 
very advantageous for Christian fellowship and a more 
intimate acquaintance amongst the friends. An opportunity 
was afforded also for witnessing to the truth in 
the Chautauqua Lake region. 

The friends in general preached an appreciated sermon 
in their deportment, tone of voice, kindness, patience, 
helpfulness. The people took knowledge of them that they 
had been with Jesus and learned of him. We have friends 
all around that lake now. Before our arrival some ministers, 
in disregard of the Word and Spirit of the Master, 
slandered us— falsified in their endeavor to awaken opposition 
amongst their people. Things resulted, however, 
to the contrary. One lady who had contracted to entertain 
six of our friends was visited by her minister and 
told that she should have nothing to do with these Bible 
Students, etc. In perplexity she counseled with her husband 
how she could get rid of them, seeing she had accepted 
in advance payment on account of their entertainment. 
He replied, "Wait a little while; I will run up 
to the Auditorium and mingle with the people and let you 
know." He returned shortly, saying that he had heard 
our opening address of welcome and mingled some with 
those attending, and wished his wife could get forty into 
the house, instead of six. 

The Chief of Police of Celoron remarked to one of 
the brethren that if everyone in the world were like the 
people who were attending the convention there would 
be no need of a police department, and that saloonmen 
would have to look for another job. He remarked that 
he had not noticed even one of the conventioners using 
tobacco. The policeman stationed at the front of the 
Auditorium said that his wife was a Christian, but that 
he had never taken much interest in religion, thinking 
it mostly a profession. He said, "I am forcibly impressed 
that the people attending this convention live their Christianity. 
My wife is away on a vacation, to be back in 
about two weeks, but I have sent her word to come 
immediately, as I am sure she will want to get acquainted 
with these people." 

LARGEST AND FINEST CONVENTION EVER HELD ON 
THE LAKE 

Celoron, where the Auditorium is located, is a worldly 
place, of course, a small "White City." Its inhabitants 
are composed chiefly of those who purvey to worldly tastes 
and appetites. They were disappointed that so large a 
throng of people should bring so little patronage to their 
merry-go-rounds, shooting galleries, etc. They all acknowledged, 
however, that the conventioners were kind, 
considerate, and minded their own business, and that 
that business evidently was to hear the speakers of the 



Convention. One of the showmen, never before interested 

in religion, attended services on the first Sunday. 

He was deeply impressed, and said that the message appealed 

to him as reasonable. He is reading the books. 

The principal owner of the place was very considerate 

of our interests and quieted the music in the vicinity of 

the Auditorium while our services were in progress. 

Altogether we had a glorious season of spiritual refreshment 

and have reason to believe that the Truth, through 

its representatives, made an indelible impression along the 

shores of Lake Chautauqua. We are most earnestly urged 

to come again next year, and the suggestion was made 

that, if we would do so, an auditorium away from the 

amusement section would be erected for our use. 

The Jamestown newspapers devoted much of their 
space to the Convention, declaring it the largest that had 
ever visited them. On the Saturday before the Convention 
closed, one journal gave about two columns of space 
and another nearly three pages. Those attending the Convention 
bought many copies of the newspapers and mailed 
them to their friends in every direction. We understand 
that one paper sold more than 25,000 extra copies. Those 
papers in turn will carry considerable of the good tidings 
to people all over the United States and Canada. 

Our arrangements for baptismal services were not all 
that could have been desired; nevertheless we had much 
to be thankful for. Doubtless the accommodations were 
much better than those of our Lord's day. We had two 
baptism discourses and two opportunities for symbolical 
immersion, at which, according to official account, 354 
adults were immersed. 

In our petitions the dear ones at home were earnestly 
remembered— that they might have an equal share in the 
blessing. And we believe that many will get the blessing: 
(1) Those who submissively bowed to the Divine Providence 
which hindered their attending the Convention, are 
sure to learn the lesson of patience and faith. (2) Those 
who attended the Convention will surely carry back to the 
stay-at-homes a share of our rich feast, which will overflow 
in all directions. 

Many "poor" attended; some assisted in part or in 
whole by "better-off" brethren and sisters. Some stayed 
at home and earned money to permit others to come to 
the Convention and get a spiritual feast. Surely all thus 
earnest were richly blessed by the great Shepherd. 

We have already remarked that some of the dear 
friends, on arrival, were not kindly received by those who 
had contracted to entertain them, and to whom money 
on account had been paid. This was vexatious and quite 
a test of patience, and faith in Divine Providence, and 
brotherly love. Yet we believe that the friends conquered 
through the Spirit of the Lord. Should we ever 
return to Chautauqua Lake we would have the very best 
and kindest of attention from every quarter. Here is one 
case as an illustration: The man of the house met the 
visitors at the door, and, in a challenging manner, said, 



"We are United Brethren," intimating that he did not 
want any conversation on religious subjects, and that it 
was questionable if he would receive the friends, even 
with this assurance. They accepted the situation graciously, 
determined not to talk religion where it was not 
wanted. However, in the house a little boy lay dying 
and unable to eat. One of the friends told the child about 
the glorious restitution, how he would come back from 
death in the resurrection, and how the entire world would 
then be Edenic. Next the child was presented with a 
copy of the Heavenly Manna, with the suggestion that 

R4673 : page 278 

that kind of food he could always take with a relish. Before 
we left all were fast friends, and the guests were 
urged to come again. 

Although we tried to make the matter plain, some of 
the dear friends, we fear, did not fully grasp the financial 
part of the arrangement for their comfort. The committee 
on arrangements undertook to furnish all in attendance 
at uniform prices, although the cost of entertainment 
would necessarily vary a great deal. To illustrate: The 
friends lodged at the upper part would have been obliged 
to pay $1.00 a day on the electric car or fifty cents on the 
boat to reach the Convention and return. Those lodged in 
the Chautauqua grounds would have had the same boat 
fare and eighty cents on the street car, and the boats do 
not stop there on Sunday. Additionally the Chautauqua 
Association charges 40 cents per day admission fee to 
their grounds, which for the ten days amounts to $4. 
We secured a concession, but paid $2 a head for all who 
lodged within their gates. Those lodged at Jamestown, 
of course, had less expense— 5 cents each way daily. 
Our committee averaged the matter and charged all alike, 
including a noon luncheon. 

It was our intention to serve the friends without 
profit, and our accounts show a shortage of $3,000. This, 
however, includes the transportation and entertainment 
of the Bethel family of more than 76. A little 
idea of the cost of the noon luncheon may be had 
from a statement of the daily food supply— fresh milk, 
1,000 quarts; lemonade, 600 quarts; sandwiches, 4,000; 
buns, 4,000; sweet cakes and crackers, 6,000; ice, 2,000 
pounds; bananas, 3,300; cheese, 135 pounds. This was our 
daily provision. It was served by 120 volunteer brethren 
at each meal. Fourteen dear friends spent nearly three 
weeks in securing the accommodations, while others 
labored day and night in making the assignments. 

While we paid a uniform rate for all rooms, they were 
not all alike. They were graded A, B, C and D by those 
who examined and engaged them. Then those who made 
the assignments gave the A grade to the $14 orders, the 
B grade to the $11, and the C and D grades to the $9 
orders. They may not all have been correctly graded, 
but we feel sure that all got excellent value for their 



money; for those who paid $14 for nine days, paid only 
about $1.50 per day for food, lodging and transportation. 

We assure all who attended that whatever was lacking 
of perfection came short through imperfection of judgment 
or matters beyond the control of those looking after 
their interests. We can certainly say that had 4,000 
people arrived there without previous arrangements for 
their comfort they would have been a sorry lot, and would 
have paid all kinds of prices for entertainment or would 
have wandered around the streets tired and hungry. Nevertheless, 
should we return to the same place another time 
we could do much better for all, because open opposition 
has disappeared. As several gentlemen of Jamestown remarked, 
"The only people here who do not seem to have 
enjoyed your Convention are the preachers and 
saloonkeepers." 

The Convention was every way an interesting one. 
The presence of Brother Hemery of the British Branch, 
Brother Lundborg of the Swedish Branch, Brother Luttichau 
of the Danish Branch, and Brother Lindqvist of the 
Norwegian Branch, added materially to the interest of the 
occasion. The list of speakers, as shown on the programme, 
which many of you have, numbered twenty-four, 
besides about twelve who took part in the symposium at 
the last session. On account of the large crowds it seemed 
unadvisable to attempt to have a Love Feast of the usual 
type. We therefore arranged that twelve of the Pilgrim 
brethren should be stationed at the outlets of the various 
aisles, both on the lower floor and in the gallery of the 
Auditorium. The friends greeted these as they passed 
from the Convention Hall on the last Sunday night. At 
the conclusion all declared, "It has been our very best 
Convention." 

LODGED AT THE MAYVILLE INN 

We knew that, on account of the Convention, the letters 
and orders coming to the Brooklyn office would be 
fewer than usual. We therefore took practically the entire 
office force to the Convention, there to continue the necessary 
features of the work in all departments. The Editor, 
as President of the I.B.S.A., felt it proper that he 
should be in attendance throughout the entire 
Convention. 

Nevertheless, as it was necessary for him to keep up 
his literary duties, it was advisable to isolate himself to 
some extent from the glad hands and loving hearts of the 
4,000 plus, each of whom desired a few minutes' conversation 
and to shake hands every time they came within 
reach. Isolation seemed cruel, but necessary, in the interest 
of the King's Business. Accordingly we rented the 
Mayville Inn, which was vacant but furnished. There 
about fifty of the friends were entertained, with the understanding 
that Brother Russell must not be intruded 
upon, and could be visited only at meal times and at the 
evening Receptions. We spoke at the Auditorium five 



times:— 

(1) At the opening session. 

(2) On Sunday morning, July 31. 

(3) A special address to the Pilgrim brethren and to 
Elders and Deacons from everywhere on Thursday evening, 
Aug. 4. 

(4) To Colporteurs on Saturday morning, Aug. 6. 

(5) To the Convention and to the public on Sunday, 
Aug. 7. 

On the latter occasion the house was crowded and an 
overflow meeting of about 700 was held in the adjoining 
theater, addressed by Brother John Kuehn. 

SIX RECEPTIONS AT THE INN 

In view of the impossibility of personal contact with 
any but a very few at the Auditorium, we arranged for 
six Receptions at the Mayville Inn, with admission only 
by cards. We had 3,600 of these cards printed, and additional 
permits were granted for the last Reception on 
Saturday evening, Aug. 6. The tickets were good only 
for the date they bore, so that the chartered steamer 
which took the friends twenty miles to the Inn and back 
might not be overcrowded. We desired that all should 
have a view of the beautiful lake and the opportunity for 
fellowship enroute. We are assured that the arrangements 
were enjoyed to the full and were seasons of refreshing 
fellowship and praise. 

At the Inn the crowds each evening were received in 
the large parlors and halls and verandas and spacious 
lawns. We used a corner of one veranda for a pulpit, 
and, after greeting the dear friends, spoke a few words 
along spiritual lines to assist in making the occasion one 
to be remembered from the standpoint of spiritual refreshment. 
Then, while hundreds sang some of our sweet 
hymns, other hundreds were invited into the large dining 
room, where with zeal they were served by loving brethren 
and sisters (recruits chiefly from the Colporteur ranks) 
with a little ice cream, cake, etc., soon exchanging places 
with the singers. We feel sure that these six receptions 
added to the comfort and joy and spiritual refreshment 
of all who participated. The numbers attending furnished 

R4673 : page 279 

a good gauge of the total number attending the Convention. 
Yet there were probably nearly 1,000 who, for one 
reason or another, did not get to the receptions— some of 
them refrained from attending, fearing that there would 
not be room, and that they would crowd out others. 
There was, however, room for all, and more could have 
been entertained. 

Reports of the Receptions were published in the Jamestown 
papers. Thinking that they may be of interest we 
include them in this report:— 



THE GREATER AND ETERNAL EDEN 
GOD'S FOOTSTOOL TO BE MADE GLORIOUS 
PASTOR RUSSELL'S RECEPTION 
AT 
THE MAYVILLE INN 



August 3.— Last evening the second installment from 
the Bible Students Convention, numbering nearly six hundred, 
visited Pastor Russell and were addressed by him 
on the lawn and porches of Peacock Inn. The twenty 
miles' ride on our beautiful Lake Chautauqua feasted 
their eyes. Their hymns of praise wafted to the cottages 
on the shores led many to surname these International 
Bible Students— "The Happy People." Pastor Russell 
spoke briefly and informally. Referring to the beautiful 
scenery of the lake, he remarked:— 

"It turned my mind back to the Garden of Eden, reminding 
me of the Divine provision for our first parents 
before sin came to mar the Divine likeness in which Adam 
and Eve were created. Then my mind went forward into 
the future, guided by the Divine lamp— the Word of God. 
In its light there arose before my mental vision Paradise 
restored— not a garden merely, but the entire earth made 
beautiful, gorgeous, fruitful, sinless, happy. 

"I called to mind the inspired promise so familiar to 
us all— There shall be no more sighing, no more crying, 
no more dying— for the former things of sin and death 
will have passed away, and the great King of Glory shall 
announce, 'Behold, I renew all things.' (Rev. 21:5.) 
I recalled also St. Peter's words of assurance respecting 
these glorious 'times of restitution of all things which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the world began.' (Acts 3:20,21.) St. Peter adds 
that this restitution of earth to its designed perfection- 
typed in Eden— and of man's restitution to God's likeness, 
delays until the second advent of the Redeemer. And 
other Scriptures, dear Brethren, assure us that the coming 
of our Master as the King of Glory is timed by God to 
take place as soon as the elect Church shall have been 
called and chosen and tested and found faithful. 

RESTITUTION WORK BEGUN 

"The Divine purpose will not be thwarted by the permission 
of sin to mar the original. The sacrificial death 
of Jesus is the complete offset to the penalty pronounced 
on Adam and his race. Restitution to perfection and Divine 
favor will result in God's 'due time.' And we believe that 
time near at hand. 

"Do we not see the promised blessing coming? What 
are our vast irrigation schemes by artesian wells and by 
aqueducts but fulfillments of the prophecies pertaining 
to the reign of Messiah and the blessing of the earth? 
Hark to the message: Streams shall break forth in the 



R4674 : page 279 

desert; and the wilderness shall bloom as the rose.— 
Isaiah 35. 

"Burbank and others are under Divine guidance working 
miracles in horticulture, just as Edison and others 
have been the instruments of Providence to give us electrical 
devices. What beautiful fruits and flowers are the 
result! It is difficult to imagine greater perfection either 
in Eden of old or in the world-wide Eden to be restored! 

"Referring to the 'times of restitution' of Messiah's 
reign the Prophet declares, 'The earth shall yield her increase.' 
(Ezek. 34:27.) Behold preparations for the fulfillment 
of this promise: About three years ago a Virginia 
farmer found one abnormal bunch of 120 stalks of 
wheat from one root— the offspring of one grain of wheat. 
Under the name of 'miracle wheat' it is now being developed 
slowly in various parts— the average yield appears 
to be about 1,200 grains from one kernel. And this very 
year the same peculiarity in oats has been found— a bunch 
growing wild by the roadside. 

"Additionally the same Divine providence is guiding 
our chemists to economical methods of extracting nitrogen 
from the atmosphere for the feeding of the soil and 
thus to the 'increase' of earth's blessings and in fulfillment 
of God's promise that he will make the earth (his footstool) 
glorious. 

DELIVERING THE CAPTIVES 

"But, my friends, the most important piece of restitution 
work relates to man. The hard, stony selfishness of 
heart which is world-wide is not God's likeness nor to 
God's glory. 

'"Man's inhumanity to man 
Makes countless thousands mourn.' 

"Nineteen centuries of preaching shows that the cure 
of this malady is not in our power, and that only the few 
even desire or seek for the Lord's spirit of gentleness and 
tender-heartedness. The great King of Glory is also the 
Good Physician. He only can cure the disease of sin and 
its results. Through him God's promise to Israel will be 
fulfilled: 'I will take away the stony heart out of your 
flesh and give you a heart of flesh.' (Jeremiah 31:31.) 
And this work will proceed from Israel to all the families 
of the earth— uplifting all the willing and obedient out 
of sin and death to all that was lost in Adam and redeemed 
at Calvary. And, thank God, the unwilling and 
disobedient will not be consigned to endless torture, but 
to 'the Second Death'— 'everlasting destruction.' 

"After some light refreshments the 'happy people' departed 
on the boat for their lodgings along the Lake and 
at Jamestown, singing enroute." 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
CALL UPON 
PASTOR RUSSELL 

Nearly 600 Addressed on the Lawn of the Late Judge 
Peacock's Residence. 

A third detachment of Bible Students, after the day's 
services, took steamer for the upper end of the Lake to 
attend Pastor Russell's reception. The Lake journey was 
an enjoyable one along spiritual lines. The students, rendering 
various well-known hymns effectively, discussed 
the Convention topics of the day. They were as happy a 
crowd as ever passed over our beautiful Lake. 

At Peacock Inn the visitors crowded the lower floor 
of the house and the extensive lawn. Pastor Russell, after 
greeting each visitor, addressed them as a whole. He 
welcomed those already well known to him, as well as 
others whom he had not met previously. He congratulated 
them upon the wonderful day in which we are living; 
upon the wonderful Bibles from which we may study concerning 

R4674 : page 280 

the great Divine Plan of the Ages. With an Oxford 
Bible in his extended hand he remarked, "I fear 
that even we fail to appreciate the value of this great Book 
which has exerted more influence in the world than all 
other books combined." He remarked that few preachers 
realize that the Bible has been in the hands of the public 
for only about one century. "Our oldest Bible societies 
are this very year celebrating their centennial. When they 
were organized Bibles were possessed only by the rich. 
Now they are to be found in the homes of all— obtainable 
free by the destitute. Many are learning the value 
of Bible references and the usefulness of Bible Concordances 
in Scripture studies. 

"Furthermore, we are too apt to forget that general 
education has only now reached the masses. It is not yet 
thirty years since free schools were established in Great 
Britain. It is only about ten years since education has 
been made compulsory in all the most civilized lands. 
Thus God has favored our day in a two-fold manner, not 
only by giving us the Bible, but by giving the masses the 
intelligence necessary to its study. 

"But, alas, just as these precious opportunities are in 
the hands of the masses; just as these blessings were 
given to humanity; just as Christendom was prepared for 
Bible study, the Lord allowed the Adversary to bring 
forward a most subtle influence in opposition to it. The 
foul-mouthed infidelity of the past has been supplanted by 
a far more dangerous enemy to Christian faith— the infidelity 
known as Higher Criticism. It is dangerous because 
of its insidious character. It has entrenched itself 
in all the colleges and in all the theological seminaries. 
While all of our churches of all denominations 



ostensibly stand as defenders of the Bible, the citadel of 

faith is being captured by the great Adversary of God 

and the Truth— Satan— who is deceiving, estranging and 

misleading the hosts of Christendom through the very 

theological professors and D.D.'s to whom they have been 

led to look for spiritual light and direction and whom 

they had supposed to be staunch defenders of the Bible 

as the inspired Word of God. This is a severe arraignment, 

but it is a generally truthful one, as each may demonstrate 

to himself. Most regretfully I am persuaded that 

four out of every five of all the ministers and Sunday-School 

superintendents of Christendom have ceased to believe 

in the Bible as the Divinely inspired revelation of the 

Will and Purposes of the Almighty. Some of these, nevertheless, 

claim to be earnest followers of Jesus as the Son 

of God, and of Divine origin. Yet how weak is their position! 

If Moses did not write the Law and if it was not 

inspired, nor the prophecies inspired, what could we think 

of Jesus and his Apostles accepting those prophecies as 

inspired and founding all of their teachings thereupon? 

Most evidently, Higher Critics who still believe in Jesus 

as the Divine Son of God have not thought logically on 

the proposition, and will reject everything pertaining to 

the Scriptures upon further reflection. 

"I congratulate you, my friends, that while sorrowfully 
we behold the fulfilling of the Scriptures in the falling 
away of these, our friends, we are not compelled by 
anything in reason nor in the Scriptures to suppose that 
their fate for such infidelity will be eternal torment. I 
congratulate you that, as Bible Students, we are growing 
stronger in our faith day by day while, in fulfillment of 
the Scriptures, a thousand fall at our side and ten thousand 
at our right hand. (Psa. 91:7.) I congratulate you 
that the study of the Bible, with the assistance which God 
is now providing, is clearing up the mysteries which have 
perplexed us all our lives and is bringing to us greater 
appreciation of his glorious purposes and greater loyalty 
to him and more earnest desire to serve his Cause of 
Righteousness and to lift up the standard of the Cross 
of Christ. 

"Truly, as the Lord through the Prophet expressed it, 
'Our feet have been kept from stumbling,' and instead 
the stumbling-stone of greater intelligence of our day 
has lifted us to a higher plane of devotion and appreciation 
of 'the heights and depths and lengths and breadths 
of the Love of God which passeth all understanding.' 

"Do not misunderstand me to be speaking harshly or 
unkindly of our dear friends who are stumbling over the 
educational opportunities of our day. On the contrary, I 
sympathize with them. Once I stood exactly where they 
stand. Once I, too, repudiated the Bible as the Word of 
God. I was as honest then as I am today, and feel 
bound to give credit for equal honesty. They are blinded 
by the dazzling glare of the earthly science of our day. 
If they ever knew, they have forgotten and dropped the 
light, the science which comes only from above. Some 



of them may be recovered from the snare of the Adversary, 
as I was. There is this difference, however: The 
majority of them seem to exult in their unbelief and to 
pride themselves and plume themselves on their opposition 
to the Bible; but my position was the very contrary 
of this. I deplored the necessity for abandoning the Bible. 
I considered it the rational thing to expect from the 
Supreme Creator some Revelation of his purposes respecting 
mankind— the object of our creation; the purpose to 
be attained; and how and why. 

"I have no doubt that many of you have had experiences 
similar to my own. Many of you have told me so. 
Let us hope that, as we have been recovered from the snare 
of the Fowler, so also may others be. Let us be prompt 
to lend the helping hand and an encouraging word. Let 
us realize that to the honest-hearted the loss of the Bible 
must be a disaster to faith and hope, as it was in our own 
cases. Let us trust that there are many others honest as 
ourselves who will yet be recovered. Let us be encouraged 
to help them by a remembrance of how great a 
blessing came to us through the proper understanding of 
the Word of God." 

"SOME BETTER THING FOR US" 
"OUR HEAVENLY CALLING" 
PASTOR RUSSELL'S RECEPTION NO. 4. 

The Mayville Inn and its spacious lawns, with Pastor 
Russell of Brooklyn Tabernacle as host, entertained the 
fourth contingent of Bible Students, about six hundred, 
last night. The numbers each night are regulated by 
cards of invitation. Like its predecessors, the occasion 
was an enjoyable one long to be remembered with pleasure 
and profit. Again the songs of "The Happy People" 
of the International Bible Students, coming and going, 
gladdened and cheered the dwellers at the Lake-side 

R4675 : page 280 

homes, who will not soon forget this Convention. In 
connection with his greetings Pastor Russell said:— 

"To the gathering of Bible Students who visited me 
here last evening I remarked the increasing beauties of 
nature as foregleams of the great 'restitution' promised 
in the Bible and which we believe is now nigh at hand. 
We then considered the world's hope, based on the great 
sacrifice at Calvary and the Bible's testimony respecting 
its far-reaching results. Tonight let us consider briefly 
the future of the Church's hope. 

"Like many of our Christian friends, for a long time 
we did not understand how to 'rightly divide the Word 
of Truth.' (2 Tim. 2:15.) We did not comprehend 
that God's Plan provides first a heavenly salvation for 

R4675 : page 281 



the Church and then an earthly salvation for mankind in 
general. The study of our Bibles along dispensational 
lines clears away all of our difficulties. It shows us that 
the promise that the redeemed shall sit every man under 
his own vine and fig tree and long enjoy the work of 
their hands (Isa. 36:16) is God's provision for Israel 
restored to Divine favor, and for all the families of the 
earth; but not for the Church. Of the true Church, the 
Bride of Christ, it is declared that her members shall in 
the resurrection be like unto the angels— heavenly or 
spiritual beings. 

"St. Paul distinctly says of these, 'Flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God.' (I Cor. 15:50.) Jesus 
tells these that he has gone to prepare them a place in the 
Father's house on high. But the place for man, the earth, 
already provided from the foundation of the world, is a 
very different one from ours, of which we read, 'Eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the 
heart of man, the things which God hath in reservation 
for them that love him.'— Isa. 64:4. 

THE SPIRITUAL CALL 

"Now we understand why it is that from Genesis to 
Malachi there is not one suggestion of a heavenly or 
spiritual hope for anyone. Every promise is earthly. In 
Abraham's case, for instance, we read, Lift up now 
thine eyes and look to the East, West, North, and South; 
for all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, 
and to thy Seed after thee.' 

"St. Paul refers to this difference between the hopes 
of the spirit-begotten Church founded at Pentecost and 
the hopes of all others. Pointing to the faithful of the 
past he declares that although they had God's testimony 
to their faithfulness, nevertheless they received not the 
promises, 'God having provided some better thing for us, 
that they without us should not be made perfect.'— 
Hebrews 11:38-40. 

"As soon as we get our 'better thing,' our higher reward 
of 'glory, honor and immortality' in joint-heirship 
with our Lord as figuratively his Bride, then the worthy 
ones of ancient times will get their reward of resurrection 
to human perfection. Then, under Messiah's Kingdom, 
those perfect men will be the 'princes in all the 
earth.' Then from the spiritual to the perfected earthly 
ones, the blessings and instructions for the world will 
descend to the poor, ignorant, selfish and superstitious 
world— to help them; to uplift the obedient to the perfections 
illustrated by the perfected worthies. 

WHAT HEAVEN IS LIKE 

"We have all heard of the Sunday-School teacher who 
told her class about heaven— about its pianos, harps, organs, 
horses and carriages, fruits and flowers, etc. We 
see that she was merely thinking of the blessings God 



has provided for the faithful and obedient of the world, 
'in due time.' She had no conception of the heaven of 
heavens promised to the faithful followers of Jesus in the 
narrow way. 

"The great Teacher explains that it is impossible to 
describe heaven and its beauties and charms. He said to 
Nicodemus, If I have told you of earthly things and ye 
believed not, how would you believe if I should tell you 
of heavenly things?'— John 3:12. 

"In line with this the Bible makes no attempt to describe 
heaven itself, nor its inhabitants. We are merely 
told that God is a Spirit 'dwelling in light which no man 
can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can 
ever see' personally. Man must discern God in his works, 
the noblest of which is the perfect man, made in 
Jehovah's moral likeness on the earthly plane— a little 
lower than the angels on the spirit plane. The most that 
the Word declares of our heavenly inheritance is that 
'Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entered 
into the heart of man, the things which God hath in reservation 
for them that love him.'— I Cor. 2:9. 

"But while refusing to inform us of the heavenly 
conditions, God does give us a soul-satisfying portion. 
Through the Apostle he declares, It doth not yet appear 
what we shall be, but we know that when he (the glorified 
Jesus) shall be revealed (at his Second Advent, in 
power and great glory) we shall be like him, for we shall 
see him as he is,' while others not thus 'changed' from 
human to spirit nature by the 'First Resurrection' power 
will not see him as he is, but only as he shall be revealed 
in his providences and judgments, which every eye shall 
recognize. 

"How satisfactory! How far beyond all that we 
could have asked or thought! 'Like Him.' What more 
could we ask? 'Like him,' whom 'God hath highly exalted, 
far above angels, principalities and powers'! We 
stand amazed at such grace! Moreover, we can realize 
that he who called us to become 'partakers of the divine 
nature' and joint-heirs with the Redeemer in his Mediatorial 
Kingdom has provided for our every comfort and 
joy in that heavenly state, the details of which we may not 
now grasp. Prophetically of these it is written, I shall 
be satisfied when I awake in thy likeness.'— Psa. 17:15." 

ALL BIBLE STUDENTS 
SHOULD BE 
BURNING AND SHINING LIGHTS 
PASTOR RUSSELL'S ADDRESS TO THE FIFTH DIVISION OF 
CONVENTIONISTS 

Nearly six hundred more Bible Students from the 
Convention visited Pastor Russell at The Mayville Inn.— 
More "happy people".— More hymns of praise.— Another 
delightful ride on our beautiful Lake going and returning. 
—Pastor Russell welcomed all most heartily.— In the 
course of the evening he gave a little address as on 



previous occasions.— He said in part: 

"One of old was declared to be a burning and 
shining light. There is force in this expression. 
Some lights are cold, austere, unsympathetic; but the kind 
approved by the Master was the burning kind— warm, 
glowing, sympathetic, helpful, intensive. The Master 
himself furnishes the best of all illustrations of the principle 
enunciated. He was the light which came down from 
heaven— undimmed, resplendent, shining forth to the utmost 
the light of Divine Truth. Not a cold, forbidding 
recluse was he, holding himself aloof from the people 
with a haughty and disdainful spirit, telling coldly 'wonderful 
words of life.' 

"On the contrary, his entire life was sympathetic, 
whole-souled. One of the charges brought against 
him by the cold Pharisees was, He receiveth sinners 
and eateth with them. Even his disciples were 
shocked that he should converse with a woman of Samaria. 
But the common people heard him gladly. While 
recognizing that he was far above their plane— while beholding 
in him the glories of an only-begotten of the 
Father, they nevertheless were drawn to him because he 
was the burning as well as the shining light. And they 
declared of him, 'Never man spake like this man.'— 
John 7:46. 

R4675 : page 282 

"LET YOUR LIGHT SO SHINE" 

"Bible Students are all Christians, though, alas, all 
Christians are not Bible Students. True, God's Book 
may even be read through by some who are unbelievers. 
And it may be scanned critically by opponents who seek 
to find fault with it and to entrap it, as they sought to 
find fault with the Master. But these are not Bible 
Students in the proper sense of the word. Only those who 
have made a consecration of their lives to the Lord and 
who are anxious to know the Divine will, that they may 
conform their lives to it, and who, to attain this end, have 
entered the School of Christ to be taught of him— only 
these are Bible Students from our standpoint— searchers 
after the secrets of the Lord, because they love him and 
are appreciative of his glorious plans and desirous of 
understanding them fully. Such Bible Students— including 
you, dear friends, and myself, I trust— should be 
burning and shining lights in the world and amongst our 
fellow-Christians of all denominations, many of whom, 
alas, have much of the spirit of the world and are lacking 
in the spirit of the Truth because of insufficient knowledge 
of the Truth itself— because they are not sufficiently 
Bible Students. 

"Let your light so shine before men that they may 
see your good works and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven.' We are not enjoined to make a show of carrying 



our Bibles everywhere in an ostentatious manner. 

We are exhorted to show forth in our daily lives the 

lessons we learn from its precious pages. As the Bible 

is our lamp provided by the Lord to all those who walk 

in his footsteps, so each of these in turn is a lamp which 

should shed forth upon others the light, the knowledge, 

the spirit of Truth for their edification. In other words, 

the holy Spirit is not poured out upon the world of mankind, 

but merely upon the Lord's servants and handmaidens. 

It is an anointing for these and upon these, 

evidencing to them that they have been begotten again 

to the new nature and making of them light-bearers for 

the benefit of others— burning and shining lights, sympathetic 

and helpful lights, 'that they might show forth the 

praises of him who hath called us out of darkness into 

his marvelous light.' 

"THE LIGHT SHINETH IN THE DARKNESS" 

"While keeping the lamp trimmed and burning, while 
seeking to glorify God as burning and shining lights in 
the world, we must not forget that the Bible assures us 
that we will be no more successful in converting the 

R4677 : page 282 

world than was our Master. His great light shone in 
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. And 
the religionists of his day instigated his crucifixion. The 
Master's prophecy respecting his followers will prove 
true to the end of the Age: 'The darkness hateth the 
light'; 'Marvel not if the world hate you. Ye know that 
it hated me before it hated you.' (I John 3:13.) It is 
altogether a mistake, therefore, to suppose that you or I 
or any other person or all of the Lord's consecrated people, 
letting their lights shine faithfully before men, could 
convert the world. Such was not God's intention. It is 
the Church, and not the world, that is being tested at the 
present time. The opposition of the world and all the 
powers of darkness serve to test us as New Creatures— 
to test our loyalty to God and to his Truth. Whosoever 
receives the light of Truth intelligently must rejoice in it, 
and, rejoicing in it, he must let it shine out upon others, 
or, by covering his light with a bushel, he will demonstrate 
his lack of courage, lack of appreciation, lack of 
zeal, which the Lord is now specially seeking for 
amongst those whom he has invited to be sharers with 
Jesus in the glories of the Mediatorial Kingdom about to 
be established amongst men. It is important, therefore, 
that we let our light shine before men. It is important 
that we be willing, nay, glad if need be, to suffer for our 
loyalty to the Lord and to his message. And we have 
his word for it that he that is ashamed of him or of his 
Word now, of such he will be ashamed by and by and 
not own them as members of his Bride class, not accept 
them as assistants with him in his glorious Throne. 



"THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD IS JESUS" 

"This is the light which lighteth every man that cometh 
into the world.' (John 1:9.) Thus far Jesus has not 
been dealing with the world, but merely with the blessed 
ones who have the eye of faith and ear of faith. 'Blessed 
are your eyes, for they see, and your ears for they hear.' 
(Matt. 13:16.) The time for the enlightenment of the 
world will be after the special call of the elect. Then the 
Church, as the Bride, will be with the heavenly Bridegroom 
in his Throne. Then all now found faithful in the 
matter of letting their light shine will be associated with 
the great Light, Jesus, as members of his Body. Altogether 
they will constitute the great Sun of Righteousness 
which will then arise with healing in its beams for 
the blessing of all the families of the earth. Then shall 
the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of 
their Father. He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear.' 
(Matt. 13:43.) He that hath a desire of heart, let him 
be obedient, and thus make his calling and election sure 
to this glorious chief salvation." 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S RECEPTIONS 
CONCLUDED SATURDAY NIGHT 
The Sixth Section of the Convention Hosts, About Six 
Hundred, Visited the Mayville Inn Saturday Night. 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S ADDRESS 

In order not to crowd the chartered boat, no more 
than six hundred were permitted to attend Pastor Russell's 
reception on any one evening. The restriction was effected 
by means of visitation cards, not more than six hundred 
of which were issued for any one of the six evenings. 
Last evening marked the conclusion of the receptions. 
The steamer was crowded, but "The Happy People" maintained 
their equilibrium of spirit and let their songs 
abound, giving good evidence that they were singing and 
making melody in their hearts unto the Lord. They evidently 
enjoyed the scenery of the Lake, but the eyes of 
their understanding seemed to take in still more beautiful 
Elysian fields. It was the same on the return journey. 

The Mayville Inn was illuminated throughout, as were 
also its verandas and lawns, the Chinese lanterns giving 
a gala effect. 

The crowd was welcomed by Pastor Russell, who 
greeted each one personally. He subsequently addressed 
them from the veranda, following which a light collation 
was partaken of. The address in part was as follows:— 

"THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CHURCH OF 
THE FIRST-BORNS" 

"My dear friends, our Convention nears its close. To 
me it has been a very enjoyable one. So far as I can discern, 



it has been the same to all in attendance. It is a 
delightful and blessed experience that so many of the 
Lord's people, by his Providence, have been permitted to 
turn aside from the busy cares of life to spend ten days 
in Bible study and in fellowship with each other in spiritual 
things. We have thus been remembering the inspired 

R4677 : page 283 

exhortation, 'Forget not the assembling of yourselves 
together,... and so much the more as ye 
see The Day draw nigh.' The nearer we come to the 
great Day of the Lord, in which the Church will be 
glorified with the Bridegroom, and in which the great 
work of blessing the world at large will begin, the more 
precious are our opportunities for Christian fellowship. 
And more than this; they daily become more important 
to us for our strengthening and upbuilding in the faith 
once delivered to the saints. 

"As we think of the closing of this Convention, let 
our minds go out toward the Great Convention promised 
in God's Word. At it will be gathered all of God's people 
—all 'Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile.' That Convention, 
like this one, will be unsectarian, interdenominational. 
Presbyterians, Methodists, Congregationalists, 
Baptists— the holy, the saintly out of each and all of these 
will be at that Great Convention. St. Paul styles it the 
'General Assembly of the Church of the First-born ones.' 
How grand to think of such a reunion, without a creedal 
fence between any of the participants and all of them 
surrounded and safeguarded by the 

Love Divine, all Love excelling,' 

and the Wisdom and Power Divine! Do you desire to 

be present at that Convention? The question is an unnecessary 

one. It is the hope, the desire, the aim of 

every one of us to be there— to make our calling and our 

election sure; to so run that we may obtain that great 

prize of participation in the 'First Resurrection.' Of that 

resurrection we read, 'Blessed and holy is he that hath 

part in the First (chief) Resurrection; on such the 

Second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of 

God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand 

years'! (Rev. 20:6.) Let us have this in mind, dear 

friends, that our participation with our Lord in the glories 

of his Kingdom is dependent upon our faithfulness here 

in following him through evil report and through good 

report, through honor and through dishonor in the bearing 

of the cross along the narrow way of self-denial. 

THE FIRST-BORNS PASSED OVER 

"I remind you that when God brought typical Israel 
out of Egypt, the first-borns had a peculiar salvation or 
preservation first. The night before the deliverance all 



the first-borns were in danger of death, and were saved 
only when under the blood of the Passover Lamb. We 
see, dear friends, the significance of this beautiful type. 
St. Paul tells us that Christ is our Passover Lamb, slain 
for us. We each have appropriated his flesh, his human 
nature, which he sacrificed on our behalf. We recognize 
his sacrifice, the blood of atonement. We see that this 
entire Gospel Age is the antitype of that night. We are 
hoping to belong to the first-borns begotten of the holy 
Spirit who, during this night time of sin and death, will 
be passed over and, on account of the blood without and 
the Lamb within, be accounted worthy of being passed 
over— accounted worthy of eternal life on the spirit plane 
as members of the 'Church of the First-born'— participants 
in the 'First Resurrection' to glory, honor and immortality 
with our Lord— like him. 

PRIESTS AND LEVITES-WHICH? 

"I remind you that all of these first-borns, passed over, 
typified all of the Lord's people of all denominations and 
outside of all denominations who are now passing from 
death unto life. I remind you, however, that in the type, 
the first-borns of every tribe were exchanged for the one 
tribe of Levi— the priestly tribe, which thereafter typified 
the 'Church of the First-borns'— the 'household of faith.' 
But I remind you further that the Lord divided that tribe 
into two classes. A little handful were made priests and 
occupied a special position of favor and relationship and 
nearness to God, and the remainder of that tribe were 
honored in being used as the assistants or servants of 
the priests. This is an allegory or type. 'The Church of 
the First-borns' will consist of two classes, a 'little flock' 
of priests and a 'great company' of the 'household of 
faith' and typical Levites who will serve. I remind you 
that the 'little flock' of priests do their sacrificing now 
and, if faithful, will shortly be made a Royal Priesthood, 
a reigning priesthood, joint-heirs with the great King of 
Glory and High Priest of our profession— Jesus. I remind 
you that the 'great company,' typed in the ordinary 
Levites, will not be in the Throne, but serve before the 
Throne. They will not be living stones of the Temple, 
but serve God in the Temple. They will not wear crowns 
of glory, though they will be granted palms of victory. 

"What places will you and I occupy in the resurrection, 
in the General Assembly of the Church of the First-borns? 
Will we be of the Royal Priesthood, or of the less honorable, 
but still blessed, servants? Will we be of the Bride 
class or of the less honored virgins, her companions that 
follow her? It is for us, dear friends, now to make our 
calling and our election sure by our zeal, our earnestness, 
our devotion to the great King and his Cause. He has 
called us to the highest place. It rests with us, under his 
wonderful and gracious arrangements, to determine 
whether we will be passed over or not passed over, and, 
if passed over, to determine whether we will accept the 



place to which we are all called or the inferior place 
which will be granted to those who do not keep their 
garments unspotted from the world and who, therefore, 

R4678 : page 283 

must come through great tribulation to enter into the 
Kingdom at all. 

ENCOURAGED TO LEAVE BEHIND A SWEET FRAGRANCE 
OF THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD 

"I exhort you, dear friends, that we strive to be present 
at the Great Convention, 'the General Assembly of the 
Church of the First-borns,' and that we strive to make 
our calling and election sure, that we may be of the 
Bride class, the Royal Priesthood class, the members of 
the Body of the great Prophet, Priest and King of Glory! 
It is to this end that we have come to this Convention— 
that we might encourage each other and be encouraged 
to maintain the good fight of faith and to gain the victory, 
so far as our hearts are concerned, over the world, the 
flesh and the Adversary. I trust that we shall all go away 
from this Convention strengthened by Divine might in the 
inner man. I trust that we shall leave behind us a sweet 
fragrance of the Spirit of the Lord in every cottage and 
hotel in which we have been lodged. I trust that we shall 
go to our homes so filled with the Spirit of the Truth, 
the spirit of meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness and love that we shall carry a blessing 
to those of our homes, that they may take knowledge 
that we have been with Jesus and have learned of him 
and that the blessing may thus overflow and abound to 
many hearts. I doubt not that such will be the blessed 
results and that this Celoron Convention of Bible Students 
will be a marked epoch in the Christian careers of 
many, marked with blessings from on high and mutual 
refreshment of spirit amongst all those who have 
participated." 

"Chosen in Christ ere the dawn of creation; 

Chosen for Christ to be filled with his grace; 
Chosen to carry the streams of salvation 

Into each thirsty and desolate place." 



R4676 : page 284 

[There is a full page picture here with the following title and caption: 

BIBLE STUDENTS IN PALESTINE 

This photograph was taken April 24th, 1910, 
on the slope of the Mount of Olives, facing 
Jerusalem, near the Garden of Gethsemane. 



Behind the group is the Valley of Jehoshaphat 
and the brook Kedron, 
beyond which on the top of the farther 
slope is the wall of Jerusalem. 
Behind the wall is seen the City. 



R4678 : page 285 

MISIMPROVED OPPORTUNITIES TAKEN AWAY 

--MATTHEW 21:23-46.-SEPTEMBER 4- 

Golden Text:— "Therefore say I unto you, The 
Kingdom of God shall be taken from you." 

IN this Study the Great Teacher in two parables 
portrays the mistake made by the religionists 
of his day. The understanding of 
these parables gives a clearer insight into 
the cause which led to the rejection of Israel 
for a time from Divine favor. Incidentally, 
too, we are to remember that nominal fleshly 
Israel was a prototype of nominal Christendom. 
Hence we may look for somewhat 
similar conditions and dealings now in the 
"harvest" time of this Christian Age. 

To get the force of the Lord's teachings here and 
everywhere it is necessary to remember that the Jewish 
people had been promised the Kingdom of God, of which 
David's Kingdom was a type on a small scale. For centuries 
they had been expecting a great King, Messiah, 
whose coming would exalt them and bring them into 
prominence as God's Kingdom. John the Baptist, when 
he came to introduce Messiah, told the Jews that unless 
they would repent and come back, to the extent of their 
ability, into harmony with God and the Law they need not 
expect to share in the Messianic Kingdom. Jesus told the 
people that unless their righteousness should exceed the 
righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, they should 
in no wise enter into or become members of the long-waited-for 
Kingdom. (Matthew 5:20.) The two parables 
of this Study illustrate what stood in the way of the 
majority. 

WORK TODAY IN MY VINEYARD 

The Jewish people professed to be God's people, willing 
to do him service. They were treated, not as mere slaves, 
but, rather, like sons. All were told to go and work in 
God's vineyard; but they divided into two classes, represented 
by the two sons, in our first parable. One of these 
sons represented the outwardly religious, pious, who said, 
Yes, we will serve God. However, they did not really seek 
the Divine service, but rather the service of their sects 



and parties and their own personal aims, honor, influence 
and preferment. The other class of Israelites, represented 
by the other son of the parable, made no pretense of serving 
God, and were branded as publicans, sinners, harlots. 
Nevertheless, when Jesus appeared, when John's message 
went forth, and afterwards the teachings of Jesus and the 
Apostles, these same publicans, sinners, harlots, were the 
ones ready to receive him, while the religious, finding that 
his message was in conflict with their teachings, repudiated 
him. Thus one of the charges against Jesus was, "He receiveth 
publicans and sinners and eateth with them." 

"Friend of Sinners was his Name" 

The second parable represents God as the owner of a 
great Vineyard, in all respects well appointed and furnished 
for his purpose. This Vineyard represents the Jewish 
nation and the Divine promises made to that people— 
the Law and all the arrangements of the Law Covenant, 
for their development. This Vineyard the owner let out 
to husbandmen, whose duty it was to care for the vines 
and the fruitage and to render to the owner the results, 
except a portion which they might keep for themselves. 
These husbandmen were the prominent religionists, of 
whom Jesus said, "The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' 
seat. All, therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, 
that observe and do." (Matt. 23:2,3.) The owner properly 
required returns on his property and sent servants to 
receive his share of the fruitage. But the husbandmen, 
instead of giving them what was due their Master, abused 
them by beating, killing and stoning them. 

These servants were the prophets of old, sent to Israel. 
They should have received the kindest treatment and an 
abundance of fruits of meekness, gentleness, patience, etc., 
but, instead, they were treated as intruders by the leaders 
of Israel. Some of them were stoned, some beaten, some 
murdered, some sawn asunder. Some wandered about in 
sheepskins and goatskins and dwelt in dens and caves of 
the earth, because not appreciated. They were not treated 
as representatives of the owner of the vineyard. Finally 
the owner sent his Son, saying, "They will reverence my 
Son." But these same husbandmen, the religionists of our 
Lord's day, took counsel to kill him and to seize his inheritance. 
They somehow got the impression that they 
could lord it over God's heritage and that anybody reproving 
them or showing up their hypocrisies or liberating the 
people from subservience to them, whoever he might be- 
even the heir— they were at liberty to kill. They crucified 
him. 

What may we presume the owner of that Vineyard 
would do to those wicked husbandmen who, forgetting the 
ownership of the vineyard, were using it as their own, 
mistreating his servants and crucifying his Son? The 
Great Teacher put the question to his hearers, and the 
answer promptly came that the owner would destroy those 
wicked men and let out his Vineyard to others who would 



render him its fruitage. 

This is just what happened. The scribes and Pharisees 
and Doctors of the Law who were using God's promises 
and blessings and their opportunities selfishly and in disregard 
of the Almighty— these were dispossessed. Their 
government was destroyed and Divine favor and privileges 
as God's mouthpieces, which they once enjoyed, were 
taken from them and given to others— to the Apostles 
and their associates, during this Gospel Age. 

However, as fleshly Israel was a type or picture of 
nominal Spiritual Israel, we may not have to look far to 
find a very similar condition of things today. Today also 
we see some high in official position as representatives of 
God and his Word using their positions to entrench themselves, 
to hold power over the people, to carry out their 
own schemes. These are inclined to speak harshly, yea, to 
"murder" any who come amongst them meekly, humbly, 
in the name of the Lord. They do not literally kill them 
nor "shoot them full of arrows," but they do behead them 
in the sense of ostracism. And they do shoot out at them 
the arrows of bitter words, slanders, etc. 

What will the Husbandman do with such servants? 
The answer is again that the opportunities which they 
have enjoyed will be taken away from them. Thank God 
that the next step in the programme will be that the King's 
Son and all of the misused servants associated with him 
will constitute the new "Kingdom of God's dear Son" 
"under the whole heavens." Matters will be no longer entrusted 
to any but the tried, proven, faithful. 

Jesus, the rejected, "is become the chief corner-stone" 
of the great Temple of God, which is the Church. As the 
privilege of being God's embryotic Kingdom was taken 
from the Jews and given to Christ and the Church, so 
presently his embryotic Kingdom will be taken from earth 
entirely— his faithful will be received to the heavenly 
plane and power and great glory. 

Whoever stumbled over Jesus suffered loss in the sense 
of being broken, but not beyond possibility of repair. "But 
upon whomsoever this stone (Messiah) shall fall, it will 
grind him to powder" in the Second Death.— Matt. 21:44. 



R4679 : page 286 

"MANY ARE CALLED BUT FEW ARE CHOSEN" 

-MATT. 22:1-14.-SEPTEMBER 11.- 

MANY of us have not in the past sufficiently discerned 
that none of the lessons of the 
Great Teacher were given in literal language 
—that they were all symbolical; as we read, 
"Without a parable spake he not unto them." 
-Matt. 13:34. 
In today's Study we have another beautiful 



parabolic lesson respecting the Kingdom. 

We might inquire why the Bible is so full 

of these lessons concerning the Kingdom? 

Is it not because the Kingdom of God is the only hope of 

the world? Are we not learning this more and more? Faith 

in the coming Kingdom of God under the whole heavens 

began to grow dim within less than two centuries after 

the death of the Apostles. Instead of longing, hoping, to 

become the Bride of Christ, to be associated with him in 

his glorious Kingdom for the overthrow of Sin and Satan 

and Death, and for the uplifting of mankind during a 

reign of a thousand years, a new faith and a new hope 

came in, contrary to the Scriptures. This unscriptural 

hope instructed Christians that they should expect an 

earthly Kingdom of their own establishment, in which the 

popes would reign as representatives of Jesus and the cardinals 

and bishops as representatives of the apostles and 

the "little flock," to whom the approaching Kingdom is 

promised. 

Thenceforth the work of the Church, to "build one another 
up in the most holy faith," gave place to the unscriptural 
course of neglecting the Church and laboring 
for the world, under the unwarranted assumption that it is 
the duty of the Church to convert the world. As to how 
much injury has thus been done it is difficult to estimate. 
For the sake of numbers standards have been lowered and 
worldliness has been recognized, until today Christendom 
is in a sad plight as respects true doctrines and high moral 
standards. 

THE MARRIAGE FESTIVAL 

As Messiah is to be the Great King of earth during the 
period of his Mediatorial reign, it is the Father's good 
pleasure that he should have a "Bride." And this Gospel 
Age is set apart for the finding and development of this 
Bride class of many members. The Kingdom is the great 
prize which the Father is to bestow upon his Son— to be 
shared by the Church, the Bride of Christ. The parable 
of today's Study outlines the call of this Bride class or 
Kingdom class from Jesus' day down to the completion 
and glorification of this company. Nowhere is Jesus represented 
as calling his own Bride. This is foreshown in 
Abraham, who typified the Father, and Isaac, who typified 
Jesus; and Abraham's servant, sent to call Rebecca to be 
the Bride of Isaac, typified the holy Spirit, whose work 
during this Gospel Age is bringing to Christ the Bride 
class— "the very elect." 

So this parable shows that the King sent forth the call 
to the Marriage. The Jewish people, the children of 
Abraham, according to the flesh, had been invited to this 
high honor from the time of the giving of the Law Covenant 
at Sinai. Century after century they waited for the 
announcement to be made to them, that the nuptial feast 
was ready. Finally, when Jesus came, the announcement 
went to them, All things are now ready! Come to the 



feast! Meantime, they had become overcharged with the 
cares of this life— business, politics and religious schemes 
of their own concocting. They manifested no interest in 
the announcement and even beat some of the servants, the 
Apostles and others, who sought to help them, and to draw 
their attention to the Great Feast, which was their special 
privilege. 

GO YE THEREFORE INTO THE HIGHWAYS AND 
BRING THEM TO THE MARRIAGE 

The Almighty was wroth and sent the Roman armies 
and "destroyed those murderers and burned up their City," 
Jerusalem, in A.D. 70. Then the King said to his 
servants, The wedding must take place even though those 
who were bidden were not worthy. Go ye therefore into 
the highways and as many as ye find bring to the marriage 
feast. As the city represented the Jewish nation, so the 
highways represented the world in general— the Gentiles 
—to whom the message of the Kingdom was sent after 
fleshly Israel had first enjoyed the offer and but partially 
improved it. Another statement of the parable shows 
three different classes:— 

(1) The Jewish rulers who rejected him. 

(2) Those called from among the streets and 
lanes of their city and gathered to the spirit plane by 
Jesus and the Apostles. 

(3) Then the report was given, "We have done as thou 
hast commanded and yet there is room." Then the message 
went forth to go everywhere among the Gentiles 

and urge them to come in, until the house should be filled 
—until the elect number for whom the feast was provided 
should be found. Our Study states that the wedding was 
furnished with guests— good and bad. In other words, 
the offer of a share with Christ in his Kingdom has attracted 
some naturally very fallen, as well as some better 
favored by nature. But the arrangements of the Great 
King are such that the "wedding garment" covers all the 
blemishes of the most imperfect as well as those of the 
least imperfect. 

WITHOUT A WEDDING GARMENT 

The latter part of our Study shows a discrimination 
and judgment ultimately to take place amongst those invited 
to the wedding and accepted. As none were permitted 
to enter in without a wedding garment— without an 
acknowledgment of the merit of Christ's sacrifice— so none 
will be permitted to remain and participate in the wedding 
festival except those who maintain their standing of confidence 
in Christ. 

Any who take off the "wedding garment" will be 
sure to be expelled from the privileges enjoyed and 
will go out from the light and blessings afforded to 
this favored class, into the "outer darkness" of the world 
and of nominal Christianity, in which shortly there will 



be a great time of trouble, symbolically represented by the 
"weeping and gnashing of teeth." 

Are we not even now in the time of this inspection of 
the guests? And are not all Christian people who cast 
away their confidence in the sacrifice of Christ and who 
accept Evolutionary theories and Higher Criticism taking 
off "the wedding garment," and will they not all eventually 
find themselves in outer darkness, in confusion, in bewilderment? 
And will they not be sadly distressed in the 
great time of trouble which the Scriptures declare to be 
near?— Daniel 12:1. 

"We see the marriage splendor, 

Within the open door; 
We know that those who enter 

Are blest for evermore; 
We see our King, more lovely 

Than all the sons of men; 
We haste, because that door, once shut, 

Will never open again." 



page 287 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study III. -The Call of The New Creation 
OCTOBER 2 

(31) When the Lord comes in the close of this age, who 
only will be accepted as his Bride? P. 75, par. 1. 

(32) Quote several comforting and encouraging Scriptures 
which declare the Divine supervision over even the humblest 
member of the New Creation. P. 75, par. 2. 

(33) Explain in detail the illustration of natural birth in 
its relation to the spiritual birth of the New Creation. 

P. 76, par. 1. 

(34) Show briefly how the Scriptures clearly distinguish 
between the New Creatures and the human family in general, 
especially with respect to (1) the Atonement Sacrifice, and 
(2) to the trials and difficulties of life. P. 77, par. 1. 

(35) What will be the test of membership in the New 
Creation? P. 78, par. 1. 

(36) In order to abide in Christ, what more than the mere 
making of a consecration is necessary? Explain fully. 

P. 78, par. 2. 

OCTOBER 9 

(37) Why are the five senses of humanity in general not 
sufficient for the New Creation in matters of judgment? 
P. 79, par. 1. 

(38) Explain the so-called "sixth sense," or complete set 
of additional spiritual senses, granted these New Creatures. 



P. 80, par. 1. 

(39) By what name should the New Creation be known? 
P. 80, par. 2. 

(40) What manner of spirit has prompted Christians to 

take sectarian names in the past, and when did it first manifest 
itself? P. 81, par. 1. 

(41) To whom especially belong the chief praise and 
honor for the blessings that have come to us through the 
Apostles and other servants of the Lord? P. 82, top. 

(42) What should be our attitude toward the present division 
into various denominations? Pp. 82, 83. 

(43) In conclusion, what names should we avoid, and 
why? P. 83, par. 2, first part. 

(44) What names should we recognize and answer to, as 
consecrated Christians? P. 83, par. 2, last part. 

OCTOBER 16 

(1) Was the opportunity to become members of the New 
Creation offered to mankind in general? P. 85. 

(2) Was the "calling" of the natural Israelites a "high" or 
"heavenly calling"? If not, to what were they called? P. 85. 

(3) Where are the terms of the High Calling set forth? 
P. 86, top. 

(4) Why could the Ancient Worthies have no part or lot 
in this New Creation? P. 86, par. 1. 

(5) Give another reason why this High Calling could not 
begin before the death of our Lord Jesus. P. 86, par. 2, 
first part. 

(6) What was the standing of the Apostles before the 
death and resurrection of Christ? P. 87, top. 

(7) Explain the difference between calling men to repentance 
and inviting them to the High Calling. P. 87, top. 

OCTOBER 23 

(8) Do the introductions to the various Epistles emphasize 
the exclusiveness of the Heavenly Call? P. 87. 

(9) Upon what conditions shall we be made joint-heirs 
with Christ? P. 87, par. 2. 

(10) Why are not many great, wise or learned called? P. 88. 

(11) Why are the conditions of acceptance more attractive 

to the more fallen members of the human family? P. 89, par. 1. 

(12) Upon what two graces of character is God especially 
placing a premium in connection with the New Creation? 
P. 90, par. 1. 

(13) To what high standard of character are the New 
Creatures called? P. 90, par. 2. 

(14) Is the Lord dealing with the imperfect flesh or with 
the new minds of these New Creatures? P. 91, top. 

(15) What should we expect the new mind to accomplish 
in controlling our mortal bodies? P. 91, par. 1. 

OCTOBER 30 

(16) What are some of the specifications and limitations 



as respects character in the New Creation? P. 91, par. 2. 

(17) Explain the difference between the "law of liberty" 
of the New Creation and the bondage of Israel to specific 
laws. P. 92, par. 1. 

(18) Is it an easy path that leads the New Creation to 
"glory, honor and immortality"? P. 92, par. 2. 

(19) Are there several different calls during the Gospel 
Age? Quote Scripture to prove position taken. P. 92, par. 3 

(20) Will there be a call to the World in the next age? 
P. 93, top. 

(21) Are any called to be of the Great Company referred 
to in Rev. 7:9-14? P. 93, par. 1. 

(22) Will these be members of the New Creation? If 
not, why? P. 93, par. 1. 

(23) Is this special call of the New Creation limited in 
time? and when did it begin? P. 94, par. 1. 

(24) When will this "acceptable time" come to an end? 
P. 94, par. 2, first part. 



R4679 : page 287 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
GOOD EFFECTS OF THE VOW 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A contemplation of the Lord's providences respecting 
the Vow, as they have been exemplified repeatedly in the 
past year, in the cases of individuals, and of various congregations 
of the Lord's people, have gradually softened 
the antagonism I felt against it, and I took it some days 
ago, as unto the Lord, believing it to be his will. 

I wish to say that I have taken the Vow, not as an 
oath, not as a guarantee that I will keep it perfectly 
(apart from the Lord's merit) and not as a protection, 
in any sense, except that it will help to keep certain parts 
of my original consecration vow prominently before my 
mind. I am sure I do not keep my consecration vow perfectly, 
and will doubtless fail occasionally in some items 
of this statement or a portion of it, but I shall do my best 
to keep it perfectly, and I am sure that is all the Lord 
expects. 

I have always fully assented to every principle contained 
in the Vow, and the true explanation of the extreme 
prejudice I have had against it is that the 
Adversary was undoubtedly trying to get me to fight 
against it and thus draw me away from the Truth and its 
service. 

Your Brother in Christ, 

CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 

CELORON CONVENTION APPRECIATED 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER:-- 



As I think over the blessed season we had at the 
Jamestown Convention, my heart goes out in joy and 
thanksgiving to our dear Lord and Heavenly Father for 
the abundance of love they have showered on us all in 
these last days. The love of our Elder Brother was 
manifest in all the arrangements and the love shining 
from the faces of the dear friends showed plainly that 
they had been with Jesus and learned of him. 

I wish to express my thanks and appreciation to you, 
dear Brother, for your loving zeal and untiring endeavor 
to serve the Lord, the Truth, and the Brethren. All the 
arrangements at the Convention spoke of that great love, 
the carefully planned accommodations for all. I can say 
that for the little sum ($14) I received accommodation far 
above my expectation. The Lord surely was in our midst, 
working all things for the good of his people. It was 
more than I anticipated, and I want to thank you, and all 
those who labored with you, for the love thus shown for 
the Brethren, and especially for the reception at The 
Mayville Inn. It was good to be there. It made me think 
of the Lord's words when he said, "I go to prepare a place 
for you." Yes, everything was prepared for us to come 
and receive a blessing, and we surely did receive one. 

Your brother in our Redeemer, JOHN ENQUIST. 



page 290 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 



SERIES V., The Atonement Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-1/2.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 289 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI SEPTEMBER 15 No. U 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Present Truth Re Advocate and Mediator 291 

A Covenant By Sacrifice Not the New 

Covenant 292 

A Question Re the Mediator 293 

The Divine Plan of the Ages in Brief 294 

The Superiority of the Sarah Covenant 295 

When Will Opportunities for Service Cease? 296 

"Through Much Tribulation Ye Shall 

Enter the Kingdom" 297 

Is the Reading of "Scripture Studies" Bible 

Study? 297 

Was Jacob's Course With Esau Dishonorable? 299 

Esau Cared Only for the Earthly Part 

of the Birthright 300 

Jacob Was Not Reproved of the Lord 300 

The Trial Hour (Poem) 300 

Three Tempting Questions 301 

Such Shall Not Inherit the Kingdom of God 302 

Some Interesting Letters 303 

page 290 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



DETROIT, MICH., SEPT. 18 

Morning Rally, 9:30 o'clock at Vermont Hall, Grand River 
and Trumbull avenues. Discourse for the Public by Brother 
Russell at Light Guard Armory 2:30 p.m. Topic "Hereafter." 

KNOXVILLE, TENN, SEPT. 24-26 

Railroads have granted the very low rate of one cent per 
mile during the Appalachian Exposition now being held in 
Knoxville. This rate is open to all and good for the dates of 
the convention. 

Many of the friends throughout the South who could not 
go to Jamestown because of the great distance, will rejoice 
to know of a convention so much nearer home. For particulars 
as to lodging, meals, etc., address Brother R. A. Parham, 
5 Maloney avenue, S. Knoxville, Tenn. 

Brother Russell's topic for the Public discourse will be 
"Hereafter." This Sunday meeting will be held at Staub's 
Theatre, corner Gay and Cumberland Sts., at 3 p.m.; other 
meetings will be held at Market Hall. It is expected that 
Brothers Stevens, Bohnet, Raymond and Rutherford will also 
be speakers. 



MANCHESTER, N.H., SEPT. 25 

The Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony, at 10:30 a.m. 
and the Discourse for the interested at 7:30 p.m., will be in 
the Dearborn Memorial Hall, corner Lake avenue and Hall 
street. Discourse for the Public at Keith's Theater, Hanover 
street, near Elm, at 3 p.m. Topic, "Overthrow of Satan's 
Empire." 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., OCTOBER 2 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock, 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks St. The evening 
Praise service, 7 p.m., and Question Meeting at 7:30 
o'clock, will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse for the 
Public at 3:00 p.m., by Brother Russell, will be in the Brooklyn 
Academy of Music, Lafayette Ave. and St. Felix St. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR OCTOBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered: (1) 138; (2) 165; (3) 135; (4) 145; (5) 
170; (6) 283; (7) 60; (8) 208; (9) 179; (10) 172; 
(11) 301; (12) 229; (13) 50; (14) 22; (15) 30; (16) 
32; (17) 12; (18) Vow; (19) 324; (20) 103; (21) 46; 
(22) 286; (23) 325; (24) 105; (25) 127; (26) 130; 
(27) 93; (28) 281; (29) 164; (30) 95; (31) 7. 



R4680 : page 291 

PRESENT TRUTH--RE ADVOCATE AND MEDIATOR 

A GENTLEMAN who fancies himself commissioned 

to be the Advocate of the New 

Covenant, but who has not yet come to see 

that the New Covenant could not be the 

Old Covenant, takes us to task saying: "Four 

years ago it was Present Truth that the 

Editor of THE WATCH TOWER needed a 

Mediator between God and Himself. Three 

years ago it became Present Truth that he 

does not need a Mediator between God and 

himself. Did the Editor of THE WATCH TOWER leave the 

Present Truth?" 

We reply, No, the Editor of THE WATCH TOWER 
did not leave the Present Truth. He kept all the 
Truth that he then had and has added to it. The light 
has scattered some more of the darkness, so that, with the 
very same thought that he had four years ago, he now 
sees that he used the wrong word in expressing that 



thought. He now sees that he should have used the 
Scriptural term Advocate instead of the word Mediator. 
He now sees that himself and others in the past have used 
language too carelessly, because of the general confusion 
and mix-up handed down from the dark ages. 

He now sees that the Scriptures nowhere say that the 
Church has a Mediator or ever will have a Mediator, and 
that they nowhere say that the Covenant of sacrifice, 
under which the Church is developed, has a Mediator. 
The Editor of THE WATCH TOWER is learning day by 
day more clearly to rightly divide the Word of Truth and 
to use Scriptural terms only. The Scriptures do say, "We 
have an Advocate with the Father." (I John 2:1.) They 
do not say anywhere, We have a Mediator between God 
and us. The Editor of THE WATCH TOWER is trying to 
assist God's people to think and speak correctly respecting 
the great work of Atonement for sin, the merit of which 
lies in the sacrifice of Jesus and the privilege to share in 
which is granted to the elect during this Gospel Age. 

The same critic innocently asks for any Bible text to 
show that the Church, the Bride of Christ, does not need 
a Mediator. How foolish! Does the Bible undertake 
to say all the things that are not so? One would think 
that no special ability would be necessary to discern that 
there is no need of a Mediator between friends. We 
never had this thought! When we used the word as 
respects the Church we used it thoughtlessly, just as our 
opponents are using it now; we used it without noticing 
that the Bible nowhere intimates a Mediator between the 
Father and the Church. It is because Present Truth is 
progressive that we have clearer light on the same facts 
than we had four years ago, even as we then had clearer 
light than we enjoyed years before that. The Editor of 
THE WATCH TOWER has believed in Jesus as his Redeemer 
from childhood. He did not understand the philosophy 
of The Divine Plan of the Ages then, but nevertheless, 
his simple faith was a sufficient basis for a consecration 
of his all to the Lord, and a sufficient basis for the Divine 
acceptance of the sacrifice and the begetting of the holy 
Spirit. Since then the light of this harvest time has 
been shining more and more clearly as the years go by. 
The light of Present Truth does not contradict the light 
of past Truth, but confirms it and further clarifies our 
vision and increases our hope and our joy. And is not 
this true of all of God's people now walking in the narrow 
way? Those who are now "waking up" to a realization 
of the fact that for seventeen years they have been in 
darkness are acknowledging that they have not been walking 
for those seventeen years in the "path of the just, 
which shineth more and more unto the perfect day." For 
the past seventeen years of their lives, the seventeen years 
of their best Christian experience, they believed that the 
Vine and the branches are one— that the Head and his 
Members are one; that the sufferings of The Christ are 
one— that the Church fills up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ— that the death of Christ is one— 



that the Church becomes dead with him sacrificially, after 
having been justified through faith in his blood, his 
sacrifice. For seventeen years they believed that the 
Prophet spake of the sufferings of Christ (Head and 
Body) and the glory that shall follow; that to be dead 
with him signifies to be baptized into his sacrificial death 
as in contrast with Adam's penalty— death. And to drink 
of his cup signifies a share of his sufferings and that the 
hope before all such is, that "if we be dead with him, we 
shall also live with him"; and "if we suffer with him, we 
shall also reign with him." For seventeen years these 
friends told us that they believed and rejoiced in St. 
Paul's sentiments of Phil. 3:9-1 1, the hope to be found in 
Christ (members of his Body), not having their own 
righteousness, which is of the Law (Covenant), but that 
which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness which 

R4680 : page 292 

is of God by faith (not by the New (Law) Covenant), 
that we might know him and the power of his resurrection 
(sharing his resurrection as his members) and the fellowship 
of his sufferings (being partakers of the sufferings 
of Christ), being made conformable unto his death (not 
a different death from his, but a similar one— not a death 
as a sinner, but a sacrificial one), if by any means I might 
attain unto The resurrection of The dead. 

We are not murmuring nor complaining against these 
friends because of the great loss which they have sustained 
—the loss of spiritual sight into the deep things of God— 
into "the mystery, which is Christ in you the hope of 
glory." We compassionate their loss and remember the 
Master's words, "If the light that is in thee become darkness, 
how great is that darkness!" While not attempting 
to judge the hearts of any who have gone out from us, 
we may be confident that the Lord did not allow them to 
go out without a sufficient reason. We regard their loss 
of spiritual sight as a Divine judgment upon them, just 
as truly as we regard the opening of the eyes of their 
understanding as a mark of Divine favor. Remembering 
that the Lord is not dealing arbitrarily either in receiving 
his people into the light nor in casting some out of the 
light, we are bound to suppose that there were conditions 
of heart in these, our friends, with which the Lord was 
not well pleased. The lesson to us is that we must walk 
in the light and that we must put away from our hearts 
and, as far as possible from our flesh, everything contrary 
to the Divine standards of meekness, gentleness, purity, 
justice, love, "if by any means we would attain unto The 
resurrection of The dead." 

Before dismissing this subject we must answer another 
foolish question, namely, What answer do we make to the 
following:— 

A certain sister owning property in her own name 
found that her husband had taken possession of it, rents, 
monies, all, and that he ignored her entirely in the matter. 



Upon her request to have some of her own money and 

property given her by her father, the husband became 

angry and sought out some of our opponents. The latter, 

after the usual course, partially misrepresented our teachings 

respecting the atonement for sin. The husband replied, 

That's what my wife says. She says, "Jesus didn't 

die for you; he died for me— but not for you; I will die 

for you." What will we answer to this? We answer 

that we would not believe a man on oath who was trying 

to cheat his wife out of her own money. We do not believe 

that the wife said anything of the kind, nor that 

she has any such idea. We believe that the husband misrepresented 

his wife's statement, just as our opponents 

uniformly misrepresent THE WATCH TOWER statements. 

A half-truth may be an untruth, if it gives a misconception 

and is intended so to do. A truthful statement would not 

serve the purpose of our opponents, for the Truth is 

logical as nothing else is. St. Paul remarked, "We be 

slanderously reported." The same is true today. The 

self-contradictions of our opponents are remarkable. In 

one breath they tell us that they have been deceived by 

us for seventeen years. In the next they say that we have 

changed within the last three years. In the next they 

affirm that they are in accord with everything in the 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES, and yet they are opposing them as 

best they are able. Oh, inconsistency, thou art not a 

jewel; nor dost thou reflect beauty or credit upon 

anybody! 

A COVENANT BY SACRIFICE NOT THE NEW 
COVENANT 

In all of our writings for the past thirty years we have 
pointed out the New Covenant as coming fully into operation 
at the close of this Gospel Age. We have pointed out 
that it is the Covenant under which restitution blessings 
are to come to the world of mankind. We pointed it out 
as the Keturah Covenant— separate and distinct from the 
Hagar Covenant, under which natural Israel was developed, 
typified by Ishmael and separate and distinct also 
from the original Abrahamic Covenant, typified by Sarah, 
whose seed Isaac typified The Christ, Head and Body. 
We saw and pointed out to others, so that they saw, that 
the antitypical Isaac— The Christ, Head and Body— is the 
Melchisedec Priest, of which Jesus is the Head and the 
Church his Body— the great Priest under whom the New 
Covenant is to be made effective to Israel and to the 
world of mankind through Israel. We pointed out also 
that the elect Church of this Gospel Age, a "Royal Priesthood," 
must all offer sacrifice; as the Apostle declares, 
"Every priest is ordained of God to offer both gifts and 
sacrifices for sin." We pointed out that our Lord Jesus 
is the great High Priest of our profession and that he 
offered himself in sacrifice and that he required that all 

R4681 : page 292 



who would be with him in his Throne must walk in his 
steps— after being justified through faith in his blood. We 
pointed out that this is what is referred to in the Scriptures 
as the Covenant by sacrifice, "Gather my saints 
unto me, those who have made a Covenant with me by 
sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) We associated this sacrificing of 
the earthly nature by all those who would be partakers of 
the divine nature with the Apostle's exhortation of 
Hebrews 9:23. We called attention to the fact that the 
word sacrifices is in the plural and refers not only to the 
most important sacrifice made by our Lord and Redeemer, 
but that it applies also to the sacrifices of all those whom 
he accepts as his members of the Royal Priesthood. These 
are the "better sacrifices," which were typified by the 
bulls and goats of the typical Atonement Day. 

We saw and mentioned that the Church as priests, 
while under the Covenant of Grace, the primary Covenant, 
the Sarah Covenant, have a work to do in connection 
with the New Covenant. As the Apostle says, "We are 
able (or qualified) ministers (or servants) of the New 
Covenant." But we see more clearly now than we did ten 
years ago just how we serve the New Covenant— that as 
members of the Body of the Mediator of that Covenant, 
we are associated with him in making preparation for 
its inauguration. We are serving it in the sense that he 
served it, only in an inferior degree and not individually, 
but in him, as "members of the Body," members of the 
"Royal Priesthood," to whom "old things have passed 
away and all things have become new." We see now more 
clearly than ever the meaning of our precious relationship 
to God in Christ as members of the antitypical Isaac, 
through whose mercy Israel and the world shall obtain 
mercy, under the provision of the New Covenant put into 
operation as soon as the Royal Priesthood shall have 
completed the appointed work of sacrifice.— 
Romans 11:27-30. 

Our opponents can all agree that they disagree with 
THE WATCH TOWER, but they cannot agree amongst themselves 
on anything doctrinal. Nor do they see, seemingly, 
that fault-finding is not proof. Let them try to set forth 
The Divine Plan of the Ages from their own standpoint. 
They cannot do it. Their theories are illogical and inconsistent. 
They take our logical presentation as a basis and 
make a few turns and twists to suit themselves, failing 
to see that whatever they add or subtract is so much 
confusion. That is the reason why so many who leave the 
Truth take a few paces after the claimed "new light" and 
then drop out forever into the blackness of outer darkness 
of unbelief and uncertainty about everything. 

R4681 : page 293 

Let such of our opponents as are honest sit down 
calmly and figure out the Covenants and their mediators. 
Thus only will they see the weakness of their present 



attitude. 

(1) Which was the original Covenant to which the 
Law was added four hundred and thirty years after.— 
(Gal. 3:17)? 

(2) Would it be proper to speak of that original 
Covenant as the same that God promised he would make 
"after those days" and which he styles the "New 
Covenant"? 

(3) If so, of what use is language, except to mislead 
and confuse? 

(4) It is admitted that St. Paul declares that the original 
Covenant had no Mediator; that it was a uni-lateral 

or one-sided Covenant which needed no Mediator. 

(5) On the contrary, it is admitted that the Mosaic 

or Law Covenant was a type of the New Covenant— that 
it could not be a type of a Covenant which preceded it. 

It is conceded that the Law Covenant and its priests 
and their services typified the New Covenant with its 
higher or "royal priesthood" and antitypical Atonement 
Day and "better sacrifices," whose blood is brought into 
the antitypical Most Holy to make sin-atonement and 
whose bodies were burned outside the antitypical camp— 
Heb. 13:11. 

If a type cannot follow its antitype, surely, then, it 
could not be "added" to its antitype. Surely no great wisdom 
is necessary to see this. "We, brethren, as Isaac was, 
are the children of the promise"— the children of the original 
Sarah Covenant— barren for nearly two thousand 
years. 

The Redeemer is our Advocate, through whose imputed 
merit we, with him, are admitted to membership 
in the Spiritual Seed under his "Covenant by sacrifice"— 
symbolized by the offering of Isaac. Sacrificing with him 
and accepted as his members we shall soon with him constitute 
the great antitypical Moses (Acts 3:22,23), the 
Mediator of the New (Law) Covenant— between God and 
men— through Israel after the flesh. 



R4681 : page 293 

A QUESTION RE THE MEDIATOR 

CAN you quote any statement in the Scriptures 
to the effect that the Abrahamic Covenant 
did not have a Mediator? 

We answer that there is no direct statement 
in those words, nor is it necessary. 
What is not stated is not to be understood. 
That is a rule of all reason and logic. It 
is what is stated that is to be taken into 
consideration. There was no mediator 
mentioned. It is for those who claim that 
the Abrahamic Covenant had a Mediator to prove it. 

The Apostle Paul in his epistle to the Hebrews (6th chapter) 



tried to show the strength and power of the 
Abrahamic Covenant; but he does not tell us of or 
point to any Mediator as having had charge of it. 
On the other hand, he does point to God's Word and 
God's oath as the foundation of that Covenant. He says 
that it was approved to us by two immutable things— that 
God could neither lie nor break his oath. The Apostle 
very particularly shows that the Law Covenant was 
added to the Abrahamic Covenant and that, added 430 
years afterward, it had a Mediator. 

So St. Paul proceeds to explain that in the case of that 
original Covenant, because there was but one party, there 
was no need of a Mediator. A Mediator stands between 
two parties to see that each does his part. Moses was 
the Mediator of the Law Covenant. He stood between 
God and Israel. (Deut. 5:5.) On the one hand he represented 
God and on the other, Israel. But as respects 
the Abrahamic Covenant there was only one party. God 
is that One. Therefore there was no need of a Mediator. 
Why not? Because God did not make any condition with 
which the Seed of Abraham would have to comply. He 
gave his oath to this Covenant, instead of a Mediator. 
God said I will do it; therefore there was no place for a 
Mediator. And there was no Mediator. The original 
Covenant did not say how many additional or subordinate 
Covenants would be made. 

As to the promised Seed of Abraham, God did not 
explain how he would secure to Abraham such a wonderful 
Seed as would bless all the families of the earth. Abraham 
did not know how this was to be done. We know 
how God secures to Abraham this wonderful Seed. He 
set before his Son the promise of a great reward. And 
he, for the sake of the glory set before him, humbled 
himself to become a man. When he left the heavenly 
glory he was merely preparing to fulfil the Covenant. 
He was not yet the Seed of Abraham. Jesus the babe 
was of Abraham's seed according to the flesh, but not 
the Seed of Abraham mentioned in the Covenant. Even 
when Jesus was thirty years of age he was not the Seed 
of Abraham referred to in that Covenant. It was not 
until he voluntarily offered himself in consecration at 
Jordan that he became the Seed of Abraham. At that 
very moment the Seed of Abraham began to be represented 
in him— when he received the begetting of the 
holy Spirit. He reached completion as the Head of that 
Seed when on the third day he arose from the dead to 
the spirit condition. In other words, the Seed of Abraham 
was not yet in existence when God made that 
promise or Covenant to Abraham. 

Then Jesus set before his followers that same joy; 
and when we consecrate similarly we enter into a Covenant 
with God by sacrifice, as "members" of the Anointed 
One. We thus agree to present our bodies, to lay down 
our lives. And we have the promise that God will raise 
us up as the Body to the same exalted condition of 
heavenly glory to which he raised our Redeemer and 



Master. "If ye be Christ's (if ye comply with the conditions), 
then are ye Abraham's Seed and heirs according 
to the promise." (Galatians 3:29.) In a certain 
sense we are already the Seed of Abraham, but not until 
we share "his (Jesus') resurrection" will we be the Seed 
in the complete sense. The first work which that Seed will 
do will be to extend this great promise that God has made 
world-wide. Its utmost breadth will be attained by 
instituting a New Covenant with Israel by which Israel 
may attain eternal life on the human plane, and all nations 
through Israel. 

A Covenant between two parties, both contracting, 
requires a Mediator. As, for instance, in the ordinary 
affairs of life, the general law of the State steps in and 
serves as mediator between all contracting parties. And 
so in contracts between God and men, it is necessary to 
have a Mediator. But suppose you said to me, I intend to 
give you tomorrow this diamond ring. Should I ask, 
Where is the Mediator? Who will guarantee to me 
that you will give me the ring? You would probably 

R4682 : page 294 

answer, There is no need of a Mediator; it is a voluntary 
gift. And so in our Covenant of sacrifice. It is a voluntary 
act. God has made a certain provision: "Blessed 
are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear." 
We agree to enter into our sacrifice voluntarily and our 
Advocate agrees to help us. If we do these things that 
we have agreed to do, we get the reward— glory, honor 
and immortality. 

THE OATH AS INSTEAD OF A MEDIATOR 

In the Abrahamic Covenant God's oath, attesting his 
Word, served to ratify the Covenant, to make it binding, 
to hold it sure. It thus took the place which might have 
been occupied by a Mediator, had there been conditions 
mutually binding upon the Almighty and upon some of his 
people. There was no Mediator, because, as already stated, 
the promise was an unconditional one: God proffered to 
do certain things— to provide through Abraham's posterity 
a Seed capable of blessing the world. Hence no 
Mediator was necessary. 

But notice that St. Paul, in speaking of this Abrahamic 
Covenant (Heb. 6:17), declares that God "confirmed 
it by an oath." The word here rendered confirmed 
is defined by Strong's lexicon, to interpose (as, 
arbiter). Young defines the Greek word mesiteuo, rendered 
confirmed in our text, "to be or act as a Mediator." 



R4682 : page 294 

THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES IN BRIEF 



GOD proposed in himself before the foundation 

of the world the great Plan re Redemption, 

because he foreknew man's fall and the 

death penalty he would put upon it. For 

the first 1656 years up to the flood God permitted 

the holy angels to demonstrate their 

inability to recover the sinner to righteousness. 

On the contrary, the contagion 

of sin spread to some of the holy angels. As 

the Scriptures declare, "The sons of God 

saw the daughters of men, that they were fair, and they 

took unto them wives of such as they would. And there 

were born unto them children, which were giants and men 

of renown. (Gen. 6.) And the earth was filled with 

violence and sin— to such an extent that God declared 

that the imagination of the human heart had become only 

evil and that continually. Foreknowing this God had already 

arranged that one of the aqueous "rings," still 

suspended above the earth, should descend, causing the 

flood, which wiped out that order of things, destroying 

every human being, except righteous Noah and his family, 

of whom it is written, "Now Noah was perfect in his 

generation (there was no admixture of angelic seed).— 

Genesis 6:9. 

Thus the angels were tested by contact with sin for 
centuries— so that all of those who desired had opportunity 
to transgress the Divine Laws. The disobedient ones are 
referred to in the New Testament as those angels who 
kept not their first estate or spirit condition, but who 
preferred to live on the earthly, animal plane. These 
were restrained in chains of darkness until the great Millennial 
morning— cut off from fellowship with God and 
the holy angels and no longer permitted to materialize and 
thus to commingle with humanity.— 2 Peter 2:4. 

When God's due time came he called Abraham to make 
of him a type of himself, and to give him a son, Isaac, to 
be a type of Christ, and to call for Isaac a Bride, Rebecca, 
who would be a type of the elect Church of this Gospel 
Age. And as with Rebecca came maids, so with the elect 
Church comes the "great company" class. As Abraham 
offered Isaac on the altar in a figure and he was recovered 
from death in a figure, so God really offered his Son in 
death and recovered him out of death actually by resurrection 
from the dead. As all that Abraham had he gave 
to Isaac, so it is that all the blessings that God has to give 
to all others of the human family who will become his 
people will come through the antitypical Isaac. And when 
Rebecca became Isaac's bride and joint-heir, she became 
sharer with him in all the joys and privileges which 
were his. Thus was represented the future glory of the 
Church with Christ in blessing all the families of the 
earth. 

Moreover a double figure is used to represent The 
Christ, namely, Jesus the Head and the Church his Body. 
In the fulfilling of this figure the Apostle tells us that all 



of the consecrated overcomers are members of the Isaac 
class, saying, "Ye, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children 
of the promise." The Church as the Bride is pictured in 
St. Paul's statement, "If ye be Christ's, then are ye 
Abraham's Seed and heirs according to the promise"— 
the promise that through us the world shall be blessed.— 
Gal. 3:29. 

ABRAHAM'S WIVES TYPICAL 

While the foregoing is a brief synoptical picture of 
the whole, the details of Abraham's life represent the 
details of the Divine Plan of the Ages. As Abraham had 
the promise that he should be the Father of many nations, 
it implies that, eventually, many peoples of the world will 
become God's children— but only through Isaac and 
through the promise made respecting Isaac's work. 
Furthermore, the Seed of Abraham, it was foretold, would 
be as the stars of heaven and as the sand of the seashore. 
The stars of heaven represent the spiritual Seed of Abraham. 
The sand of the seashore represent the multitudinous 
earthly seed, the human family brought back to 
life during the Millennium, the result of the redemptive 
plan. 

St. Paul gives us the key to the entire situation in the 
suggestion that Abraham's wives were typical of Covenants 
and this explains to us the seemingly harsh treatment 
of Hagar. Abraham was obeying Divine instructions, 
and the Divine instructions were so shaped as to 
constitute the matter in type a picture and lesson for our 
instruction. Abraham's first wife was Sarah. St. Paul 
explains that Sarah typified a fundamental promise, and 
her name, Sarah, signifies princess or chief one. This 
princess Covenant, the one upon which all the others depended 
for their fulfillment, is the one which fulfills its 
mission or purpose in the development of the spiritual 
Seed— Isaac— "We as Isaac was are children of the promise." 
This Covenant has nothing whatever to do with 
the development of any other children of God except 
through the Isaac class, the Mediator class, the great 
Prophet, Priest and King class, through which all of God's 
blessings are to descend to humanity. 

Because Sarah was to serve as a type of spiritual 
things she was barren for long years, to teach that God's 
primary Covenant with Abraham would be barren (unfruitful) 
for long centuries. Meantime, in order to make 
another type, Sarah's bondmaid, Hagar, was given to 
Abraham for a wife, Sarah seeking to appropriate the 
child of Hagar as the Seed of promise— as her own. 
Hagar represented the Law Covenant made with Israel 
at Sinai, as St. Paul explains. The child or offspring of 

R4682 : page 295 

that Covenant was the Jewish nation, Israel in the flesh. 
The fact that Sarah sought to recognize Ishmael as her 



son and held Hagar in her arms at the time of his birth, 
implied that the Law Covenant with Moses as its Mediator 
would, for a time, seem to constitute Israel the heir of 
the original Covenant— which included the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. But this was not the Divine 
will. 

APOSTOLIC EXPLANATION OF COVENANT TYPES 

And so, in God's due time, Sarah brought forth Isaac, 
who typed the true heir of the Covenant or Promise. 
This birth of Isaac was represented primarily by the 
begetting of our Lord Jesus Christ by the holy Spirit to 
the spirit nature; and, later on, by his resurrection to the 
perfection of spirit nature; and in a larger sense, as St. 
Paul explains (Ye, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children 
of promise), the birth of Isaac represented the begetting 
by the holy Spirit of the entire Church, which is 
the Body of Christ. Then came the persecution, the 
mocking of Isaac by Ishmael and the subsequent casting 
out from Divine favor of the Hagar or Law Covenant 
and her child, the Jewish people. They have been outcast 
for centuries and were about to die— about to lose their 
national identity, about to be absorbed by other nations, 
just as Hagar and Ishmael, after being cast out, wandered 
through the desert until they had eaten their loaf and had 
drank the water they had with them and Ishmael was 
ready to die. Then the angel of the Lord drew their 
attention to a spring of water in the desert and, after 
their refreshment, counseled their return and submission 
to the Divine arrangement— their recognition of the 
Sarah Covenant and spiritual Israel. We have come 
close to this very point of time now. The poor Jews, 
losing hope, were about ready to die, to give up all faith 
in the promises. But, behold, at the opportune time, a 
well-spring of hope revives them and the message to them 
is that there is a spiritual Israel and also a natural Israel 
and that their blessings are along natural lines and must 
come to them through the recognition of the glorified 
Mediator of a New (Law) Covenant. 

The Apostolic explanation of this wonderful system 
of types stops here. And we would be inclined to stop 
here also, were it not that other Scriptures clearly point 
out that later on, after the death of the Hagar Covenant 
and after the principal Covenant shall have accomplished 
its purposes in the bringing forth of spiritual Israel, the 
antitypical Isaac, a New Covenant is due to be introduced 
"after those days"— after the interim of this Gospel Age 
specially set apart for the development of the antitypical 
Isaac. That New Covenant is referred to by St. Paul. 
When discussing this very subject he says respecting 
natural Israel's restoration to Divine favor, "This is my 
Covenant with them when I shall take away their sins; as 
concerning the Gospel they are enemies for your sakes; but 

R4683 : page 295 



as touching the election, they are beloved for the fathers' 
sakes,...for as ye in times past have not believed God, 
but have now obtained mercy through their unbelief; 
even so have these also now not believed, that through 
your mercy they also may obtain mercy. For God hath 
concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy 
upon all."— Rom. 11:26-32. 

The same great Covenant, future for Israel, is referred 
to by the Prophet Jeremiah. (31:31 .) Israel is there told 
that after certain days God will make a New Covenant 
with them, not the Sinaitic Covenant— not the Hagar 
Covenant— and just as surely not the Sarah Covenant, 
which gives birth only to a spiritual Israel. The prophecies 
respecting that New Covenant are earthly, restitutionary. 
Under it, "after those days," God will take away 
the stony heart out of their flesh and give them a heart of 
flesh— he will make them tender-hearted human beings, 
loving, kind, etc. But he will not make of them spirit 
beings or New Creatures. 

The Mediator of that New Covenant, Israel understood, 
will be a greater Mediator than Moses, though like 
unto him in the sense that Moses was the type or small 
fore-finger of him. Even so the Mt. Sinai Covenant, with 
Israel as the Ishmael class gendered thereunder, were 
typical of the greater blessings and upliftings to be accomplished 
by the New (Law) Covenant. For these reasons the 
Lord did not confuse the types by reinstating Hagar as 
Abraham's wife after the death of Sarah, as representing 
a renewal of Divine favor toward Israel and the use of 
natural Israel as the earthly channel of Divine favor and 
blessing to all the families of the earth. Instead, God 
permitted Hagar to cease as a type after showing her 
subserviency to Sarah and the recovery of her child, the 
Jew, from perishing. When Abraham, after the death of 
Sarah, took another wife, Keturah, we have every reason 
to believe that she, also, was a type and represented a third 
Covenant. And her many children represented typically 
the many people, kindreds and tongues of the world which 
will ultimately become, under the New Covenant arrangement, 
children of the Highest. 

THE SUPERIORITY OF THE SARAH COVENANT 

Nevertheless it should be continually borne in mind 
that in this series of types the Lord everywhere showed 
the superiority of the Sarah Covenant. In one sense of 
the word Sarah was Abraham's only wife, because Hagar 
and Keturah are mentioned merely as concubines. Thus 
the Divine Plan all centered in the promise, "In thy Seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." Nevertheless 
the Jew and his Law Covenant have been used of the Lord 
as a supplementary means of blessing and instruction to 
the Church and to the world. Likewise in the future the 
blessings that will go to Israel and through Israel to the 
world under the New Covenant will all depend upon the 



first Covenant, the Sarah Covenant, the spiritual one 
and its spiritual Seed— The Christ, Head and Body. 
The New Covenant can go into effect as a better 
Covenant than the Mosaic one only by reason of having a 
better Mediator than Moses, "The Mediator of the New 
Covenant"— The Christ. And he will become the Mediator 
of that Covenant and put it into effect for the blessing of 
all through or by means of his "better sacrifices." First, 
the sacrifice of Jesus, the foundation of all reconciliation 
with the Father— "and we through him." Secondly, the 
Father's acceptance of the Church as members of the Body 
of Christ, upon the condition mentioned by St. Paul, "I beseech 
you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present 
your bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable unto God." 
These are the better sacrifices which the great Mediator 
presents to Justice, all founded upon the merit of the Lamb 
of God which taketh away the sin of the world. His merit 
will be shared in, through God's arrangement, by the "little 
flock," the Royal Priesthood, who not only by faith accept 
the Redeemer's merit, but who, by grace, also lay down 
their lives. They become dead with him, that they may 
also live with him and share his glory, honor, immortality, 
Kingship, Priesthood, Mediatorship, etc. 

"Ah, these are of a royal line, 

All children of a King, 
Heirs of immortal crowns divine, 

And lo, for joy they sing! 

"Why do they, then appear so mean? 

And why so much despised? 
Because of their rich robes unseen 

The world is not apprised." 



R4683 : page 296 

WHEN WILL OPPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE CEASE? 

THE question has frequently been asked, If 
after the door of opportunity to enter the 
"narrow way" shall have closed and one 
should then find himself still in heart accord 
with the Lord and his Plan, but cut 
off from all opportunity of service, should 
he believe that he has made his calling and 
election sure? 

We answer that we would not think that 
this fact would constitute a ground or warrant 
for concluding that such had made his calling and 
election sure. It might be considered, rather, as an indication 
to the contrary, yet we think we should not, under 
such circumstances, be discouraged, but conclude that 
if our hearts had continued loyal to the Lord we were 
now merely enduring a test of faith and that the proper 



course would be to stand firm in the faith, in the spirit 
of the words of Job, "Though he slay me, yet will I trust 
in him." It seems that the Lord desires his people to 
abide in his love continually and has made the arrangement 
that our standing in him, our peace of heart, shall 
depend upon our faithfulness to conscience and to duty, 
or rather our faithfulness to duty, according to our 
conscience. 

Evidently the condition which the Lord desires most 
is that we shall day by day keep close to him; that we 
shall see that no day passes by in which we have not 
striven to do the Lord's will, and that if we have failed 
to do the Divine will, according to our conception of that 
will, we should at once take the matter to the Throne of 
Grace in prayer and supplication until we have the realization 
of Divine forgiveness and reconciliation. Thus 
living day by day we may feel sure that we are abiding 
in the love of God and may feel each day that so far as 
that day is concerned we had made "our calling and election 
sure"; that we are abiding in that condition which 
would make sure to us the "prize" at the end of the way. 

MADE SUPPLICATION TO HIM WHO WAS ABLE TO 
SAVE HIM OUT OF DEATH 

But if in any degree we should seem to be separated 
in a measure from the Lord and his love and lack the 
realization of his favor we should not conclude that we are 
not in the right condition of full acceptance with him, 
because we know that our Lord, as he neared the end, 
had considerable fear of this kind. He had a fear that 
he had not fully complied with all the conditions, and 
"with strong crying and tears" he made supplication "to 
him who was able to save him out of death, and was 
heard in respect to the thing which he feared." He 
feared that he had been unfaithful; he feared that in 
some way, unintentionally, he had failed to conform to 
the Divine requirements. 

Again, we remember that in his dying hour, it was 
the Father's will that he should experience a full cutting 
off and hiding of the Father's face, so that he cried out 
in his anguish, "My God! My God! Why hast thou forsaken 
me?" What have I done that I should be denied 
fellowship with thee? And so, if this was true of him, it 
might be true of any of his disciples; our conscience, 
therefore, might not always be a safe guide as to what 
would constitute an acceptable condition with the Lord. 
So the Apostle Paul, after referring to the fact that 
others might misjudge us and that it was a small thing 
that he should be judged of his brethren or of any man, 
continued, "Yea, I judge not mine own self." I realize 
that I am not competent to judge even my own case. 
There is One that judgeth me, even God. 

So it is in our experiences. We have found some 
with very sensitive consciences who are continually inclined 
to reprove themselves as always failing, as always 



doing something wrong. It seems to be their normal condition 
to feel so. Such persons might easily make a mistake 
respecting the diagnosis of their case. Others, the 
very reverse of this, continually feel well satisfied with 
themselves, even though they are not in full harmony 
with the Lord. So those who are overly conscientious 
and those who are lacking in conscientiousness in their 
judgment of themselves, should seek to make up these 
deficiencies of their own conscience so that they can 
arrive at a right judgment, can be in harmony with the 
Divine judgment. 

CHRISTIAN GROWTH NECESSARY 

At the same time we are to remember that all that we 
can do that will constitute us acceptable in coming to 
the Lord will be the exercise and cultivation of faith. 
Our faith should not be in ourselves, because such faith 
is merely self-confidence. We are to realize that we have 
nothing that would commend us to God. We are to realize 
that we come short continually; that it is not possible 
for any one to come up to the perfect standard; therefore 
we are to be continually in the attitude represented 

R4684 : page 296 

in the Lord's prayer, "Forgive us our trespasses," feeling 
sure that we have trespassed, and seeking meanwhile to 
minimize these trespasses, to be so faithful that these 
will become less and less daily in the Lord's sight. 

But from our own experience we would consider the 
proper thought to be, "Have I lived today as best I knew 
how, and are the accounts right with the Lord, and is 
there anything that I can do better tomorrow than today, 
in the light of the experiences of today? Can I be wiser, 
can I be stronger, can I be more self-sacrificing?" When 
we are doing the best we can do, we are to know that the 
Lord does not expect more than that of us. 

We remember a remark made by a brother at one of 
the conventions. He said, "I am doing the very best 
that I can, and I am trusting in the Lord." We remember 
our reply that we thought that a very wonderful testimony 
—for any one to be able to say, conscientiously, 
that he was doing the very best that was possible for him 
to do. Personally, we never know when we have done 
the very best possible. We always try the next day to 
see if we can do better; but if any one has reached the 
place where he has done the very best possible, he has 
surely done well. We feel at times that we have done 
the very best, yet we very rarely close a day in which 
we come to the conclusion that we have done the very 
best we could possibly do in every particular, in every 
item of the day; and so we try to mark those points in 
which we might have done better, that we may have 
the benefit of those experiences on the morrow. 

But if our hearts have been loyal to the Lord and we 



have been serving him to the best of our ability, striving 
to bring every word and every action and every thought 
into full subjection to the will of God— if this has been 
our endeavor, then we may feel satisfied that God is 
pleased with us; that we are in the condition that he has 
declared is acceptable with him; that we are in the way 
to gain the great "Prize" he has to give. But we are not 
guaranteed this for the morrow, but only for that moment; 
and so the Lord wishes us to live moment by 
moment and to realize his blessing moment by moment, 
and not to think that our case is decided and ended. 
Our question, then, should not be, "Will we feel satisfied 
at some future time?" but rather, "What is my experience 
now, this moment?" Sufficient unto each day are its 
trials and difficulties. 

R4684 : page 297 

"THROUGH MUCH TRIBULATION YE SHALL ENTER 
THE KINGDOM" 

The question is also asked, Should we assume that 
none will remain on this side of the vail long after the 
Harvest work is fully closed? 

Our thought is that there will be privileges of service 
down quite close to the time of trouble; that there will 
not be a long period of waiting in which we would have 
no opportunities of service. Of course, this is purely 
conjecture; nothing that we think of in the Scriptures 
states so positively, but there are so many ways of service 
that we can hardly imagine that all opportunities of 
service would be cut off. If we were cut off from public 
service, there would still be a great deal of service, or 
opportunity for service, in a private way. We can hardly 
imagine such a condition arising in the world as would 
cut us off from all service, public and private, until the 
time of trouble would be so thoroughly upon the world 
as to stop business and all else. It is our expectation that 
nearly all the saints will be gone by the time the trouble 
is so intense that there will be no opportunity for service 
of any kind. 

Suppose, however, for illustration, that for some reason 
the mails would close, or some other situation should 
arise that would practically separate us from the world 
in general, we would still have opportunities of serving 
one another, and many of the Lord's people have found 
that their severest trials come in the rendering of service 
to those closest to them. We have known of cases where 
husbands found it very much easier to render service to 
others than to their own families, their wives and children. 
We have known of instances in which it was the same 
with the wife, and with the children. Sometimes our 
severest trials, therefore, may lie very close at home, and 
our very best opportunities for service consequently may 
be very close at hand. So we think that when the time 
comes when all opportunities of service shall be cut off 



it will mean that the end is close and that the time of 
trouble is here; and if any of us were here under these 
conditions, we should fear that we were going to be of 
the "great company" and have our share in the "time of 
trouble." 

But, on the other hand, we do not know to what extent 
this trouble that will prevail upon the "great company" 
may be in some measure also upon the "little flock." 
Many of the "little flock" may go into a great deal of 
trouble. We do know that all the Church, the "little 
flock" and the "great company" will suffer great tribulation. 
The Scriptures say of the "little flock," "Through 
much tribulation we must enter the Kingdom," and it will 
be through much tribulation that the "great company," 
though failing to get a place in the Kingdom class, will 
be fitted for their position; so there will be "much tribulation" 
for both classes. Perhaps this will be the outward 
tribulation. We are not competent to say at this time; 
we do not see clearly what the Lord meant when he said, 
"Watch, ye, therefore, that ye may be accounted worthy 
to escape those things coming upon the world and to 
stand before the Son of Man." We do not know whether 
he meant that we should be accounted worthy to escape 
all this outward trouble coming upon the world in general 
and to literally stand before the Son of Man, in the 
sense of being translated, perfected New Creatures beyond 
the vail, or whether, on the other hand, he may have 
meant, "Watch," in your course of life, and be so faithful 
to the Lord that you may be accounted worthy to stand 
and not fall in the day of the presence of the Son of Man, 
escaping those things which are coming upon the world 
in the sense of not having the anguish of mind that will 
be upon the world while being in some of the tribulation 
with them. 



R4684 : page 297 

IS THE READING OF "SCRIPTURE STUDIES" BIBLE STUDY? 

THE plan of reading twelve pages of the 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES each day, tried 

by so many, results in more Bible study than 

any other way that we know of. We believe 

that it is not so much the time that is 

given to Bible study, but the amount of 

study done and the amount of information 

gained, that counts. We all know people 

who have spent days and weeks and years 

in the study of the Bible and have learned 

little or nothing. We think the idea that Bible study is 

merely the time spent in handling a Bible and reading 

over some verses is a mistaken idea. 

It is a great deal like hunting or fishing. Some people 
go hunting every year, and though they do a lot of hunting, 



it is no sure indication of how much they get. Some 
do a lot of fishing, but do not get many fish. Bible study 
is very much the same. It is not the amount of time we 
spend in poring over a passage, but the amount of information 
we secure from the Bible. 

The six volumes of SCRIPTURE STUDIES are not intended 
to supplant the Bible. There are various methods to 
be pursued in the study of the Bible and these aids to 
Bible study are in such form that they, of themselves, 
contain the important elements of the Bible as well as 
the comments or elucidations of those Bible statements, 
on exactly the same principle that our Lord and the 
Apostles quoted from the Old Testament, and then gave 
elucidations of those Old Testament passages. Many of 
the elucidations were such that if we had not had them, 
had not had specific interpretations, we might never have 
been able to discern the proper application of them. 

THE HARVEST THE DUE TIME FOR A CLEAR UNFOLDING 
OF THE TRUTH 

The applications of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES are, of 
course, based upon those of the Lord and the Apostles. 
We do not feel that it would be in our province to give any 
interpretation except that which would be either already 
given by our Lord and the Apostles or such as would so 
fit and dovetail with their interpretations as to leave, in 
our judgment, no doubt as to the proper application of 
the Scriptures referred to and explained. 

Those parts of the Bible which once we thought we 
understood well, we find that we did not understand at 
all. Some of the very things relative to the Ransom, relative 
to Salvation, we did not understand. Looking back 
over our experiences, we fully believed that there was a 
God and that he would reward those who diligently sought 
him, and that he had sent Jesus his Son, but how and 
why, we did not comprehend. We had wrong ideas as to 
what was the penalty for sin; wrong ideas as to why a 
Savior should come; entirely wrong ideas as to what the 
Savior did; wrong ideas as to what he was to do in the 
future, and as to what would be our relationship to the 
Father and the Savior. We knew, in some sense of the 
word, that we were called to be a son, but how to become 
a son and what was meant by the begetting of the holy 
Spirit, and kindred terms, we did not comprehend; and 
in our experience we have found none who ever did comprehend 
these things. 

R4685 : page 298 

So we believe that the thought for us to take in this 
connection is that it is because we are living in this particular 
time, in the ending of this Age, that we are favored 
with such a clear unfolding of spiritual things. It 
is also our thought that present blessings of a temporal 
kind, such as the electric light, are due for similar reasons. 



We believe that any other explanation would confer 
too great honor upon the individual connected with 
the production. The very ablest minds in the world have 
examined these subjects, but now, by God's grace, we 
have come to the place where the vail is taken away and 
where we can see the real meaning of God's Word— not 
merely one person can see it, but hundreds, thousands, 
see it. 

We think that we get the right conception to thus 
view it rather than to think that we had some great power 
which enabled us to put together a great system of 
theology, more wonderful than all other systems of theology 
put together— a thousand times more wonderful. 
Therefore, the simplest way to explain the matter is to 
acknowledge that the Lord's due time has come and that 
he has guided to the right understanding. 

If, then, the Lord has provided us with something in 
our day that other days than those of the Apostles knew 
nothing about, no matter how good nor how wise they 
were— for us to ignore the line of teaching which has 
been thus developed would be, in our judgment, to ignore 
the Lord's providences. It is for each one to think for 
himself, however, and to guide his conduct in every way 
accordingly. 

If the six volumes of SCRIPTURE STUDIES are practically 
the Bible topically arranged, with Bible proof-texts 
given, we might not improperly name the volumes— 
the Bible in an arranged form. That is to say, they are 
not merely comments on the Bible, but they are practically 
the Bible itself, since there is no desire to build any doctrine 
or thought on any individual preference or on any 
individual wisdom, but to present the entire matter on the 
lines of the Word of God. We therefore think it safe to 
follow this kind of reading, this kind of instruction, this 
kind of Bible study. 

Furthermore, not only do we find that people cannot 
see the Divine Plan in studying the Bible by itself, but 
we see, also, that if anyone lays the SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
aside, even after he has used them, after he has become 
familiar with them, after he has read them for ten years 
—if he then lays them aside and ignores them and goes 
to the Bible alone, though he has understood his Bible for 
ten years, our experience shows that within two years he 
goes into darkness. On the other hand, if he had 
merely read the SCRIPTURE STUDIES with their references, 
and had not read a page of the Bible, as such, he would 
be in the light at the end of the two years, because he 
would have the light of the Scriptures. 

Our thought, therefore, is that these SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES are a great assistance, a very valuable help, in 
the understanding of God's Word. If these books are to 
be of any value to us it must be because we see in them 
loyalty to the Word of God, and as far as our judgment 
goes, see them to be in full harmony with the Word and 
not antagonistic to it. Therefore, in reading them the 
first time, and perhaps the second time, and before we 



would accept anything as being our own personal faith 
and conviction, we should say, "I will not take it because 
these studies say so; I wish to see what the Bible says." 
And so we would study the Scriptures in the light of 
these SCRIPTURE STUDIES; we would prove every point, or 
disprove it, as the case might be. We would be satisfied 
with nothing less than a thorough investigation of the 
Bible from this standpoint. 

If, after doing that, we should find the books to be 
in accord with the Bible, then we would think we were 
logical in saying, "I will not need to go through that 
process now every time that I read the SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 
for I have looked up those texts of Scripture and 
know certainly that the New Testament proves all those 
points." If, at the same time, in any future reading, we 
should come to a place where something did not seem clear 
to us and we thought of some Scripture which seemed not 
as harmonious with it as we had previously thought, we 
would think it our duty to refer at once to the Scriptures, 
because the Scriptures are the standard, and in that reference 
to the Scripture it would be with a view to discerning 
whether or not we had been mistaken in our previous 
examinations. 

"THEY SHALL BE ALL TAUGHT OF GOD" 

We would conclude, practically, that we could not understand 
anything about the Bible except as it was revealed. 
We would, therefore, not waste a great deal of 
time doing what we know some people do, reading chapter 
after chapter, to no profit. We would not think of 
doing it. We would not think we were studying the 
Scriptures at all. We would think we were following 
the course that had been anything but profitable to ourselves 
and many others in the past— merely reading over 
the Scriptures. We would say that the same Heavenly 
Father who had guided us to this Truth, to this understanding 
of the Scriptures as his children, if he had some 
further information for us he would bring it to our 
attention in some manner; and therefore we would not 
see the necessity of reading the New Testament every 
day or every year; we would not consider that necessary. 
We would consider that the Scripture which says, "They 
shall be all taught of God," would imply that in his own 
appointed way God would bring to our attention whatever 
feature of Divine truth would be "meat in due season for 
the household of faith." 

Further, we would say that now, having satisfied ourselves 
respecting what the Divine Plan is, we would 
understand that we had reached the place that the Apostle 
speaks of as being a qualified ambassador of God, a qualified 
minister of the New Covenant, and that, as a servant 
or minister of the New Covenant, we now had a 
responsibility in making known these things that we had 
learned; that we were not put here primarily to read the 
Bible, but primarily to serve the Lord and his Truth. 



It was quite proper, however, that before we came to a 
knowledge of the Truth, and when we were in measurable 
discontent of mind as to what was the Truth, that we 
should refrain from telling anybody else. 

We remember very well in our own personal experience 
that after we had tried some street preaching, etc., 
we came to the conclusion that there was something 
wrong; that we did not understand what we were trying 
to tell to others; that we did not understand with sufficient 
clearness to properly present it and make sure that 
we were representing the Lord and his message aright, 
and we said to ourself, "I will stop any endeavor to teach 
others until I know what I believe." 

We think that should be the attitude of every one 
of us. Why should we attempt to preach or teach anything 
that we do not understand? So, after God favors 
us in this time with an understanding of Present Truth, 
he has given us a knowledge of more truth than we 
could have gained in a thousand years if we had read and 

R4685 : page 299 

studied unaided; and now we can attempt to present it to 
others. Why has he given us a knowledge of this Truth? 
He wishes us to be "thoroughly furnished unto every 
good word and work." Therefore, we should study that 
we may be able to speak the word of the Lord freely 
and know that we are not misrepresenting the Divine 
purpose and plan and character; and we ought therefore 
to give the more earnest heed to the opportunities for 
service and consider that the information which has been 
given us has been given for the very purpose that we 
may impart it to others— to those brethren and sisters of 
the Lord's family, some of whom are in Babylon yet, 
honest at heart, perhaps, and very desirous of knowing 
the truth, though perhaps very much blinded as we once 
were. 

"SCRIPTURE STUDIES" NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR 
THE BIBLE 

This is not, therefore, putting the SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
as a substitute for the Bible, because so far as substituting 
for the Bible, the STUDIES, on the contrary, continually 
refer to the Bible; and if one has any doubt as to a 
reference or if one's recollection should lapse in any degree, 
one should refresh his memory, and, in fact, should 
see that his every thought is in harmony with the Bible 
-not merely in accord with the SCRIPTURE STUDIES, but 
in accord with the Bible. 

We might remark that quite a number of the friends 
in the Truth are making it a rule to read twelve pages of 
the SCRIPTURE STUDIES a day, and that we do not know 
one who has been following this course and making use 
of the various means of grace the Lord has provided 
(Dawn and testimony meetings and Sunday meetings 



and Pilgrim meetings and the Berean lessons, Manna 
text, etc.), who has gone out of the Truth. We know a 
great many who, on the contrary, have been of the opinion 
that they knew these things long ago, while in fact 
they do not know half of what they did know— they have 
forgotten more than half of what they read and they are 
those who are now stumbling— going into outer darkness. 

We are not wishing in this to say anything against 
one's poring over chapters that he does not understand 
and others do not understand, hoping that he might light 
on some truth. We have no objection to this. He has a 
perfect right to do so if he wishes. He has a right to 
spend weeks and years in this way if he chooses, but 
the chances even then are that when he does light on 
something he will have it all wrong. 

Furthermore, we would suggest that merely reading 
twelve pages of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES would not be 
studying in the proper sense of the word— neither studying 
the Bible nor studying the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. A 
proper study would be to think of the meaning of every 
word and every sentence. The thought is, it is not to see 
how much one can read, but to make sure that one goes 
no further than he comprehends or understands, whether 
that means one page or twenty pages. We should not 

R4686 : page 299 

consider it a Scripture study in any sense of the word 
unless our thought has grasped the matter from the 
standpoint of seeking to know what the Scriptures teach 
and seeking to call to mind these Scriptures that are 
being explained and to call to mind other texts, perhaps, 
that are not cited, or of which only a small portion is 
cited. 

If one will do all this it will not be merely a reading 
but a study; and from this standpoint, whoever reads two 
pages of SCRIPTURE STUDIES each day with the suggested 
passages connected with those two pages, would do more 
Scripture studying in that time than he could do by any 
other method. Whenever he reads these pages and calls 
the corresponding or connecting Scriptures to mind he 
is drawing from the whole Bible, from Genesis to Revelation, 
with practically every page he reads. Now is it 
possible to find any other Bible study that would accomplish 
as much for us in the same time as this would do? 
If there is we ought to take it. If there is not, then we 
have our option. 



R4686 : page 299 

WAS JACOB'S COURSE WITH ESAU DISHONORABLE? 

THE question has been asked, Why did Jacob 
take from his brother Esau the birthright 



and blessing? Why did he not give him the 

pottage when he was hungry, instead of 

selling it to him? We think it fair to infer 

that both Esau and Jacob were hungry. 

The proof that Jacob was hungry was that 

he had prepared the pottage. We also have 

proof that Esau was hungry; but we have 

no evidence as to which was the more hungry. 

We will suppose that they were about alike hungry 

and that there was not enough for two to get a meal. 

Esau made it known that he wanted something to eat and 

Jacob thought this a proper time for him to secure something 

which Esau had, but which Esau did not really 

want. 

It is also reasonable to suppose that the whole life of 
Esau was careless of religious matters and interests. He 
married into families of surrounding heathen people, entirely 
in disregard of the promise made to Abraham, getting 
several worthless wives, according to his mother's 
statement. This being true, it seems quite likely that 
he and Jacob had many talks about God's promise to 
their grandfather Abraham, and how the fulfillment of 
the promise would come about, and that Esau had all 
along been an unbeliever; and now, when the opportune 
time came and they were both hungry and the food was 
there, Jacob said, "You don't care for your birthright, 
Esau, and you do not appreciate this promise made to 
Abraham; it does not count for anything to you; I will 
tell you what we will do. You may have the supper and 
I the birthright. Is it a bargain?" Esau said, "It is a 
bargain, for I am more desirous of the supper than the 
birthright." 

It was a fair transaction. If one buys a house at a 
bargain and both buyer and seller are satisfied with the 
transaction, we would not say that it was cheating or robbery; 
and so with Jacob. The Abrahamic promise, so far 
as Esau's expectation was concerned, was not worth anything. 
He had no confidence in the promise. The Apostle 
Paul calls our attention to the matter and says that Esau 
was profane; that is, he did not count the promise of God 
as worth anything; he was willing to sell it for a mess 
of pottage, as though he was getting the better of the 
bargain, probably saying to himself, "That poor brother 
of mine does not know what life is; if he would only take 
a few lessons from me he would begin to live. Here he 
is believing something that God said to grandfather Abraham, 
and he thinks he will get something wonderful out 
of it some day. I do not think it worth considering." And 
so Esau doubtless thought he was the gainer over Jacob 
in getting the supper. 

R4686 : page 300 

ESAU CARED ONLY FOR THE EARTHLY PART OF 
THE BIRTHRIGHT 



It has also been asked, "Why did Jacob attempt to 
deceive his father?" Jacob was trying to obtain that 
which he had bought and which he saw the seller would 
not deliver. Jacob knew his brother was a dishonest man 
to start with. All the arrangements were made for Esau 
to receive the blessing that he had sold, and now he was 
about to steal it. Jacob must have reasoned, "I will try 
to prevent his stealing it; I have bought the birthright; 
I have a right to represent Esau in this matter; I shall 
merely try to have justice done, to get my father to do 
that which is right and proper, that which I know is 
God's will, because God told our mother about the matter 
at the time of our birth— that the blessing was to come to 
me; and here in God's providence it has come to me in 
a legitimate way by my brother's not caring for it and 
my caring a great deal for it. Now it is only a question 
as to how I shall get it. As a matter of fact, Esau does 
not value the birthright except from the earthly standpoint. 
I know he does not care a whit for the promise 
made to father; he has no confidence in it. All he thinks 
about is the property that will go to me if I am recognized 
as the elder son." 

Jacob knew that he would be in trouble if he would try 
to get the blessing, and yet he was so in love with the 
promise that a great blessing would come out of it, that 
he was willing to forego everything. He was willing to 
become an outcast from his home if he might only have 
the spiritual part of the promise, and so he left his home 
with the distinct understanding that he was losing his 
father's earthly possessions and getting only the spiritual 
blessing which Esau did not desire. He did not attempt 
to take from Esau the portion that Esau wanted. 

Some one might query, if Jacob knew that the Lord 
promised him this blessing through his mother, was it not 
a lack of faith for him not to recognize that the Lord 
would give it to him without any deceit or misrepresentation? 
We suppose that if Jacob had lived in our day 
and had all the advantages that we have, the instructions 
of the Old and New Testaments and the begetting of the 
holy Spirit, he might have learned to exercise his faith, 
which was already a strong faith as respects God's promise; 
he might have learned to wait on the Lord. We 
have many advantages over him in all these respects. 
He had very few examples before him respecting the 
waiting on the Lord or anything of that kind, and he did 
at least show his zeal and energy and confidence in God 
in the course that he took; and for a person not begotten 
of the holy Spirit we think he did wonderfully 
well. 

JACOB WAS NOT REPROVED OF THE LORD 

We think it well for us to remember in this connection 
that we should measure all of our ideas according to the 
Divine standard, and if we do not do so we make a 
mistake. The Divine standard rules. Now, according to 



the record, there was not a word said by the Lord against 
Jacob in this whole procedure, and if God had nothing 
to say against him, who are we that we should have? 

When Jacob fled to Padan-aram for fear of his 
brother, forsaking his home and all the property that was 
his according to his purchase, willing to let it remain 
permanently in the hands of Esau, as he had intended to 
do anyway— when he fled from home and had nothing 
but a stone for his pillow, that very night the Lord appeared 
to him in a dream; a vision or picture was given 
him of the blessing that was his. This indicated that 
God's favor was with him. Now to think that God could 
and would conspire with an evil person is not our way of 
reasoning on the matter. We do not object to others 
reasoning differently. We will reason according to the 
standard the Lord raised, and say, "Thus it is written." 

It may be that there was something not written in the 
record that might give a different view of the matter, 
one more easy to comprehend. The Apostle Paul commends 
Jacob's faith, but counts Esau's selling the birthright 
as reprehensible, and tells us that we should not be 
like the "profane person who sold his birthright." (Heb. 12:16.) 
In this Paul seems to intimate that there may be 
some who wish to sell their birthright and others who may 
wish to buy the birthright. 

The Jews in our Lord's day who failed to accept the 
invitation of the Lord and who were not Israelites indeed, 
these sold, for the "mess of pottage" of earthly blessings 
and earthly favor, their heavenly, their spiritual rights; 
and we who are Gentiles and to whom this right did not 
appertain by nature, have been invited in to see if we 
will appreciate the privileges and win the prize— and we 
will win the prize; we will get the birthright of Esau and 
the Esau class will not get it. 



R4688 : page 300 

THE TRIAL HOUR 
EPH. 6:10-18. 

The "hour of temptation" has come to the Church, 

The time of her testing is here, 
And storm-clouds of ominous portent roll up, 

Betokening the tempest is near. 

The carnage grows fiercer 'twixt error and truth, 

The hosts of the foe press around 
As the day waxes late and the shadows grow long, 

And their tauntings and boastings abound. 

And many who fought in the ranks by our side, 

Have been pierced by the enemy's dart; 
Their "shield" and their "helmet" lie prone in the dust, 



And the "arrow" has smitten their heart. 

Their arm lost its cunning in wielding the "sword," 
Their "breastplate" was loosed from its place, 

The "helmet" was lost and the shafts of the foe 
Smote them down and they sank in disgrace. 

O, dear fellow-soldiers! O brethren in Christ! 

Let us gird up our "armor" anew! 
Let us heed the sure Word of our leader and "Head" 

And be loyal and steadfast and true. 

The night hastens on— only one hour to fight; 

No thought now of wavering nor fear; 
Our Captain calls, "Onward!" then close up the ranks, 

For the hour of our victory is near. 

Courage, comrades! The banner of truth waves aloft; 

No such banner was ever unfurled! 
We will follow its lead e'en thro' carnage and blood, 

For by it we shall conquer the world! 

Tho' feet may grow weary and hearts throb with pain, 

Let us never give up in the fray; 
Our Captain is strong and can know no defeat, 

And will guide to the end of the way. 

Soon the fight will be over, the conflict be past, 
And the "roll-call" will sound thro' the sky, 

Will you answer your name? Shall I answer to mine? 
Can we gladly respond: "Here am I!" 

O, God of the battle, our Father, to Thee 

With strong supplication we cry! 
The conflict is deadly and wily our foe, 

Yet we know that deliverance is nigh. 

And thou who hast guided and led all the way 

Wilt guide 'till the victory is won, 
'Till the night is all spent and the glad day has dawned, 

And we hear thy sweet plaudit, "Well done!" 
ALICE G. JAMES. 



R4686 : page 301 

THREE TEMPTING QUESTIONS 

-MATTHEW 22:15-22;34-46.-SEPTEMBER 18- 

Golden Text:— "Render unto Caesar the things that are 
Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's." 

THE Pharisees and Sadducees of our Lord's 
day were the leaders of religion. They had 



formed a trust or federation, so to speak, and 

rarely made an attack upon each other, 

although their doctrines were directly opposed. 

The Pharisees acknowledged God 

and the prophets and the Law, and believed 

in a future life by a resurrection from the 

dead, and believed in a coming Messiah to 

exalt their nation and through it to bless the 

world. The Sadducees believed nothing of the kind— they 

were agnostics, Higher Critics. They were making the 

R4687 : page 301 

best of the present life, doubting any future existence. 

The Pharisees opposed Jesus because he did not acknowledge 

them, but criticised them, and showed the hypocrisies 

of their claims to be perfect and holy in the keeping of 

the Law, and reproved them for their lack of sympathy 

with the poor and less pretentious. 

The Sadducees opposed Jesus because, from their 
standpoint of unbelief, he was a fraud. But even as a 
fraud they would not have bothered themselves to oppose 
him, only that they perceived that he was gaining an influence 
with the people— an influence which they feared 
might, sooner or later, lead to some disturbance of the 
peace and unfavorably influence the conduct of the Roman 
Empire towards the Jews. So while the Sadducees 
and Pharisees both opposed Jesus, their opposition was for 
different reasons. 

The triumphal entry of Jesus into Jerusalem, and the 
crying of the multitude, "Hosanna to the Son of David," 
the Messiah! awakened envy in the minds of the Pharisees. 
But in the Sadducees it produced a fear that the 
common people should become so aroused as to involve 
their nation in some strife with the Empire. The Pharisees 
strove to turn away the sympathy of the people from 
the Great Teacher, and, to this end, sought to catch him 
in his words by putting the question, 

"IS IT LAWFUL TO GIVE TRIBUTE?" 

They reasoned that if Jesus would say, It is not lawful, 
they would have little difficulty in having him arrested as 
a leader of sedition and thus compel Pilate to put him to 
death. They reasoned further that if Jesus should answer 
that it was lawful to give tribute to Caesar he would 
thereby alienate the sympathy of the multitude, which 
cried "Hosanna!" after him; for the Jews held, almost 
superstitiously, the idea that they, as God's Kingdom, must 
not pay tithes to any earthly Kingdom— that it would be 
irreverent to do so, excepting under compulsion. We notice 
how artfully they endeavored to ensnare the Master 
by complimenting him upon his truthfulness, saying, "Master, 
we know that thou art true!" Not only so, but they 
sought to impress upon him their appreciation of him as 
a Teacher— that he would teach the light, the Truth, at 



any cost. And so they said, "Thou teachest the way of 
God in truth!" And further, they fortified their position 
by saying, "We know that thou regardest not the person 
of men!" 

These treacherous compliments were intended to ensnare 
him, but he promptly answered, "Why tempt ye me, 
ye hypocrites?" Why do you veil your base designs under 
guise of speaking for the Truth? "Show me the tribute 
money." This was, literally, the census coin in which the 
tax was to be paid. They handed him a denarius, the 
usual wage for the day laborer, corresponding in value to 
about seventeen of our cents. Jesus asked, "Whose is 
this image and superscription?" They answered, "Caesar's." 
Jesus replied, "Render unto Caesar the things that 
are Caesar's and unto God the things that are God's." No 
wonder the wily Pharisees were troubled to know how to 
catch him in his words! On the contrary, they were 
caught; for all of their complimentary remarks stood to 
his credit in the minds of the common people. 

WHOSE WIFE SHALL SHE BE? 

Next, the Sadducees, the agnostics, tried to entrap the 
Great Teacher by asking one of their stock questions. 
Seven different brothers in turn married the same woman 
and all died before she did. To which of them will she 
be wife in the resurrection? They did not ask, To which 
will she be wife in heaven or Purgatory or eternal torture, 
for neither Jesus nor the Jews held any such teaching. 
The Pharisees and Jesus taught the resurrection of the 
dead, and it was against this teaching that the Sadducees 
aimed their sarcastic question. 

Note the majesty of the Master's answer: "Ye do err, 
not knowing the Scriptures, neither the power of God!" 
You do not understand the Scripture teaching respecting 
such questions, and you are ignoring in your question the 
great Divine power which, at that resurrection time, will 
be exercised and will straighten out all the difficulties of 
the situation. Then the Great Teacher proceeded to inform 
them that such as would (gradually) attain to the 
resurrection, such as would get a complete raising up out 
of sin and death conditions, would "neither marry nor be 
given in marriage," but would be sexless, as are the angels. 
Thus the supposed great and unanswerable question of the 
Sadducees fell flat and their ignorance was exposed. 

WHICH IS THE GREAT COMMANDMENT? 

Next, one of the Doctors of the Law endeavored to entrap 
the Lord on a question of the relative importance of 
the Divine commandments, asking which Jesus considered 
the great one of all. The Great Teacher promptly divided 
the ten commandments into two, according to the Law 
(Deut. 6:5), and answered, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy 
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all 
thy mind." This is the first and great (chief) commandment. 



And the second is like unto it— "Thou shalt love 
thy neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments 
hang all the Law and the Prophets." What could the 
Lawyer say to such a summarization of the Law? He 
had nothing left to say. He was answered as never before. 

THEN JESUS TURNED QUESTIONER 

The Great Teacher asked the Pharisees, "What think 
ye of the Messiah? Whose Son is he?" They answered, 
"The Son of David." The Teacher then queried, "How 
then doth David in spirit (prophetically) call him Lord, 
saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right 
hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool? If David 
then calleth him Lord, how is he his Son?" 

Of course the question was too deep for the Pharisees. 
The Great Teacher could answer all of their questions, but 
they could not answer his. How beautifully clear we see 
it to be that the Messiah, according to the flesh, was born 
of the lineage of David, but that God's purposes were not 
fully accomplished in Messiah of the flesh— that he lay 
down his flesh, sacrificially, and was raised from the dead 
to the plane of glory, honor and immortality, "far above 
angels, principalities and powers." We perceive that in 
the days of his flesh he was the Son of David, but that in 
his glorification he is David's Lord in that David will receive 
through him, in due time, not only resurrection from 

R4687 : page 302 

the dead, but also the blessings of participation in the 
Messianic Kingdom. The father of Messiah in the flesh 
will thus become the son of the Messiah of glory, whose 
earthly life is to be the restitution price for the whole 
world, including David. Thus it is written, "Instead of thy 
fathers shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make 
princes (rulers) in all the earth."— Psa. 45:16. 

AN ILLUSTRATION IN AN EARTHLY PRINCE 

At a German function in Berlin the story goes that a 
Colonel met a young officer unknown to him whose only 
decoration was a large medallion set in brilliants. The 
Colonel inquired, "Lieutenant, what is that you have on?" 
The young man replied modestly, "An order, Colonel." 
The Colonel replied, "Not a Prussian Order; I know of 
none such." "An English Order, Colonel," said the young 
man. "And who in the world gave it to you?" asked the 
Colonel. The reply was, "My grandmother." The old 
Colonel began to think that the young man was making 
game of him and inquired, "And who may your grandmother 
be?" To his utter astonishment and dismay the 
answer was, "Queen Victoria, of England." Here was a 
Prince in disguise. And so Jesus was the great King of 
Glory in disguise. "He was in the world and the world 
was made by him, and the world knew him not."— 



John 1:10. 

R4687 : page 302 

SUCH SHALL NOT INHERIT THE KINGDOM OF GOD 

--GALATIANS 5:15-26.-SEPTEMBER 25.- 

Golden Text:— "If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit." 

ST. PAUL was a practical man, not merely a 

theorist; he brought his teaching down to 

a practical level which his readers could 

comprehend. Today's Study is one of these. 

Like all of St. Paul's epistles and entreaties, 

it is addressed to the Church, to those who 

have turned aside from the broad road of 

selfishness and worldliness, to walk the narrow 

way, in the footsteps of Jesus, and 

thereby to become joint-heirs with Jesus in 

his Messianic Kingdom, which is shortly to bless the world. 

Nevertheless, many who are not saints, many who are not 

wholly consecrated to God, may draw valuable lessons 

from the Apostle's words in this lesson, as well as in 

others. Many lessons of life specially applicable to those 

who have made a consecration to be the Lord's followers 

are valuable also to the remainder of mankind. 

The Christian has, so to speak, stepped out of his old 
self and become a New Creature, a Spirit being, which 
merely resides in the flesh and has interests that are distinctly 
separate and often antagonistic thereto. The Apostle 
urges these to walk in the spirit; that is to say, to let 
their daily course of life be in accord with their new 
nature. So doing, they will resist and not fulfil the desires 
of the flesh. Why? Because they will realize that there 
is an antagonism of interests as between the desires of 
the flesh and their desires as New Creatures. The two 
are at warfare, the one desiring against the other. There 
may be a truce for a time, but there will never be peace 

R4688 : page 302 

between them. Our interests as New Creatures are along 
spiritual lines, while our depraved appetites and tastes go 
in the opposite direction. Hence the Apostle said, "Ye 
cannot do the things that ye would!" As New Creatures 
you would follow in the footsteps of your Master, perfectly, 
but having fallen flesh, you cannot do this! You can 
only hobble after him at very most. But if we take 
this position and become his followers, we will be no 
longer under judgment according to the flesh, but will be 
judged as New Creatures, perfect in will— rendering the 
best obedience to righteousness we are capable of, under 



our handicap of imperfect human organism. 

THE FRUITAGE OF THE FALLEN FLESH 

In order that none might make a mistake as to what 
would constitute the desires of the flesh, the Apostle recites 
them and declares that they are manifest or openly 
discernible, namely: "fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, strife, jealousies, wraths, 
factions, divisions, heresies, envyings, drunkenness, revelings 
and such like, of the which I forewarn you, that they 
which practise such things shall not inherit the Kingdom 
of God." These are works of the fallen flesh and antagonistic 
to righteousness. All of God's people are to resist 
them, if they would not lose his favor. They have the 
seeds of all these iniquitous things in their flesh, received 
by heredity; but their minds, their wills, have been 
changed, converted, turned around, to righteousness— to 
the doing of the will of God. As New Creatures they must 
not practise the fleshly things, else they will not grow in 
the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit and will not be fit 
for the Kingdom. 

The Apostle does not here say that if anyone were 
overtaken in a fault and lost his temper, for instance, and 
got into strife, that this would bar him forever from the 
Kingdom. He might, indeed, through tears and prayers 
and Divine forgiveness, come back into harmony with God 
and subsequently become a valued soldier of the Cross 
and follower of the Lamb. But if any practise such 
things they should know that they are developing and 
strengthening a character contrary to the one which God 
will approve— they are going backward and not forward. 
Let us note the difference between an accidental slip with 
a penitent recovery, and a wilful practising of a wrong 
course. Alas! how many Christians have the evidence in 
themselves that they will not inherit the Kingdom of God 
—unless they make a fresh start and reverse the order of 
their living ! 

THE FRUITAGE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 

If the Apostle led us into a tangled wildwood of human 
selfishness, thorns and thistles, as a specimen of the 
fruitage of the fallen flesh, he next leads us in the opposite 
direction, and shows us the fruits and flowers of sweet 
odor which belong to the Garden of the Lord. He tells 
us that these delightful fruits of the Spirit should more 
and more be cultivated, and should be developed to perfection 
in our hearts, and, as far as possible, should overrun 
and cover and choke out the imperfections of our flesh. 
The fruits of this garden are all the fruits of the Spirit of 
God— all such as he originally planted in man and which 
have become vitiated through sin— all such as he now has 
implanted afresh and would develop in the hearts of his 
sanctified ones. The fruits of the Spirit, which should be 
manifest in all of the followers of Jesus in more or less 



perfection are these: "love, joy, peace, long-suffering, 
gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, temperance; 
against such there is no law." 

The Apostle explains that those who have become 
Christ's followers have crucified the flesh with the passions 
and desires thereof. They have voluntarily agreed 
that they will live contrary to the emotions and desires of 
the fallen flesh. He urges, If we live by the Spirit, by the 

R4688 : page 303 

Spirit let us also walk! It is the Spirit of God which has 
quickened us and which ultimately is to perfect us. But 
it can perfect us only if we are led by it and walk in its 
ways. Otherwise we will not be fit for a place in the 
Kingdom, whatever other place in God's arrangements we 
may have. One of the most dangerous besetments of the 
Christian is vanity. It leads to more trouble, provokes 
more quarrels and envyings than is generally supposed. If 
we are walking after the Spirit of our Master, it will mean 
that instead of being vainglorious we will be meek, humble, 
teachable. And only such will eventually be ready for the 
glory, honor and immortality which God will bestow upon 
the faithful at the Second Coming of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ. 



page 303 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We desire to express to you and your most efficient committee 
our thanks and appreciation for your untiring efforts 
for the comfort of the brethren, and also to congratulate you 
upon the success of the great Convention at Celoron. It was 
good to be there. How we enjoyed your generous and cordial 
hospitality at Peacock Inn and your talk on Monday 
evening, Aug. 1 ! Nothing cold about the reception but the 
cream; that was very cold and delicious. As long as memory 
lasts we shall revert to that happy evening and those six hundred 
friends, bound together by bands of Love and Truth, 
which will endure throughout eternity. Some months ago 
we took the Vow, and are glad that we did. 

Your Sisters in Christ, 

MRS. F. A. STEELE, 
CLARA P. STEELE. 



DEAR PASTOR:- 

Thirty years ago at a meeting for children I saw Jesus as 
my Savior, and I was very happy. I had the desire to speak 
to everybody I met about my Savior, and oh, such a longing 
to go to China as a missionary overtook me; but when I came 



to be about sixteen years of age I read Calvin's Confession 
of Faith. I spoke about it to my father, who was a strict 
United Presbyterian, and very strong on election, as set forth 
in the Confession of Faith. Very soon I lost the joy I had 
and became sad and indifferent about trying to bring others to 
Jesus, as I felt they were powerless to make themselves of the 
Elect. 

Thank God, two months ago he drew my attention to a 
notice in a barber shop window of your prospective lecture 
on "Hereafter." I went and heard you, and have since read 
the DAWN-STUDIES. I cannot express the blessings I have 
received through them. 

I felt constrained to write you, as I thought you would 
also like to know that I have taken the Vow. I trust to pay 
it unto the Lord in his strength. 

Yours in the love of God, 

MRS. HELEN HANDASYDE. 



ALLEGHENY, PA., Sept. 4. 

BELOVED BROTHER:- 

The closer I get to the places where you have walked and 
labored the most, the more I am impressed with the closeness 
of your walk with God, and the more do I desire to follow in 
your footsteps. 

As I have just viewed your old home, gone all through the 
old Bible House, stood in the pulpit occupied by you for so 
many years, and have now looked around over these beautiful 
hills over which you have gone, my heart goes down deep into 
my consecration vow, and I am renewedly determined to be 
found, by his grace, faithful unto death. With much fervent 
love I remain 

Your brother in Christ, MENTA STURGEON. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I take this opportunity of writing you in regard to a 
rather strange experience which I have had out in this western 
country. 

A new Methodist minister was sent in here about six 
weeks ago and, after looking the field over, decided to organize 
a Sunday-school in this neighborhood. The school was 
organized two weeks ago, and I was unanimously chosen as 
Bible teacher for the whole school. On the following Tuesday 
this man visited at the house where I and my son have 
been working, and, after some conversation, started to catechise 
me, with the result that he decided to dispense with 
my services and appoint another in my place. The matter 
came up on Sunday last, and, after explaining to the congregation 
that I was not a safe man to have as teacher, requested 
them to appoint another. 

The congregation, however, were not satisfied with this 
way of doing things, and suggested that I have a chance 



to defend myself, which was granted, with the result that 
I was reappointed by the people and the preacher set aside. 
We are to have our first study on Sunday next. I have been 
wondering just what course would be best to pursue, and 
would like to have the benefit of your counsel in this matter. 

None of these people has ever heard about or read any 
of your literature, and are somewhat curious to know just 
what we teach. I have thought of starting with "Some things 
to remember when studying the Bible and the importance 
of sound doctrine," and then follow it up with Ransom and 
Restitution lessons, etc. 

Yours in the Master's Service, W. G. O. 



DEAR SIRS:- 

I have read three volumes of your SCRIPTURE STUDIES and 
some of the pages many times. I am deeply interested in 
what I have learned and am trying hard to get others interested. 
My religious faith is Baptist. The members of my 
Church snub me sometimes, and my pastor snubs me all the 
time, because I believe what I have heard and read. My 
pastor has openly denounced me from his pulpit, which I 
feel badly about, but I can never give up that which I believe 
to be truth. 

Any one of your tracts that is best suited to the needs of 
my pastor would you please send it to me or to him. 



OUR DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We have just returned from San Francisco, where we enjoyed 
a feast at Brother McMillan's meetings. Since we are 
now alone here we sometimes attend the classes at San 
Francisco and Oakland, seventy-five miles distant. No ! we 
are not alone; we always claim the promise. 

We greatly enjoyed the privilege of distributing Peoples 
Pulpit announcements of the meetings. In this town we mail 
a good many Peoples Pulpits and on Saturdays we place 
them in the farmers' rigs as they are tied at the plaza. 

While working among the flowers in my greenhouse I 
discovered a vegetable cure for eczema and inflammations 
of the skin. I know it is good, for I cured myself with it. 
I call it "Floral." It seems to be another evidence of the 
nearness of the establishment of the Kingdom. 

We want to express to you in a few words that this 
great Truth is becoming more of a reality to us as the end 
of the course draws near, and we strive the more to make 
our calling and election sure. We do thank our Heavenly 
Father for the increasing light he is giving us through that 
willing servant to those who hunger and thirst for it. 

G.J. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Love and greetings in the one hope of our calling, to be 
joint-heirs with our Lord and Saviour. 

It is my earnest desire to be more faithful daily in living 
my consecration vow— to scrutinize my every thought and 
word and act more closely, so that I may be the better enabled 
to serve the Lord and his dear Flock. I want to be more 
and more thankful for the wonderful way he is leading me. 
I raise my voice in thanksgiving to our dear heavenly Father 
for permitting me to read the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
which have answered the questions that I had been asking 
much of my life. Next to the Bible, they are the most excellent 
books ever written; they have helped to bring me much 
closer to our dear Redeemer. May the Lord's richest blessings 
be with you, dear Brother Russell, throughout your 
pilgrim journey. 

Enclosed please find draft; may it help to carry on the 
good work in the Lord's service. 

Yours in his service, B. A. KRENZ. 



page 306 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The Atonement Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-1/2.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 305 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 



Views From The Watch Tower 307 

Signs of Restitution Continue 307 

Church Federation at the Door 308 

"The Image of the Beast" 308 

"Watchman, What of the Night?" 310 

St. Paul and Moses Patriots Extraordinary 311 

Wise and Foolish Virgins 312 

The Reckoning Hour 313 

The Sheep and the Goats 314 

The Mark of Perfect Love (Poem) 315 

This Looks Reasonable 315 

Some Interesting Questions 316 

Moses and the Law Covenant 316 

Justification by Faith 317 

How to Determine the Lord's Will 317 

Faith the Gift of God 318 

Is the Church in the Flesh a Royal 

Priesthood? 318 

Some Interesting Letters 318 

Berean Questions in "Scripture Studies" 319 

page 306 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



BROOKLYN, N.Y., OCT. 2 

Morning rally for praise and testimony at 10:30 o'clock 
at the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks street. The evening 
Praise Service at 7 and Question meeting at 7:30 o'clock will 
also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse for the public at 3 
p.m. by Brother Russell will be in the Brooklyn Academy of 
Music, Lafayette avenue and St. Felix street. 

NEW YORK CITY, OCT. 9 

By invitation of prominent Hebrews, Brother Russell will 
speak on "Zionism in Prophecy" at the Hippodrome, West 
44th street and Sixth avenue, at 3 p.m., Sunday, October 9. 

LONDON, ENGLAND, OCT. 23, 30, NOV. 6 

Brother Russell will sail for Great Britain on Oct. 12 and 
will speak in Royal Albert Hall at 7 p.m., on above dates. 

CLEVELAND, OHIO, NOV. 20 

OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLA., NOV. 27 



R4694 : page 306 

THE ANTITYPICAL JUBILEE BEGINNING 

Some of our readers have been disturbed by one item 
relative to the beginning of the antitypical Jubilee in the 
September number of the Overland Monthly. Nothing in that 
article is intended to be different or contradictory to our 
presentations in the SCRIPTURE STUDIES showing the year 1875 
A.D. as the opening year of the antitypical Jubilee of a thousand 
years. In the Overland article we merely showed that 
the seventy years destruction of Jerusalem in the days of 
Daniel represented Israel's entire Jubilee system. We 
showed two ways of counting it:— 

(1) Seventy times fifty equals 3,500 years; 

(2) Nineteen times fifty plus fifty-one times forty-nine 
equals 3,449 years ending with 1874, marking 1875 as the 
first year of the antitypical Jubilee. 

The latter is, to our understanding, the proper method 
of counting the Jubilee and agrees perfectly with our presentation 
of the matter in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Volume II. 



page 306 



HARVEST WORK--COLPORTEURING. 

Remember that harvest privileges may soon cease. Remember 
that they are now many and great. Remember the 
Master's word, "He that reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth 
fruit unto life everlasting." 

We have plenty of territory open, both for SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES and for HEAVENLY MANNA. The publishing of the 
sermons is preparing many for the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. All 
who purchase and use the MANNA are blessed and ready then 
to buy and read the STUDIES. Write to our Colporteur Dept. 



R4688 : page 307 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

SIGNS OF RESTITUTION CONTINUE 

THE United States Government is experimenting 

with a new kind of wheat recently found 

in Palestine by Dr. Aaronsohn. Experiments 

are being made in the arid districts of the 

far West, where ordinary wheat failed for 

lack of moisture. The claim made for the 

new wheat is that it is really the very oldest 

of all the various wheats— the original or 

wild wheat, the parent from which all other 

wheats have descended. Lost for a long 

time, it is now coming to the front again. Dr. Aaronsohn 

declares his belief that not only wheat, but oats, barley 

and rye originated in Syria and Palestine. He claims 

for this parent or wild wheat that it endures the most 

extreme climatic conditions, enduring more cold and more 

heat than other varieties, and subsisting with almost no 

moisture. He claims also that it is not subject to the 

pest which attacks others. What will our evolutionist 

friends think of this— that the parent wheat is better 

than any of its children. 

Wheat is the great staple of the world, and, used with 
milk as a diet, it supplies really everything essential to 
the maintenance of the human system; hence, as the New 
Dispensation will be ushered in, the matter of wheat will 
be an important one. Dr. Aaronsohn says, "It seems to me 
that we are justified in hoping to produce races of wheat 
better adapted to the semi-arid regions of Algeria, Tunis, 
Syria, Egypt and Turkestan, as well as to those of America. 
If we secure races that will enable us to increase 
the yield by as much as one bushel per acre on these vast 
areas, the world's total production of wheat will be materially 



augmented." 

MIRACLE WHEAT AND MIRACLE RYE 

Some years ago we made mention of the miracle wheat 
discovered in Virginia, which originated with the fruitage 
of one grain found growing by itself. Two grains of this 
wheat were given to the Editor, who, in turn, handed 
them to a brother in the Truth, who reported that the two 
grains produced 1,312, which, planted, produced five 
pounds— one grain having fifty stools of well-developed 
stalks or straws. The brother planted the miracle wheat 

R4689 : page 307 

alongside of some ordinary wheat, and reports that the 
miracle wheat heads are from three to five inches long 
and from three to five grains to the mesh, whereas with 
the common wheat the heads are from two to three inches 
in length. 

Another brother obtained some of the miracle wheat 
and, out of the first crop, presented the Editor a peck of 
the same. This was entrusted to another brother, a 
farmer, who has just handed the Editor $ 100 proceeds 
therefrom, with the following report:— 

As you remember, I secured also a peck of the miracle 
wheat from a brother in the Truth as a donation to yourself 
(because he first heard of the miracle wheat through 
THE WATCH TOWER). This was sowed on half an acre 
of run-out land. On the adjoining half-acre was sowed a 
bushel of common wheat for comparison. The sowing 
was done in the midst of a seven weeks' drouth. During 
the late fall and the early spring the miracle wheat looked 
very thin compared with the common wheat. However, 
in the month of May both plots appeared to be about the 
same, except that the miracle wheat laid flatter on the 
ground. Late in June the miracle wheat was much the 
heavier, and stood nearly a foot higher than the common 
wheat, and about a week later in point of ripening. Not 
having threshed, I cannot at this writing report the respective 
yield, but am satisfied that the miracle wheat will 
be more than double that of the common. 

The grains are in appearance similar to ordinary red 
wheat. I can with difficulty distinguish a difference. The 
color of the miracle wheat is a trifle richer. I will send 
you a photograph of a dozen heads and the largest stool 
I can find of both the miracle and the common wheat. 
Brother Kuesthardt advertised the wheat in his paper, 
and the money sent you is the result of the sales at $ 1 
per pound. 

Your brother in Christ, J. A. BOHNET. 



RABBI SALE AN IDEAL CONGREGATIONALIST 



The public press reports the following sentiments expressed 
by a prominent Hebrew Rabbi:— 

"Orthodoxy as it is known today, with its doctrines, 
creeds and dogmas of the Trinity, the communion, of heaven 
and of hell, has been given a severe jolt by Rabbi Samuel 
Sale, of the Shaare Emeth Hebrew Congregation, in an address 
before a body of Christian ministers at the Congregational 
Ministers' meeting at the First Congregational Church. 

"Rabbi Sale's remarks brought a breathless silence among 
his hearers, and his expressions regarding the "universal religion" 
created a sensation. 

"In the views of Rabbi Sale his Satanic Majesty, starring 
through the ages as a figure of ignominy and evil, is given a 
new role, in which he is only a negative force and becomes 
a servant of God, not a rival, in the activities of men. Heaven 
is declared to be not a place for future preferment, but a 
condition to be realized here, now and forever. Hell is abolished, 

R4689 : page 308 

as being no justifiable disposition for those not qualified 
for eternal bliss. Adam and Eve are relieved from responsibility 
in the matter of original sin. The Bible, said to be as 
great a composite as Homer's Iliad or the Odyssey, is about 
as fallible as these. It is not a book of plenary inspiration, 
Doctor Sale asserted, for the only reliable scroll of the Law 
or the Word of God is the intelligent consciousness of 
the individual man. 

"Rabbi Sale denies the Jews the privilege of being the 
chosen people, except in their own estimation. Christianity, 
as it is known today, with its foundation doctrines of the 
Trinity, communion and metaphysical difficulties, Doctor Sale 
classified as an aftergrowth, and entirely foreign to the exalted 
simplicity of the lowly Nazarene. 

CREEDS BLAMED AS BARRIERS 

"The jealous assumptions of creeds and dogmas, with 
their insistence on incidentals, conventions and artificialities, 
are blamed by Dr. Sale as the barriers which prevent the 
realization of the ideal religion— that preached of in the 
prophetic writings— the worship of God in the service of man. 

"In serious mien, Doctor Sale smiled solemnly at the traditional 
idea that God revealed his laws in the beginning 
exclusively to the Jew. It was a very natural idea for the Jew 
to entertain, he thought. Choosing his words slowly and reflectively, 
he said: 'Not to Israel, not to man of any creed, 
sect or nationality, but to man, has God revealed himself. 
Not in the scroll, not in the Bible, is his infallible Word, but 
in the intelligent consciousness of every individual.' 

"When he had concluded, there was a moment of thoughtful 
silence on the part of the audience, when Doctor Albert H. 
Jordan arose and said:— 

'"That was great' 

'"We'd like to make you a Congregationalist, Doctor Sale,' 
a minister observed." 



"The intelligent consciousness of the individual" was 
indeed God's original writing of his Law— in the first 
perfect man, created in his Maker's likeness. But the 
Bible tells truly that all of Adam's children are blemished 
by sin, and by its death penalty. What about people who 
have only unintelligent consciousness! And what about 
the thousands of gradations of unintelligent consciousness 
—all men! God gave a revealed religion for these 
in the Bible! Only those intelligently unconscious of 
their ignorance disdain it! 



CHURCH FEDERATION AT THE DOOR 

While the religious world has been waiting for the 
slow processes of denominational action to bring about 
Church Federation in a couple of years or more, some 
active ministers in various parts are hastening the matter 
by methods of their own. The latest of these movements, 
as well as the one nearest home, is described in The 
New York World as follows:— 

"Protestant ministers in New York have taken a step that 
may lead, so they hope, to a united Protestantism in New 
York and eventually in all America. The meeting was held 
upon invitation of the Federation of Churches, and one hundred 
ministers present were made up of Baptists, Congregationalists, 
Disciples, Seventh Day Adventists, Episcopalians, 
Quakers, Lutherans, Methodists, Moravians, Presbyterians, 
Pentecostal Nazarines, Reformed Swedenborgians, Unitarians, 
Universalists and three ministers who said they did not belong 
to any of these. 

"This, the most remarkable religious gathering ever held 
in New York City, was called a clerical conference. The 
Bronx and Brooklyn were represented as well as Manhattan. 
It was the first gathering, but it was announced that it is to 
be continued with regular monthly meetings, save during the 
summer. 

"Among the ministers present were the foremost leaders 
in all the bodies named. All of the eight speakers asserted 
that hereafter Protestants are going to show a united front. 
Bishop Greer of the Episcopal Church presided. 

BISHOP GREER OPTIMISTIC 

'"We hear at times,' he said, 'that the churches are failing. 
It is not true. The churches are well filled, some of them 
crowded, and the proportion of men attending them is greater 
than ever. We are all well aware of the sin prevalent in our 
midst. But it has always been prevalent. The gain is that 
the churches now know it exists, and are doing something to 
stamp it out.' 

"Speaking for Presbyterians, the Rev. Dr. George Alexander, 



moderator of the New York Presbytery, declared they 
stand ready to meet Episcopalians half way. Bishop Greer 
had mentioned the moderator by name, saying he wished he 
might have the privilege of laying on of hands upon such a 
leader as he. Replying, the veteran Presbyterian leader said 
he would not seriously object. It surely would not hurt him, 
and it might do good. He allowed there are some Presbyterians 
in New York who stand on what they are pleased to 
call their principles, but he added that some who have few 
principles manufacture them out of their prejudices. 

"The Rev. Nehemiah Boynton of Brooklyn, speaking for 
Congregationalists, enumerated the political, social, amusement, 
Sabbath rest, labor and other questions on which, he 
said, Protestants might unite. 

A STRONG LIST OF SPEAKERS 

"Other speakers included the Rev. Dr. J. B. Remensnyder, 
who spoke for Lutherans; the Rev. Dr. F. Mason North, 
who believed the Methodists would join heartily; the Rev. 
Dr. Swift of the American Tract Society, who wondered how 
many religious bodies are 'willing to sacrifice their names in 
order that the cause of Christ may be advanced.' 

"In closing, Bishop Greer stated that the next matter in 
hand is to hear from representatives of each body in the 
conference what are their hindrances to co-operation. The 
Bishop believed the time in America to be ripe for unity, and 
declared that the Episcopal Church stands ready to aid. 

"The conference membership is to be much enlarged until, 
if possible, it includes all of the Protestant ministers in the 
greater city. The Unitarians and Universalists are usually 
barred in such meetings, but both were present, three men 
from each." 

"THE IMAGE OF THE BEAST" 

Here we have exactly what we have been looking and 
waiting for since 1881, when we announced the Federation 
of the Protestant Churches to be set forth in the 
Bible as one of the prominent features of the harvest of 
this Gospel Age. We then pointed out that the attempt 
to organize Protestantism, first made in 1846 through the 
Evangelical Alliance, would reach consummation soon. 
We pointed to the Scriptures which indicate that this 
Protestant Federation will so considerably resemble the 
Roman Catholic Institutions as to properly deserve to be 
called its "Image," and that the "Image" already existed 

R4690 : page 308 

in a disorganized condition, as represented in the terms 
of Protestant orthodoxy and their co-operation with 
Catholicism. We pointed out that the important matter 
waited on and necessary to the power and activity of the 
Protestant "Image" is the "life" which it is to receive 
from the Protestant Episcopal System. 



Up to the present time Protestant denominations have 
hesitated to pronounce anybody or anything heretical, except 
as each denomination may have occasionally done 
this within its own borders. There has been a strong desire 
to formulate a creed which would have the support 
of all and permit the denouncing of everything outside 
of it. But the way to do this was not heretofore clear, 
because the retort might be, By what authority do you 
set yourself up as a judge of what is orthodox and what 
is unorthodox? What have you more than your own 
opinion of the Bible's teaching? Have you any authority 
more than others? Produce the authority. 

The fear of being thus questioned has exercised a 
salutary effect heretofore, except with the ignorant. But 
when the various ministers of other denominations shall 
have in considerable numbers accepted re-ordination as 
ministers at the hands of Episcopalian Bishops, matters 
will be different. Speedily the validity of other ordination 
will be questioned. The authority of this so-called 

R4690 : page 309 

"Apostolic Ordination" will give seeming right of authority, 

dignity and power. After the prominent ministers 

of various denominations shall have submitted themselves 

to such re-ordination the "lesser lights" will make 

a rush for it. The Episcopal Church proffered it on easy 

terms years ago, and the only objection to its acceptance 

has been the fact that it implies that Protestant ministers 

heretofore have been without Divine authority, sanction, 

power or ordination to preach the Gospel as God's 

ambassadors. 

"THE BLIND LEADING THE BLIND" 

The situation is becoming strenuous. The great ministers 
realize that with their own teachings and those of 
the colleges along the lines of Higher Criticism and Evolution, 
intelligent Christians are rapidly losing faith in 
the Bible. These ministers realize that this places Society 
in a dangerous position— that without faith in some 
higher authority, civilization would soon drift into anarchy. 
They feel the need of a substitute for the Bible— 
the need of some voice to address the people authoritatively. 
The desired end, they believe, can be best secured 
through the Federation of the Churches and the 
coming of all ministers of the Gospel under the Episcopal 
ordination. Then, they think, we will present to the 
world a large system and a bold front and command their 
attention to the voice of the Church and the Voice of 
God coming down through the "apostolic succession"— 
just as the Catholics do— a mild "Image" of Catholicism, 
but full of its power and vigor. 

The Scriptures show that by the time this Catholic 
power and vigor and "apostolic-succession" authority are 
felt by the Federators, a spirit of autocracy and persecution 



of everything contrary to the Federation and contrary 

to Catholicism, of which it is to be the "Image," 

will be dealt with more and more severely, energetically 

and ruthlessly, as the masses fall in line with the Federative 

Movement and catch its spirit of bigness, dignity, 

power, authority— a spirit very different from that inculcated 

by the Master and the Apostles in meekness, gentleness, 

patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, love. 

Far be it from us to suppose that the gentlemen participating 
in the meeting described foregoing are animated 
by all the vicious malevolence which the Scriptures indicate 
will ultimately result. On the contrary, they little 
realize the end of the road upon which they are entering. 
It is a case of the blind leading the blind. As the Scriptures 
indicate, the ditch is before them— the ditch of anarchy, 
the very thing which they are desirous of averting. 
To us the Scriptures indicate that the prosperity of the 
Federated Protestant "Image" will for a little time be so 
great, so pronounced, and its arrogance become so great 
that the sympathy of the masses will be entirely alienated 
and turned into bitterness. Hence the Scriptures show us 
that the climax will come suddenly, unexpectedly, "In one 
hour."-Rev. 13:15-17. 



IS THE WORLD BETTER? 

"Commenting on Dr. C. W. Eliot's statement that 
'The world has been re-made within fifty years,' Thomas 
E. Watson, the Southern statesman and publicist, responds 
with the inquiry, 'Is the newly made world of today 
a better world than that of fifty years ago?' Mr. 
Watson, answering his own question, wrote:— 

"It seems to be a fact that a large percentage of the people 
have departed from the old faith, in the matter of religion. 
It seems to me that this is indisputably true; but does the man 
who loses his faith in Christianity become a better man on 
that account? Is the scoffing son or grandson of the New 
England Puritan a higher, nobler type than was his pious forefather? 
Is the preacher's son who is an infidel a more useful 
citizen than the preacher father? 

"Again, are we an honester, more temperate people than 
were the Americans of fifty years ago? What is the exact 
social and moral significance of the fifty or sixty thousand 
divorces that are being granted by the courts annually? What 
weight is to be given to the fact that President Roosevelt appointed 
a commission to investigate existing conditions in 
the homes of the people of cities, and that this report, officially 
made after painstaking investigation, revealed such an appalling 
state of affairs that the government decided it would 
be advisable to suppress the publication? 

"Again, what is the real meaning of the astounding size of 
our yearly drink bill? And what is implied by the infinite 
variety and ingenuity of the devices invented to keep us from 
stealing? Every time you go into a store you are bound to 



be reminded of the fact that the proprietor places no confidence 
in the employee and the employee places none in the 
proprietor. 

"In the cash drawer, in the system of collecting 
fares on street cars and railway trains, in the check and 
counter-check at the hotels, in the elaborate system of the 
banks, in the expensive safe vaults provided against the 
burglar, the robber and the sneak thief— in fact, in every 
direction that our eyes take in the business world, we are 
bound to see that commerce goes upon the idea that every man 
will steal if he gets the opportunity, and the whole trend of 
the ingenious, elaborate, and constantly changing system is 
to take away the chance to steal. The entire precautional 
system cries out: 'Every one of us will steal if you don't 
watch us!' Was it that bad fifty years ago? 

"We cannot agree with Mr. Watson, because of what 
he sees to commend in the past, that the people as a whole 
are not very much better conditioned than they were half 
a century ago. The writer here, who has almost reached 
the three score and ten, has seen great progress in the improvement 
of human life and living, much more than the 
most optimistic fancy of his boyhood days could have 
dared to imagine. 

"Mr. Watson, who, by the way, is an ardent Baptist 
and clings most tenaciously to the 'old faith,' wants to 
know if the liberal religious teachings of today have made 
the present day American a more useful citizen than his 
orthodox father. We think it has. It is within our remembrance 
when there was constant warfare between 
the rival sects. The Catholics were denounced by the 
Protestants and the Protestants were as roundly abused 
by the Catholics. Liberalism has changed this."— The 
Sunday Call. 



There are two sides to nearly every question— sometimes 
three. Two sides of a question are discussed foregoing. 
The third side, which harmonizes both, and 
which we believe is the Truth, is this:— 

Moral standards of the world in general certainly have 
improved in many respects. The world as a whole is more 
intelligent, broader-minded and more benevolent than in 
the past. It is along religious lines that we seem to see 
an unfavorable comparison. The light and liberty of our 
day have overbalanced many of the best minds of the 
world and led into Higher Criticism, Evolution and various 
other doctrines contrary to the Scriptures. As a result, 
Christian faith is weak and sterling Christian character 
is becoming scarce. Our Lord prayed, "Sanctify them 
through thy Truth; thy Word is Truth." And we are 
learning that there can be no sanctification without the 
Truth. Hence the decline in Christianity, because of the 
departure from the Divine standard. True, indeed, many 
of the things believed by our fathers were unscriptural. 
True, indeed, many of the sentiments of the world today 



are sounder and clearer and more logical and more 
God-like. 

If our forefathers had presented only errors, the loss 
of them would have been beneficial, rather than otherwise. 
However, with the errors, they had truths derived from 

R4690 : page 310 

the same Word of God and their faith rested upon a 
sure foundation, even though it was blemished, imperfect. 
A blemished faith is much better than no faith. And 
hence, from this standpoint, today is less favorable than 
fifty years ago. We could not expect Prof. Eliot, nor any 
other Higher Critic disbeliever in the Bible, to see the matter 
from our standpoint. Nor shall we try. It is our part to 
do what we can for the establishment of faith and for 
the purging of it from all the inconsistencies and errors 
of the "dark ages"— the restoring of faith to its original 
simplicity and purity. In so far as we succeed in ourselves 
or others, we know that the result will bring a 
blessing and sanctification, under which all the light and 
blessing of this present time will be helpful in a proper 
approach toward God and appreciation of his character 
and Word. 



R4691 : page 310 

"WATCHMAN, WHAT OF THE NIGHT?" 

From "The Life of Faith." 

WATCHMAN, what of the night? The watchman 

said, The morning cometh." (Isaiah 21:11,12.) 

The nineteenth century beheld, 

perhaps, the most amazing progress the 

Church of Christ has ever experienced. A 

little more than a hundred years ago there 

was no Bible Society; today three Anglo-Saxon 

Bible Societies alone pour forth annually 

over ten million portions of the 

Scriptures, in four to five hundred languages 

of the world. Can any imagination conceive the spiritual 

effect of this mighty river of Truth pouring itself among 

all mankind? A little more than a hundred years ago 

missionary societies— apart from the Jesuit and Moravian 

—were practically unknown; in 1909 there were 19,875 

missionaries scattered, as living epistles of Christ, 

through the heathen world. It would be difficult to say 

what was the membership of God's Church when the 

century dawned; but it is now computed that the membership 

of Protestant Evangelical communions is not less 

than one hundred and forty to one hundred and fifty 

millions. It is possible that eternity will reveal to us 

that the nineteenth century was the richest toward God 



of any century in the world's history. 

Nor does God's worldwide advance slacken; the last 
decade is probably the most wonderful of all. "The 
morning cometh!" More educated converts have been 
won in India in the last two decades than in the whole 
preceding century. Bishop Moule, of Mid-China, says 
that when he first landed in that Empire it held less than 
fifty Protestant Christians; in the first decade of the 
twentieth century there have been 16,000 martyrs; and 
nearly two thousand missionaries are now planted 
throughout China. A little over twenty years ago the 
Christians in all Korea numbered seven; in 1908, alone, 
there were fifty thousand converts; and, at a recent conference 
of twelve hundred laymen, some walked for ten 
days to enjoy the Bible study. In Tokachi prison, in 
Kokkaido, Japan, a spiritual movement, sweeping through 
it in 1908, brought nearly two thousand of the inmates to 
Christ, and most of the prison officials have been baptized. 
Four years after the Welsh revival, in spite of the 
reaction, from sixty to seventy thousand converts were 
known to be established in church fellowship. The census 
bureau of the United States, reports that, between 1890 
and 1906, an average of eight new churches had been 
built every day. It has been recently stated that within 
the last decade more Jews have become believers (it is, 
of course, but an approximate computation) than in all 
the seventeen hundred years after Paul. 

All these are but symptoms of a work of the holy 
Spirit which is nothing short of stupendous. For the 
first time since our Lord ascended, nearly the whole world 
is now open to the Gospel, and is being penetrated by 
heralds of the Cross. The year 1908 was a phenomenal 
one in missionary advance; 164,674 native members were 
added to the Church, or an average of five hundred a day. 
Nor is the heroism of the Cross confined to any Christian 
group. Dr. Ambrose Shepherd recently met a young 
Roman Catholic priest in a railway carriage, on a farewell 
visit to his mother before leaving for the Congo. 
"When do you expect to come back?" Dr. Shepherd 
asked. "Never," was the reply; "we have buried fifteen 
already, and the average period of life is about two 
years"; and when the young priest arose to take farewell, 
in a voice that trembled with emotion, he said, "The life 
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the 
Son of God." 

"The watchman said, And also the night." The facts 
are not more antithetical than are the words of the 
watchman. "Of no time in the history of the world," 
said The Times recently, "are so many signs of general 
unrest recorded as those which seem to confront us today"; 
or, in the words of the Bible Society's report 
(1909), "The horoscope of the future is written over 
with signs of incalculable change." As the Rev. James 
Johnston has pointed out in his, "A Century of Missions," 
the heathen and Mohammedan population of the world 
counts more by two hundred millions than a hundred 



years ago, while the converts and their families number 
less than three millions; a seventy-fold increase of the 
darkness over the light. There are millions more of 
heathen souls in China today than when the first Protestant 
missionary landed a hundred years ago; for every 
convert added to the Church a thousand souls are added 
to Chinese heathendom by mere growth of population. 
"If our plans of education be followed up," said Lord 
Macaulay in 1836, "there will not be a single idolator 
among the respectable classes in Bengal thirty years 
hence"; today there is a false god for every member of 
the population of India— between two and three hundred 
millions. In Japan there are four hundred and fifty 
heathen temples for every single Christian missionary. 
There are 400,000,000 of mankind who have not a leaf of 
the Bible in their 2,700 languages and dialects. 

Nor is faith what it was in the lands of faith. In 
1908, in the State Church in Berlin alone, the fall in membership 
was ten thousand persons. The Bible Society 
reports that the sale of the Scriptures is falling. In 
Liverpool— the third city of the empire— in 1881, 40 seats 
out of every 100 were filled at morning worship in the 
Free Churches; in 1891, 31; in 1902, 25; in 1908, 12. So 
also evening attendance has fallen from 57 in every 100 
seats in 1881, to 28 in 1908. "Tom Paine's work," says 
the editor of the Freethinker, "is now carried on by the 
descendants of his persecutors; all he said about the Bible 
is being said in substance by orthodox divines from 
chairs of theology." At the last census in France, eight 
millions enrolled themselves as atheists; "We have driven 
Jesus Christ," says the Premier, M. Briand, "out of the 
army, the navy, the schools, the hospitals, the lunatic 
asylums, and the orphanages; we must now drive him 

R4691 : page 311 

out of the State altogether." This decay in faith is already 

producing its inevitable recoil in morality. While 

the population of the United States has grown one hundred 

per cent., crime has increased by four hundred per 

cent. The decade of unprecedented revivals— in Wales, 

Madagascar, Korea, China— is the decade of unparalleled 

earthquakes— at Valparaiso, San Francisco, Jamaica, Messina; 

it would seem as if grace is speaking her loudest 

as the earth trembles with premonitory judgments. The 

vast revival in Moslem lands; the flood of infidel literature 

which Japan is pouring into China, a fourth of the 

human race; the mushroom growth of such spiritisms as 

Spiritualism and Christian Science; the actual rumors of 

the rebuilding of Babylon and the Temple— "the watchman 

said, And also the night." 

"The watchman said, If ye will inquire, inquire ye." 
"If the light that is in us be darkness, how great is the 
darkness"; and if the Lamp of Prophecy be extinguished, 
how inextricable is the confusion. "Inquire ye." Why 
inquire? Because the future which God has revealed, is 



the future which I ought to know; because without a 
knowledge of prophecy, the present workings of God are 
plunged in unintelligible mystery; because prophecy uncovers 
the pitfalls that lie in our path; because a knowledge 
of the future is of incalculable importance in shaping 
the present. Hear the watchman's mournful undertone: 
"If ye will inquire, inquire ye." It is a strange 
irony of the situation that worldly eyes can read the 
signs more acutely than the general Church. Says a 
novelist whose works sell by the hundred thousand, in 
many languages: 

"All things that Christ prophesied are coming to pass 
so quickly that I wonder more people do not realize it; 
and I especially wonder at the laxity and apathy of the 
Churches, except for the fact that this also was prophesied. 
Some of us will live to see a time of terror, and 
that before very long. The blasphemous things which 
are being done in the world today cannot go on much 
longer without punishment. We know by history that 
deliberate scorn of God and Divine things has always 
been met by retribution of a sudden and terrible nature— 
and it will be so again." 

Prophecy is the profoundest pessimism and the profoundest 
optimism; it is profoundly pessimistic of all that 
a Christ-rejecting generation is about to do; it is profoundly 
optimistic of all that an almighty and an all-gracious 
God will effect in the imminent establishment of 
his Kingdom. Dr. Kelman recently asked an eminent 
American man of science his solution of the problems of 
modern city life. "An emperor!" came the answer, swift 
and decisive. "An emperor?" asked Dr. Kelman, in surprise; 
"I thought you had done with all that in America. 
Besides, your emperor would need to be a very wonderful 
man, incapable of mistakes, and extraordinarily competent 
for leadership." "Precisely," was the quiet answer; 
"and we know the Man; we are waiting for him, and his 
name is— Messiah." "The thrill of that reply," says Dr. 
Kelman, "will never leave me." 

"The Watchman said, Turn ye; come." It may be 
that some unbelieving eyes may alight upon these words. 
The Rabbis expound the Watchman, who speaks here, as 
the Messiah; so it is— "turn ye"— repentance toward God; 
and "come"— faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Why 
thus turn and come? Because, to press forward, if we 
are right, is to press forward amid perhaps the mightiest 
operations ever put forth on a worldwide scale by the 
holy Spirit. 

"The difficulty in the world today is not to 
find God, but to escape him. Because every moment that 
a world hardens itself against Divine light, an atmosphere 
is being produced in which it is every moment 
more difficult to believe. Because, if to Chorazin and 
Bethsaida, after three years of Gospel opportunity, Jesus 
said, "It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon," 
shall it not also be said of our cities, after a thousand 



R4692: page 311 

years of opportunity? Because nineteen hundred years 
ago the Night was far spent, and the Day was at hand; 
there can be no time to lose now. The day before the 
wall of fire rolled down on St. Pierre, the telephone clerk 
spoke through to Fort de France, saying that the people 
were fleeing. Next morning, at ten minutes to eight, he 
was heard to exclaim, "My God! it is here!" and he was 
afterwards found, with the receiver in his hand, burnt 
to a cinder. "Watchman, what of the night?" That is, 
what hour of the night is it? "Little children, it is the 
last hour."— I John 2:18. 



R4692: page 311 

ST. PAUL AND MOSES PATRIOTS EXTRAORDINARY 

"For I could wish that myself were accursed from 
Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen, according 
to the flesh."— Romans 9:3. 

THIS is one of the most patriotic expressions 

to be found in the Bible. It is comparable 

only to the request by Moses in respect to 

the Children of Israel, that if God would 

blot out Israel, he should blot out 

him also from his book of remembrance 

and special favor. We have a very 

high estimation of St. Paul's generosity of 

heart and loyalty of mind to his kinsmen, 

the Jews, and also for that of the 

great Law-Giver. 

We are not, we think, to understand this as though it 
merely read, I do wish myself accursed. Neither are we 
to understand this expression to signify, I could wish myself 
damned; but rather, I could wish myself cut off from 
membership in the Body of Christ, if by my being cut off 
it could be so arranged, in harmony with the Heavenly 
Father's will and provision, that it would benefit my 
brethren, my nation— so that as a whole nation the Israelites 
would constitute the Royal Priesthood and become 
Israel on the spiritual plane. I perceive that they do not 
realize how much they are missing. I feel such a grief 
for them, that having received the promises centuries ago 
and having hoped in these promises (many still hope in 
them) they are now so blinded as to reject the favors of 
God, because it was not on a spiritual plane that they 
anticipated them. If my being cut off from fellowship 
with the Lord Jesus Christ as a member of that Body of 
glory would thus benefit them and were to put me down 
on the plane of the "Great Company," instead of my 
being one of those who would share in the glory of the 
Kingdom, I would be well pleased, indeed, if it were God's 



will, that thus I might have the satisfaction of knowing 
that I had been such a blessing to my own people. 

ST. PAUL'S GREAT UNSELFISHNESS 

We confess that the Apostle's attitude on this subject 
is marvelous. We cannot doubt his sincerity. He was 
proving this in all of his course of life. For one to will 
to sacrifice his place in the Body of Christ for the sake 
of the multitude of his sinful nation, is something very 

R4692: page 312 

wonderful. This, however, is not an example to us— that 
we should say that if we could bring some of our children 
or friends into the Truth we would be willing to be cut 
off for the benefit of these, and thus to subordinate ourselves 
and take the lower position. It is our privilege to 
take the position God has offered us, but those who may 
be able to rise up to so high a standard are worthy of 
admiration because of the grandeur of character implied. 
St. Paul's great unselfishness was one of his grand traits, 
and we think it would be well for each of us to cultivate 
that trait to a greater degree, looking to the interest of 
the brethren, willing to subordinate our own preferences 
and our own ways in certain particulars if we can see 
that this would be an aid to others, especially an aid to a 
number of others. This is the Spirit of Christ; this is 
certainly in full accord with all the instructions of the 
Lord— that we should humble ourselves, and in honor 
prefer one another, even to the extent of self-sacrifice. 
The Apostle's course was self-abnegation to an extent, 
however, that we do not understand the Lord has demanded, 
although he has said, "we ought to lay down 
our lives (our human lives) for the brethren." 

In a sense, we might say that the Jewish nation stood 
related to Saint Paul in much the same way that the 
nominal Christian church of today stands related to the 
fully consecrated. They are our brethren by a nominal 
consecration or nominal profession. Such a relationship 
we ought to feel, we think. We believe this text encourages 
us to feel a great deal of interest in these brethren, 
and to be willing to do a great deal to help them. 
We do not know how many may really be saints and 
merely for the time blinded by the errors which the Adversary 
has caused to be promulgated. "The god of 
this world hath blinded the minds of those who believe 
not." (2 Cor. 4:4.) We understand these words, "believe 
not," to apply not only to an entire lack of faith, 
but to apply also to the various imperfect degrees of development 
of faith in ourselves and in others. What is 
it that has hindered us from reaching the very highest 
attainment of that which God has provided for us? Some 
of these errors are standing in the way. Where did they 
come from. They came from our Adversary. 



"LET NOT SIN HAVE DOMINION OVER YOU" 

And he it is who has completely blinded the heathen 
and has darkened the understanding of Christians, and 
we ought to be glad to do all in our power to remove those 
blinding influences. To whatever extent we do this, to 
whatever extent we are of aid to our brethren in the 
nominal church, it will make us proportionately sympathetic 
with them— not with the systems that are contrary 
to the teachings of the Word, but sympathetic with the 
people who are blinded by the teachings of those systems 
—not sympathetic with the blindness, but with those who 
are experiencing the blindness. The Apostle seems to 
give the thought of a gradual obliteration of blindness 
when he speaks of "the eyes of your understanding 
opening ye might be able to comprehend with all saints," 
etc. So we see that in our own cases it is a gradual opening 
of the eyes of our understanding, and this progresses 
in proportion as we get free from the power of Satan 
and his blinding influences. We get free from these influences 
in proportion as we lay hold upon the Lord 
Jesus Christ and his wonderful provision made for our 
liberation, that we might ultimately stand free in the 
liberty wherewith Christ makes us free. He makes us 
free as the Emancipation Proclamation made the slaves 
free. And yet, after the proclamation is made, it is one 
thing to learn of our liberty and another thing to avail 
ourselves of that liberty and thus to become actually 
free. It takes, perhaps, months or years to gain this full 
liberty from blindness. "Let not sin, therefore, have 
dominion over you." 



R4692: page 312 

WISE AND FOOLISH VIRGINS 

-MATTHEW 25:l-13.-OCTOBER 2.- 

Golden Text:— "Be ye therefore ready also; for the Son of 
man cometh at an hour when ye think not."— Luke 12:40. 

THE Great Teacher in today's Study tells us 

further about his glorious Messianic Kingdom 

and concerning those who will be 

accounted worthy to share it with him— as 

his Bride. This parable has not been of general 

application all through this Gospel Age. 

It applies merely at the close of the Age 

—at the present time, we believe. It does 

not take into consideration the world, nor 

even the nominal Church, but solely, only, 

the true Church, the Virgin class. The word "virgin" 

signifies pure and in using this term the Lord implies 

that he is referring only to those who have been justified, 



by faith and consecration, because by nature none are 
pure; none are holy; none are virgins. 

FIVE WISE-FIVE FOOLISH 

One of the special lessons of the parable is to 
show that amongst the pure, the wise, the consecrated 
people of God, there are two classes. For a time these 
will be all together— unseparated. But in the fulfilling of 
this parable certain circumstances and conditions and 
truths will develop and separate these two classes of 
saints, virgins. 

The parable shows all the virgins as sleeping, waiting 
for the coming of the Bridegroom. Apparently, there is 
no difference; but really there is a difference— the wise 
had a larger supply of oil than had the foolish. Then 
came an announcement of the presence of the Bridegroom 
and a call to go forth to meet him. This implies that 
something from the prophetic Word at the appropriate 
time will call the attention of all the Virgin class to the 
presence of Messiah. But at the Second Advent it will 
be as it was at the First Advent, when John said of 
Jesus, "Behold there standeth one among you whom ye 
know not." We are not to expect the Second Coming 
of Christ in the flesh, but as a spirit being. 

We are to remember that the Scriptures outline two 
distinct features connected with the Second Coming. 
First will come the parousia or "presence" of the Lord, 
recognizable only by the Wise and Foolish Virgins. In 
his parousia or "presence" he will test and prove his 
Church, dividing them into wise and foolish virgin classes 
—the wise virgins to become the Bride class and the 
foolish virgins to become the class who will experience 

R4693 : page 312 

a second grade of salvation— coming up out of great 
tribulation and becoming the Bridesmaids, so to speak, 
"the virgins, the Bride's Companions, who follow after 
her." (Psa. 45:14.) These will attain great blessings in 
spiritual life, but fail to gain the prize of joint-heirship 
with the Lord in his Throne, in his Kingdom. 

Later on will come the manifestation of Christ with 
his Church, in power and great glory, in the setting up 
of his Messianic Kingdom and in the overthrow of everything 
contrary to it. Concerning this manifestation we 

R4693 : page 313 

read, "When he shall appear, we, also (the Bride class), 
will appear with him in glory."— Col. 3:4. 

It will be in the time of the presence, the parousia, of 
the Son of man, for the gathering of the "elect," that all 
the Virgins will be awakened by the message of the Truth. 
Some will be able to appreciate, others will not be able 
to appreciate his presence. The latter will need to "go 



and buy" the oil, the wisdom, the understanding, of the 
Divine Word. It will cost some of them considerable of 
self-sacrifice and humiliation to learn their lessons. Such 
as obtain the oil in time will join the party that will 
go in with the Bridegroom to the marriage feast. Then 
the door to that High Calling will close forever. 

Thank God that it is not as we once supposed— that 
the door of mercy is to close, shutting out the foolish 
Virgins of the Church, together with the whole world of 
mankind; and, as we once supposed, shutting them into 
eternal torment. The parable merely shows that the 
closed door will exclude any others from coming into the 
Bride class, to be joint-heirs with Messiah in his Kingdom. 
The door will close because the full number elected 
and predestinated to this high honor will have attained 
the necessary character-likeness of Christ and will have 
stood the necessary testings. 

As no one of the Jewish priests could ever serve as 
High Priest if he had a superfluous finger or toe, it is 
thus shown in the type that the antitypical High Priest, 
the Messiah, will have only a definite, fixed number of 
members in his Body— neither one too few nor one too 
many. Later on, the foolish Virgins came to the "door," 
but found it forever shut. They lost the great prize. 
They were foolish in that they did not give attention to 
getting the oil in time; foolish also in that they cared 
too much for the things of this present life; but they 
were Virgins, nevertheless. They finally got the oil, 
which represents the holy Spirit, but too late! The door 
was shut! They could not be of the Bride class. The 
Master answered, I know you not. I could not recognize 
you as my Bride. 

In view of this the Lord exhorts that his consecrated 
followers of the Church or Virgin class be constantly 
on the alert, because they know neither the day 
nor the hour of the Master's coming and of the invitation 
to go in to the wedding. The parable shows, however, 
that although the time of the Master's coming could not 
be known in the past, nevertheless, it would be known to 
all of the Virgin class "in due time." It will be announced, 
as indicated in the cry. The cry will be so 
loud that all of the Virgins will hear it, even though 
the world will have no knowledge of it. The Master 
merely wished us to understand that the great event would 
not be foretold in advance. 

The parable does not show how the foolish Virgins, 
excluded from the wedding and from membership in the 
Bride class, will be treated. Other Scriptures, however, 
show that this foolish virgin class will share with the 
world in a great time of trouble, which will then come 
to every nation. In that time of trouble these foolish virgins 
will suffer severely and "Wash their robes and make 
them white in the blood of the Lamb," and thereafter be 
accounted worthy to "serve God in his Temple," though 
not worthy to be of the Temple. They will be accounted 
worthy to serve before the Throne, though not worthy to 



sit in the Throne. They will be accounted worthy to 
have palms of victory, but not be accounted worthy of 
crowns of glory. The lesson to God's people is to Awake, 
to hearken, to have our lamps, the Word of God, trimmed 
and burning, and to have oil, the holy Spirit, in our vessels 
—to be living in an attitude of full consecration to 
God.-Rev. 7:9,14,15. 

We see the marriage splendor, 

Within the open door; 
We know that those who enter 

Are blest for evermore; 
We see our King, more lovely 

Than all the sons of men; 
We haste, because that door, once shut, 

Will never ope again. 



R4693 : page 313 

THE RECKONING HOUR 

-MATTHEW 25:14-30.-OCTOBER 9.- 

Golden Text— "His Lord said unto him, Well done, thou good 
and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, 
I will make thee ruler over many things; 
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." 

THIS study follows the one of last week. It 

also illustrates the fact that Messiah at his 

Second Advent, before appearing to the 

world in power and great glory and in the 

time of trouble, will be present amongst his 

consecrated people and many of them will 

know of his parousia, or "presence," in this 

time. He will do amongst them a judging 

work— deciding their rewards in proportion 

to their faithfulness. It is well that 

we keep in memory the difference between the parable 

of the pounds and the parable of the talents. Both represented 

money. But a talent is sixty times as valuable 

as a pound. In the parable of the pound, each servant 

got one pound, but in the parable of the talents the numbers 

given varied. In some respects all of God's people 

have one common footing and common privilege of service, 

as represented by the pound. In another respect 

their opportunities, privileges and advantages vary, as 

represented in the present study, the parable of the talents. 

This is another parable of the Kingdom. The Great 
Teacher himself went into the far country, even heaven; 
but before departing he delivered unto his servants 
certain blessings, privileges, opportunities— "to 
each according to his several abilities." The beginning 
of this parable was in the days of the 



Apostles when Jesus ascended up on high and at 
Pentecost shed forth in the Father's name the holy 
Spirit, communicating a blessing upon each one of his 
followers, as represented in the talents and opportunities 
of each follower. All through this Gospel Age these 
servants have been making more or less use of their privileges 
and more or less wisely exercising themselves to 
serve the Master. Some traded with their talents, or used 
them in preaching, teaching, etc. And others hid them in 
the earth, perhaps under cares and responsibilities. After 
a long time the Lord of these servants cometh and reckoneth 
with them. This long time is the Gospel Age, and 
the presence of the King in the end of the Age to hear the 
report of his servants and to reward them represents the 
parousia (or presence) of Messiah and his testing, sifting 
work in his Church. We should distinctly note that 
this testing and proving is not of the world, for Christ 
never recognized any as his servants, except the consecrated. 
Many Christian people believe that we are now 
in the time when the servants of the Lord are rendering 

R4693 : page 314 

up their accounts, and when he is saying to some, "Well 
done, good and faithful servant; enter into the joys of 
thy Lord," and when he is saying to others, "Thou 
wicked and slothful servant. .take ye away, 
therefore, the talent from him, and give it unto him that 
hath the ten talents." But all of this testing and rewarding 
of the servants of Christ is manifestly prior to any outward 
manifestation of the King in his glory, because the 
worthy ones are to share with the Master in his glorious 
manifestation and this testing must demonstrate the 
worthy ones, in advance of the revelation in glory. 

TO RULE OVER EARTH'S CITIES 

The one who had received five talents and used them 
wisely, energetically, faithfully, loyally, doubled them and 
was invited to share in the Master's joy and glory. His 
reward would be to sit as a ruler of many. In other 
words, the service of the present life is but an insignificant 
one in comparison to the glorious service which 
awaits the Lord's faithful people in the future— when 
they shall sit with Messiah in his Throne and, as kings 
and priests, bless and instruct and uplift and control 
Israel and all the nations of the world. The approval of 
the one who was given two talents and who was equally 
faithful, was in equally kind and benevolent terms. He 
also was a good and faithful servant over a few things; 
he also would be set as a ruler over many things; he also 
might enter into the joy of his Lord. The servant who 
failed to use his talent was branded as wicked and slothful. 
He knew in advance that the talent was given him 
for use and because he had professed to be a faithful 
servant. His failure to use the talent proved him disloyal, 



unfaithful. It was, therefore, taken away from him. 
It is not for us to presume to say that the Lord will 
have no blessing whatever for that unfaithful servant. 
He was a servant all the time. He respected 
the talent. He did not lose it. But he did not use it 
properly. He seems to represent a very similar class to 

R4694: page 314 

the one described in our study of a week ago as the foolish 
virgins. This class will fail to get into the glories of 
the Kingdom, but will surely get into the time of trouble 
and its outer darkness, disappointment and chagrin, with 
which this Age will end and the New Age be ushered in. 
The Lord grant that this lesson may help some of 
his consecrated servants to be more faithful, more 
careful, in the use of their consecrated talents, that they 
may glorify the Lord and hear his "Well done" in the 
end! 

One difficulty with many of us in the past has been 
fear of the Master. We should have gotten better acquainted 
with him. We should have learned more respecting 
his real, true character and his purposes. If now 
the eyes of our understanding are opening, if now we 
are seeing the beauty of our talents and privileges of 
service as never before, let us quickly dig the talent out 
and wash it free from all soil of the earth and use it 
earnestly, zealously, vigorously, for the praise of our 
King, redeeming the time, knowing that the days are 
unfavorable. 



R4694: page 314 

THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS 

--MATTHEW 25:31-46.-OCTOBER 16.- 

Golden Text— "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of 
the least of these, my brethren, ye have done it unto me." 

PREVIOUS studies have pointed us to the 

Kingdom and incited the Lord's people to 

strive to become members thereof— kings 

and priests unto God in association with the 

Redeemer. Today's study tells of the Kingdom, 

but from another standpoint. It explains 

the work of the Kingdom after it shall 

have been set up— after Messiah at his Second 

Advent shall have gathered his "jewels" 

to constitute his Bride class— after these 

shall be with him in the Throne of his glory— after he 

shall have taken unto himself his great power and shall 

have begun his Messianic reign of righteousness "under 

the whole heavens." It is important in every study of the 



Scriptures that we recognize the Divine Plan as a whole 
and properly locate the teaching of each parable. 

We know that the parable of the sheep and the goats 
belongs not to this Age, but to the coming Age of Messiah's 
glorious reign, because the introduction declares 
this, saying, "When the Son of man shall come in his 
glory and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit 
upon the Throne of his glory, and before him shall be 
gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from 
another as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats." 
Those sheep and goats will not include the Church, to 
whom the promise is, "When he shall appear, we also 
shall appear with him in glory"— sharing his Throne. 

The salvation of the Church will be finished before the 
salvation of the world will begin. Today's study pictures 
the salvation of the world, showing us how every member 
of Adam's race will be on trial during the reign of Messiah 
and, by his obedience or disobedience to the light and 
knowledge then prevailing, he will be deciding his own 
everlasting future, either as a sheep or as a goat. It will 
require the entire one thousand years of Messiah's reign 
to complete the testing and separating work. 

THE WICKED NOT TO BE PRESERVED 

All then obedient will be recognized as children of God 
and brethren. All the disobedient will be reckoned as 
children of the Adversary and worthy to share his fate, 
because, under favorable conditions, they were rebellious. 
Such shall be destroyed with Satan in the Second Death, 
which is symbolically represented as fire, because fire is 
always destructive, never preservative. On the contrary, 
the sheep class at the conclusion of Messiah's reign will 
have reached perfection, the image and likeness of God, 
on the human plane. These will be invited to become the 
kings of earth under the Divine supervision— even as was 
Adam in his original perfection— crowned with glory and 
honor and set over the earthly creation.— Psalm 8:3-5. 

The terms and conditions which will test and determine 
who will be sheep and who will be goats, who will be 
obedient or disobedient to the Divine regulations, will be 
mercy, kindness, love. The loving and sympathetic 
character is the only one which God purposes 
shall have eternal life, either on the heavenly 
or on the earthly plane— all having either the 
wolfish or devilish character, or even the goat 
character— of waywardness and unsubmissiveness, will be 
accounted unworthy of any further blessing after the 
close of the reign of Messiah. The testing then will not 
be as to believing or disbelieving, striving to do well or 
not striving to do well. The Church is dealt with now 
along such lines. God's dealings with us make allowances 
for our unwilling imperfections. But in the trial 
of the world in the future every man shall be tried according 
to his work, not according to his faith. In that 
time knowledge will have practically supplanted faith; 



R4695 : page 315 

hence faith will have no special rewards. Works will 
then have the rewards, and each member of the race will 
be expected to strive for perfect works and to be assistants 
of the Great King Emmanuel and his Bride, the 
Church on the spirit plane. Mankind will be enabled gradually 
to attain such perfection of mind and of body as will 
make perfect works possible. At the conclusion of the 
Millennial Age perfect works only will be rewarded. 

REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS 

We have already referred to the rewards that will be 
granted to the "sheep" class at the close of Messiah's 
Kingdom— they will enter into life eternal and become 
possessors of the earthly Kingdom originally given to 
Adam, but lost through disobedience, and redeemed by 
the sacrifice of Jesus and restored by his Messianic reign, 
for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done 
on earth as in heaven." 

As for the "goat" class, we have already intimated that 
their punishment will consist of destruction in fire, or destruction 
everlasting, the Second Death— the destruction 
which God has already determined for Satan and all who 
are his messengers and servants, after the manner of 
this goat class— because, with all the favorable opportunities, 
they failed to develop such characters as God 
could reward with life everlasting. The contrast is emphasized 
in the last verse of the study. These (the goat 
class) shall go away into eternal punishment; but the 
righteous, the sheep class, into eternal life. The contrast 
is perfect. The one gets life to all eternity. The other 
gets the specified punishment of destruction to all eternity. 
The Greek word here translated punishment is 
kolasin, which signifies restraint, cutting off— in this case 
cutting off from life— Second Death. "The wages (punishment) 
of sin is death." 

Some one has well said:— 
"Sow a thought and you reap an act; 
Sow an act and you reap a habit; 
Sow a habit and you reap a character; 
Sow a character and you reap a destiny." 

The Divine intention as respects the salvation of this 
Gospel Age and the salvation of the world during the 
coming Age is that only such as develop the God-like 
character shall be permitted to enjoy Divine favor to all 
eternity. God has determined that the time shall come 
when there shall be no more sighing, no more crying, no 
more dying; but instead, every creature in heaven and in 
earth and under the earth shall be heard praising God and 
the Lamb. 



R4694: page 315 

THE MARK OF PERFECT LOVE 

Oh Lord, we thank thee thou hast set 

A Mark of perfect love 
Which we must reach ere we can win 

Approval from above. 

For, in the reaching of that Mark, 

Our characters are built, 
Which thou requirest of all those 

Whom Christ has freed from guilt. 

We consecrate to follow him 

Along the "narrow way"; 
And so we strive to overcome, 

And grow, from day to day. 

And "perfect love"— what does it mean? 

Must we attain thereto? 
And actually love, and perfectly, 

Our God and brother true? 

E'en so, we actually must love 

Our Father, first and best, 
And love our "Elder Brother," as 

In him we find true rest. 

And then our enemies we love; 

We seek to do them good! 
We ever try to render them 

The services we should. 

Ah yes, 'tis actual, perfect love 

We truly must attain; 
But, oh, how often do we fail! 

And failure gives us pain— 

Because this creature of pure love 

In sin-racked body lives; 
But, praise his name, our Advocate 

His loving service gives. 

So, perfect will and perfect love 
Are handicapped till we 

In his own likeness shall awake- 
Like him for e'er to be! F. A. R. 



R4695 : page 315 

THIS LOOKS REASONABLE 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



WHILE reading the article in May 1 TOWER, 

entitled "The Binding of the Strong Man," 

certain further conclusions presented themselves 

to my mind; but they were of such a 

startling character that I have refrained 

from mentioning them to a single soul, as 

I would not for all the world wish to promulgate 

an idea that had any measure of 

error in it. However, the more I have 

thought over it the more has it impressed 

me as correct. It is herewith submitted for your consideration. 

If you can discern anything unscriptural in it 

I shall drop the matter altogether, as it is far better to 

suppress a questionable truth than run the risk of propagating 

a possible error. 

The Lord has permitted the Church in these last times 
to be blessed with such an abundance that it makes us 
tremble lest we might be instrumental in the circulation 
of some one of the many forms of unscriptural teaching, 
thus assisting in marring in our own mind, and in the 
minds of others, the beautiful harmony of the Divine 
Plan. How the Truth has made us love our Lord, 
and how grievous it would be if we were to find that in 
any way we have encouraged that which did not properly 
represent him ! 

The article referred to suggests the thought that just 
as there is a Christ company, the Church, the Body of 
Christ, and then an individual Christ, who is the Head 
of the Body, even Jesus, so likewise there is a Satanic 
company, a System over which the Devil is head, as 
well as the individual Satan, Beelzebub, the "Chief of 
Devils." 

In that article you remind us that during the last 
thirty-five years there has been considerable evidence that 
a work of restraint has been going on in this great "system 
of which Satan has stood as the representative or 
head." You there point out how much evidence we have 
of the gradual binding of this system of things in the 
Prohibition movement, and we saw how the light along 
all lines was the agency being used of the Lord in the 
accomplishment of this binding or restraining of some 

R4695 : page 316 

of the things connected with the evil system. However, 
you made it plain that you did not refer to the binding of 
the individual Devil, but to the binding of the satanic 
organization. 

But right here I thought of the words of our Lord 
in Matthew 12:29, to which your article also refers, 
"How can one enter into a strong man's house and spoil 
his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then 
he will spoil his house." According to this, if the Lord 
were to bind the Strong Man, Satan, before he began to 
spoil his house, and if we see reason to believe that the 
house is being spoiled already, then must we not conclude 



that the personal Devil has been bound for some 
time? May it not be that part of the work accomplished 
by our invisibly present Master between 1874 and 1878 
was the binding of the Wicked One? One of our Lord's 
first experiences after his baptism 1 800 years ago was 
with Satan, and how likely that one of his first experiences 
at his second coming would be with the same Adversary! 

If the question is asked, Where, then, if Satan is now 
bound, do all our temptations come from? I answer, 
from the fallen spirits who were once under the control 
of Satan. For some cause, possibly the fact that he had 
been a being of a higher order than they, Lucifer appears 
to have had power over the other angels that had 
fallen, which they could not successfully resist; so if 
they were ever to be brought back into harmony with 
God it would be necessary for them to be set free from 
the bondage they were in to their leader, Satan. 

In Hebrews 1:6, we find that all the other translations 
give quite a different thought from that in the King 
James translation; even the margin of the authorized 
version gives the correct thought. The Revised Version 
says, "And when he again bringeth in the First-Born 
into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God 
worship him." This would, to my mind, seem to imply 
that when our Lord would come into the world the second 
time, one of the things he purposes is to give the 
fallen angels a chance to prove whether they are willing 
to become angels of God once more, and one of the ways 
whereby they might demonstrate that they are sick and 
tired of the service of the Devil is to acknowledge the 
authority of the One who has now returned to be King 
of earth, by worshipping and obeying him. On the contrary, 
those of them who would continue in sympathy 
with the evil principles of their wicked master, would 
simply use the increased liberty that would come to them 
through the binding of Satan, to introduce new forms 
of wickedness. 

During the ages in which they served Satan, no doubt 
many wicked ideas apart from their leader occurred to 
them, but as he had his own idea of how his kingdom 
should be run, they were not allowed to have their own 
way. But now Satan's restraint has given them the occasion 
wished for, and would account for the great diversity 
of spiritualistic phenomena, compared with that of 
former times. 

I cannot see how the fallen angels could have a fair 
trial as long as Satan was at liberty to coerce them to do 
his bidding, as seems to have been the case in the past. 

If Satan is now bound, it would also teach another 
lesson: Many have the idea that in order to bring all 
the iniquity in the world to an end, it is merely necessary 
to bind the great Author of Sin, when things would 
naturally readjust themselves in harmony with the will 
of God. But the fact that after the binding of the Evil 
One things would in some respects be even worse than 
they were before, resulting in the worst time of trouble 



that had ever been, would prove to all the universe that 
sin is not merely such an awful thing because Satan was 
here to direct things, but that the real cause of the trouble 
was sin, whether there was an archangel behind it, or 
one of the lower order of angels, or simply a man; that 
sin is the terror, with Satan or without him; that sin is 
the cursed thing. 

The last point to be mentioned is this: If Satan was 
bound about 1874, and if the period of his restraint is 
also to be a thousand years, he would be due to be set at 
liberty about 2874. On the other hand, a thousand years 
from 1915, when the world will have been fully turned 
over to Christ, will bring us to 2915, when the world will 
have been fully turned over to the Father. This would 
allow a period of about forty years as the "little season" 
when Satan is to bring upon the world the great and 
final test. But if the binding of Satan is to be reckoned 
from 1915 it would be difficult to see where the little 
season, "when the thousand years were finished," would 
come in. From this standpoint these various Scriptures 
would be equally applicable to the individual Satan, and 
also to the satanic system. 

Now, dear Brother, if you have anything that even 
half-way looks like proof that I am wrong in these suggestions, 
I think it would be better for me to drop it altogether, 
as far as presenting these things to others is concerned, 
as we cannot afford to risk stumbling our brethren 
with a doubtful interpretation. 

Praying the Lord's continued direction in all your affairs, 
as you seek to pour out the little strength and time 
that remain to you, in the service of the Lord of the 
Harvest, I remain, 

Your Brother and servant in the cause which seeks the 
Glory of our Lord, BENJ. H. BARTON. 



R4696 : page 316 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
MOSES AND THE LAW COVENANT 

Question.— Was Moses out from under Adamic 
Condemnation? 

Answer.— If he was a member of the Jewish nation 
then he was in this special covenant-relationship with God. 
Adam, when he sinned, lost his covenant standing with 
God and was sentenced to death. God made a new arrangement 
with the Seed of Abraham, that he would enter 
into a Covenant with them as though they were perfect; 
and to this end Moses became their mediator. We have 
every reason to suppose that Moses was also a participator 
in the arrangement as well as being the mediator of 
it. So we suppose that Moses was under the Law the 
same as were his successors, and this Covenant, by its 



arrangement year by year continually, not only put them, 

at the first, in this condition of typical justification or 

covenant-relationship with God, but it gave them a whole 

year of that favorable condition; and only at the end of 

the year, when the period for which the sacrifice had been 

offered had lapsed, were they no longer in covenant-relationship 

with God. Then they put on sackcloth and ashes 

and, like the remainder of the world, they were sinners, 

under condemnation, but under more condemnation than 

the rest of the world because they had the additional 

condemnation of the Law. 

We understand, then, that if Moses could have kept 
the Law under that Covenant, God would have been 
bound to give him eternal life according to the promise— 

R4696 : page 317 

"He that doeth these things shall live by them." God did 
not say anything about Christ or believing in Christ or 
anything of that kind; merely, he that doeth these things 
shall have eternal life by doing them. And so we think 
that this promise applied to Moses and all the Israelites 
under the Law, and still applies to the Jews. And we believe 
God would give eternal life to anyone who could do 
those things perfectly, but this offer was made only to 
the Jews. They were out from Adamic condemnation 
in that tentative sense; not that they had escaped, for 
since they still bore unchanged the same imperfections as 
the remainder of the children of Adam, they could not 
do what they wished to do; as the Apostle says, "We 
cannot do the things that we would." So they had a 
condemnation as a people which other nations did not 
have. Adam, individually, had been sentenced to death. 
His children did not have, individually, that condemnation. 
They were born in "prison"— in this death condition. 
But in the case of the Jews, God treated them as though 
they had been separated from the remainder of the world. 

It was as if they had said, "We did not do anything 
wrong, Lord; why do you not give us a chance?" 

"I will give you a chance; I will give you my Law 
to keep." 

"What will you give us if we keep your Law 
perfectly?" 

"I will give you eternal life." 

"We will keep it. We agree to keep your Law, and 
you agree to give us life." So, then, these children of 
Adam, the Jews, who, like the rest of the world, were 
not on individual trial previously, and had not, therefore, 
been sentenced as individuals, but were merely sharing the 
effect of Adam's condemnation— all these Jews were now 
put on trial for life, and when they failed it meant a 
special penalty upon them, because they now had an individual 
trial and failed. Therefore, we see that it was 
necessary that the Jew, under this second condemnation, 
or this individual trial and individual condemnation, 
should all be under Moses as the Mediator, so that Christ 



could take the place of this Mediator and effect something 
for that nation. Moses was merely typical of the 
better Mediator. Therefore, since they were in that 
Mediator, who was only a type of Christ, God was merely 
showing to them in a typical way what he will do for 
them by and by, when Christ will be Mediator of their 
New (Law) Covenant.— Jer. 31:31. 



JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH 

Question.— Will any of the Gentiles be justified by 
faith during the Millennial Age? 

Answer.— We understand that justification by faith 
applies to the present age and to our salvation— the 
Church's salvation— which is called "salvation by faith" 
in contradistinction to the salvation that was offered to 
the Jews in their Age, the salvation by works, under the 
Law Covenant, and also in contrast with the salvation 
that will be offered to the Jews and to the world in the 
next Age, which will be a salvation by works under the 
New (Law) Covenant. In other words, this Gospel Age 
is the only Age in which faith takes the place of perfection. 
It is true, of course, that no Jew could have been 
justified before God by keeping the Law Covenant unless 
he had believed in God; and it is equally true that no one 
will be justified under the New Covenant arrangement 
except he believe in God and is in harmony with the arrangements 
that will then be open to all. However, this 
will not make it a faith-salvation, a salvation by faith, 
but a salvation by works— the works of the Law. 

The works of the Law were unable to save the Jews 
during the Jewish dispensation because they could not 
keep the Law, and because there was no arrangement 
made through an efficient mediator to lift them up out 
of their degradation, but this arrangement has been made 
future for all Israel and all who will come in under this 
arrangement in the Millennial Age. They will be enabled 
to perform the works. They will be helped out of 
their degradation. So we read in Revelation that the sea 
will give up her dead, the grave will give up the dead 
that are in it, and that they shall all stand before the 
great white throne during the Millennial Age, and shall 
all be judged out of the things written in the book; 
according to their works shall they be judged, then. The 
distinctive statement made regarding us now is that it is 
not according to our works that we are judged, but according 
to our faith. So, then, there will be faith and 
works in the Millennial Age, and there are faith and 
works in this Gospel Age; but the faith of the Millennial 
Age will be less meritorious in proportion because everything 
will be very plain and easy to believe, and hence it 
will not be the faith that will be specially rewarded then, 
but the works. In this Age faith takes the most important 
place, and we are not rewarded according to our 



works, for we have none to reward. But it is the faith 
that will be rewarded. 

Faith and works apply to both ages, but in the one 
age it is the faith that is rewarded, and in the other the 
works will be rewarded. In the one, faith is the standard 
or test of whether one is worthy or unworthy and 
in the other works will be the standard or test of whether 
one is worthy or unworthy of eternal life. 

Galatians 3:8 seems very particularly to show that the 
reference is to the Gentiles who are justified through 
faith and not by works; hence, we understand that this 
text applies to the Gospel Age in the sense that God foresaw 
that during this Gospel Age he would justify certain 
of the Gentiles through faith, just as he intended also to 
justify some of the Jews through faith. The Gentiles 
never were under the Law of works, but are accepted 
under the Gospel arrangement, by faith. 



HOW TO DETERMINE THE LORD'S WILL 

Question.— Suppose some one has in mind an undertaking 
which he believes is of the Lord's leading, and yet 
others who are as consecrated to the Lord as himself, 
seem to think it may not be of the Lord's leading, is 
there any way whereby he can assure himself that he is 
right? 

Answer.— We think that it is a good rule, when one is 
uncertain as to what is the right course, to simply stand 
still and wait, if the matter can be dealt with in that way. 
But if it is a matter that cannot be delayed but must be 
determined at once, it would not do to stand still; but it 
would be well in many instances to merely stand and 
wait. 

For instance, a gentleman asked us as to whether he 
should build a house or not. We were not hasty in giving 
him advice, and he urged us to tell him our thought. 
After he had told us all the conditions, we advised him 
not to build, and gave our reasons. We did not attempt to 
urge our views upon him at all, but left them there. It 
is well for us to remember not to give too much concern 
about things that are not in our hands to decide; we 
would thus save ourselves a deal of trouble. In everything, 
however, that is in our hands to decide, we should 
use a great deal of care and judgment and try to find out 
the Lord's will in the matter. 

In the case of people having different opinions about 

R4696 : page 318 

things, we think it well for one, if the responsibility rests 
with him, to hear what others may have to say and then 
consider the matter with as much wisdom and judgment 
as possible, and proceed to act according to his best 
judgment, taking into consideration the reasons advanced 



by his friends, bearing in mind, however, that the 
responsibility of decision is with himself. 



FAITH THE GIFT OF GOD 

Question.— Is faith the gift of God? 

Answer.— "By grace are ye saved through faith, and 
that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God." The Apostle 
seems to intimate that grace is God's favor; in fact, 
the word "grace" has the signification of gift, or that 
which is favor. Our salvation is of Divine favor— not of 
any necessity on God's part, not because Justice required 
it, not because anyone could have demanded it from him, 
but it is his own merciful, gracious provision, and this 
salvation in our case is through faith. And the faith is 
not of ourselves, as a matter of course. Hence we think 
that when the Apostle says "it is not of ourselves," he 
must refer to faith. However, faith, in a very important 
sense, is of the individual; we are urged to "have faith 
unto God." One cannot have faith for another. The individual 
must exercise his own faith in God; and yet in 
this text we are told that our faith is of God. 

R4697 : page 318 

In what sense could this be of God? We answer 
that it is of God in the sense that every good and every 
perfect gift comes down from the Father. Our faith 
must have a foundation, must have a basis. We must 
have knowledge of a matter in order to have faith in it. 
We have knowledge of God, and this knowledge which is 
granted us as a grace or favor brings us to the place 
where we are enabled to exercise the faith. The faith in 
a great measure rests upon the knowledge. The knowledge 
shows us God's character; the Divine Revelation 
makes known to us certain facts respecting God's purposes, 
and we see the purposes thus outlined to be in 
harmony with the character of God, and this enables one 
to believe the promises; and believing them, we are enabled 
to act upon them; and this is faith. 

So, then, our faith, while it is of ourselves in the sense 
that we must exercise it, is of God in the sense that he 
supplies the necessary elements from which that faith 
is to be compounded. 



IS THE CHURCH A ROYAL PRIESTHOOD NOW? 

Question.— Is the Church in the flesh a royal 
priesthood? 

Answer.— We recognize that we are not a royal priesthood, 
in the full sense of the word, yet, because we are not 
yet certain that we shall be in the priesthood finally. We 



must first make our calling and election sure. 

It will have to be determined whether we shall be in 
the "Little Flock" or "Great Company"— whether Priests 
or Levites— or whether we shall be worthy of life at all. 
Since this matter, then, is in process of determination and 
will not be fully settled until our death, it follows that 
we are not in the fullest sense of the word officiating 
priests, but candidates for this priesthood, and temporarily 
acknowledged as priests and counted as priests- 
just as some time you might meet a gentleman who had 
been nominated for Governor. By way of compliment 
you might say, "Good morning, Governor." He is not 
really a Governor yet. That will be determined by the 
election, but before he is elected it might be proper or 
courteous to call him Governor. And so with us. We 
hope we shall make our calling and election sure; that we 
shall be of that royal priesthood in the fullest sense, and 
in one sense we are now members in the Body, in that we 
have already received a begetting of the Spirit, acknowledgment 
of the Lord as ambassadors of God. This is an 
acknowledgment in one sense of the word of our priestly 
office, for these priests are "ambassadors," and to whatever 
extent we are conducting ourselves as ambassadors 
of God, to that extent we are priests of God— of the probationary 
kind, and not fully of the Melchisedec kind, 
which we shall be when our change shall come and we 
shall be like our Lord. 



page 318 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
QUARTERLY REPORTS DESIRED 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We take this opportunity of advising you of the progress of 
the evangelistic services the Cleveland, O., class is engaged in. 

We have held four meetings in Chardon; the first had an 
attendance of thirty, and this with opposition from a political 
meeting held in the church; the number at our service exceeded 
the church service. The next Sunday there were 
thirty persons present again, the third Sunday fifteen, and the 
fourth Sunday ten. An immense amount of literature was 
taken, and the ten seemed to be interested enough to form 
a class. They are now reading the first volume. It was 
thought advisable that they thus continue for a short time, 
when organization will be taken into consideration. 

Upon receipt of a letter in a roundabout way from Lorain, 
twelve consecrated children of God who had left the Salvation 
Army, because of methods of which they could not approve, 
were formed into a class, and are meeting regularly 
every Sunday. Some sixteen volumes having been purchased 
since their first meeting. We are furnishing a leader every 
Sunday. 



On July 24 we held a public meeting in Clyde, O., at 
the direction of the Bellevue Ecclesia, where about fifty were 
present. The Bellevue friends have been very zealous this 
summer, and no doubt their efforts are showing some fruit. 
We have in view two or three one-day meetings, after which 
we again purpose holding three or four meetings in towns 
where the expenditures will justify the efforts. 

We would appreciate any suggestions from you that you 
might see fit to make. We are anxious for all the service that 
we can undertake. 

Yours in Service, 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS OF CLEVELAND. 

IN REPLY 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I accept the above as a Quarterly Report. It is excellent. 
The classes which have a surplus of energy and talent surely 
do well to employ it thus in nearby places. May the Lord's 
blessing continue richly with you as a class and individually, 
and upon your labors in the "harvest" field. 

I take this opportunity to request Quarterly Reports from 
all the classes which have elected me their Pastor. To fulfil 
the pastoral office I must look specially after the interests of 
these classes— even though I know not how I can really do 
more for them than I now endeavor to do for all. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I feel impelled to write you a word of encouragement and 
endorsement. In WATCH TOWER issue of Sept. 15 there is 
an article captioned, "Is the reading of SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Bible study?" which I read with great pleasure; and in it I 
note your defense of the Bible and your humility and meekness. 
My answer to the question would be "Yes, the reading 
of SCRIPTURE STUDIES is Bible study, for who of us ever understood 
the Old or New Testament till we, by God's goodness, 
through your loving, zealous and Christlike effort, came 
in contact with these STUDIES?" 

Those of us who were trained for the ministry studied 
everything and anything but the Bible. What some of us did, 
at best, was to memorize as much of the good Book as we 
could, but neither bishops, nor D.D.'s, nor B.D.'s, nor any 
other understood the Book, and consequently could not help 
the weaker ones. 

You have spoken the truth; for I remember when I served 
"Ism," I honestly came to the conclusion that I was unfit to be 
in that position as a teacher of God's Word when I was practically 

page 319 

unable to give a clear, definite and reasonable answer 
to one of the members of the congregation who asked a 
Biblical question; and in substance I said, "I will stop any 
endeavor to teach others until I know what I believe, what 



to teach and how to teach it." And it was not many days after 
this decision that our Father apprehended me through these 
STUDIES, and I apprehended his Truth. 

God bless you! War a good warfare, be courageous and 
may the blessings in Numbers 6:24-26 be yours until the end 
of your pilgrimage. 

I am yours fraternally, J. J. HARRIS. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

By an oversight, or rather by a misunderstanding as to 
who should send in the request for Pilgrim service, we have 
not been having the calls we expected, and did not know 
where the trouble was till your letter to us of Sept. 3. Then 
we found that one Brother who was to send in the request 
did not so understand it, and this we learned when the class 
met. Most assuredly we want a Pilgrim Brother every time 
we can get him, and we want you to plan for us a two-days' 
visit also each time. This we have always had, and want the 
same if you can let us have so much of service without in 
any way taking service from some other class. We shall 
gladly have Brother Hall with us. He was with us on one 
other occasion for two days, and we greatly enjoyed his visit. 
Our class is growing in the knowledge of the Truth daily, 
and we want every help we can get. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, CHAS. BOAZ, M.D. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings from the Church at Lancaster to you, our beloved 
Pastor, through whom the Lord has called and made 
us to sit down at his table and through whom he has served 
us with "meat in due season." 

We rejoice with you in the increased light that is shining 
so brightly on the various features of the Divine Plan (the 
sin-offering, the covenants, etc.). We have been led and fed, 
nourished and cherished of the Lord by the precious truths 
which he has brought to us through you, his servant, until 
we are caused to exclaim with Brother Paul, "Oh the depth 
of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God,... 
for who hath known the mind of the Lord or who has been his 
counsellor?" 

We also recognize with you the evil day in which we are 
living and the increased powers of evil in various directions, 
and herewith send the names of those who have sufficiently 
realized this to make the Vow their own unto the 
Lord. And as was suggested by you, that all the names of 
those in the Lancaster class who have taken the Vow be sent 
to you together, we take this opportunity to do so. Those 
having previously sent in their names are listed separately. 

We earnestly request to be remembered at the throne of 
heavenly grace that we might faithfully keep both the spirit 
and the letter of the Vow until we are all brought face to 
face with him who died for us and bought us with his own 



precious blood. 
Yours in the love and service of our King, 

SIGNED BY FORTY-FIVE. 

IN REPLY 

BELOVED IN THE LORD:- 

I acknowledge your letter of the 16th inst, and assure 
you that its words of love and fellowship in our dear Lord 
are highly appreciated and fully reciprocated. 

I am also refreshed through this token of your confidence, 
prizing the approval of the fellow-members in the Body 
next to that of the gracious heavenly Father and our dear 
Lord himself. 

I note, with gratification, that so many of the Lancaster 
Class have, in acknowledgment of all the benefits which they 
have received from the Lord, paid their vows to him in the 
presence of all the people. It is surely strengthening to note 
the names of the twenty-five friends who have more recently 
paid their vows to the Lord, in addition to the twenty who 
did so earlier and who previously notified us. 

May each of us be more and more diligent to hold our 
"Head" purely; that we may grow more and more into him 
and at his revelation be given a seat with him on his throne. 



page 319 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study III. -The Call of The New Creation. 
NOVEMBER 6 

(25) Would it be consistent with the Heavenly Father's 
character of Justice and Love to extend a single invitation 
which could not be made good, if accepted? P. 94, par. 2. 

(26) At what time did the general call cease? P. 95, par. 1. 

(27) Did the ceasing of the "call" signify the end of all 
opportunity for admittance into joint-heirship with Christ? 
P. 95, par. 1. 

(28) What evidences may be considered as good proof of 
having been accepted of the Lord as prospective heirs with 
Jesus Christ by those who have consecrated since 1881? P. 96. 

(29) How does God call the New Creation? In what 
sense is Christ our Wisdom? What is the value of Wisdom 
in general? P. 96, par. 1. 

(30) Is our natural Wisdom sufficient for us as New 
Creatures? P. 97, par. 1. 

(31) What conditions are essential in order to have a 
hearing ear for the "Wisdom from above?" P. 97, par. 2. 

(32) What important facts must be grasped, and how is 
Christ made our Wisdom before we can be justified? P. 98, 
2d to 18th lines. 



NOVEMBER 13 

(33) Does Christ cease to be our Wisdom at the time of 
our Justification? P. 98, 18th line to end of par. 

(34) Explain the orderly operation of this "Wisdom from 
above." P. 98, par. 1. 

(35) How is Gentleness manifested in this heavenly Wisdom? 
P. 99, par. 1. 

(36) Explain the relationship of mercy and good fruits 
to "the Wisdom from above." P. 99, par. 2. 

(37) How is heavenly Wisdom "without partiality?" 
P. 100, par. 1. 

(38) Why is this Wisdom "without hypocrisy?" P. 100, 
par. 2. 

(39) How has God given us this heavenly Wisdom 
through his Son and the Members of his Body? P. 100, par. 3. 

NOVEMBER 20 

(40) If Christ is our "Justification," what are the primary 
thoughts contained in the word Justification? Give an illustration. 
P. 101, top. 

(41) Apply this illustration to mankind. P. 101. 

(42) Since we as a race are all imperfect, and none can 
meet the requirements for himself or "his brother," explain 
how God has purposed to accept and deal with these unjust, 
imperfect beings in general. P. 102. 

(43) Explain the "Justification by faith" provided for the 
New Creation. P. 102, par. 1. See also W.T.'10-85-88. 

(44) How long does this reckoned or faith-Justification 
hold good? P. 103, par. 1. W .1710-87, 1st col. 

(45) Is Christ the cause or ground of our Justification? 

If so, explain in detail the prevalent confusion respecting the 
ground or basis of our Justification, giving Scriptural quotations. 
P. 104, par. 1. 

(46) How may we harmonize these apparently conflicting 
statements? P. 105, par. 1. 

(47) Explain how we are "Justified by God's grace." 
P. 105, par. 2. 

(48) How are we Justified by Christ's blood? P. 105, par. 3. 

NOVEMBER 27 

(49) Why was the resurrection of Jesus Christ necessary 
to our Justification? P. 106, par. 1. 

(50) How is the Church justified by faith? P. 106, par. 2. 
W.1.'10-86,87. 

(51) Explain the difference between the faith necessary 
to vitalized Justification of the Church, and that which will 

be required of the world for actual Justification, in the Millennial 
Age. P. 106, par. 3. 

(52) What is the difference between our relationship to 
God through reckoned Justification and that of the world in 
the next age through actual Justification? P. 107, par. 1. 
W.1,'10-92, 2d col. 

(53) What is the object in granting this reckoned Justification 



to the Church in the present time? P. 108, par. 1. 

(54) What do works have to do with our Justification, 
and are we judged according to our works? P. 108, par. 2. 

(55) Give an illustration of the general operation of Justification 
by grace, by the blood, and through our faith, and 

the relation of works to the same. P. 109, par. 1. 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI OCTOBER 15 No. 20 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 323 

Prepare War! Wake Up the Mighty Men! 323 

Decline of Non-Conformists in Britain 324 

New Church Union Movement 325 

The Heavens Rolling Together 325 

A Catholic Church Prop 326 

Abraham Lincoln's Confession of Faith 326 

Higher Criticism Influence Appalling 327 

Cumbered With Much Serving (Poem) 327 

Pastor Russell Addressing Enthusiastic 

Jewish Mass Meeting at Hippodrome 328 

"Wilt Thou That We Command Fire?" 330 

"A Savior and a Great One" 330 

Told for a Memorial of Her 331 

"She Hath Done What She Could" 331 

"The Poor Always With You" 331 

"This Do in Remembrance of Me" 332 

Israel's First-Borns Passed Over 332 

God's Estimation Different From World's 333 

Some Interesting Letters 334 

page 322 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 



FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



LONDON, ENGLAND, OCT. 23, 30, NOV. 6 



CLEVELAND, OHIO, NOV. 20 
OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLA., NOV. 27 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., DEC. 4 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 

Some confusion seems to prevail amongst the dear friends 
in respect to the proper manner of using the above mentioned 
title, owing to the fact that mistaken advertisements, signs 
and letter-heads do not read properly, but are misleading. The 
I.B.S. Association is here at Brooklyn— a regularly organized 
Association. We suggest that letter-heads, etc., used elsewhere 
read somewhat as follows:— 

PHILADELPHIA CLASS 
OF THE 
INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 



HEART BOOK-MARKS 



Hereafter regular Colporteurs (working on assignments of 
territory and making regular reports with lists of names of 
purchasers of STUDIES) will be supplied free on request, one of 
the wonderful book-marks for each set of STUDIES of three 
or more volumes. In other words, they may order one heart 
for each copy of Vol. III. These are proving to be great aids 
in the sale of the STUDIES. 

PALESTINE REMEMBRANCERS OF OLIVEWOOD 

When in Palestine we thought of THE WATCH TOWER 
readers everywhere and surmised that they might like to have 
some little remembrancer of our visit. Accordingly we placed 
an order for a sufficient number of olive wood articles to 
supply an estimated demand. These have only now arrived. 
The articles are paper-knives, paper-weights and pin-cushions, 
the latter made of two thin pieces of olive wood a little larger 
than a silver dollar, with velvet cushion between for pins and 
needles. The wood is cut crosswise of the tree and is polished. 

It would especially please us to send these out to the 
different friends without money and without price, but we 
cannot afford to do this. We can, however, supply these at a 
very low price, 7c each, including postage or expressage. 

Wherever possible we advise that the friends bunch their 
orders; but we are prepared to send them out as they may 
be pleased to order them— even singly. State what you prefer 
and give your address very plainly. Order at once, before 
the Christmas rush. Those receiving THE WATCH TOWER on 
the Lord's Poor List may have one of these souvenirs without 
charge, upon request. 



THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE 

Those of the friends who are using the Bibles containing 
our special Berean Helps write us that they are in love with 
them more and more as the days go by and they learn their 
usefulness. Some, however, forget what a valuable assistance 
to Bible study they have close at hand, with comments or 
other information on the major portion of God's Word and 
references to SCRIPTURE-STUDIES, TOWERS, etc. 

We have these in two different styles and five different 
grades— the cheapest as low as $1.65, the very best and most 
complete at $3.50. They will be described in the next issue. 



BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS IN GERMAN 

The sermons are now published regularly in a German 
newspaper. Order it through THE WATCH TOWER office and 
get the advantage of our clubbing rate— $1 per year; $1.50 to 
Canada and foreign addresses. 



LITERATURE FOR HEBREWS 

We have obtained a supply of a newspaper published in the 
Yiddish language, which our readers are welcome to have for 
use amongst their Hebrew friends. Its contents are Zionistic. 
It is composed largely of quotations from Brother Russell's 
writings and sermons. We have already arranged to supply 
some of the larger cities, but still have some for the smaller 
places. Order no more than you can and will use judiciously. 



R4697 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

"PREPARE WAR! WAKE UP THE MIGHTY MEN!" 

WHILE peace conferences are being held and 

while disarmaments are being considered, 

preparation for war goes steadily on. Germany 

is fortifying her islands nearest to 

Great Britain, and is now demanding that 

Holland shall likewise fortify her seacoast. 

The apparent motive behind this interest in 

Holland's fortification is that Germany proposes 

at no distant day to make Holland a 

part of the German Empire, and would like 

to have it fortified in advance. This would bring Germany 

within a few hours' sail of British ports. The British believe 

that it is the intention that they shall be invaded 

and conquered and made a German Province. Undoubtedly 

both Holland and Belgium would be parts of Germany 

today were it not for Great Britain, which protects 

these nations as a barrier between her and Germany's 

army. A panicky feeling prevails in Great Britain. We 

make an extract from the Naval and Military Record, the 

writer being a secretary of the National Service League. 

We quote as follows:— 

"We want a million men with six months' training 
now, and after that another million in reserve, and these 
must be intact when all our regulars have left our shores. 
Without them we can neither fight by land nor sea. It is 
evident to all but to our ill-informed and apathetic people, 
that our supremacy at sea is slipping from our grasp, and 
our rivals feverishly prepare to dictate terms when we are 
least expecting war. 

"We must be prepared to send 500,000 of our finest 
manhood and maintain that force abroad if we would 
save our interests and keep our friends in Europe. By 
1915 Germany will have her ports and naval arsenals, her 
wharves and jetties and her fleet and transports ready, 
and when ready she may strike like lightning. Then, not 
far from Waterloo, must come the clash of nations fighting 



for their very life. 

"Round Holland and Belgium the nets are drawing 
closer every day. We already harbor a million of the 
enemy within the gate. Our politicians mostly lie, or dare 
not speak the truth. Disaster stares us in the face. At 
the outbreak of war our food supplies will fail, and prices 
will be far beyond the pockets of the poor. Employment, 
then, will cease, and starving millions will demand 
surrender." 

THE METHODISM OF WESLEY VANISHING 

"For the fourth year in succession the Wesleyan 
Methodist Church reports a decrease in membership, 
running into thousands each year. Thousands of 'pious 
persons' are on the books, some paying to the support 
of the church, and some not. In course of 
time many of these paper members, having no living 
interest in the church, drift away, and are then classed 
amongst those who have 'ceased to meet,' though they 
never have met in their lives. 

"Many others are still retained on the books long 
after the 'ceased-to-meet' period, the explanation often 
being given that the minister will not take the responsibility 
of 'unchurching' them. A time at length 
comes when the thing has grown to be such a palpable 
farce that something must be done. Besides, chapels 
and churches are assessed in their payments on the 
numbers on the class books, and grumblings begin to be 
heard from those who have to find the wherewithal. A 
drastic pruning then takes place, and decreases are reported. 
Those who maintain that numbers mean nothing 
pooh-pooh the returns. 'Things are just as they 
were,' they say; 'but honesty for the moment has 
prevailed.' 

NUMBERS UNRELIABLE 

"There is truth in this view of things, but not the 
whole truth. The plain fact is that the numbers reported 
are never wholly reliable. There are thousands 
of others on the class books whom the ministers know 
right well are not genuine members, but whom they 
are afraid to strike off because of the trouble their action 
might bring on them at the conferences. No church likes 
to see its membership declining, and any tendency that 
way is keenly questioned. Only recently the writer sat 
in a meeting called for the purpose of 'pruning' where 
many worthless names were allowed to pass muster 
through that unwholesome fear. Some little time ago 
the writer was shown two membership tickets written by 
the minister for two people who had been dead a considerable 
time, and another for a person who had removed 
from the neighborhood. 

"It is maintained by many loyal Methodists that a 
true and faithful record of membership would prove that 



the Wesleyan Methodist Church is far more seriously 
declining than the returns to be discussed in the conferences 
show. 

R4697 : page 324 

"The causes of the decline are not far to seek. The 
old Methodism of John Wesley is rapidly vanishing, or, 
where it still lingers, is tabooed by the upper circles of 
the church. Not only that, but scores of the very men 
who are paid to maintain it are constantly declaring 
that the Methodism of John Wesley has had its day, and 
that it is not respectable enough for the age in which we 
live. 

DECLINE IN PREACHING 

"The preaching in the Methodist pulpits is another 
cause of the decline. There may be more scholarly men 
in the pulpits than formerly, but the impassioned note 
in the preaching common amongst the early Methodists, 
has almost clean gone out of the sermon. And this is 
acknowledged by many ministers themselves, but, in explanation, 
they will tell you that we are living today in 
a time of changing creeds, and that the most careful 
language has to be employed in dealing with certain 
great themes. The truth, however, is that scores of 
ministers hardly know what they believe, and, therefore, 
it is not likely that they can grow impassioned over 
something of which they have only a very hazy idea. 

"I do not know whether they are right or not. I am 
a layman, and not an expert in theology, but the men in 
the pulpit who have thrown over the old views of the 
atonement, the resurrection and other great tenets which 
Methodists used to believe with all their strength cannot 
expect to fill churches with the dry husks which they 
offer their congregations instead."— London Dispatch. 



DECLINE OF NON-CONFORMISTS IN GREAT BRITAIN 

Reports in Great Britain show that Baptists, Congregationalists 
and the various Methodist denominations 
there are declining in numbers and prestige. The cause 
of this is not far to see. Gradually the common people 
are losing their sectarian spirit. Those once told directly 
or by implication that the members of their sect 

R4698 : page 324 

alone would escape eternal torment and attain heavenly 
bliss have outgrown such teachings. As a result all now 
teach that one denomination is practically as good as 
another in the Lord's sight and equally sure of heaven. 
And the general sympathy and mental breadth of all 



Christians have increased to the degree that preachers 
are expected at funeral services to make the heavenly 
portals broad for all— the white and black, ring-streaked 
and speckled sheep of every kind and name and to have 
a large corner for those who have made no profession, 
but have lived ungodly lives to the very end. For the 
latter the hope is expressed that they may have said a 
prayer before drawing their last breath. 

By common consent neither people of civilized lands 
nor people of heathen lands are now going to the hell 
of torment which our fathers proclaimed and believed. 
The only ones being roasted there are such as went at 
least more than thirty years or more ago. 

As a result Christianity and Church fellowship and 
saintliness stand for nothing. Christianity has become 
merely another name for decency and civilization. All 
doctrines are abandoned as merely speculations. Churches 
are becoming merely social clubs in which form and ceremony 
mark the quality. Consequently the masses are 
inclined to attend worship, either to hear an entertaining 
lecture or to hear beautiful music by a trained and well-paid 
choir or for a ceremonial religion with plenty of 
show and movement. This accounts for the growing unpopularity 
of those sects which once stood for the highest 
standards of earnestness and Christian zeal and liberty, 
non-conformity and simplicity. 

The Methodist Church in the United States is very 
different from all the various smaller Methodist bodies 
of Great Britain. The Episcopal feature in it constitutes 
its clergy a great hierarchy with a vast influence. It is 
a masterpiece of organization in which the smallest 
teacher or lay preacher is attached to the one above him, 
in order to hold his own position. And the ordinary 
minister is attached to his presiding Elder. And the 
presiding Elders are attached to their Bishops. Its 
management, its system, its watch-care over every interest 
is second only to that of papacy— the masterpiece 
of all the organizations of the world. 

A LAMENTABLE DECLINE 

The Methodist Census again shows a decrease in 
membership, this time of 2,267, as compared with last 
year's decrease of 1,444; the total reduction in the past 
four years amounting to the startling total of 9,869. The 
fact that this falling-off represents but two per cent, of 
the entire body is of comparatively little moment in the 
face of the grave fact that, in spite of the huge and continued 
effort, instead of proportionate progress there has 
been a steady decline. The outlook is even more serious, 
for there is, as might be expected, a decline in the 
sources from which the members are chiefly drawn; 
thus, when the numbers "On trial for Membership" and 
of the "Junior Society Classes" are taken into account, 
"the total loss in all grades of membership for the four 
years is 23,996."— London Christian. 



CHURCH MEMBERSHIP DECLINING 

The figures presented to the annual meeting of the 
Baptist Union this week, showing a decrease of Church 
membership by 1,553, while there is an increase of some 
38 places of worship, are causing a good deal of heart-searching 
among the leaders of Nonconformity. There 
was also a decrease in the previous year. It is curious 
that while the facilities for worship increase, the number 
of adherents or recognized members decreases year by 
year.— Darlington (Eng.) Times. 

WHERE THE FAULT REALLY LIES 

Rev. H. C. Morrison, in a sermon preached at the 
Desplaines camp meeting, said:— 

"I am not afraid of the blatant infidelity of Tom Paine or 
of Voltaire or of Robert Ingersoll, but I am afraid of the 
infidelity that masquerades in clerical clothes and in the 
sanctuary. I believe that that infidel, Rev. Lyman Abbott, 
has done more evil than any other of his class in America," 
said the preacher. 

"The reason why the working men are rejecting the Bible 
and are no longer in fear of its warnings against sin, why the 
Ten Commandments are discounted and the church and the 
ministry are not respected as they once were, is because men 
like Lyman Abbott have so instilled doubt into the public 
mind as to the reliability of the Bible as the Word of God 
that the average person has lost faith in its commanding 
authority." 

We quite thoroughly agree that the infidelity of the 
colleges and seminaries and pulpits of today is much 
more injurious than that of Paine and Voltaire. But 
Brother Morrison in the quotation above discloses the 
fact that he does not understand the situation. The real 
fault lies back of his criticism— in the creeds of the dark 
ages which defamed the Divine character and, by foolish 
interpretations of the Bible, overthrew the faith of some 
of the noblest specimens of our race— turning them into 
Higher Critics. 

The real fault, therefore, lies in the doctrine of 
eternal torment, which is still held forth in all the Church 

R4698 : page 325 

creeds and outwardly, at least, endorsed by the Rev. Morrison 
and thousands of others of all denominations of 
Christendom. These false doctrines are turning the 
hearts of honest and logical ministers and other thinkers 
away from God, who has so long been misrepresented 
to them, and away from the Bible, which they 
have so long misunderstood. It is useless longer to ask 
intelligent people to worship a God described to them 



as worse than themselves, or to accept as the Divine Plan 
such an unwise, unjust, unloving one as they represent 
the Divine Program to be. 



A NEW CHURCH UNION MOVEMENT 

Recently (July 1 8) twelve clergymen and twelve laymen 
of the Episcopal Church incorporated in the State of 
New York under the name of Christian Unity Foundation. 
It was announced that this is the official start of a 
movement which began in St. Thomas Episcopal Church, 
New York, last February. Bishop Courtenay was announced 
as the first President. The organization starts 
with a gift of $10,000 for individual expenses and is 
ready to receive further contributions. Its object purports 
to be the bringing about of a union of all the Christians 
of the world— Protestant, Roman Catholic and 
Greek. 

The new organization differs from the one organized 
three years ago, styled The Federal Council, which, without 
disturbing present organizations, speaks for Federation. 
The new movement provides for one great religious 
body in which all names and divisions would be removed. 
Mr. Rockefeller and everybody else is prophesying a united 
Christendom. They believe such a union or fusion necessary. 
Our opinion, based upon the prophetic Scriptures, 
is well-known to our readers. As long ago as 1880, in 
these columns, we pointed out, when others did not expect 
it, that such a Federation is sure to be accomplished 
and that, according to the Scriptures, the effect will be 
baneful, injurious in the extreme. Nevertheless we still 
see that while outwardly injurious to the highest interests 
of the "sanctified in Christ Jesus," it will not really 
injure this class. On the contrary it will provide the 
very oppositions and restraints and persecutions which, 
under Divine supervision, will work out blessings for 
the elect and separate them more completely than ever 
as wheat from the chaff of nominal Christendom. 

"In your patience possess ye your souls," declares the 
Master. We are living in a momentous time. Much is 
accomplished in one year. What may we expect by October, 
1914, the date of the termination of Gentile times? 
Let us not speculate, but let us keep awake and mark the 
stately steppings of our present Lord amongst the affairs 
of mankind— leading onward to the inauguration of the 
glorious Kingdom of the Son of God, and, through it, 
to the blessing of Israel and all the nations of the earth. 



THE HEAVENS ROLLING TOGETHER 

Under the symbolism of the rolling together of the 
heavens as a scroll the Bible pictures the end of this age, 



its time of trouble, and how, as a result, the extremes 
of the ecclesiastical heavens, Catholic and Protestant, 
will be drawn together. A scroll does not always roll 
equally from both ends. If one end be fastened the other 
end will do all the rolling. Thus far Roman Catholicism 
has made little advance toward fellowship with Protestantism, 
but the latter is daily rolling a little nearer to 
Catholicism. Notice, as an instance, the great Eucharistic 
Congress at Montreal, Canada, the first of the kind to 
be held in America. One hundred and twenty-five 
bishops were in attendance and thousands of visitors 
from all parts of the world. 

Cardinal Vannutelli, the special Legate or Representative 
of the Pope, enroute to the Congress, stopped in 
England, in spite of the legal statute which forbids the 
entrance into Great Britain of Papal Legates. The 
newspapers note that he is the first Catholic of this rank 
to enter the Island of Great Britain in three hundred 
years. Evidently the Law on the subject is a dead letter. 
Catholics and Protestants have both made an advance 
since that Law was made. 

The Government's representative in Canada, Judge 
Girourd, welcomed the Cardinal Legate in the words, 
"The administration of the Dominion of Canada presents 
its homage to his excellency and bids him welcome." 

At the Congress, Father Vaughan of London, one 
of the leading delegates, attacked Protestantism, declaring 
that Protestantism is dying out; that soon there will be 
nothing left of it; that Protestants, if they wish to conserve 
their religion, should labor for the abolition of 
race suicide. 



R4699 : page 325 

WELL EXPRESSED--SHOULD BE HEEDED. 

In the Atlanta Weekly Journal, Bishop Warren A. 
Candler says, "Nothing is more schismatic than the effort 
to impose conditions of Christian fellowship upon others 
which the holy Scriptures do not impose." Not only 
should Methodists, Episcopalians and Catholics heed 
these true words, but all denominations of Christ should 
heed. All should remember that there is but one 
"Church of the Living God, whose names are written 
in heaven," and that it has but one Lord, one faith and 
one baptism, and one God and Father over all. All such, 
recognizing the Scriptures as the message of God through 
Jesus, the Apostles and prophets, should judge themselves 
and fellow-members, not by fanciful standards of 
the dark ages, but by the Word of the Living God which 
liveth and abideth forever, and according to which, the 
Master tells us, we, and, in time, the world also shall be 
judged. 



CHEAPEST AND BEST LIFE INSURANCE 

Of course, the Lord's consecrated people recognize 
that they have no earthly life to preserve— that it is consecrated 
to death in the service of the Lord and of his 
cause. From this standpoint the best and cheapest 
policy is a full consecration of baptism into Christ's 
death and the Lord's receipt, the earnest of our inheritance, 
the begetting of the holy Spirit. Such are 
assured by the Scriptures that they will from time to 
time receive dividends in slander, evil-speaking and persecutions, 
generally from "false brethren." But even 
these experiences are guaranteed to work out for the 
insured special blessings, and to constitute assurances of 
Divine favor continued with them. 

But our particular thought at this time is to answer 
the queries of some respecting the insurance of their 
earthly lives in the interests of those dependent upon 
them for temporal support. So far as the Editor is concerned, 
he carries no life insurance of any kind and desires 
none. Nevertheless all are not situated alike. To 
our understanding a father, having dependent wife and 
children— if the latter be of tender years and unable to 
make their own living— has some responsibility for 
them; according to the Apostle's statement, "He that 
provideth not for his own is worse than an unbeliever." 
It may, indeed, be argued that this, in the Apostle's day, 
could not have applied to life insurance— that at most it 
could have meant that a man should pay his just debts, 
keep his family in reasonable comfort, and, if possible, lay 

R4699 : page 326 

aside for them some small provision in the way of a 
cottage, or what not, that would stand between them and 
immediate want, in event of his death. But in case he 
could not do this, he might now be able to discharge his 
duty toward them through the medium of life insurance. 

True, we have said, and still say, that we believe the 
time is near when insurance companies, with all the other 
arrangements of our present civilization, will be overwhelmed 
in the great time of trouble foretold by the 
Prophet Daniel (12: 1). It is equally true that we anticipate 
that that climax of trouble is not farther away 
than 1915. Our thought is, further, that the so-called 
mutual insurance companies will fail sooner than those 
styled "old line" insurance companies, which have the 
backing of vast accumulations of money and the support 
of the more wealthy. The mutual companies will fail, 
first, because, as times get hard, many will be unable to 
pay their assessments and drop out and thus make the 
assessments larger for those who remain in. And, as 
the pinch continues, these also will withdraw and the 
mutual companies will fail. We are not writing as the 



agent or emissary of any insurance company; hence 
we mention no names, but merely offer a suggestion for 
the benefit of our readers who feel that they have an 
obligation toward their families to the amount of $1,000 
or more. All the "old line" companies have a variety 
of policies, some of them more, and some of them less 
favorable. And the agents who solicit insurance get 
larger commissions from the more expensive kind of 
policies, hence are not so likely to introduce the kind 
which we are about to recommend and which may be 
obtained from any first-class insurance company and is 
the lowest-priced insurance granted by any of them. We 
describe it as follows:— 

It is known as a "Five- Year-Term Policy." It expires 
at the end of five years, but that should be no 
objection to us. It is convertible at any time within 
four years to a longer term policy. These policies grant 
full immediate benefit and, so far as the insurance feature 
is concerned, are as good as any other higher-priced 
policy for the time mentioned. As for the cost:— 

For a person of fifty-three years of age, the cost 
would be $25.65 per $1,000 for the year. For younger 
persons the rate would be cheaper; for older persons, 
dearer. 



A CATHOLIC CHURCH PROP 

The Roman Catholic Church evidently finds its revenues 
diminishing, as its people become less fearful of the 
terrors of Purgatory. It has devised a new scheme 
whereby to provide for its faithful both earthly and 
Purgatorial Insurance. 

The new scheme is an insurance company along ordinary 
lines, but Catholics only are expected to patronize 
it. The religious feature of the arrangement is that the 
insurance premiums are to go to the Catholic Church 
treasury and to be credited to the insured as instead of 
direct payments. This is a long-headed scheme. Perhaps 
it would work well with the various Protestant denominations. 
Why not? 

THE EUPHRATES DRYING UP 

In Revelation we read of the drying up of the Euphrates 
River, that the way of the Kings of the East may 
be prepared. (Rev. 16:12.) This is symbolical, of 
course. It calls our attention back to the typical Babylon 
and her fall before Cyrus. Babylon was built upon 
the River Euphrates, which ran through the midst of 
the city. Her wall was impregnable, but Cyrus' army 
turned aside the river into a new channel, leaving the 
old channel dry and enabling him to march his army 
under the Babylonian gates, which otherwise served as 
the city's defense. 



We are to expect a parallel to this in connection with 
mystical Babylon— Christendom. In the symbolical language 
of Revelation, waters symbolize people; hence the 
turning aside of the "waters" would represent the alienation 
of the people and the alienation of the people would 
be indicated by their withholding of financial support. 

Gifts of money to ecclesiastical institutions represent 
love or fear. The increasing light of modern times has 
not only decreased love for the creeds of the "dark 
ages," but it has also decreased fear for their threatenings. 
As a result neither love nor fear is operating as 
strongly today as once it did in the minds of the 
masses. What wonder if the result would be the drying 
up of the Euphrates and the ultimate collapse of mystic 
Babylon! The matter is under the control of the antitypical 
Cyrus, of whom it is written, "Thus saith the 
Lord to his anointed (typical), to Cyrus, whose right 
hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I 
will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two-leaved 
gates; and the gates shall not be shut; I will 
go before thee and make the crooked places straight; I 
will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder 
the bars of iron. And I will give thee the treasures of 
darkness, and hidden riches of secret places." (Isa. 45:1-3.) 
Thus saith Jehovah, "That saith to the deep, 
Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers; that saith of Cyrus, 
He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure; 
even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to 
the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid." (Isa. 44:27,28.) 
As the typical Cyrus encouraged and gave liberty 
to the Jews to return from Babylonian captivity, so the 
antitypical, our present Lord, will see to the drying up 
of the Euphrates and also to Israel's opportunity and 
encouragement to return to the land of Abraham. 



ABRAHAM LINCOLN'S CONFESSION OF FAITH 

"I have never united myself to any church, because 
I have found difficulty in giving my assent, without 
mental reservation, to the long complicated statements 
of Christian doctrine which characterize their Articles 
of Belief and Confessions of Faith. Whenever any 
church will inscribe over its altar, as its sole qualification 
for membership, the Savior's condensed statement of the 
substance of both law and gospel, 'Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, 
and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thyself,' that 
church will I join with all my heart and all my soul." 



SCIENTISTS ARE VERY COURAGEOUS 

Common people hesitate to be out of line with truth, 



even a little, but scientists think nothing of thousands of 
millions of years. An illustration of this is found in 
their statements respecting the age of our planet. The 
Scranton Tribune quotes the scientific (?) estimates as 
follows:— 

Lord Kelvin, of England, some years ago, guessed the 
earth's age to be about ninety -eight millions of years- 
days and months not stated. Five years later this scientific 
gentleman revised his figure, estimating mother earth 
to be from twenty millions to forty millions of years old. 

Scientist D. D. Lapparent, in 1890, estimated the earth's 
age at from sixty-seven to ninety millions of years. 

W. J. Sollas, in 1909, estimated the age of the ocean 
as from eighty millions to one hundred and fifty millions 
of years. 

R4700 : page 327 

Charles D. Walcott, Secretary of the Smithsonian 
Institute, in 1893 gave as the earth's maximum age 
seventy millions of years. 

The latest scientific (?) declaration on the subject 
is from the Smithsonian Institute which, being under 
governmental control, gives its estimate an official standing. 
The figures are given by Frank Wigglesworth 
Clark and George F. Baker, of the United States Geological 
Survey, whose pronouncement is not above seventy 
million years, nor below fifty-five million years. 

Ordinary men obliged to confess themselves perplexed 
to the extent of from fifteen million years to one hundred 
million years, would be apt to keep very quiet lest some 
one would criticize them and say they didn't know their 
business; but scientific men are so used to guessing on 
every subject that they do not take their own situation so 
seriously. 

These scientific gentlemen usually feel that they are 
damaging the credibility of the Divine testimony on the 
subject. We doubt if the majority of them know that 
the Bible does not undertake to say when the earth was 
formed, though it does undertake to say when the ocean 
was formed. Bible students will note that Genesis declares 
that when the first of the creative orders or epochs 
began, "the earth was without form and void." In 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. VI., we have presented the 
Bible's own testimony, to the effect that each of the 
creative days was 7,000 years long and that we are living 
in the seventh epoch day and that six-sevenths of it are 
in the past. One more thousand years will complete it- 
complete an entire cycle of 49,000 years and usher in the 
glorious fiftieth of absolute perfection. 



REMARKABLE WORDS IN A PROMINENT PLACE 
It is well known that the Union Railway Depot in 



Washington City is thus far the finest on earth— the 
new Pennsylvania Railroad depot in New York City 
alone excepted. It is nearing completion and the following 
three texts of Scripture are quite prominent over the 
main arches of the entrance:— 

(1) "Thou hast put all things under his feet." 

(2) "The truth shall make you free." 

(3) "The desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose." 
Our friends and our enemies alike will be inclined 

to suppose that in some manner we engineered the putting 
of those texts in those prominent positions. We 
want, in advance, to disclaim the honor. The selection 
was made by Prof. Eliot, formerly President of Harvard 
University and now prominent as an advocate of a 
Christless Christianity— Evolution and Higher Criticism 
of the Bible, which mean no Bible. How came he, 
then, to select these texts of Scripture? Answer: "God 
is able to make the wrath of man to praise him." 



HIGHER CRITICISM INFLUENCE IS APPALLING 

Secretary Foster of the Detroit Y.M.C.A., speaking 
to the World's Sunday School convention at Washington 
the other day, made this discouraging statement: "Seventy-five 
per cent, of all the boys over thirteen years of age in 
the Protestant Sunday Schools of the United States are 
lost to the church, and never make professions of faith." 
He added, so as to leave no question about his facts, "I 
have made that calculation after study, observation and 
experience," and practically all the delegates in the meeting 
agreed with him. An English delegate, shocked by it, 
remarked, "This is the most astonishing statement I have 
heard in this country. In England we do not lose more 
than three per cent." 

Mr. Foster's statement, which the Englishman called 
"astonishing," might be called appalling by every sincere 
Christian, and at once provokes the questions, What are 
the churches and the Sunday Schools doing? Would the 
result be better or worse if the latter were abandoned 
altogether? What happens to the children after they 
leave the Sunday School to wean them from the faith? 
Do the Sunday Schools really give them any faith at all, 
that it is so easily and generally rubbed off afterwards?— 
Detroit Free Press. 



"HE DIED UNTO SIN ONCE" 

We have been requested to reprint the following from 
our issue of March 1, 1898:— 

"There is no necessity for discussing with honest minds 
what is and what is not meant by the expression— the 
Lord's death. Some, in an anxiety to get away from the 



doctrine of the ransom, or, rather, in their anxiety to get 
away from the logical deductions associated with the 
doctrine of the ransom, are claiming, regardless of all 
Scripture to the contrary, that our Lord Jesus had two 
deaths, one when he came into the WORLD, and the OTHER 
at CALVARY; and that the death of the "man Christ Jesus, 
who gave himself a ransom for all," at Calvary, was of 
small importance as compared with the other. They seem 
willingly ignorant of the fact that the Scriptures declare, 
In that he died, he died unto sin once'; and that that 
one death, and the only one ever referred to by our Lord 
or his apostles, was the death at Calvary. 

"The Apostles declare that Jesus spoke of the death 
which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. This one and 
only death of our Redeemer is what is symbolized in the 
Memorial Remembrancer— his body, his flesh broken for 
us, and of its merits and life all who would have life 
everlasting must partake." 



CUMBERED WITH MUCH SERVING 

"Christ never asks of us such arduous labor 
As leaves no time for resting at his feet; 

This waiting attitude of expectation 

He ofttimes counts a service most complete. 

"He sometimes wants our ear, our rapt attention, 
That he some sweetest secret may impart; 

'Tis always in the time of deepest silence 

That heart finds fullest fellowship with heart. 

"We sometimes wonder why the Lord has placed us 
Within a sphere so narrow, so obscure, 

That nothing we call work can find an entrance; 
There's only room to suffer— to endure. 

"Well, God loves patience; souls that dwell in stillness, 
Doing the little things, or resting quite, 

May just as perfectly fulfill their mission, 
Be just as useful in the Father's sight 

"As they who grapple with some giant evil, 
Clearing a path that every eye may see; 

Our Savior cares for cheerful acquiescence 
Rather than for a busy ministry. 

"And yet he does love service, where 'tis given 
By grateful love that clothes itself in deed; 

But work that's done beneath the scourge of duty, 
Be sure to such he gives but little heed. 

"Then seek to please him, whatsoe'er he bids thee, 

Whether to do, to suffer, to lie still; 
Twill matter little by what path he leads us, 



If in it all we sought to do his will." 



page 328 

[On this page a picture of Pastor Russell addressing a Jewish 
audience at the Hippodrome consumes over three-quarters of the page. 
The following is the caption below the picture:] 

Pastor Russell, of the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 

Addressing an Enthusiastic Audience 
at the Jewish Mass Meeting at the Hippodrome. 



(From New York American, October 2.) 

R4700 : page 328 

PASTOR RUSSELL TO 
ADDRESS HEBREWS 

page 328 



Remarkable Gathering to Take 
Place in Hippodrome 
Next Sunday. 



R4700 : page 328 

Pastor Russell, of the Brooklyn 
Tabernacle, is to address a giant 
mass meeting of the Jews of New 
York on Sunday, October 9, at 3 
o'clock, in the Hippodrome. He is 
considered one of the most eloquent 
Protestant preachers, and has gained 
a wide audience among the Hebrews 
by his sympathetic treatment of Jewish 
questions. 

Pastor Russell's sermon will be on 
"Zionism in Prophecy." His appearance 
before a representative mass 
meeting of Jews will be the first time 
that a well-known Protestant minister 
has been asked to deliver an address 
to such an assembly. 

Prominent Jewish citizens are arranging 
to make the meeting one of 

R4700 : page 329 



the largest gatherings ever held in this city. The Yiddish 
newspapers and Jewish societies are represented on the 
committees in charge of arrangements. 

HE IS HIGHLY ENDORSED 

Counselor Leo Wolfson, president of the Federated 
Roumanian Jews of America and Vice Grand Master of 
the I.W.S.O., when seen at his office, said: 

"As one who is interested in the Jewish question and 
an old worker for the Zionistic movement, my attention 
was called to Pastor Russell's interest in the Jews. 

"I feel that an address by him on Zionism and Jewish 
prophets will present the question from a new point 
of view, and a point of view that I will be very willing 
to learn. 

"I am sure that Pastor Russell's treatment of the question 
will be sympathetic, and will doubtless create widespread 
discussion of Zionism, its aims and ideals." 

In speaking of the coming meeting and Pastor Russell's 
address, J. Pfeffer, of No. 139 Delancey street, said 
last night: 

"Many of Pastor Russell's sermons have been printed 
in Jewish papers, and in these sermons he has preached 
sympathetically upon Jewish questions. This is primarily 
the reason why the Jews are anxious to hear him 
speak of the future of the Jew. 

UNUSUAL COURSE FOR GENTILE 

"Pastor Russell has been and is agitating Zionism. 
From a religious point of view he seems to believe in 
Judaism. It is a new occurrence for the Jews to have a 
Gentile take so much interest in problems and topics that 
are of special interest to them. 

"Judging from the preparations and the interest already 
manifested in the announcement of the meeting 
I am of the opinion that it will be a very large gathering." 

Pastor Russell, it is reported, will leave after next 
Sunday's meeting for London. While he is in England 
he will address many gatherings. One of these meetings 
will be a Jewish mass meeting. The London mass meeting 
will be held in Albert Hall, the largest auditorium in 
Great Britain. 

The committee in charge of next Sunday's meeting 
in the Hippodrome includes: A. B. Landau, editor of 
The Warheit; Louis Lipsky, editor of the Maccabean; 
J. Pfeffer, editor of the Jewish Weekly; Abraham Goldberg, 
editor of the Yiddish Volk, and Leo Wolfson, editor 
of the Yiddish Spirit. 



(From New York American, Oct. 9.) 



PASTOR RUSSELL CHEERED BY AN AUDIENCE 
OF HEBREWS. 



4,000 in Hippodrome Applaud When Venerable 
Brooklyn Clergyman Advocates Establishment 
of a Jewish Nation. 



Hearers Who Came to Question Gentile's Views 
on Their Religion Find He Agrees in Their 
Most Important Beliefs. 



The unusual spectacle of 4,000 Hebrews enthusiastically 
applauding a Gentile preacher, after having listened 
to a sermon he addressed to them concerning their own 
religion, was presented at the Hippodrome yesterday 
afternoon, where Pastor Russell, the famous head of the 

R4701 : page 329 

Brooklyn Tabernacle, conducted a most unusual service. 

In his time the venerable pastor has done many unconventional 
things. His religion is bounded by no particular 
denomination, and encompasses, as he says, all 
mankind. His ways of teaching it are his own. But he 
never did a more unconventional thing than this— nor a 
more successful one. 

He won over an audience that had come— some of it, 
at least— prepared to debate with him, to resent, perhaps, 
what might have appeared like a possible intrusion. "Pastor 
Russell is going to try to convert the Jews to Christianity," 
was the word that many had received before the 
meeting. "He wants to proselyte us." 

RECEIVED AT FIRST IN SILENCE 

In the crowd which filled the big showhouse were 
scores of rabbis and teachers, who had come to speak 
out in case the Christian attacked their religion or sought 
to win them from it. They had questions and criticisms 
ready for him. He was received at first in a dead silence. 

But the pastor did not seek to convert the Jews. To 
their unbounded delight, he pointed out the good things 
of their religion, agreed with them in their most important 
beliefs as to their salvation, and finally, after a warm 
advocacy of the plan of the Jews establishing a nation 
of their own, brought about a tumult of applause by leading 
a choir in the Zionist anthem: "Hatikva— Our 
Hope." 

A more interesting audience the Hippodrome never 
held, perhaps. From all parts of the city came serious-minded 



Hebrews to hear what it was an alien, a Gentile, 
might have to say to them at a service, held during their 
week of feasting, Rosh Hoshana. They were quiet, well-dressed, 
thinking men and women. 

Among them were many prominent figures of the Hebrew 
literary world. Some of these escorted Pastor Russell 
to the Hippodrome in a motor car and then took 
places in the auditorium. The literary men recognized 
the pastor as a writer and investigator of international 
fame on the subject of Judaism and Zionism. Some of 
those present were Dr. Jacobs, editor of the American 
Hebrew; W. J. Solomon, of the Hebrew Standard; J. 
Brosky, associate editor of the same; Louis Lipsky, editor 
of the Maccabean; A. B. Landau, of the Warheit; 
Leo Wolfson, president of the Federation of Roumanian 
Societies; J. Pfeffer, of the Jewish Weekly; S. 
Diamont, editor of the Jewish Spirit; S. Goldberg, editor 
of the American Hebrew; J. Barrondess, of the Jewish 
Big Stick, and Goldman, editor of H'Yom, the only Jewish 
daily. 

NO RELIGIOUS SYMBOLS THERE 

No symbol of any religion at all greeted them when 
they gazed at the Hippodrome stage. It was entirely 
empty save for a small lectern and three peace flags 
hanging from silken cords above. One was the familiar 
white silk banner with the Stars and Stripes in its center, 
together with the words "Peace Among Nations" in letters 
of gold. Another bore a rainbow and the word 
"Pax." The third was a silken strip bearing miniature 
representations of all the nations' flags. 

There were no preliminaries. Pastor Russell, tall, 
erect and white-bearded, walked across the stage without 
introduction, raised his hand, and his double quartette 
from the Brooklyn Tabernacle sang the hymn, "Zion's 
Glad Day." The members of this organization are Mrs. 
E. W. Brenneisen, Mrs. E. N. Detweiler, Miss Blanche 
Raymond and Mrs. Raymond, Emil Hirscher, C. Myers, 
J. P. MacPherson and J. Mockridge. Their voices 
blended perfectly, and the hymn, without any instrumental 
accompaniment, was impressive. 

R4701 : page 330 

But still there seemed an air of aloofness about the audience. 
They did not applaud, but sat silently watching 
the stalwart figure of the pastor. When he began to talk, 
however, they gave him respectful attention. 

With a powerful, yet charming voice, that filled the 
great playhouse, the unconventional clergyman made his 
every word audible to every hearer. His tones pleased 
their ears, his graceful gestures soon captivated their 
eyes, and in a few moments his apparently thorough 
knowledge of his subject appealed to their minds. 
Though still silent, the 4,000 were "warming up" to him. 



RESERVE AND DOUBT VANISH 

It was not long before all reserve, and all possible 
doubt of Pastor Russell's entire sincerity and friendliness 
were worn away. Then the mention of the name of a 
great Jewish leader— who, the speaker declared, had been 
raised by God for the cause— brought a burst of applause. 

From that moment on the audience was his. The Jews 
became as enthusiastic over him as though he had been a 
great rabbi or famous orator of their own religion. He 
hailed them as one of the bravest races of the earth— having 
kept their faith through the persecutions and cruelties 
of all other people for thousands of years. And he 
predicted that before very long they would be the greatest 
of the earth— not merely a people, any longer, but a 
nation. By a system of deductions based upon the prophecies 
of old, the pastor declared that the return of the kingdom 
of the Jews might occur at so near a period as the 
year 1914. Persecution would be over and peace and universal 
happiness would triumph. 

As he brought his address to a conclusion the pastor 
raised his hand again to his choir. This time they raised 
the quaint, foreign-sounding strains of the Zion hymn, 
"Our Hope," one of the masterpieces of the eccentric 
East Side poet, Imber. 

The unprecedented incident of Christian voices singing 
the Jewish anthem came as a tremendous surprise. 
For a moment the Hebrew auditors could scarcely believe 
their ears. Then, making sure it was their own hymn, 
they first cheered and clapped with such ardor that the 
music was drowned out, and then, with the second verse, 
joined in by hundreds. 



The discourse has already been reported in the newspapers 
which publish the sermons weekly. 



R4701 : page 330 

"WILT THOU THAT WE COMMAND FIRE?" 

-LUKE 9:51-56.-OCTOBER 23.- 

Golden Text:— "And it came to pass, when the days were well-nigh 
come, that he should be received up, he steadfastly set his 
face to go to Jerusalem and sent messengers before his face." 

THIS week's study relates an incident which 
occurred on the occasion of our Lord's journey 
from Galilee to Jerusalem just before 
his crucifixion. He knew that his hour was 
come; that his sacrificial life of three and a 



half years should be accomplished. The 

Great Teacher was full of courage. "But of 

the people there were none with him" in the 

sense of sympathetic appreciation of the conditions. 

True, he had informed the twelve 

Apostles respecting the consummation of his work and its 

nearness, but they had been slow to believe all the things 

written in the Law and the prophecies concerning him. 

Their minds naturally grasped the glorious things spoken 

of the Messiah. They were so busy thinking of his glorious 

Kingdom, and of their glorious association with him 

in that Kingdom, that they failed to note the other prophecies 

which, with equal distinctness, foretold his sufferings 

and ignominy. Similarly, they overlooked the Master's 

own words concerning his death. They thought of 

him as speaking in some figurative, hyperbolic manner. 

And Peter even attempted to rebuke him, saying, "Be this 

far from thee, Lord; it shall not happen unto thee." 

REFUSED BY THE SAMARITANS 

Another account intimates that James and John visited 
the Samaritan city for the purchase of bread and supplies 
for the party. The Samaritans recognized them and inquired, 
would the Great Teacher recognize the Samaritans 
and heal their sickness or would he treat them as 
Jews in general treated them— unkindly? They believed 
the latter. The Apostles frankly told them that the Great 
Teacher was sent only to the Jewish nation and would 
not stop to heal their sick ones, because he was "not sent 
save to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." 

Naturally enough the Samaritans resented this and 
were angry. They said, Very well. Buy bread from the 
people whom you instruct and whose sick you heal. 

St. John and St. James were greatly incensed at this. 
Was not Jesus the greatest Teacher? Was he not the 
Messiah? Had he not, as such, the right to determine the 
will of God respecting who should and who should not receive 
his benefactions? With this answer they came to 
Jesus and, relating the circumstances, asked, "Wilt thou 
that we command fire to come down from heaven to destroy 
these men and their city?" 

WHAT SPIRIT ARE YE OF? 

We listen with keen interest for the Master's response. 
As we once viewed the matter of the Divine program it 
would have seemed right for the Great Teacher to have 
said to the Apostles, Never mind, my dear disciples; wait 
just a little while and all those Samaritans will die and 
my Heavenly Father will deliver them over to the devils 
for an eternity of torture. In comparison with eternal 

R4702 : page 330 

torture that which you propose in the way of burning up 



their city and incidentally burning them for a few minutes 
would be as nothing. I appreciate, my dear disciples, your 
spirit, that it is God-like; that you desire to do all the 
roasting and burning within your power, and I commend 
you for it. Continue to thus copy your God and to cause 
suffering to as many as possible of your fellow-creatures 
who do not think exactly as you do. 

Was this the answer of the Great Teacher? Thank 
God, No! His teaching was the very reverse— sympathetic, 
loving, kind. And he had the Father's Spirit and 
understood it and followed it perfectly. In answer to 
their query, we read, "Jesus turned and rebuked them" and 
said, "Ye know not what spirit ye are of! The Son of 
man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them!" 

"A SAVIOR AND A GREAT ONE" 

The language spoken in Palestine in Jesus' day was the 
Syriac. One of the Great Teacher's titles is The Savior. 
And this, in the Syriac language, signifies, "The Life-Giver." 
The whole world was damned enough before 
Jesus came. He came not to damn (condemn) them 
more, but that they through him, might have life!— John 10:10; 
3:17. 

Life! Did they not have life? No. All human life 

R4702: page 331 

was forfeited through father Adam's disobedience. All 
mankind are dying as a result. A Life-Giver, a Savior 
from death (and not from eternal torment), was what 
was needed. 

The first work of the Savior is the redemptive work of 
Calvary. His second work is the selection of his Church 
to be his joint-heirs in the Kingdom. His third work will 
be the saving of Adam and all of his race from sin and 
death— from all the mental, moral and physical degradation 
which came through father Adam's disobedience and 
through his children being born in sin and shapen in iniquity 
and in sin conceived by their mothers. 

The saving of the Church is a great work! How faithful 
we should be if we have heard, if our eyes have seen, 
if our hearts have tasted of the grace of God in this wonderful 
privilege of becoming members of the Bride of 
Christ. However, we cannot suppose that the saving of 
merely a handful of select ones is the purpose of God in 
the creation of the world and the redeeming of the world. 
On the contrary, this elect "Little Flock" is spoken of as 
a "first-fruits unto God of his creatures." (Jas. 1:18; 
Rev. 14:4.) This implies an after-fruitage much more 
numerous. While God does not propose to save anyone 
out of death and to life eternal contrary to the individual 
will, he does propose that every creature lost in Adam and 
redeemed by Jesus shall be brought to a clear knowledge 
of the Truth, that they may be saved. He does propose 
that only the willingly obdurate shall be lost; and their 



loss will be the loss of life— as the Apostle declares, "everlasting 
destruction." 



R4702: page 331 

TOLD FOR A MEMORIAL OF HER 

-MATTHEW 26: 1-16. -OCTOBER 30.- 

Golden Text:— "She hath done what she could."— Mark 14:8. 

IN a previous study we considered the Great 

Teacher's triumphal entry into Jerusalem 

on an ass, and his tender of himself to the 

Nation of Israel as their King, in fulfillment 

of the prophecy of Zechariah 9:9-12. That 

was five days before the Passover. For several 

days Jesus taught in the temple, going 

at night to the home of Lazarus, Martha and 

Mary at Bethany. He knew what to expect 

—that his hour was come. He knew 

that even then the chief priests and elders of the people 

were considering his destruction and hesitating only lest 

it should cause tumult. Their indignation against the 

Great Teacher was that he did not teach as they taught 

and that his teachings had much more power with the 

masses than all their teachings combined. Anger, envy, 

hatred, united in branding him as an impostor and in sending 

him to his death, "for the good of the cause." 

The feast at Bethany referred to in this study may have 
been on the night before our Lord's betrayal, two days 
before the feast of Passover. But the concensus of opinion 
seems to be that it occurred on the Sabbath evening 
preceding the triumphal ride to Jerusalem. It matters 
not, however. There was such a feast. Jesus and his 
disciples were present. During the feast a woman approached 
with an alabaster flask of very precious perfume. 
She poured it upon his head and the entire room 
was sweet with the odor. The woman was Mary, the 
Sister of Lazarus and Martha. 

Another account shows that the protest made by the 
disciples against this as a waste was instigated by Judas, 
the treasurer of the little company of the Lord's disciples. 
John remarked that he was a thief and carried the bag 
and intimated that he was more interested in the money 
than in the poor and that his mention of the poor was 
merely a subterfuge. But the Great Teacher rebuked his 
disciples, saying, "Why trouble ye the woman; for she 
hath wrought a good work upon me; in that she hath 
poured this ointment upon my body she did it to prepare 
me for burial. Truly I say unto you, Wheresoever this 
Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, there shall 
also this which this woman hath done be told for a memorial 
of her." (Matt. 26:10-13.) How considerate was 



the Great Teacher! How sympathetic! How appreciative 
of everything done for him ! 

"SHE HATH DONE WHAT SHE COULD" 

The Lord, in line with all the Scripture teachings and 
usages, declines to recognize woman as a teacher of religion 
in the Church amongst his followers. No woman 
was given a place amongst the twelve Apostles— nor even 
when the seventy evangelists were sent forth with the 
simple message, which any woman could have given, 
surely as glibly as any man, or more so; even on this mission 
he did not send women, nor even a representative of 
the sex. The man, in Scriptural usage, is the figure of 
the Lord; the woman, the figure of the Church. It would 
be out of harmony with the figure that the Church should 
be the instructor and the Lord the pupil. Consistently, 
therefore, it would have been improper for woman to 
have been commissioned to represent the Lord. Hence, 
women as teachers in the Church have no authority in 
the Bible for the position. We read that the serpent beguiled 
Mother Eve and made of her a teacher of error to 
her husband. We read that the evil spirits used a certain 
young woman as a medium to announce the Apostles. But 
we find no Divine sanction of woman as a teacher in the 
Church, but that the young woman who acted under the 
spirit of divination and attempted to preach Christ and 
the Apostles was rebuked by the Apostle Paul and the 
spirit of divination dispossessed. 

All this, however, does not indicate that either Jesus or 
the Apostles were either rude toward women or unappreciative 
of their qualities of heart and mind. Quite the 
contrary. Amongst the Lord's followers were many 
"honorable women" and his special love for this Mary and 
her sister Martha is particularly recorded. Let us learn 
the lesson from the Book and not attempt to teach the 
Book. 

"THE POOR ALWAYS WITH YOU" 

Our Lord, in reply to the argument of Judas, that the 
ointment should have been sold for a large sum for the 
benefit of the poor, answered, The poor ye have always 
with you. Whensoever ye will ye may do them good; but 
me ye have not always. Poverty is sure to be a factor in 
the social order during the present time, because, in our 
fallen condition as a race, some are more brilliant of mind 
than others and selfishness is the general rule. Hence, 
until the end of the reign of sin and death the poor will 
be here. And there is a blessing attached to every good 
deed, every noble endeavor to help any member of the 
race to higher and better conditions, mentally, morally, 
physically. By and by there will be no poor, for, under 
the Kingdom condition, love will be the ruling principle, 
instead of selfishness. Under the Messianic rule righteousness 
will soon become universal; God's will is eventually 



to be done on earth as it is done in heaven. 
R4702 : page 332 

"BUT ME YE HAVE NOT ALWAYS" 

This was true of the Master. A little while and he was 
gone from them, ascended to the Father's right hand. The 
same principle prevails in respect to the Lord's followers 
styled, "The members of his Body." Whatever we can do 
for these members, the great Head will consider as though 
done unto himself. While, therefore, it will always be in 
order to do good unto all men as we have opportunity, it 
will always be in order also to do good "especially unto 
the household of faith." These should always be first in 
our thoughts. 

The spirit of selfishness in Judas led on from one degree 
to another of covetousness until he was willing to 
sell his Master to his enemies. Alas, what a terrible 
power for evil is selfishness! How many are willing to 
barter the Truth for the sake of worldly ease or prosperity! 
Such as have the spirit of the Truth to a considerable 
extent should beware of where selfishness leads if 
followed— to the Second Death. 



R4703 : page 332 

"THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME" 

-MATTHEW 26: 17-30. -NOVEMBER 6.- 

THESE studies are selected for us in advance. 
Otherwise our preference would have been 
to consider the incident connected with our 
Lord's closing of earth life in the Spring 
of the year about the season at which that 
occurred. But Truth is always precious to 
us and has always profitable lessons. 

Jesus was a Jew and was, therefore, 
obligated to every feature of the Mosaic 
Law. He came not to destroy the Law, but 
to fulfill it. Today's study points us to the fulfillment 
of one feature of the Law— the Passover; not that it is 
already entirely fulfilled, but that the type has for more 
than eighteen centuries been in process of fulfillment and 
the complete fulfillment, sure to come, is, we believe, near 
at hand. To appreciate this study we must have clearly 
in mind the type:— 

Approximately 3,500 years ago God delivered the people 
of Israel from the despotic power of Pharaoh, King 
of Egypt. Time after time Pharaoh had refused to let 
the people go, preferring to hold them as chattels, slaves. 
Time after time God had sent plagues upon Egypt as 
chastisements. Under the influence of each plague 



Pharaoh repented and through Moses entreated God for 
mercy upon himself, and for the people relief from the 
plague. Nevertheless, every manifestation of Divine 
mercy tended only to harden his heart until finally the 
tenth plague, the severest of all, was necessary. That 
plague consisted in the execution of the death sentence 
against all the first-born of Egypt. But the Israelites in 
Egypt were exempt from its provisions under certain conditions. 
Each family was required to have its own lamb, 
not a bone of which was to be broken. Its blood was 
sprinkled upon the door-posts of the house and the family, 
assembled within, partook of its flesh with unleavened 
bread and bitter herbs, pilgrim-like, with staff in hand, 
ready for departure out of Egypt in the morning. 

ISRAEL'S FIRST-BORNS PASSED OVER 

When that night the Divine sentence slew all of 
Egypt's first-borns, the first-borns of Israel were passed 
over or spared; hence the name— Passover. And this 
ceremony, as a reminder of the great blessing of the Lord 
upon Israel, was commanded to be observed yearly as a 
memorial of God's goodness and because it typed, or illustrated, 
a still greater mercy and blessing yet to come. 

A little later on those spared first-borns were exchanged 
for one of the tribes— Levi. Thereafter the 
Levites were the passed-over first-borns and were specially 
devoted to God and his service. 

THE ANTITYPICAL FULFILLMENT 

Those experiences of the Israelites and their first-born 
ones were very real and properly very interesting to 
them; but they are still more interesting to Christians, 
who themselves are antitypes now being passed over. By 
Christians we do not mean all who merely make profession, 
nor all who attend Church, however regularly. We 
mean merely the saintly few who are now being called 
and being tested as to faithfulness to the Lord and by 
faith being passed over— from death unto life. These are 
Scripturally styled, "The Church of the first-borns, whose 
names are written in heaven." (Heb. 12:23.) As the 
deliverance of the nation of Israel from Egypt took place 
after the sparing or passing over of the first-born, so, 
correspondingly, the Divine blessing will come upon the 
world of mankind directly after the completion of "the 
Church of the first-born"— directly after their passing 
from death into life, by the power of the First Resurrection. 
If there is a first-born class it implies that there 
will be an after-born class. Thus the Scriptures everywhere 
distinctly teach that the present call, trial, testing, 
proving and final rewarding of the Church will not be 
the end of Divine mercy toward humanity, but, on the 
contrary, will be only its beginning; for since the saintly 
are spoken of as the "Church of the first-born," or as the 
Apostle declares, "the first-fruits unto God of his creatures," 



we are assured thereby that after-fruits are equally 
part of the Divine Program. 

Amongst the Levites were several divisions representing 
different ranks and grades of the Church of Christ. 
But the principal division or section of the Levites was 
the priestly family of Aaron, just as there is a special 
class amongst the antitypical Levites, the faithful few, 
known in the Scriptures as the Royal Priesthood. 

THE ANTITYPICAL LAMB AND HIS BLOOD 

In Jesus' day the time had come for the fulfillment of 
the antitype of the Passover. Jesus himself was to be 
the Passover Lamb. By faith the merit of his sacrifice, 
his blood, was to be sprinkled upon the door-posts of his 
people's hearts, and his flesh, the merit of his earthly 
perfection, was to be eaten or appropriated by them in 
their minds. With it they were to eat the unleavened 
bread of the Divine promises and the bitter herbs 
of trials and adversities, and withal they were to drink 
wine, the blood of the grape, symbolically implying their 
participation with the Lamb in his ignominy and 
sufferings. 

The Lamb of God, Jesus, the antitypical Passover 
Lamb, was slain nearly nineteen centuries ago on the 
exact anniversary of the killing of the typical lambs. 
The sacrifice of Jesus needs not to be repeated, for by 
faith we all sprinkle this same blood today, and in our 
hearts feed upon the merit of the same earthly sacrifice, 
and have plenty of bitter herbs of persecution and drink 
of the blood— share the Master's spirit and its reward 
of suffering for righteousness' sake. 

R4703 : page 333 

Not many have appreciated these privileges during all 
these nineteen centuries— in all but a "little flock." Nor 
are there many who envy them their present experiences; 
nor are there many who appreciate how great will be 
their reward and blessings in the life to come. Then, instead 
of suffering with Christ, they shall reign with him 
in glory, honor and immortality. 

"THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME" 

Jesus, about to begin the fulfillment of this type by 
dying as the antitypical Passover Lamb (Christ our Passover 
is slain for us— I Cor. 5:7), instituted for his followers 
an annual remembrancer which, in their minds, would 
take the place of the type and continually remind them of 
the great Antitype. Instead of the literal flesh of the 
lamb, the Master used bread, and instead of the blood, 
the fruit of the vine, and instead of a further commemoration 
of the type, he directed that this be done in remembrance 
of the antitype— "the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sins of the world," and the passover coming to 



the Church of the first-born, as precedent to the great 
blessings to result for Israel and all the families of the 
earth. 

Our Lord as a Jew was obligated to keep the typical 
passover, eating of the literal lamb, etc., first; but subsequently, 
after that passover supper, he instituted with the 
bread and the fruit of the vine his substitutionary memorial 
of himself, saying, "Take, eat; this is my body. 
And he took the cup; and when he had given thanks, he 
gave it to them; and they all drank of it. And he said, 
...Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the 
fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new in 
the Kingdom of God"— until his second coming in power 
and great glory to receive the Church as his elect Bride 
and Joint-Heir in his Kingdom and to shower blessings 
richly upon Israel and through Israel upon the whole 
world of mankind. 

JUDAS, THE SELFISH BETRAYER 

The hour for the betrayal was drawing near. The 
Master knew by some power unknown to us who would 
betray him, etc. Breaking the matter to the twelve, he 
said, "One of you will betray me." Each asked, "Is it I?" 
Even Judas brazenly challenged the Master's knowledge 
of his deceitful course and said, "Is it I?" The answer 
was, It is as you have said— you are the betrayer. The 
Divine programme was carried out by the traitor, and the 
Scriptures were fulfilled which declare that he should be 
sold for thirty pieces of silver; but the coincidence marks 
the Divine fore-knowledge without implying that God in 
any manner instigated the traitorous conduct, hence the 
statement, "Woe unto that man by whom the Son of Man 
is betrayed!" From this standpoint we are to understand 
that there is no hope for Judas in a future life. His 
sorrow and anguish before his death were such as found 
no compensation in any happiness he had enjoyed in previous 
days. 

IN MY FATHER'S KINGDOM 

In giving the disciples the bread, which represented 
his flesh, and the cup, which represented his blood, the 
Master pictorially offered them justification and sanctification, 
and, as St. Paul explained, he did more than this 
—he offered them a participation with himself in the 
sufferings of the present and in the glories of the future 
(I Cor. 10,16,17; Matt. 26:29.) The antitype of the cup 
in its higher sense will be the new joys of the Kingdom 
which all the faithful in Christ will share with the great 
King of glory, when he shall take unto himself his great 
power and reign. 



R4703 : page 333 



GOD'S ESTIMATION DIFFERENT FROM THE WORLD'S 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I request your opinion upon the correctness of a 
thought found in one of the Convention Reports in the 
following language:— 

"When the holy Jesus died, it was as a victim of Sin, 
which, for the moment, seemed to have the victory. Indeed, 
he could not have died had sin not been imputed to 
him; for all the promises of health, prosperity and life 
which were by the Law were his. The Law said— "The 

R4704 : page 333 

man which doeth those things shall live by them." (Rom. 10:5.) 
Thus came a necessity for our Lord to be accounted 
a sinner, in order that he might die for the people. 
For this reason we do not see that it is possible for the 
members of the Church to die unless, like him, they are 
accounted sinners." 

I am well aware that the Lord Jesus would not have 
died (the Report says, "could not have died") if there 
had been no sin to be atoned for. But if our Lord died, as 
above suggested, it seems to me that his death must have 
been a penal death and not a sacrificial one. Could he 
die both a penal and a sacrificial death? It seems not so 
to me. If the Lord Jesus died a penal death it would 
appear to me that he could have no life rights left to his 
credit to bestow upon either the Church or the world. 

I anxiously await your reply, for if the foregoing expression 
is correct, I have seriously misunderstood both 
the Scriptures and the DAWNS. 

Your loving brother in our dear Redeemer, 
W. W. M.-, Suffolk, Va. 

IN REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER M.:-I am glad to note your careful 
discrimination in your Scripture studies. This is one 
lesson that all of the dear friends in the Truth need to 
learn— not to accept implicitly everything that they read 
in a Convention Report, nor everything that even a regular 
Pilgrim may express. The same principle, of course, 
holds true with respect to our own presentations, oral and 
printed. All that we receive as spiritual food should be 
thoroughly masticated before assimilation. We have 
great confidence in all of the dear Brethren engaged in 
the Pilgrim service; otherwise they would not represent 
the Society. However, we must not be held responsible 
for their every expression. We believe them to be thoroughly 
well-intentioned, but perfection alone will be 
reached beyond the vail. We come now to your question. 

We cannot quite endorse the phraseology of the statement 
you quote. All of the Church die as the victims of 
sin, in the sense that sin and death are mentioned in a 



personified way in the Scriptures. Sin has actuated all 
those who oppose the Truth and persecute the Lord and 
his consecrated footstep followers. But we cannot agree 
with the thought that our Lord's death was a penal one. 
One Scripture might be considered as supporting this 
thought, namely, the words, "He was made sin for us who 
knew no sin." But this Scripture we understand to signify 
that our Lord, who knew no sin, was made a sin-offering 
on our behalf. We remember also the Scripture 
which declares that "As Moses lifted up the serpent in 
the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up." 
The serpent, indeed, is the symbol for sin. But we can 
think of only one way that our Lord was viewed as a serpent 
—in the sense that he underwent all the experiences 
which a sinner could have been required to undergo. 
Thus he suffered as a sinner, and for the sinner, the same 

R4704 : page 334 

penalty that might have been required of any sinner. But 
while, in the eyes of men, he was a malefactor, a sinner, 
etc., he was the reverse of all this in the eyes of his true 
followers and in the Father's sight. 

What Jesus did he plainly stated:— He laid down or 
surrendered his life because thus he could best serve the 
Father's purposes. He did not give away his life, nor did 
he die under condemnation as a sinner, nor did he forfeit 
his life; nor did the Jews or Roman soldiers take his 
life from him contrary to his permission. He laid it down 
of himself. Had he died a sinner in God's sight, with sin 
imputed to him by the Father, he would have had nothing 
to give for the redemption of Adam and his race;— he 
would have been unable to become their regenerator in 
the "times of restitution." 

We submit that the only proper view of the Lord's 
death is that it was a manifestation of his absolute obedience 
to the Father's will. That extreme of obedience was 
rewarded with the divine nature and glorious exaltation in 
his resurrection. The risen glorious Redeemer made no 
satisfaction of Justice and paid nothing over on behalf of 
anybody until after he had ascended up on high. Then he 
appropriated of his merit to all who, during this age, will 
accept the Father's call and drawing to become members 
of his Body. To these he imputed enough of his own merit 
to make good the deficiencies of their flesh, in order that 
they, like himself, might present to God sacrifices holy and 
acceptable and thereupon be begotten to the spirit plane. 
Later on our Lord's human life, unforfeited, not yet given 
away, will be given away on behalf of Israel and the 
world, canceling the sins of all the people and securing 
the Mediatorial Throne of the Millennial Age for the 
blessing of Israel, through its Mediator, and also for all 
the families of the earth through Israel and under Israel's 
New (Law) Covenant. 

We note your second question relative to our statement 
in March 1st WATCH TOWER, page 88, second column, 



where we set forth that Satan's "little season" will 
be after Messiah shall have delivered up the Kingdom to 
the Father. It is true that some years ago we were not 
so clear on this as now— less positive. The great Mediator 
will indeed "destroy from amongst the people" all who will 
not obey him throughout the Millennial Age, so that at the 
transfer of his Kingdom, at the time of his vacating of his 
Mediatorship, the world of mankind will be perfect. The 
Mediator will step from between God and man, and Divine 
tests will be applied to prove, to demonstrate the heart-faithful. 
The sentence upon the disloyal will be, "There 
will come down fire from God out of heaven and destroy 
them." This indicates a testing and punishing by Divine 
Justice similar to that which came upon father Adam. 
This would not be possible so long as the Mediatorial 
Kingdom held sway. However, we understand that our 
Lord will be the Father's representative in connection 
with that exhibition of Divine Justice, which will follow 
his Mediatorship, just as he was the Father's representative 
and agent before he came into the world to be our 
Redeemer. 



R4704 : page 334 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
FROM THE SALVATION ARMY 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have often wanted to tell you something of what the 
knowledge of Present Truth has meant to me, but I find it 
very difficult to put it into words. 

From my earliest recollections I have been "feeling after 
God," lending an eager ear to any who seemed to know something 
of him and his ways, and who sought to conform their 
lives in accordance with their belief. When but twelve years 
of age I was "confirmed" in the Church of England. I looked 
forward to that ceremony with happy anticipations, thinking 
that it would surely work a great change in me for the better. 
My disappointment was bitter when the expected "change" 
did not take place, but resulted in the decision, for the time, 
that such things were not for me; that I must be more 
depraved than the rest of humanity, and that, therefore, it 
was of no use for me to try to "be good." 

A few years later I was "converted" in a Methodist Church 
revival, and a year later joined the Salvation Army. My 
reason for becoming a Salvationist was that they were the 
most earnest Christians I had ever met, and, too, I had a 
great desire to work for the Lord in return for his wonderful 
goodness to me. For sixteen years I remained in the Army, 
fourteen years as an officer, devoting all my time to the work. 
The last seven of those years were spent in New York City, 
where I was working in the Editorial Department at National 
Headquarters. For six years I was Assistant Editor of 



The War Cry and Editor of the children's paper known as 
The Young Soldier. This brought me into close touch with 
the young people, of whom I became very fond, and among 
whom I was known as "Cousin Sunshine," they writing many 
letters to me under that nom de plume, which letters were 
printed in The Young Soldier, together with one from myself 
addressed to the young people. 

But while I enjoyed my work my heart was not satisfied 
on doctrinal points. My Bible told me that God was love; 
the creeds of the Salvation Army and other sects depicted 
him as a fiend, torturing millions of human beings eternally, 
while I would not torture a kitten for one moment. Jesus 
said, "I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me," yet I 
saw that not only were all men not drawn to him, but that 
very few of them were, and fewer still were consecrated footstep 
followers of the Lord. Surely he desired that all men 
should be drawn to him, but since they were not, the only 
logical conclusion must be that Satan was the stronger, and 
that God was not the Almighty God the Bible proclaimed him 
to be. The creeds could not help me in this matter, for they 
explicitly declared that the majority of the race would not 
be drawn to the Lord Jesus and be saved, and some even went 
so far as to say that God had never intended that all men 
should be so "drawn." 

These and other questions caused me great distress of 
mind and heart, and I prayed earnestly that God would send 
me the key that would unlock the Scriptures and smooth out 
the seeming contradictions in his Word and show me what 
was Truth. You can understand, then, dear Pastor, with 
what great joy I examined, with my Bible, "The Divine Plan 
of the Ages," the "Hell" pamphlet, and others, as put into my 
hands by a dear Brother whom the Lord used as his messenger. 
I knew it was the Truth; it stamped itself so by the very 

R4705 : page 334 

Word of God. And oh, how I thanked him that at last I had 
the key that unlocked the wonderful treasures in his Word. 
In a few months I had left the Salvation Army. Few among 
its members, even my close friends, understand my position, 
but grieve over me as one who has been deceived by a "strong 
delusion." I rejoice that the light will so soon come to them. 
Many of the young people do not know what has become of 
me, but in answer to their earnest inquiries have merely been 
told that "Cousin Sunshine is no more." I am sorry to have 
grieved their young hearts, but must leave that, too, with 
the Lord. 

My testimony up-to-date is that the Lord and his Truth 
are more precious to me than ever, and the pathway truly 
"shineth more and more." The Vow, the Covenants, etc., 
have been wonderful sources of strength and joy to me, and 
I praise him more and more for having granted me the great 
privilege of understanding as much as I do of the wondrous 
things that are written in his Word— "written for our admonition." 
(I Cor. 10:11; 2 Tim. 3:16,17.) Truly "He hath brought 
me into a large place," and my heart rejoices daily in his goodness 



to even me. 

Pray for me, dear Pastor, that I may be faithful, and that 
even I may be "counted worthy to stand before the Son of 
Man. "--Luke 21:36. 

I remember you daily in my prayers, praising God for your 
faithfulness to the present time, and praying that you may so 
continue to the end of the way. 

Your sister in the hope of immortality, 

MRS. A. I. RITCHIE. 
(Formerly Staff-Captain Nina Maitland.) 

R4705 : page 335 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

About a year ago a paper, issued not far from my home, 
began publication of your sermons. Of course, I was delighted 
that so many of my neighbors and friends would thus 
be brought within touch of the Truth, which I so dearly love. 
Recently the sermon feature was discontinued. Then I bethought 
me that I had not specially encouraged the publishers, 
nor told them of my deep interest in the matter. I supposed, 
however, that others had been more faithful than 
myself in this respect. I concluded that, although late, I 
would endeavor to retrieve my opportunity. I wrote to the 
publisher on the subject and felt vexed with myself and 
others that it was possible for the publisher to write to me 
as follows:— 

"I do not know how many of our readers care for the sermons, 
but no one has complained of their discontinuance so 
far but you. This leads us to believe that they were not very 
popular with our readers. We never heard from anybody 
who did take pains to say that he cared for them." 

I trust that this will be a lesson to me that I should not 
only pray for God's blessing upon the work, but also be on 
the alert to do my part to help forward his glorious message- 
however others may care to do their parts. With Christian 
regards, 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, . 

IN REPLY 

We sympathize with this case. There are others just like 
it, and probably will be more. Brethren and sisters, particularly 
those possessed of the talents of penmanship and of 
good expression, have a glorious opportunity for serving the 
Truth, which many of them, we fear, do not properly appreciate 
until after it has passed them by. It is apt to be thus 
with all of God's blessings. 

Incidentally, let us remark that some dear friends send us 
newspaper subscriptions for friends and neighbors, without 
inquiring of them whether or not the gift of the paper would 
be acceptable. This is a serious mistake. The intended kindness 
becomes an injury if the favored one writes to the newspaper 
refusing it and declaring that he never ordered it. We 
have sent papers to some of the Lord's poor at the Society's 
expense— newspapers never do this, and thanks to them is 



wholly improper. 

We would not reflect upon all of the dear friends. Some 
are very thoughtful and are continually, every month or so, 
noting to the publishers some appreciated features of certain 
sermons and expressing their gladness that the Gospel is 
reaching the many who rarely attend Church services. We 
might remark, however, that dear friends who are poor 
writers and very ungrammatical would serve the Truth 
better by not writing much. It is the work of the gifted, who 
can serve the Truth best along the lines of encouraging newspaper 
publishers, to do so. If they neglect the opportunity 
they will surely regret the matter sometime. Large weekly 
newspapers do not need special encouragement in the way of 
subscriptions: it is your nearby daily or smaller weekly that 
needs your subscriptions and those of your friends. 



BRETHREN: - 

I have seen the first number of your periodical (P.P. 
Spanish), and have pondered the contents in my heart. Glory 
be to God! In my position as preacher of the Gospel (30 
years), I have not encountered such brilliant truths as I now 
see in the four pages of your blessed little paper. My mind, 
stupefied by human theories, has hindered perfect reasoning 
on the plan of God. Now all I see is clear, logical and true. 

The article, "Where Are the Dead?" was for me a celestial 
light which let me see a glorious eternity. I am conducting 
amongst this people a Mexican Mission, attended by thirty 
to forty individuals; we keep no accurate account. I preach 
the Gospel to them and their characters have been modified 
so that they are now good men. Although I am an ordained 
minister of the Baptist Church, I do not work in connection 
with them nor with any denomination. Last Sunday I 
preached a sermon on the theme of "Where Are the Dead?" 
and the congregation received this new light with great joy. 

I have here a good friend, a Mr. John R , with 

whom I conversed on this subject, and he told me more particularly 
about these things, so new to me, and which have 
helped us here so much. Glory be forever to the blessed God 
and Father of our Lord Jesus! 

From your brother in the faith, 

C. TEZEDA Y VALDIVIA. 

(Translated from the Spanish.) 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST JESUS:- 

I advise you that I have received a copy of the PEOPLES 
PULPIT (Italian), which treats on the subject of "Where 
Are the Dead?" and I read the same with pleasure. I desire 
that you do me the kindness of sending me other discourses 
along Scripture lines, because I aspire to be a helper in the 
Lord's work in the Italian field. 
Your brother in Christ, DEN ANTANACCI. 

(Translated from the Italian.) 



"SOW BESIDE ALL WATERS!" 

EDITOR OF PEOPLES PULPIT:-- 

Through a friend there has come to my hands a copy of 
your PEOPLES PULPIT, which has interested me exceedingly to 
the very end, for I see that you invite inquirers to send for additional 
literature. I hope I may be favored with some— "The 
Thieves in Paradise," "The Rich Man in Hell" and "Lazarus 
in Abraham's Bosom." I also wish to know more fully about 
the book entitled "THE PLAN OF THE AGES." Anticipating the 
kindness, I am, 

Yours very truly, MANUEL R. LANUZA. 

(Translated from the Spanish.) Philippine Islands. 

page 335 



"FORSAKE NOT THE ASSEMBLING" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In my pilgrimage, especially of late, I find numerous Truth 
friends unmindful of Paul's admonition, "Forsake not the assembling 
of yourselves together, as the manner of some is, 
and the more so as ye see the day approaching" (or drawing 
on). And to my query, "Why not have a meeting of the 
friends regularly, as do the Truth friends in other places?" I 
am almost invariably given the excuse, not a real or valid 
reason, "there is so much prejudice in this community," or, 
"our people are scattered," or "there are so few of us here," etc. 

The dear friends do not realize that all this is true of every 
locality, and in view of all the circumstances the conditions 
could not well be otherwise. In several places I have brought 
the friends to a realization of the necessity of meeting regularly 
for testimony and Berean Bible study, irrespective of all 
seemingly adverse conditions or unfavorable circumstances. 
I find much more Christian warmth and fellowship amongst 
those who do assemble regularly than amongst those who 
neglect to avail themselves of this blessed privilege. If there 
were no other incentive for meeting than this, it should be 
sufficient for Truth friends everywhere to assemble themselves, 
even though there be but three or four who could regularly 
come together. 

The great Apostle surely gave wise counsel when he unconditionally 
admonished us to assemble ourselves, as others 

are doing, irrespective of convenience or inconvenience to ourselves. 
We owe to others spiritual refreshment and Christian 
fellowship, and we need the polishing derivable only by coming 
in contact with one another. 

Some of the Truth people deplore their inability to serve 
the Lord, as well as their lack of opportunity for so doing. 
Bless their hearts, here is just the very best kind of a chance 
to serve the Master. Their attendance at a meeting is in itself 
a testimony of love and faith in God and his saints. 

Where the Friends meet regularly, too, the class is growing 



in numbers as well as in spirituality, I find. 

It seems to me that a TOWER article right along this line 
would be timely and helpful. I wonder if the other pilgrims 
have a similar experience? There is much to be said in favor 
of regular services amongst the brethren and not one thing I 
can think of that would be a valid argument to the contrary. 
There is no good reason for not having meetings regularly 
anywhere that I have ever been. 

Your brother in Christ, J. A. BOHNET. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR NOVEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for November follow: (1) 259; 
(2) Vow; (3) 301; (4) 75; (5) 60; (6) 135; (7) 
129; (8) 333; (9) 176; (10) 238; (11) 38; (12) 105; 
(13) 293; (14) 170; (15) 172; (16) 245; (17) 313; 
(18) 8; (19) 279; (20) 145; (21) 229; (22) 256; (23) 
98; (24) 164; (25) 162; (26) 160; (27) 208; (28) 303; 
(29) 222; (30) 267. 



page 338 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 
Blessing God and Cursing Men 339 



No Evil to Which the Lord's People 

Are More Exposed 340 

How the Depraved Taste Hedges Behind 

Conscience 341 

Love Commands that We "Speak Evil 

ofNoMan 342 

"Doth a Fountain Send Forth at the Same 

Opening Bitter Water and Sweet?" 343 

"The Tongue Set on Fire of Gehenna" 345 

Concordances and Other Bible Study Helps 346 

"The Presence of the Son of Man" 347 

"This Generation Shall Not Pass" 347 

Satan's House to Be Broken Up 348 

The Dark Gethsemane Hour 348 

Judas the Ungrateful Apostate 349 

Nearing the Goal (Poem) 350 

Watch Tower Bibles 350 

The Liberty Wherewith Christ Makes Free 351 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 351 

page 338 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



CLEVELAND, OHIO, NOV. 20 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:00 
o'clock. Discourse for the interested at 1 1:00 o'clock in 
Pythian Temple, Huron Road near East Ninth street. Discourse 
for the public by Brother Russell at the Hippodrome, 
Euclid avenue, near East Ninth street, at 3:00 P.M. Topic, 
"Hereafter." Visiting friends will be heartily welcomed. 

OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLA., NOV. 27 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:00 
o'clock and Discourse for the interested at 1 1:00 o'clock. 
Discourse for the public at 3:00 P.M. by Brother Russell. 
Topic, "Hereafter." All sessions will be held in the Auditorium, 
Cor. Walker and California Sts. Visiting friends will 
be warmly welcomed. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., DEC. 4 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle. The evening meeting at 7:30 
o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse for the 
public at 3:00 P.M. in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 
Lafayette Ave. and St. Felix St. Topic, "The Messenger of 
the Covenant." Visiting friends warmly welcomed. 

OMAHA, NEB., DEC. 11 

HARTFORD, CONN., DEC. 18 

MOBILE, ALA., DEC. 26 

CHOOSE CHRISTMAS TOKENS WISELY AND EARLY 
AS POSSIBLE 

When thinking of Christmas tokens for your friends, do 
not forget SCRIPTURE STUDIES, in all languages and in various 
styles of binding; the HEAVENLY MANNA, in three styles of 
binding, 50c edition in blue cloth, wholesale rate 35c, or in 
lots often cheaper; leatherette edition, gold edges, $1.00, 
wholesale rate 60c; charges collect. Full leather 
edition, gold edges, $1.50, wholesale rate to you, $1.00. Remember 
also the Emphatic Diaglott, cloth $1.50, leather $2.50. 
One year's subscription will be given to THE WATCH TOWER, 
with either of these as premium, in order to introduce THE 
TOWER to new readers. Concordances— Young's, Strong's, 
Cruden's. Bibles of every make. Order by number. Our subscribers 
supplied at wholesale rates. Let your gifts to friends 



be of the useful kind; also, as far as possible, these should be 
your representatives. 



R4705 : page 339 

BLESSING GOD AND CURSING MEN 

"But the tongue can no man tame: it is an unruly evil, full of 
deadly poison. Therewith bless we God, even the Father, 
and therewith curse we men, which are made after the 
similitude of God. Out of the same mouth proceedeth 
blessing and cursing. My brethren, these 
things ought not so to be."— James 3:8-10. 

THESE words of the inspired Apostle are addressed 

to the "brethren"— not to the world. 

Indeed, the entire Epistle is addressed to 

the Church. The fact that in opening it 

James addresses "the twelve tribes which 

are scattered abroad," is not to the contrary 

of this. We are to remember that to the 

twelve tribes of Israel, the natural Seed of 

Abraham, pertained originally the great 

Covenant or promise of God made to Abraham. 

By natural heredity, then, God's offer or proposition 

to bless the world belonged to fleshly Israel, as the 

Divine instruments, if they would comply with the Divine 

conditions. But one of the Divine conditions was 

that they should have the faith of Abraham, and should 

not be considered the promised Seed of Abraham without 

that faith, since Abraham was to be the Father of 

the Faithful. 

Our Lord and the Apostles, in the New Testament, set 
forth clearly how and why natural Israel, as a nation, 
was broken off from inheritance under that Covenant. 
The Apostle, representing the promise as an olive root, 
describes all Israelites as branches growing up out of that 
root, and tells us that many of the natural branches were 
broken off, the vast majority, and that only a remnant at 
the first advent were found possessed of the faith of 
Abraham, and accepted by our Lord as members of the 
house of sons.— John 1:12. 

The Apostle further explains that the rejection of the 
unbelieving of natural Israel left the way open to engraft 
in the place of the broken-off branches some from amongst 
the Gentiles, possessed of the faith of Abraham. And 
this, we see, has been the work of this Gospel Age- 
grafting into the original root of promise believers from 
amongst the Gentiles, who were once without God and had 
no hope in the world, strangers from the commonwealth of 
Israel, but are now brought nigh, united with Christ, and 
through him united with the Abrahamic root of promise, 
and inheritors of all its richness and fatness.— Eph. 2:12,13; 
Rom. 11. 



Thus we see that these Spiritual Israelites become 
the Israelites indeed, from the Divine standpoint, the 
actual inheritors of the Abrahamic Covenant or promise; 
although we see also, yet to be fulfilled, certain gracious 
earthly promises to the natural Seed of Abraham; nevertheless 
they have missed, have lost, as a nation, as a people, 
the great prize; as the Apostle declares, "Israel hath 
not obtained that which he seeketh for; but the election 
hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded."— 
Rom. 11:7. 

So, then, the "twelve tribes" of Israel had promises 
made to them which apply not merely to themselves, but 
also and specially to Spiritual Israel, whom they typified; 
while the original election, or predestination, of God, respecting 
the Abrahamic Seed, that it should be 144,000 
or 12,000 from each tribe, still stands; and consequently 
that each one accepted from among the Gentiles, and 
engrafted into this root of Abrahamic promise, is counted 
as taking the place of one of the broken-off branches of 
the various tribes. 

By the time the Gospel Age shall have finished its 
work, a Spiritual Israel will have been found— "a royal 
priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people"— showing 
forth the praises of him who called them out of darkness 
into his marvelous light— neither one more nor one less 
than the original, elect, predetermined number— a natural 
Israelite having been "broken off" for each one from 
the Gentiles "grafted in." The Church is thus referred 
to in Revelation 7:3-8. And the sealing of the Church 
is spoken of as being so many from each of the tribes, 
with the intimation that all of these will have been 
"sealed in their foreheads" before the great time of 
trouble shall come upon the world. 

So, then, the Epistle of James is to be understood as 
addressed to these true Israelites, engrafted into the root 
of promise, and taking the place of the natural Israelites. 
And to this agree the words of the Apostle Paul, "They 
are not all Israel which are of Israel." (Rom. 9:6,7.) 
And again, "He is not a Jew which is a Jew outwardly, 
neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh; 
but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision 
is that of the heart." (Rom. 2:28,29.) And again, the 
words of our Lord in addressing his Church: "I know the 
blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, 
but are of the synagogue of Satan."— Rev. 2:9; 3:9. 

Our Lord recognized this same distinction between 
natural and true Israelites. When receiving Nathaniel 
he declared, "Behold, an Israelite indeed." These two 
Israels, of the flesh and of the spirit, were typified in 
Isaac and Ishmael, and again, as the Apostle declares, 

R4705 : page 340 

in Jacob and Esau. (Rom. 9:8-13,22-33.) In each case 
the inheritor of the promise was the younger brother, 
illustrating that Spiritual Israel would be developed after 



natural Israel, and take its place as heir of the chief 

blessings mentioned in the Abrahamic Covenant. However, 

we are to remember that a blessing was granted 

also in each case to the elder brother, in the types; and so 

it is in the antitypes. While God has appointed Christ 

to be the heir of all things, and has called the Church as 

his Bride, to be his joint-heir in all things, he has, nevertheless, 

provided that blessing shall flow from these to 

the earthly seed, and in turn through the latter to all the 

families of the earth.— Rom. 11:26-33. 

Having thus definitely determined that the Apostle 
is addressing the Church, let us consider the astounding 
statement of our text, and seek to ascertain in what sense 
it should be understood; resolving that, should we find 
that in any sense or degree it applies to us individually, 
we will assuredly respond quickly to the spirit's teaching, 
and correct so evil a condition. 

CHRISTIANS WHO CURSE MEN WITH THEIR TONGUES 

We may readily see how the Apostle means that God's 
people bless or praise his name with their tongues. They 
do so in prayer; they do so in their hymns of praise; 
they do so in declaring his Truth, and in witnessing to 
his providences on their behalf. In a word, we bless God 
with our tongues by showing forth his praises, who called 
us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 

But in what sense does the Apostle mean that Spiritual 
Israelites curse men with their tongues, and that so commonly, 
so generally prevalent as to require public reproof? 
Surely no Christian curses his fellow-man by 
oaths and profane swearing! But are there not other 
ways in which our tongues may be a curse and an injury 
to fellow-men? We are to remember that the meaning 
of our English word "curse" has somewhat altered in 
common usage within the last century, having very generally 
lost the sense of injury and assumed wholly the 
sense of swearing, profanity. In the Greek language 
different words are used when referring to a cursing 
oath, viz., anathema, and anathematiso, used ten times 
in the New Testament; and when referring to a spoken 
condemnation as a blight or curse, viz., katara and 
kataraomai, which signify condemnation, to speak against, 
to speak evil of, to injure. The latter is the word used 
by the Apostle James; hence his language really is— 
With the same tongue wherewith we praise and honor 
God, we do injury to fellow-men, by evil-speaking, slandering, 
etc. 

Thus our Lord, using the same word, said, "Bless them 
that curse [speak evil of] you." The Apostle Paul, using 
the same word, admonishes God's people to "Bless and 
curse not"— speak favorably of others, but do not speak 
injuriously of them. Again, we are told that our Lord 
cursed (the same Greek word) the fig tree, saying, "Let 
no fruit grow on thee henceforth"— he injured it, he made 
a declaration unfavorable to its future development. 



Thus also the Apostle declares that the Jews under the 
Law were under a curse— not that the Law was evil, but 
that, because of imperfections of the flesh, the Israelites 
came under the condemnation (curse) of the Law. He 
declares also that "Christ hath redeemed us [formerly 
Jews] from the curse [condemnation] of the Law, being 
made a curse for us"— having suffered for us the full 
condemnation of blight which the Law imposed upon the 
transgressor. (Gal. 3:10-13.) He illustrated the same 
thought in connection with the word "curse," when he 
declares that garden land which had been overgrown 
with thorns and briars is "nigh unto cursing"— not ready 
for profanity, but for condemnation, as unfit for tillage, 
until burned over and its weeds exterminated.— Matt. 5:44; 
Rom. 12:14; Mark 11:21; Heb. 6:8. 

Having thus before our minds the real word, and its 
signification as used by the Apostle, we see that while 
curse is a proper enough translation of the original, the 
whole difficulty is that present-day common usage and 
common education have largely hidden from sight this 
signification of the word. Similarly the word evil has 
lost its original breadth of meaning, and is almost invariably 
considered to signify immorality, badness, 
wickedness; whereas in its breadth of meaning it may 
be used to refer to anything that is undesirable, not good, 
such as calamities, etc. 

NO EVIL TO WHICH THE LORD'S PEOPLE ARE MORE 
EXPOSED 

Looking at the Apostle's statement from this standpoint, 
we see clearly that his charge is applicable to 
Christian people of today to an alarming extent. How 
many there are who do injury with their tongues to their 
fellow-creatures, who use the same tongue in offering 
praise to God. We know of no evil to which God's consecrated 
people are more exposed than to this one. With 
many it is as natural to gossip as to breathe. They do 
it unconsciously. We have even known people who took 
cognizance of the Scriptural injunction against slander 
and evil-speaking, who were so utterly confused on the 
subject, and so unaware of their own conduct, that 
they would declare their horror of speaking a slander 
in the very same breath in which they utter slanders. 
We mention this in proof that this evil is so ingrained in 
fallen human nature as to elude the notice of the new 
nature sometimes for years— and thus escapes the correction 
in righteousness which the Lord's Word directs, 
and which all who are truly the Lord's people desire. 

Many are the peculiar subterfuges which the fallen 
nature will use, in its attempt to stifle the voice of conscience 
and yet maintain the use of this channel of evil 
—long after it has been driven from evil practices which 
are less common, less popular, more generally recognized 
as sinful. 

(1) It will say, I mean no harm to anybody; but I 



must have something to talk about, and nothing would 
be so interesting to friends and neighbors as something 
which has more or less of a gossipy flavor (scandal) 
connected with it. But is evil-speaking, slander, any 
the more proper on this account for the children of the 
light? By no means. Hence it is that the Scriptures 
instruct us, "Let your conversation be such as becometh 
saints"; "Let your speech be with grace, seasoned with 
salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every 
man"; "Let no corrupt communication proceed out of 
your mouth, but that which is good, to the use of edifying, 
that it may minister grace unto the hearers."— Phil. 1:27; 
Col. 4:6; Eph. 4:29. 

But the scandal-monger, however refined his methods 
and words, well knows that so far from the scandal ministering 
grace to the hearer, it ministers evil; that the 
hearer is impelled by the forces of his fallen human nature 
to go quickly and tell the scandal further; true or 
false, he knows not and heeds not. It has kindled in his 
heart a flame of carnal sentiment which issues from his 
lips to "set on fire the course of nature" in others, similarly 
weak through the fall. The fallen nature feasts and 
revels in just such things, feeling the more liberty to 
do so because they delude themselves that thus they are 
moralizing— preaching against sin, and that in thus discussing 

R4705 : page 341 

and impliedly denouncing the said-to-be transgressions 
of another, they are mentioning matters abhorrent 
to their righteous souls. Alas! poor, weak, fallen 
humanity's reasonings are seriously defective when the 
Lord's counsels in righteousness are ignored. 

MUCH FOR DISCUSSION ON THE SUBJECT OF THE 
RICHES OF GOD'S GRACE 

As for the point that there would be little else to 
talk about if scandals were thoroughly eliminated from 
Christian conversation, and all were to abide strictly 
by the Apostle's injunction, "Speak evil of no man," we 
answer: Is there not a wide scope for conversation 
amongst Christian people on the subject of the riches 
of God's grace in Christ Jesus our Lord, expressed in the 
exceeding great and precious promises of the Divine 
Word? In these things we have indeed that which 
not only ministers grace to the hearer, but which adds 
also to the grace of the speaker. It showers blessing 
on every hand, so far as the "new creature" is concerned, 
and assists in deadening the old nature with 
its evil desires, tastes, appetites. 

This is what the Apostle had in mind, evidently, 
when he said that the Lord's people should "show forth 
the praises of him who called us out of darkness into 
his marvelous light." And a heart filled with the spirit 
of love, the spirit of God, the spirit of Truth, 



the spirit of the Master, will be sure to overflow 
that which is within, for, "Out of the abundance 
of the heart the mouth speaketh." An evil mouth, therefore, 
a mouth which does injury to others, either to 
fellow-members of "the Body of Christ," or to those who 
are without, indicates an evil heart, implies that the heart 
is not pure. "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they 
shall see God."-I Pet. 2:9; Matt. 12:34; 5:8. 

(2) Another excuse for gossip about other men's 
matters is offered by others who say: I can talk about 
religious matters to those who are religiously inclined, 
but when I am with worldly people, or with professors 
of religion who take no interest in religious themes, I 
must be agreeable and accommodating, and must at least 
hear their gossip and news; and if I do not share in 
such conversation I would be considered very peculiar, 
and my company would not be desired. Yes, we answer; 
but this is to be one of the peculiarities of the "saints." 
They are not only to be different from the world, but 
different also from the nominal professors of religion. 
Their religion is not to be merely on the surface, and on 
one day of the week, and under a certain suit of clothes; 
but is to be of the heart, related to all the affairs of life, 
for every day and every moment. To follow strictly the Divine 
injunction will indeed separate these from some who 
are now their friends and who love such evil things- 
forbidden us who have become sons of God and who 
have received of his spirit of sonship, the spirit of Love. 

THE WAY TO GLORY, HONOR AND IMMORTALITY A 
NARROW WAY 

That our Lord understood and taught that the way to 
glory, honor and immortality is a narrow one is evident. 
"If any man would be my disciple, let him deny himself 
and take up his cross and follow me." And again— 
"Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for strait is the 
gate and narrow is the way that leadeth unto life, and 
few there be who find it." If, therefore, your failure 
to be an entertaining visitor, neighbor, friend, is because 
of your fidelity as a "new creature" to the law of Christ, 
Love— which "worketh no ill to his neighbor," either in 
word or deed— then indeed you have cause for rejoicing, 
because you are suffering a little, experiencing a loss, 
for Christ's sake, for righteousness' sake. The loss may 
at first seem heavy, but if you endure it for Christ's sake, 
in obedience to his righteous law of Love, you will 
soon be able to say with the Apostle that such losses are 
"light afflictions," not worthy to be compared with the offsetting 
blessings.-Phil. 3:7,8; 2 Cor. 4:17. 

Your cause for rejoicing is that you have the Lord's 
promise that such suffering shall work out for your good. 
Companionship with those who are not seeking to walk 
according to the mind of the spirit, but according to the 
common "course of this world," is injurious to the saints, 
to those who are seeking to walk in harmony with the 



new mind. They are far better off without such worldly 
companions and friends, and in proportion as they are 
separated from these they will find closer fellowship with 
the Lord himself and with his Word, and with all who 
are true members of his Body, and under the direction 
of his Spirit. 

It is in harmony with this that the Scriptures declare, 
in so many words, that the friendship of this world signifies 
enmity against God. (Jas. 4:4.) God has purposely 
placed the matter in such a position that his people must 
take their choice, and lose either the Divine friendship 
and fellowship, or the worldly friendship and fellowship; 
because those things which the Lord loves are distasteful 
to the worldly, and those things which the worldly love, 
evil deeds and evil thoughts, evil-speaking, are an abomination 
in the sight of the Lord, and those who love and 
practice such things lose his fellowship— they are not of 
his Spirit. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, 
he is none of his."— Rom. 8:9. 

(3) Another way by which some otherwise good 
Christian people avoid this question, and justify themselves 
in this common fault of humanity, is by confining 
themselves (as they think) to the truth. But they never 
know how frequently their gossip-loving natures pervert 
their judgment and lead them to accept as truth, things 
respecting which they have little or no knowledge. Nor 
are such anxious to know more, after they have circulated 
a slander with their stamp of verity on it. To find it untrue 
would prove them "false witnesses" and put them to 
trouble to correct the lie. The pride of the natural mind 
objects and refuses to believe the truth under such circumstances. 
Thus one evil leads to another. 

HOW THE DEPRAVED TASTE HEDGES BEHIND 
CONSCIENCE 

Such will say, "Oh, I never tell anything for truth 
until I positively know it to be true— of my own observation, 
my own personal knowledge. Anything that I do 
not know of myself to be true I am always careful to 
so state, and say, I have heard thus and so, or, I am 
told thus and so; I do not vouch for the truth of it myself. 
Thus I am sure that I always avoid speaking evil 
of anyone." Perhaps there is no more common delusion 
on this subject than is thus expressed. The depraved 
taste hedges itself behind conscience, and declares that 
it is always right to speak the truth, and hence God cannot 
have meant that speaking the truth would be slander, 
but that in condemning evil-speaking and slander, as 
works of the flesh and the Devil, he must have meant the 
speaking of that which is false, untrue. 

This is a great mistake. A slander is equally a slander, 
whether it is true or whether it is false, and is so 
regarded, not only in the law of God, but also in the 
laws of civilized men. True, in human law, if a suit were 
brought for slander, if it were proven that the charges 



made by the slanderer had some basis of fact, that would 
probably be considered by the Court and jury an extenuating 

R4705 : page 342 

circumstance, and would probably very much 

reduce the amount of the verdict for damages. A slander 

is anything which is uttered with the intention of injury 

to another, whether true or false, and the laws of men 

agree with the law of God, that such injury to another is 

wrong. 

In other words, Divine and human laws agree that 
a first wrong does not justify a second wrong. Human 
law says, If a wrong has been committed, the Courts 
are open to the injured one to seek redress or the punishment 
of the evil doer; but the injured one shall not 
be permitted to take the remedy into his own hands, 
either by making an assault with physical force or by the 
use of the more subtle weapon, the tongue, to assassinate 
his reputation with the poisoned stiletto of envy and 
malice. True, many slanderers are never prosecuted; 
true also, the newspapers of the United States many times 
escape heavy damages for libelous slander by the plea 
that they do not publish the defamations as of malice, 
but simply as news, which, they claim, properly belong 
to the public, as in the cases of politicians who are seeking 
the franchises of the people for positions of public 
trust. Then again, public men, knowing that much of 
the false statements by the opposition press will be 
properly credited as falsehoods, consider it good policy 
to let any ordinary slanders go unchallenged in the 
Courts. The effect is a gradual growth of slander among 
the people, sure to work evil to themselves and to their 
institutions; for government officers and courts and everybody 
of influence coming under such slanders (generally, 
we believe, untrue) lose their influence for good over 
the lower classes, who are thus being helped along to 
greater lawlessness day by day, and preparing for the 
period of anarchy which the Scriptures tell us is near 
at hand. 

THE LAW OF LOVE COMMANDS THAT WE "SPEAK EVIL 
OF NO MAN" 

But the Law of God, the Law of Christ, goes much 
further and deeper into such matters, naturally, than do 
the laws of men; for it deals not with men, but with the 
"new creatures in Christ Jesus"— transformed by the 
renewing of their minds, and under special Covenant 
relationship, and bound by the law of Love, which 
"worketh no ill to his neighbor," under any circumstances, 
under any provocation, but, on the contrary, returns "good 
for evil," "blessing for cursing." 

The Law of Love commands silence to all who 
acknowledge that law and the Law-Giver, saying, "Speak 
evil of no man." (Titus 3:2.) It goes further than this 



and declares against evil thoughts, evil suspicions, evil 
surmisings against neighbors. It declares that love filling 
our hearts will not only hinder evil conduct and injurious 
words, but will even prevent evil thoughts— "Love 
thinketh no evil." The new creature possessing it can 
be convinced of evil only by indisputable proofs. Indeed, 
to impress this subject and its importance in his sight, 
the Great Teacher declares to the pupils in his school— 
With what judgment ye judge others, I will judge you. 
(Matt. 7:1.) And again he tells them to pray to the 
Father— "Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those 
who trespass against us." (Matt. 6:12.) Again he declares. 
If at heart ye treasure up resentment against 
others, the Heavenly Father will not forgive you.— 
Matt. 18:35. 

Ah! indeed, a Christian after the Lord's pattern, a 
graduate of the school of Christ and prepared to teach 
others, is one who not only outwardly, but inwardly also, 
is clean— separated, washed by the water of Divine instruction, 
from the meanness, the filthiness of the flesh. 
He is no longer the slave of sin, controlled by the desires 
and weaknesses of his fallen flesh and its spirit of 
the world, bearing fruits unto unrighteousness— anger, 
malice, hatred, strife, slander, evil-speaking. (Col. 3:8; 
I Pet. 2:1,2.) From his high standpoint of appreciation 
of the Divine law, the advanced Christian sees that in 
the Lord's sight hatred is murder, slander is assassination, 
and the destruction of a neighbor's good name is robbery 
and rapine. And any of these things done in the Church, 
among the professed people of God, is doubly evil— the 
assassination and robbery of a brother.— Compare I John 3:15 
and Matt. 5:21,22. 

THE NATURAL HEART IS DECEITFUL AND DESPERATELY 
WICKED 

To utter a defamatory or injurious remark against 
another, and then to add, "I do not know whether it is 
true or not," is to show that the speaker is exercised by an 
evil spirit and not by the Spirit of Christ, the spirit of 
love— he wishes to injure or curse his fellow-creature, is 
anxious to do so. He would feel restrained to some extent 
from telling what he knew to be absolutely untrue, 
but delights to speak evil, and is glad to know that 
he may roll it as a sweet morsel over his tongue, 
and hence speaks of even those scandals which he does 
not know to be true, and attempts to excuse himself with 
such an apology as the above. 

Verily, it is with force that the Scriptures declare that 
the natural heart is deceitful above all things and desperately 
wicked. Those who thus speak, and thus attempt 
to justify their misconduct, have either never entered the 
school of Christ, or are as yet only in the infant class, 
and do not know that theirs is the spirit of murder, and 
not the spirit of brotherly love. Oh! that all true Christians 
might learn the scope of this law of Love, in its relationship 



not only to God, but also to fellowmen; what a 
bridling of tongues it would mean, what a carefulness 
of speech! As David said, "I will take heed to my ways, 
that I sin not with my tongue." And he who watches his 
tongue is putting a detective upon his deceitful heart and 
can the better know it and master it, for "out of the 
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh."— Jer. 17:9; 
Psa. 39:1; Matt. 12:34. 

The only exception to this rule, "Speak evil of no 
man," would come in where we might know of an absolute 
necessity for making known an evil— where the relating 
of the evil would be contrary to our heart's wishes, 
and only mentioned because of necessity— because of love 
for others who, if not informed, might be injured. For 
instance, the law of the land demands that, if we know of 
murder having been committed, it shall not be considered 
slander, but on the contrary be considered duty, to make 
known to the proper officers of the law the facts (not suspicions) 
which have come under our observation. Likewise, 
if we knew of some weakness in a brother or sister, 
and realized that another brother or sister was about to 
be placed in a dangerous position by reason of 
that weakness, it might become our duty to make 
known, either to the individual or congregation 
liable to be injured, so much of our knowledge 
of facts (not suspicions) as might be necessary to guard 
against injury through the weakness mentioned. But this 
would not be speaking evil, but, on the contrary, 
would be speaking with a good motive, with the intention 
of preserving the one party from extraordinary 
temptation, and of preserving the other party from injury. 
And before anything should be said on the subject we 
should most positively satisfy our own consciences that 

R4705 : page 343 

our motive in speaking is a good one, and not an evil 
one; that we are about to use our tongue to bless, and 
not to injure. And even then, prompted by the spirit of 
love and kindness toward the weak brother, as well as 
toward the others, we should avoid mentioning one solitary 
item that would not be necessary to the object in 
view. 

"DOTH A FOUNTAIN SEND FORTH AT THE SAME 
OPENING BITTER WATER AND SWEET?" 

But some will object to limiting this liberty to cases 
of positive knowledge, and urge that absolute knowledge 
generally being small little could be said. We answer 
that this is in line with the Divine law— "Love thy neighbor 
as thyself." You would not want your neighbor to 
use brain and tongue in evil surmises and slander against 
you; and you should not do so to him. The law of the 
land does not demand that you should tell one word more 
than you know (of personal knowledge) against your 



neighbor; it does not ask your suspicions and evil surmisings. 

And on the contrary, the law of the Lord commands 

that all under the law of love shall not utter one 

solitary suspicion against a neighbor; and that if suspicion 

beyond knowledge is forced upon the mind by associated 

circumstances, the new mind shall promptly, with 

its native benevolence, counterbalance the suspicions by 

suggestions of the possibility of misinformation or misinterpretation 

and always give the apparently guilty the 

benefit of the doubt. 

Another will object— "Oh! I could never waste so 
much time in getting at facts. Life is too short! Why, 
I would have no time at all left for my own business, 
if I carefully hunted up the facts so as always to speak 
from knowledge and never from hearsay!" 

Just so! and the lesson to you should be to follow 
the Scriptural rule— "Speak evil of no man!" 

(1) Because you have not the time to get at the 
facts, and quite probably also lack the ability to judge 
impartially, if you had all the facts before you. 

(2) Because, if you have the Spirit of Christ, love, 
dwelling in you richly, you will prefer to tell no one the 
facts, even if you have the chain of evidence complete. 
You will loathe the matter the more in proportion as the 
known facts are unfavorable. What, then, must be the 
condition of those who have itching ears for scandal 
and of those whose tongues delight in scandal as a sweet 
morsel, and are anxious to scatter an evil report of which 
they have no knowledge— only prejudiced hearsay? The 
most generous view possible of such is that they have 
little of the Spirit of Christ; that they are deficient in 
brotherly love and have never truly learned "the golden 
rule." 

The Apostle inquires, "Doth a fountain send forth 
at the same opening bitter water and sweet?" The form 
of his question implies the answer, No; it is either good 
water only, or brackish water only. He evidently wishes 
to suggest that we apply the same rule to our hearts and 
mouths: How is it possible if our hearts have been renewed 
that our mouths utter loving sweetness to God 
and bitter acrimony, envy, hatred, strife, towards or respecting 
our fellowmen? 

THE TREASURE OF THE NEW MIND IN AN EARTHEN 
VESSEL 

There is but one way of understanding the foregoing 
question Scripturally. It is expressed by the 
Apostle Paul (2 Cor. 4:7), "We have this treasure [the 
new heart, the new mind, the new nature] in an earthen 
vessel." Not that Christians are of two natures, for that 
thought is contrary to the science of the Bible. No mixture 
of natures can be recognized; hence it was that our 
human natures were justified through faith in Jesus' 
blood and a renouncement of sin and a consecration to 
death, that instead we might have spiritual natures and 



become "new creatures in Christ Jesus." The new 
creature, however, is as yet only in embryo, possessing 
only the new mind which dwells in and proposes to regulate 
and govern the mortal bodies, which are considered 
dead so far as the will of the flesh is concerned. 

When, therefore, our mouths are speaking forth 
heartfelt praise to God, who hath blessed us, lifted our 
feet from the horrible pit, and the miry clay, and placed 
us upon the Rock Christ Jesus, and has put a new song 
into our mouth, our praise implies that the new mind is 
controlling at such a time, that the new heart is overflowing 
in the mortal body, and going forth through the lips 
to the blessing and edification, the comfort and encouragement 
of those who hear. Thus the fountain in our heart 
is sending forth sweet waters, carrying with them life, 
blessing, refreshment. But when our tongues speak evil 
of any, whether it be true or false, it implies that the 
new nature is, temporarily at least, overcome by the old 
nature; it implies that another fountain is now operating 
and using the tongue, the mouth, in issuing forth the 
words of malice or hatred or envy or strife or reproach 
or evil speaking of any kind— cursing or injuring others 
in any degree, great or small. 

This implies that the flesh is not being kept under, 
kept dead, kept buried, kept out of sight. Such a condition, 
therefore, implies slow spiritual development or 
retrogression— falling away on the part of the "new 
creature." All such should remember, as the Apostle 
Paul declares, "The time past of our lives sufficeth us to 
have wrought the will of the Gentiles." Again, he says, 
"Yield not your members as instruments of unrighteousness; 
but yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive 
from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness 
unto God."-I Pet. 4:3; Rom. 6:13. 

"PURGE OUT THE OLD LEAVEN" 

From this point of view we may console ourselves 
if, in looking backward, we perceive that in our own 
cases from the same mouth has proceeded praise to God 
and injury and defamation and slander and evil-speaking, 
or any of these evil propensities, toward 
our fellow-creatures. It does not, therefore, prove that our 
hearts were not truly justified, and sanctified by the holy 
Spirit of adoption; it does not prove that we are not sons 
of God and partakers of his Spirit. It does prove, however, 
that we are in a sadly improper condition— spiritually 
sick and in need of taking a purgative; as the Apostle 
expresses it, "Purge out, therefore, the old leaven [malice, 
etc.], that ye may be a new [unadulterated, pure] 
lump" or loaf— proper representatives of the Body of 
Christ -I Cor. 5:7. 

We may know assuredly that, until the "new creature" 
gains a thorough victory over the flesh, we will not be 
winners of the great prize which is promised only "to 
him that overcometh." The overcoming, however, will 



be not in the perfecting of the flesh, but in the perfecting 

of the heart— the will, the intentions. As for the blemishes 

of the flesh, some of them, undoubtedly, despite 

every effort on our part to eradicate them, will continue 

with us so long as we are in the flesh. The perfection 

which is to be hoped for, therefore, and aimed at and expected 

and gained by the overcomers, is the perfection of 

the will, heart, intentions— "Blessed are the pure in heart; 

they shall see God." 

R4705 : page 344 

Moreover, our physical weaknesses and defects not 
only vary in kind but in intensity. Some are by nature 
more inclined to gentleness, kindness, etc.; others, until 
accepted of Christ, may have very uncouth, coarse, rude, 
rough earthen vessels. And while the influence of the 
treasure within, the "new mind," will be sure in any case 
to exercise a modifying and transforming effect upon the 
earthen vessel, we cannot expect as much of a change in 
some as in others. We cannot expect as complete a correction 
in righteousness in the outward man, where coarseness, 
rudeness, unkindness are, so to speak, bred in the 
bone and fibre, as we might expect in one born to fine 
sensibilities. 

While recognizing this difference of "earthen vessels," 
we, of course, must use our best endeavors each to correct 
his own. We are to remember that our relationship 
to one another in the Body of Christ is not according to 
the flesh, but according to the Spirit; hence, as the Apostle 
declares, we know one another no longer according to the 
flesh, with its weaknesses, imperfections and ungainly and 
ungraceful natural tendencies. We know each other only 
according to the Spirit, according to the intentions, according 
to the heart— as "new creatures," not as old 
creatures.— 2 Cor. 5:16. 

This will lead us to be very pitiful of one another's 
imperfections of the flesh, so long as we have the assurance 
that the flesh does not represent our brother's real 
self, his mind, his will. We are, therefore, to be gentle 
toward all, "kindly affectioned one toward another," so 
that so far from desiring to wound one another, or to injure 
one another, or to devour one another with our 
tongues, we shall sympathize with each other, do each 
other good, and, by words of grace and comfort, or by 
admonition and reproof spoken in love, may "build one 
another up in the most holy faith"— in the likeness of our 
Lord and Master. 

Proceeding with this subject, the Apostle points out 
that there are two kinds of wisdom, a heavenly and an 
earthly, and that all of the Lord's people should discern 
these, and should see to it that theirs is the heavenly. 
The Apostle's intimation is that there may be some with 
the Church, who may have counted themselves in 
the Church, who may have associated themselves with 
the Church from worldly-wise motives— some who have 



caught sight of the fact that there is a reasonableness and 
a wisdom in the teachings of the Scriptures which they 
admire and which they can turn, perhaps, to their own 
advantage. These, he implies, will be inclined to be heady 
and to make a show of their wisdom, and to be "puffed 
up" by it, and while outwardly acknowledging the propriety 
of the Christian graces, brotherly-kindness, gentleness, 
meekness, patience, love, they have in their hearts 
bitter envyings and strife— strife to have name and fame 
—envying those who may seem to them to have more 
of these. 

These, the Apostle intimates, will find it difficult, yea, 
impossible, to avoid cursing (speaking evil of, injuring) 
the brethren. It will be so natural to them to do so that 
they cannot avoid it, because they have not pure hearts— 
they have not regenerated hearts. If their hearts ever 
were regenerated, they have returned like the sow to 
wallowing in the mire— like the dog to his vomit. The Apostle's 
advice to such as find that they have in their hearts 
envious and bitter feelings, is that they have no cause 
to glory or to boast, but on the contrary should acknowledge 
that, having these evil conditions in the heart, they 
are not Christians at all, and they should cease to lie 
against the truth— cease to act fraudulently, hypocritically 
—cease to continue to claim to have renewed hearts, 
sanctified in Christ Jesus. 

He tells such plainly that their wisdom, their knowledge, 
is not of God, is not of the holy Spirit— "This wisdom 
descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, 
devilish; for, where envy and strife are, there is confusion 
and every evil work [to be anticipated]."— 
Jas. 3:15,16. 

It seems evident that although the Apostle James' 
denunciation applies to any professing to be Israelites 
indeed, he nevertheless is specially aiming his remarks at 
those who profess to be teachers in the Church, to have 
wisdom to a considerable degree. And his words remind 
us of the words of the Apostle Paul; when speaking of 
the various gifts distributed to the Church, he seemingly 
points out the dangers of those of large knowledge, and, 
as an illustration of this principle which James presents, 
he says:— 

"THOUGH I SPEAK WITH THE TONGUES OF MEN AND 
OF ANGELS AND HAVE NOT LOVE" 

Though I could speak with the tongues of men and of 
angels, and have not Love, it would imply that I had become 
as a sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal, making 
a noise indeed, but having no feeling respecting the matter 
myself— I have neither part nor lot with those who 
possess the Spirit of Christ. Although I have the gift 
of prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, 
and though I have all faith, and have not Love, I 
am nothing; and though I bestow all my goods to feed the 
poor, and give my body to be burned, and have not Love, 



itprofiteth me nothing.— I Cor. 13:1-8. 

Thus the Apostle points out distinctly that knowledge 
and oratory are not the most vital tests, but that Love, 
permeating the heart and extending out through all the 
course of life, and actuating and operating our mortal 
bodies, is the real test— the real proof of our Divine relationship. 
He points out that those who had received 
gifts of God before they had come into a proper relationship 
to God might become sounding brass and tinkling 
cymbals, and thus become "nothing," if they lose the 
love, if they lose the Spirit of Christ; for "if any man 
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his." 

It is well for the Lord's people to take particular note 
of these Divine instructions from two of the chiefest of 
the Apostles, and to remember that, valuable though they 
be, neither oratory nor knowledge is to be considered 
amongst the "brethren" as sure proofs of their being in 
the right way, nor that their influence might not be injurious 
instead of helpful. The leading characteristic to 
be looked for in everyone accepted as a servant of the 
Church, to minister in holy things, should be first of all 
the spirit of Love. We do not mean to say that knowledge 
and ability should be entirely ignored, but we do 
mean to say that these should be considered of secondary 
and not of primary importance, as is always the tendency. 

Select from among yourselves, holy men, full 
of the holy Spirit, that they may have the charge of the 
spiritual interests of the different companies of the Lord's 
people. And for a Divine explanation of how this holy 
Spirit will manifest itself, of the qualities, therefore, that 
are to be looked for in the servants of the Church, see 
I Cor. 13:4-8; also I Pet. 1:22,23; 2 Pet. 1:1-13. For 
their own good, as well as for the good of the Church, 
all who, having other qualifications, give evidence of being 
puffed up and of desiring to lord it over God's 
heritage (the Church), or who manifest envy, strife, 
bitterness, evil-speaking— these should be passed by, as 
giving evidence of having the wrong spirit, that cometh 

R4705 : page 345 

not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. They 
are unsafe teachers, and are likely to do more harm than 
good, with whatever knowledge they may possess. 

"THE WISDOM THAT COMETH FROM ABOVE," ETC. 

Continuing, the Apostle leaves no doubt respecting 
his meaning, for he distinctly outlines the course and 
fruitage of heavenly wisdom, saying, "The wisdom that 
is from above is first pure"— truthful, honest, sincere, not 
put on, not used as a garment of light to deceive and to 
cover up selfishness, malice, hatred, strife; it makes no 
compromises with sin, impurity, in any shape or form. 

It is "peaceable."— So far from being a quarrelsome, 
bickering disposition, the "new mind" desires peace; it 



will "contend earnestly for the faith once delivered unto 

the saints," but it will not contend simply from a love of 

contention, a love of strife; on the contrary, the new 

mind is peaceably inclined, would prefer, so far as possible, 

to yield a non-essential point in a controversy; it 

loves its opponents and sympathizes with their 

difficulties. 

It is "gentle"— not rude or coarse, not rough in 
action or word or tone; and if the earthen vessel through 
which it speaks have these rudenesses ingrained by 
nature, the "new nature" regrets them, strives against 
them, and seeks to conquer them; and where they do 
injury to others is ready, willing, glad to apologize, and 
to remove the smart. 

It is "easy to be entreated"— easy of approach, not 
haughty, not disdainful, not hard or cruel; yet it is firm 
on matters of principle; principles cannot be bended or 
modified; they belong to God. But while affirming the 
principles, this spirit of wisdom points out its own willingness 
to moderation, by acknowledging any good features 
in its opponent, and by pointing out the reason why no 
modification is possible in relation to Divine laws and 
principles. 

It is "full of mercy and good fruits."— It delights in 
all things prompted by love and kindness; it takes pleasure 
in doing for others; it takes pleasure, not only in showing 
mercy to dumb animals under its care, but it especially 
delights in mercy in dealing with brethren in respect to 
their faults. It is merciful also in the family— not over-exacting, 
but generous, kind, benevolent. It is generous 
also with opponents, and those who are contentious— not 
wishing to push a victory, even for the truth, to such a 
point as would be injurious, hurtful, unmerciful to the 
antagonist. 

It is "without partiality."— It loves the good, the true, 
where these are found; and opposes the untrue, the impure 
and the unholy, whether found amongst friends or 
enemies. Its justice is of the strictest kind, tempered 
with mercy; it will not approve a fault in a brother, because 
he is a brother, but would reprove the same with 
gentleness and meekness, remembering the liability of all 
to the assaults of the world, the flesh and the Devil. It 
will not fail to see a virtue in an enemy, nor hesitate to 
acknowledge it. Truth is its standard, not prejudice, not 
partyism, not sectarianism. 

It is "without hypocrisy."— It is thoroughly candid; it 
needs not to feign love, because it is love; it needs not 
to put on a kindly exterior and to smother feelings of 
wrath and envy and strife, for it is without envy, without 
strife. Such works of the flesh and of the Devil 
have, by the grace of God, been seen to be earthly, sensual, 
devilish, and have been repudiated, and the heart has been 
justified, cleansed, sanctified to God, renewed in thought, 
intention, will, and is now full of the treasure of the 
holy Spirit. 

With these thoughts before our minds, let us all, dear 



readers, more earnestly than ever, guard against the old 
nature, and its insidious attempts to gain control over 
our tongues. Let us, more and more, seek to appreciate, 
in ourselves and in others, this heavenly wisdom, whose 
operation is so forcefully presented by the Apostle. The 
more important our members, the more influential, the 
more earnestly ought we to strive to keep them in full 
subjection to the Lord, as his servants. Our feet are useful 
members, consecrated to the Lord; we may use them 
in many errands of mercy, to the glory of his name and 
to the profit of his people. Our hands are likewise useful, 
if thoroughly consecrated to the Lord's service. Our 
ears are also useful in his service, to hear for him, to refuse 
to hear the evil, and thus to approve evil, and to 
set a good example to others. Our eyes are a great blessing 
from the Lord, and they also are to be kept from evil, 
from the lust of the eye and the pride of life, and are 
to be instruments or servants of righteousness, in seeing 
the good, in appreciating the good, and in assisting the 
good, and in helping us to know the will of our God. 

"THE TONGUE SET ON FIRE OF GEHENNA" 

But of all our members the most influential is the 
tongue. The tongue's influence exceeds that of all our 
other members combined. To control it, therefore, in the 
Lord's service, is the most important work of the Lord's 
people in respect to their mortal bodies and the service 
of these rendered to the Lord. A few words of love, 
kindness, helpfulness— how often have such changed the 
entire course of a human life! Yea! How much they 
have had to do with moulding the destiny of nations! 
And how often have evil words, unkind words, slanderous 
words, done gross injustice, assassinated reputations, etc.! 
As the Apostle declares, the tongue is capable of setting 
on fire the whole course of nature— awakening passions, 
strifes, enmities, at first unthought of. No wonder he 
declares such tongues "set on fire of Gehenna"— the 
Second Death! 

The public servants of the Church are to some extent 
specially its "tongues," and what an influence they 
wield for good or for evil, in the blessing and upbuilding 
of the Lord's people, or for their injury— cursing. How 
necessary that all the tongue-servants of the Lord's 
Body be such, and such only, as are of his spirit. Their 
influence not only extends to those who are in the Church, 
but in considerable measure they are mouthpieces heard 
outside. And the same principle applies to every individual 
member of the Church, in his use of his member, 
his tongue. He may use it wisely or unwisely, with 
heavenly wisdom or with earthly wisdom. He may use 
it for strife, and tearing down the faith and character 
of the brethren, in overthrowing love and confidence, or 
he may use it in building up these graces of the Spirit. 

How many have proved the truth of the Apostle's 
words— that the tongue has great possibilities for 



defiling the whole Body, the Church, and setting on fire 
the course of nature, by stirring up the evil passions and 
propensities of the fallen nature! How few amongst the 
Lord's people have conquered the tongue to the extent of 
bringing it into subjection to the will of God, that they 
may minister good, and only good, to all with whom they 
come in contact! Let us, dearly beloved, be fully resolved 
that by Divine grace (promised to assist us) we shall 
witness great progress in our control of this most important 
member of our bodies, bringing the same into full 
subjection and obedience and service to the King of kings 
and Lord of lords— to him "who hath called us out of 
darkness into his marvelous light." 



page 346 

CONCORDANCES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this journal 
for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following publications 
by other presses, which we supply at specially low prices because of 
the assistance they will lend to the study of God's Word. We mention 
these somewhat in the order in which they seem to us to be desirable 
aids. 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
STUDENT'S EDITION 

We specially recommend this Bible for 
its smallness of size, lightness of weight 
and good-sized print, and above all for the 
helps to Bible students and teachers bound 
with it. Printed on India paper; excellent 
press work. Its special feature distinguishing 
this Bible from all others is 

ITS BEREAN BIBLE 
TEACHERS' MANUAL. 

Parti. 

Brief Scripture Commentary based on 
expositions of SCRIPTURE-STUDIES, THE 
WATCH TOWER and Brother Russell's published 
sermons, tracts, etc., with references 
to these for fuller comments. 

Part II. 

INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS 
Texts topically arranged for use in 
teaching Divine Plan privately or publicly. 



Part III. 

BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX 

Part IV. 

DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED 
SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED. 

WHOLESALE PRICES IN ANY 
QUANTITY 

Postage, or Expressage Included 

MINION TYPE EDITION, 4-1/2 x 6-3/4 inches. 
Sample of Type, etc., on page 350 of this 
issue. 
No. 1918-So-called French Seal, red 

under gold, round-cornered, divinity 

circuit, linen lined $1.65 

No. 1928-Same as 1918, bound in 

Levant Morocco, fine-grained, very 

durable, leather lined 2.50 

BOLD-FACE TYPE EDITION 

No. 1938— See sample of type, etc., on 

page 350 of this issue. Size 5-1/2 x 

7-1/2. The helps in this Bible are the 

same as described in No. 1928. The 

binding is Levant Morocco, leather 

lining. Price $3.00 

No. 1948— This Bible is the same as 

No. 1938, except that it contains additional 

matter desired by some, namely: 

The Bagster Concordance with a 

Historical Summary, etc. Price $3.25 

No. 1958-This Bible is exactly the 

same as No. 1948, except that it is 

bound in a little better leather, and 

is calf-lined to the edge. Price $3.50 

Patent index 25 cents extra, but we do not advise this on so 
small a book. The above very special price was secured only by our 
placing a very large order— 10,000 copies. This is probably the 
largest-sized single order ever placed for India paper Bibles. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 
For the Household of Faith 

The demand for this publication increases year by year. It is a 
textbook for each day in the year, and good year by year continuously; 
in fact, its value increases as additional autographs of friends are 
secured. It has a very appropriate comment under each text, selected 
from the columns of back issues of THE WATCH TOWER. 

Our present edition of the "Manna" contains the same texts 
and comments as all former editions. Every alternate leaf is blank -ruled, 
for use as an autograph and birthday record. It is printed on 
fine bond paper. We now have same in three different grades of 



binding, at very reasonable prices, considering the class of workmanship. 

PRICES IN HANDSOME DARK BLUE CLOTH. 

The cloth edition of the "Manna" will be sold by Manna Colporteurs, 
and others, at fifty (50) cents each (60 cents when gotten 
by mail or prepaid express). The wholesale rates, open to WATCH 
TOWER subscribers, are as follows, cash with order: 

1 copy, postpaid $ .35 

10 or more copies, by express, prepaid; each 30 

10 or more copies, by freight or express, charges collect; each... .20 

LEATHERETTE EDITION. 

The Leatherette "Manna," although prepared for special work in 
connection with securing subscriptions for newspapers, and therefore 
sometimes designated as "the newspaper Manna," is in an especially 
attractive binding. 

1 copy, Leatherette, postpaid $1.00 

10 or more copies, by freight or express, charges collect; each... .60 

THE DELUXE EDITION. 

A beautiful presentation volume, purple leather, limp-padded 
covers, embossed in gold on side and back, and put in individual boxes: 

1 copy, DeLuxe, postpaid $1.50 

10 or more copies, by freight or express, charges collect; each... 1.00 

We, of course, prefer the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES to be colporteured; 
but a good follow-up work can be done with "Manna" 
by those who cannot do the regular work with the STUDIES. 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast table; 
and that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed with the natural 
food, stimulating thankfulness to the Giver of all Good and thus 
inducing the peace of God and favoring both spiritual and natural 
health and well-being. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This very valuable work, published under the author's copyright 
by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been sold by them at $4 
in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For several years a friend, an 
earnest Bible student, desirous of assisting the readers of our Society's 
publications, has supplied them through us at a greatly reduced price; 
now he has purchased the copyright and plates from the Fowler & 
Wells Co., and presented the same to our Society as a gift, under our 
assurance that the gift, will be used for the furthering of the Truth 
to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction of price as will permit 
the poor of the Lord's flock to have this help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES. -These will be sold with THE WATCH TOWER 
only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage and, as a 
Premium, one year's subscription, new or renewal, to W. T. On thin 
paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red under gold edges, 
silk sewed, leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— includes postage and one 
year's subscription to W.T. 



THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. As footnotes 
it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., Sinaiticus, 
Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ from the Common 
Version. This is a very valuable little work, published in Europe, 
which we specially import for the benefit of our readers. Price, 50c, 
including postage. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading Hebrews, 
by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a valuable aid 
in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special price, in leather 
binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. The publishers advise that 
they are bringing out a new revised edition of this valuable work, with 
considerable additional matter— historical data, etc., and have advanced 
the price. We are not permitted by the publishers to cut this price, 
but we may and do give in addition, postage free, any four volumes of 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES, cloth binding, with each Concordance, or six 
volumes if purchaser pays expressage. Postpaid, cloth binding, $6.00. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It has some 
advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we prefer it. 
Special reduced prices— in cloth binding, $3; half leather, $5. Carriage 
prepaid, 65c. extra. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have either 
of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth binding, $1, delivered. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's work. 
It is a large volume of 1,020 pages. In cloth binding, $1.30, including 
postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE" 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and seems 
remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this class of 
books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday Bible lesson with 
their children, and this book furnishes interesting topics, to which may 
be added as much concordant "Present Truth" as the age of the 
children will justify. Parents are responsible for their children's 



training in theology as well as in morals. This will assist you in the 
discharge of this duty, and thus be a blessing to yourself as well as 
to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and corners, 
gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special price, 75 cents, 
plus 25 cents postage. 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES-INDIA PAPER 

Calls for SCRIPTURE STUDIES divided into small portions, light, 
convenient for the pocket, that could be read on the cars, etc., led us 
to prepare an India-paper edition. The entire volume is on this very 
fine paper reduced to three-eighths of an inch in thickness and about 
four ounces in weight. [The type is exactly the same size as in the 
regular editions.] It is a beauty. Leather covers, gold edges. Its 
cost, with postage, is now 75c. each for the first three volumes and 85c. 
each for the remainder per volume. 

BIBLE CATALOGUES 

We are not giving a list of Bibles of the various publishing houses, 
as has been our custom heretofore. THE WATCH TOWER BIBLES, in 
the above different styles, will meet the needs of nearly all desiring 
Bibles. 

We specially recommend THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE as an excellent 
gift and one which might serve to arouse interest in the SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES. 

However, should any desire other Bibles, please write us, and we 
will be pleased to supply a full catalogue of any of the Bible publishing 
houses. 



R4705 : page 347 

"THE PRESENCE OF THE SON OF MAN" 

-MATTHEW 24:32-44.-NOVEMBER 13.- 

"Watch and pray, lest ye enter into 
temptation."— Matthew 26:41. 

FOR various reasons many Bible students understand 

that our Lord referred to the Jewish 

nation under the symbolism of a fig-tree. 

He had been telling his disciples 

what he expected in the end of this age, 

when he would come again to receive his 

faithful to himself and to give them a place 

as his Bride upon his Throne and to establish 

his Kingdom under the whole heavens 

for the blessing of Israel and all the 

world through Israel. In this study he tells us that 

amongst the prominent signs of the closing of this age 

and the opening of the new will be the budding of the 

fig tree— the springing forth of new life and new hope 



in the Jewish nation. And is not this condition of things 
manifesting itself today? Behold the Jews awakening 
and listening to the voice of Moses and the Prophets calling 
them to Palestine and to fresh hope in God and in the 
glorious promises to which they still are heirs as the natural 

R4706 : page 347 

seed of Abraham! "For the gifts and calling of God 
are things he does not repent of."— Rom. 11:11-39. 

"THIS GENERATION SHALL NOT PASS" 

The generation which witnesses the signs promised in 
the verses preceding our lesson and which witnesses this 
putting forth of the green leaves of hope by Israel will 
see to the full the accomplishment of the glorious change 
of Dispensation so long foretold. They will witness the 
passing of the reign of the Prince of Darkness and the 
inauguration of the glorious reign of the Prince of Light 
—Messiah with his glorious Bride class; not, however, 
that mankind will see Messiah with the natural eye, nor 
see even his glorious Bride, except with the eyes of their 
understanding. "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God" in this highest sense. Flesh and blood, 
however, will see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the 
Prophets in the Kingdom, and will have full testimony 
and practical demonstration of the Kingdom power in the 
great transformation that will be wrought and the restitution 
blessings which will be showered upon Israel and 
upon all who will come into harmony with God through 
Israel's New Covenant.— Jer. 31:31. 

The present ecclesiastical heavens and the present social 
earth will, indeed, both pass away in the great time 
of trouble with which this age will end; but following 
these, supplanting them, will come the new heavens and 
the new earth— the new religious institutions of the Lord 
—the Church in glory, and the new social order amongst 
mankind under the regulations for which we still pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth." Then 
the words of the great Teacher will surely have 
fulfillment. 

THE DAY AND HOUR HAD NOT BEEN FORETOLD 

The day and hour of the great change no one knew, 
not even the angels in heaven. The Master himself declared 
that he did not know— but the Father alone. This 
should not, however, be understood to mean that the Son 
of God would not know about the matter later on, in due 
time, before he would begin his work of establishing the 
Kingdom. Neither would it prove that the angels of 
heaven would be in ignorance up to the last moment. 
Neither would it prove that God's people, living at the 
time for the establishment of the Kingdom, would not 
know. In fact, the Master declares that all living in 



proper harmony with him would be kept informed respecting 

the Father's Plans as they became due. He declared 

that if they would partake of the things of God 

and follow after them, then they should have meat in 

due season. 

In this very study the Great Teacher illustrates this 
principle, referring to Noah and Lot. Noah was informed 
respecting the coming change of Dispensation when he 
was instructed to build the ark one hundred and twenty 
years before the flood. Lot was instructed respecting the 
disaster coming upon the city in which he lived long 
enough in advance to escape from it; likewise the Church 
of Christ is forewarned by this illustration and reminded 
that when they flee they shall not, like Lot's wife, covetously 
look back to the things which, under Divine condemnation, 
are to pass away, but shall escape to 
the mountain— flee to the Kingdom of God, which will at 
that time be in process of establishment. 

Doubtless much of the immorality and sensuality 
which marked the days of Noah and the days of Lot will 
prevail in the world in the closing days of the present age. 
Other Scriptures so inform us, even though this study intimates 
nothing of the kind. This lesson brings to our 
attention another feature connected with our Lord's Second 
Advent— a feature which hitherto has been little noticed 
by Bible students. It informs us that his Second 
Coming will be unobserved, unknown to the world; that 
he will be present in the world, and have to do with the 
gathering together of his saints and with the great time 
of trouble which will follow, yet be entirely invisible to 
men, recognizable only by outward signs of his presence 
and known only to the saintly few of humanity. 

This feature of the lesson is veiled from the eyes of the 
average Bible student by a mistranslated word. The 
Greek for the word coming in verses 37 and 39 is parousia, 
which does not mean coming, but should be rendered 
presence, as of one who has already come. 

"IN THE PRESENCE OF THE SON OF MAN" 

This gives us a stupendous thought! The great King 
of kings will for a time be present amongst men, invisible, 
unknown, except by a very few of his saints, to whom his 
presence will be revealed through the knock of prophecy 
and the opening of the eyes of their understanding to appreciate 
fulfillments. Everything will continue as ordinarily 
—the eating, drinking, planting, building and marrying, 
"as it was in the days of Noah." Had the world 
known in Noah's day the climax of trouble impending, 
many of the ordinary affairs of life would have been discontinued 
—and likewise here. The lesson is that as the 
world did not know in Noah's day, so the world will not 
know "in the days of the Son of Man"— in the presence 
of the Son of Man. 

The field is the world, said our Lord, in explaining 
one of his parables. And so we should interpret it here. 



The Lord will gather some of his jewels from the field; 

all not his jewels will be left. Two will be grinding at 

the mill preparing food for the household; one will be 

taken and another left. The Lord's household is the 

Church, and the mills which prepare the food for the 

Church are theological. The intimation is that some theologians 

will be taken and some will be left, in the selective 

processes of the presence of the Son of Man— in the 

making up of his jewels. 

St. Luke mentions another feature of this discourse. 
There shall be two in one bed; the one shall be taken and 
the other left. A bed is a place for rest. All churches 
profess to be resting places, where the weary and heavy-laden 
rest through faith in God and in his promises. The 

R4706 : page 348 

teaching, then, would be that not all who are resting in 

the churches of Christendom, in the creeds, will be 

amongst the elect, the gathered jewels. Some will be 

taken away from these beds. Others will be left in them. 

A vivid description of these creed-beds and their unsatisfactory 

character is given us by the Prophet— 

Isaiah 28:20. 

WATCH THAT YE MAY KNOW 

Following these illustrations of his presence and his 
work in the harvest time of this Gospel Age the Master 
exhorts all of his followers to watch, to be ready, to be 
on the alert, to be on the lookout, that they may be ready 
for his presence, that they may, in due time, discern his 
presence, and that they may be gathered or separated 
from the world and theological relationship, and from 
earthly church relationship, to the Master himself. Some 
very earnest Bible students believe that we are in this 
harvest period now; that the Son of Man, the glorified 
Messiah, invisible to men, is even now present doing a 
searching and separating work in his Church, gathering 
his saints unto himself preparatory to their change from 
earthly to heavenly conditions and preparatory to the 
inauguration of the great time of trouble, by which present 
institutions will be blotted out to make way for the 
Kingdom of righteousness, for which we have so long 
prayed. Many Bible students believe that the present unrest 
and sifting and shaking amongst Christians and the 
creeds of all denominations and the colleges and seminaries 
are but incidental to this work which the Son of 
Man, present amongst us, is accomplishing for the purpose 
of fully separating to himself his very elect. 
Whether this proposition be agreed to or not, the fact 
still remains that thus matters will be whenever the time 
shall come, whenever the end of this age and the inauguration 
of the new shall take place. 

SATAN'S HOUSE TO BE BROKEN UP 



All of the foregoing suggestions are confirmed by the 
symbolism of the 43d verse. Here the Master likens the 
institutions of the present time to a house or household. 
Elsewhere he informs us that Satan is the Prince of this 
world, the over-lord who tyrannizes the world, operating 
through the weaknesses and passions and depraved appetites 
and impaired reasoning faculties of humanity. Had 
the time of the Lord's Second Advent been clearly made 
known that knowledge would have so altered matters and 
affairs that the world would not have been taken by surprise 
in connection with the gathering of the Lord's jewels 
and the establishment of his Kingdom, and thus there 
would not be such a breaking-up in earth's affairs as is 
now impending; the Kingdom would be established, but 
not in the way in which God designed. 

In this verse our Lord likens his second presence, unknown 
to the world, to the presence of a thief in a house, 
unknown to its master. The Lord's saints in the world 
are his jewels. These he will take away and the loss to the 
world will be great. As the saintly ones will be gathered 
from the field, from the mill and from the bed into closer 
heart-union with the Lord, those left in the world, the 
mill and the bed, will be greatly disadvantaged— not because 
the jewel class are wealthy or have worldly greatness, 
for of these chosen saints it is distinctly stated that 
there are amongst them "not many great, not many rich, 
not many wise, not many noble." But these saintly ones 
are, nevertheless, the "salt" of the earth and the salt of 
the churches, and the salt of the theological seminaries. 
After the taking away of the salt class, putrefaction and 
disintegration will speedily follow. 

In view of all this, all who profess to be the Lord's 
people should earnestly watch, as well as pray; they 
should watch their words and thoughts and doings and 
see to it that they worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness, 
and that they do not idolize either dead or living 
men or creeds. Thus walking circumspectly in the footsteps 
of Jesus the saintly ones will be kept in the hour of 
temptation, which shall come upon the whole world to 
prove them.— Rev. 3:10. 



R4707 : page 348 

THE DARK GETHSEMANE HOUR 

-MATTHEW 26:36-46.-NOVEMBER 20. 

"The Son of man is betrayed into 
the hands of sinners."— V. 45. 

AFTER the Master and his disciples, as Jews, 
had celebrated the Passover Supper and after 
he had subsequently instituted the Memorial 



of his death, with the bread and the 

cup, and after Judas had gone out to betray 

him, Jesus and the remaining eleven left the 

upper room in Jerusalem, crossed the city 

to the gate, and thence crossed the Valley 

Kedron and ascended the sloping side of 

Mt. Olivet toward the Garden of Gethsemane. 

The word Gethsemane signifies oil-press. Tradition 

has it that this Garden belonged to the family of 

which the Apostles John and James were members, and 

that for this reason the Lord and his disciples were privileged 

to feel themselves at home there. St. Mark, the 

writer of one of the Gospels, but not one of the Apostles, 

is credited with having been a member of the same family. 

One of the accounts of the arrest of the Master tells that 

amongst those who followed after him was a young man 

wrapped with a sheet, and who fled naked when some 

members of the band attempted to lay hold of him. That 

young man, tradition says, years afterwards was known 

as St. Mark. 

This was the most memorable night of the Master's 
experience. He knew perfectly the meaning of every feature 
of the Passover. He knew that he was the Lamb of 
God, antitypically, whose death was to be accomplished 
on the following day by crucifixion. Yet his thoughts 
were for his dear disciples. He must give them final 
words of encouragement and instruction. And so he did. 
Three chapters of St. John's Gospel record the incidents 
of the intervening time between the leaving of the upper 
room and the arriving at Gethsemane, the place of the 
oil-press. "And Judas also, who betrayed him, knew the 
place, for Jesus ofttimes resorted thither with his disciples." 
(John 18:2.) In St. John 14 the Master told his 
disciples about the place he would go to prepare for them, 
but that he would send the Spirit of Truth to be their 
Comforter, and it would show them things to come. In 
the fifteenth chapter he gave them the parable of the 
Vine and the Branches, and assured them that no longer 
should they be servants, but friends, "For all things that 
I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you." 
In the sixteenth chapter he explained to them that persecutions 
must be expected, if they would share his sufferings 
and be prepared to share his glory. 

A little while and they would not see him; then again 
a little while and they would see him. The entire period 

R4707 : page 349 

of his absence from the Divine standpoint, as compared 
to eternity, would be but a little while. Then, by virtue 
of the resurrection "change," they would see him, because 
made like him. "In the world ye shall have tribulation; 
but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." 
"These things I have given unto you that in me ye might 
have peace." In the seventeenth chapter is recorded his 
wonderful prayer to the Father on behalf of his followers 



—not for the Apostles only, but for all those also who 
would believe on him through their word. 

IN THE GARDEN OF GETHSEMANE 

Thus discoursing, they reached the Garden, or olive-yard, 
where the press for extracting the oil from the 
olives was located. Somewhere near the entrance eight 
of the disciples were bidden to remain watching while 
Jesus, with the specially beloved Peter, James and John, 
went a little farther. And then, realizing the impossibility 
of even his dearest friends appreciating his sorrowful 
condition, he went still farther alone to speak to the 
Father. The disciples, perplexed, astounded, by the things 
that they had heard from his lips, did not comprehend the 
true situation. They evidently thought that there must 
still be something parabolic in his utterances. They 
would indeed watch with him, but they were weary and 
sank into slumber. The spirit was willing, but the flesh 
was weak. 

If some have queried why the Master preferred to be 
alone in prayer so frequently, the answer is, "I have 
trodden the wine-press alone, and of the people there 
was none with me." (Isa. 63:3.) His disciples and followers 
loved him dearly. Still he was alone, because he 
alone had been begotten of the holy Spirit. His followers 
could not feel so blessed nor be Spirit-begotten until after 
his sacrifice had been finished nor until he would appear 
in the presence of God for them to apply his merit imputedly 
to them; to permit them to join with him sacrificially 
in the sufferings of this present time, that they 
might share with him also in the glories to follow. 

St. Peter, referring to the foregoing experience of our 
Lord, declares that he offered up strong crying and tears 
unto him that was able to save him from death, and was 
heard in respect to that which he feared. Why did he 
fear? Do not all humanity face death, and some of them 
with great courage and some with bravado? Ah, there 
is a vast difference between the Master's standpoint and 
ours as respects death. We were born dying. We never 
knew perfect life. We have always known that there is 
no escape from death. It was different with him. His 
experiences on the spirit plane before coming into the 
world were all in association with life, perfection of life. 
"In him was life" uncontaminated, because he was holy, 
harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners; his life 
came not from Adam. 

He knew that in his perfection he had a right to life, 
if he would live in perfect accordance with the Divine 
requirements. But he knew also that by special Covenant 
with God, "a Covenant by sacrifice," he had agreed to 
the surrender of all his earthly rights and to allow his 
life to be taken from him. The Father had promised him 
a great reward of glory, honor and immortality through 
resurrection from the dead, but this was dependent upon 
his absolute obedience in every particular— in word, in 



thought, in deed. The question was, Had he been absolutely 
loyal to God in every particular? If not, death 
would mean to him an eternal extinction of being; not 
only the loss of heavenly glory promised as a reward, but 
the loss of everything. Can we wonder that he did not 
understand? The hour seemed so dark, and he said, "My 
soul is exceeding sorrowful." He knew that he was to 
die. He knew that death was necessary. But here, now, 
looming up before him on the morrow was a shameful 
execution as a blasphemer, as a criminal, as a violator of 
Divine law. Could it be possible that in anything, even 
slightly, he had taken to himself the honor due to the 
Father? Could it be possible that in any degree he had 
held back, even in his mind, from full obedience to the 
Father's will? Did this crucifixion as a criminal possibly 
mean the loss of Divine favor? Was it necessary that 
he should die thus? Might not this cup of ignominy pass? 
So he prayed in a great agony. And although the older 
Greek manuscripts do not contain the statement that he 
sweat great drops of blood, medical science tells us that 

R4708 : page 349 

such an experience would not have been at all impossible 
in a nervous, strained, mental agony. But we note the 
beautiful simplicity of the statement with which his 
prayer concluded— "Nevertheless, my Father, not my will, 
but thy will, be done." 

How childlike and beautiful the faith and trust, even 
amidst strenuous agitation! St. Paul says that he was 
heard in the thing which he feared. How? God's answer 
came by angelic hands. An angel appeared and 
ministered to him— ministered to his necessity. "Are they 
not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to those 
who shall be heirs of salvation?" (Heb. 1:14.) We are 
not informed in what words this heavenly ministry was 
expressed to the Master in his lowliness and sorrow, but 
we do know that it must have been with full assurance of 
the Heavenly Father's favor and sympathy and love. He 
was heard in respect to the things which he feared. He 
received the assurance that he was well-pleasing to the 
Father; that he had been faithful to his Covenant, and 
that he would have the resurrection promised. 

From that moment onward the Master was the calmest 
of all who had any association with the great events 
of that night and the following day. Officers, servants, 
Sanhedrin, priests, Herod and his men of war, Pilate and 
his soldiers, and the shouting rabble— all were excited, all 
were distressed. Jesus only was calm. This was because 
he had the Father's assurance that all was well between 
them. As this blessed assurance gave the Master courage, 
so his followers since have found that, "If God be for us, 
who can be against us?" If we have the peace of God 
ruling in our hearts, it is beyond all human 
comprehension. 



JUDAS THE UNGRATEFUL APOSTATE 

The world is full of sadly disappointing characters. 
In many things we all fail. Selfishness, meanness, perversity, 
pride, etc., mark the human family most woefully. 
But withal, can anyone find anything more reprehensible 
than the ingrate who would betray his best friend? 

The world is of one opinion respecting such characters 
as that of Judas. And although he is a noted example he 
is by no means an exception; there are many. Some of 
them live today. But whoever can see the meanness of 
such a disposition with a reasonably good focus will surely 
be saved from manifesting such a character, however 
mean might be his disposition. The man who could sell 
his Master for thirty pieces of silver is justly in contempt 
with all humanity. Nor was it merely the thirty 
pieces that influenced the ingrate. Rather it was pride. 
He had thought to be associated with the Master in an 
earthly throne. He had set his faith upon this expectation. 
Now that same Master explained more fully that 
the throne was not yet in sight; that it belongs to an age 
to follow this, and is to be given only to those 
who prove themselves loyal and faithful unto death. 
In the mind of Judas the matter took not the wisest and 

R4708 : page 350 

best way. Holding the Great Teacher in contempt, the 

deceived one probably intended that the delivery should 

be merely a temporary one— a lesson to the Master not to 

talk that way, not to carry matters too far— an incentive 

to him, compelling him to exert his power for the resistance 

of those who sought his life and thus, in exalting 

himself, make good to his disciples the share in the Kingdom 

which he had promised, or, failing of this, to wreck 

the entire project. Alas, the love of money, the love of 

power puff up and make delirious some who become intoxicated 

with ambition. How necessary that all the 

Lord's followers remember the message, "He that humbleth 

himself shall be exalted, and he that exalteth himself 

shall be abased!" "Humble yourselves, therefore, 

under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in 

due tame. "-Matt 23:12; I Pet. 5:6. 



NEARING THE GOAL 

With eyes aflame, with panting breath, they come- 
The runners— every nerve and muscle tense; 
Urged forward by a thousand deafening cries. 
On, on, they rush! When one, close to the goal, 
For but one moment glances back in pride 
To note how far he hath outrun the rest. 
Alas! tripped by a pebble on the course, 
He stumbles, falls, arises, but too late! 



Another sweeps ahead with blood-flecked lips 
And bursting heart! One final, awful strain, 
With superhuman effort, grand, supreme, 
He leaps into the air— and falls in death 
Across the line— a victor, but at what 
A fearful cost he gave his life, his all! 

I ponder o'er this tragedy of days 
When Greece was mistress of the world, and say, 
Hast not thou, also, entered on a race, 
My soul, in contest for "a Crown of Life"— 
A prize thou canst not win except thine all 
Thou givest! Then, be wise, and watch and pray, 
Turn not thine eyes one instant from "the mark," 
For fear thou dash thy foot against some small, 
Well-rounded truth, which in thy pride thou hast 
O'erlooked, and thus thou stumble, fall; and though 
Thou shouldst arise, 'twould be too late to win! 

Ah, then, consider thy "forerunner," Christ; 
Yea, call to mind the "cloud of witnesses" 
Around— those noble, faithful ones of old— 
And strip thyself, my soul, of every weight; 
Gird up thy loins; make straight paths for thy feet; 
Breathe deeply of the Spirit's conquering power; 
And run with patient, meek, enduring zeal! 
Almost thou hast attained, my soul! My soul- 
Shall angels, principalities, or powers, 
Or height, or depth, or other creature, draw 
Thee from the goal so near? Ah, yes, so near, 
The glory-light streams through the parting "vail"! 
Have faith, press on! One effort, grand, supreme— 
And thou hast won in death Love's blood-bought crown! 
G. W. SEIBERT. 



page 350 

WATCH TOWER BIBLES 

We cannot commend these too highly. Many of the 
friends are finding these Bibles more and more useful. 
We have them in two different styles and five different 
grades— the cheapest as low as $1.65, the very best and 
most complete at $3.50. Following is a description of 
each of the numbers and the size and style of type used: 

BIBLE NO. 1918, PRICE $1.65 POSTPAID 

Minion type, India paper, references, French seal (best 
sheep) binding, red under gold edges, silk head band and 
marker, linen lined, maps, TOWER and DAWN Comments, 
Instructor's Guide, Berean Topical Index, Difficult Texts 
Explained, Spurious passages noted. This additional 
matter fills 542 pages. Size, 5x7x1 inch. 



BIBLE NO. 1928, PRICE $2.50 POSTPAID 

This Bible is exactly the same as No. 1918, except 
that the leather is genuine Levant Morocco leather and 
leather lined. This should be a very durable binding- 
fine-grained leather. 

[Illustration of the scripture print appears here.] 

THIS SIZE TYPE USED IN BIBLE NOS. 1918 AND 1928. 

BIBLE NO. 1938, PRICE $3.00 POSTPAID 

This Bible is of a larger size and of a bolder, blacker 
type. It is rather large for a pocket (5-1/2 x 7-1/2 x 1-1/4), 
but is light and convenient for handling. The helps are 
the same as in those described above. India paper, red 
under gold edges, silk head band and marker. These are 
bound only in the better leather, Levant Morocco, and 
are very durable. Sample of type below: 

BIBLE NO. 1948, PRICE $3.25 POSTPAID 

This Bible is exactly the same as No. 1938, except 
that it contains additionally the Bagster Bible Concordance, 
Index of Proper Names, Alphabetical Bible Index, 
etc. Size 5-1/2 x 7-1/2 x 1-1/2. 

BIBLE NO. 1958, PRICE $3.50 POSTPAID 

This Bible is exactly the same as 1948, except that it 
is bound in a still better leather, and is calf-lined to edge: 

[Illustration of the scripture print appears here.] 

THIS SIZE TYPE USED IN BIBLE NOS. 1938, 1948 AND 1958. 

WATCH TOWER HELPS SEPARATE 

About 570 pages, on India paper, French Morocco 
binding, $1.25 each postpaid; in cloth-binding, silver title 
imprint, 50 cents each. Our advice is that as the Bibles 
cost so little more all who can should procure them. Besides, 
it is very convenient to have the Scriptures and the 
helps under the same cover. Any regular TOWER reader 
who cannot purchase these helps, even in their cheapest 
form, may state his case to us, as a brother in Christ has 
kindly offered to supply a few of the cheaper kind to such. 



R4707 : page 351 
THE LIBERTY WHEREWITH CHRIST MAKES FREE 



LIBERTY is a grand word, yet it does not 

always spell true blessing and happiness. 

In the Second Psalm we read of some 

who say, "Let us break their bands asunder" 

—let us be free. In Genesis we read 

of how Satan broke loose from the restraining 

hand of righteousness and made 

shipwreck of his eternal interests. We 

learn also of how he seduced Mother Eve 

and she persuaded Adam to break loose from 

the Divine restraints to eat of the forbidden fruit. The entire 

history of the Jewish nation is a narrative of 

rebellions against Divine regulations— temporary feelings 

of release and liberty and subsequent experiences 

of sorrow and repentance. Judas cut loose from bondage 

to his Master and the Divine providences represented in 

him. The thirty pieces of silver, the wage of his treachery, 

brought joy to his craven heart for but a little time. 

At last it ate as doth a canker and he wished it back and 

himself rid of the liberty into which he sold himself. St. 

Peter was unwillingly entrapped into denying his Master 

and asserting his liberty with oaths. But his loyal heart 

could find no rest in such liberty. 

Should it surprise us that the Adversary still holds 
up the bait of liberty and leads the world into all kinds 
of excesses in the name of liberty? Should it surprise 
us that amongst God's people, too, he uses the same tactics 
—telling them that they are enslaved when they are 
obedient to the voice of God's Word and to the leadings 
of his providence? Is it surprising that he urges them 
to break the bands of the consecration and reassert 
their freedom? It is not strange! Nor is it peculiar 
that some, in leaving the Truth, are beginning a warfare 
against it— opposing the very harvest work which 
once they endorsed and co-operated with, betraying it, 
seeking to injure it, etc. When such boast of their new-found 
liberty we ask them, What liberty have you? The 
only answer can be that they feel relieved in being rid 
of their bonds of consecration to the Lord. Alas ! they 
glory in their shame. What need we wonder if anger, 
malice, hatred, envy, strife, bitterness, back-biting, assassination, 
slander and murderous hatred take the place in 
their hearts and conduct, once filled by the spirit of 
brotherly kindness, meekness, gentleness, long-suffering? 

Let all the children of the light, begotten of the holy 
Spirit, rejoice in the only liberty that is really a blessing, 
the liberty wherewith Christ makes free those who become 
his bond-servants. These are set free from the bondage 
of sin— envy, malice, strife, hatred and the murderous 
spirit. These are bound with cords of love to their 
Master and to the letter and spirit of his teachings- 
bound to do good unto all men as they have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith— bound to the altar 
of sacrifice with cords of devotion, strengthening as the 
days go by, even unto death; for such is the crown of 
life prepared. 



page 351 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study III.-The Call of The New Creation. 
DECEMBER 4 

(56) What kind of faith justified the Ancient Worthies? 
P. 110. 

(57) Explain the difference between the justification of 
the Ancient Worthies and the justification during the Gospel 
Age. P. Ill, par. 1. 

(58) What is the significance of justification to life 

(Rom. 5:18), and how does it affect the New Creation? P. Ill, 
par. 2. 

(59) What relation do the Ancient Worthies bear toward 
this justification to life? P. Ill, par. 3. WT/10-132. 

(60) Explain the principle underlying God's acceptance 
of our imperfect works. P. 112, par. 1. 

(61) Explain the difference between the test of faith and 
the test of works, showing to what ages they respectively 
apply. P. 113, par. 1. 

(62) Before whom is it necessary for the sinner to be 
justified? Explain why it is thus. P. 114, par. 1. 

(63) Explain the different position of the Mediator with 
respect to sin and sinners. P. 1 14, par. 2. 

(64) If all of our Redeemer's merit was involved in imputing 
to believers what their sacrifices lacked to make them 

holy and acceptable, what can he do for the world? And 
will he similarly impute his merit to the world? Or will he 
actually surrender it forever on the world's account? Will 
the Millennial Kingdom or Mediatorial Kingdom or 
Emergency Kingdom for man's uplift be the result of the 
imputation of Christ's merit or on account of the actual satisfaction 
of justice? P. 115, par. 1. 

DECEMBER 1 1 

(65) Briefly explain the relation of the New Creation to 
the Abrahamic Covenant. P. 115, par. 2. 

(66) What is evidently the sole object of the Gospel 
Age? P. 116, par. 1. 

(67) What blessing is enjoyed by those who are simply 
"justified by faith," and refuse to consecrate? P. 116, par. 2. 

(68) Explain how this class receive the grace of God in 
vain. P. 117, par. 1. 

(69) What is evidently the condition of the whole nominal 
"Christian World" in this respect? P. 117, par. 2,3. 

(70) Explain why the merely justified are unable to appreciate 
"the deep things of God." P. 118, par. 1. 

(71) Would it be reasonable to expect that these should 
receive special favor in the Millennial Age? P. 118, par. 2. 



(72) What three classes alone seem to be profited beyond 
the present life through this justification by faith? P. 119, 
par. 1. 

(73) To whom will the Kingdom arrangements appeal 
most strongly at first? P. 1 19, par. 2. 

DECEMBER 18 

(74) How is Christ made unto us Sanctification, and can 
any man sanctify himself aside from the merit of Christ? If 
not, explain why. P. 119, par. 3. 

(75) Why is it necessary to "abide in Christ," and what 

is the significance of the text, "Our God is a consuming fire," 
in this connection? Pp. 120, 121. 

(76) What does sanctification signify, and upon what 
class alone is it enjoined? P. 121, par. 1. 

(77) Explain God's order with respect to sanctification. 
P. 122, top. 

(78) Will sanctification be required of the world in the 
Millennial Age? P. 122, par. 1. 

(79) While sanctification is a general principle for all 
God's creatures, to what class do the Scriptures especially 
apply this admonition? P. 123, par. 1,2. 

(80) Explain the difference between the consecration of 
the Levites and that of the Priests, in the type, and give the 
antitypical application. P. 124, par. 1,2. 

(81) Explain how a perfect compliance with the terms of 
our justification must lead us in the end to sanctification. P. 
124, par. 3; P. 125, par. 1. 

DECEMBER 25 

(82) What is the position of those believers who refuse 
the call to sacrifice? P. 125, par. 2. 

(83) Describe the two classes of antitypical Levites. P. 126, 
par. 1,2,3. 

(84) What is the test that will confirm the Great Company 
as worthy of the Levites' portion under the Kingdom? 

P. 127, par. 1,2. 

(85) Who were Levi's three sons, and what were their 
positions with respect to the Tabernacle in the Wilderness? 
P. 128, par. 1. 

(86) What four classes of justified humanity did these 
represent? P. 128, par. 2. 

(87) State the respective order and rank of these antitypical 
Levites in the Kingdom. P. 129, par. 1. 

(88) Explain why the refusal of any to go on to consecration 
could not justly merit punishment. P. 129, par. 2. 

(89) Explain the antitypical significance of the Levites 
having no inheritance in the land of Canaan. P. 130, par. 2. 
W.T.' 10-245. 

(90) How did the types illustrate the fact that only the 

fully consecrated, spirit-begotten believers are counted members 
of the Great High Priest? P. 131, par. 1. 



page 354 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The Atonement Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

The Purification of the Sons of Levi 355 

He Will Thoroughly Purge His People 355 



He Shall Gird Himself and Serve Them 356 

Respecting "Things New and Old" 357 

Arraigned as a Blasphemer 357 

Self-Confidence Is Weakness 359 

"Before the Cock Crow" 360 

The Prince of Life Crucified 360 

Jesus Before King Herod 361 

Thou Art Not Caesar's Friend 361 

"Now is Christ Risen" 362 

His Death and Resurrection Needful 363 

"Glory to God in the Highest" 363 

"The Desire of All Nations" 363 

"A Savior and a Great One" 364 

This Is My Will for Thee (Poem) 364 

Questions and Answers 365 

How to Gain the Great Prize 365 

Some Interesting Letters 366 

page 354 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



MEMPHIS, TENN, NOV. 25 

OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLA., NOV. 27 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10.00 
o'clock, and Discourse for the Interested at 1 1.00 o'clock. Discourse 
for the Public at 3.00 p.m., by Brother Russell. Topic, 
"Hereafter." All sessions will be held in the Auditorium, 
Cor. Walker and California Sts. 

SAN ANTONIO, TEX., NOV. 29 

HOUSTON, TEX., NOV. 30 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., DEC. 4 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10.30 o'clock 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle. The evening meeting, at 7.30 
o'clock, will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse for the 
Public at 3.00 p.m., in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 
Lafayette Av. and St. Felix St. Topic, "The Messenger of 
the Covenant." 

OMAHA, NEB., DEC. 11 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10.00 
o'clock. Discourse for the Public at 3.00 o'clock. Discourse 
for the Interested at 7.00 o'clock in the evening. All services 
in the Omaha Auditorium, Cor. 15th and Howard Sts. 

HARTFORD, CONN., DEC. 18 

CHATTANOOGA, TENN., DEC. 25 

MOBILE, ALA., DEC. 26 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JAN. 1 

ST. PETERSBURG, FLA., JAN. 8 

PHILADELPHIA, PA., JAN. 15 



191 1 --NEW MOTTO CARDS-191 1 

We have imported an extremely choice line of Motto 
Cards of entirely new design. We also have some of the 
good old standbys, which are difficult to improve upon. We 
again adopt the $1 packet (postage included) plan as every 
way the best and cheapest. Remember that our prices are 



about one-half the usual charge, and the very choicest. 

Packet M. A. —Nearly all old, but choice, medium sizes. 

Packet M.B.— Old and new designs, about equally assorted. 

Packet M.C.— All new, specially recommended to those 
who have already had our old standbys. 

Packet M.D.— Old and new, but all large. 

Packet M.E.— All new, all large. 



R4708 : page 355 

THE PURIFICATION OF THE SONS OF LEVI 

"Who may abide the day of his coming? And who shall 

stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire; and he 

shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall 

purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and 

silver, that they may offer unto the Lord 

an offering in righteousness."— Malachi 3:2,3. 

WE understand this statement to apply to our 

Lord's manifestation at the first advent and 

throughout the Gospel Age. He has been 

appearing, in the sense of making himself 

known to those in the right condition of 

heart, that he might assist them in walking 

in his steps. But he is particularly manifesting 

himself to them now. The Jews, at 

his first advent, had been expecting the 

greater Mediator than Moses, who was the 

Mediator of the old Law Covenant. Moses said to them, 

"A Prophet [a great Messiah] shall the Lord your God 

raise up unto you from amongst your brethren, like unto 

me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall 

say unto you. And it shall come to pass that every soul 

which will not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed from 

among the people." (Acts 3:22,23.) So they were expecting 

this great Messiah, the greater Mediator of the 

New Covenant. 

Jehovah had said, "I will send my Messenger,... 
even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in." 
You are expecting a greater than Moses; but it will mean 
a severer trial and testing when the greater shall come. 
The text above does not signify that he will refine literal 
silver and literal gold, but that he will refine God's people. 
These will be relieved of the dross, that they may offer 
unto the Lord an acceptable sacrifice. These sons of 
Levi, in the antitypical sense, are the household of faith. 
And they have proposed that they will offer sacrifice to 
the Lord— will "present their bodies living sacrifices." 
Such as do thus fully present themselves will be the 
Priests, and the great Messiah will be the High Priest. 
They will offer unto the Lord an acceptable sacrifice in 
righteousness. This work has been in progress throughout 
this Age. And because we are now in the end of the 



Age, tests more crucial are being applied, and will continue 
to be applied until the Lord shall have completed the 
development of this spiritual house of Levi, the antitypical 
Priests and the antitypical Great Company. 

The text having reference to the entire appearance of 
Messiah, beginning at Jordan, his appearance will culminate 
in his glorious revelation at his second Advent. 
Messiah, the Head of this greater prophet than Moses, 
was raised up first. It requires the entire Gospel Age to 
raise up the Body of this greater Mediator and antitype 
of Moses. 

R4709 : page 355 

HE WILL THOROUGHLY PURGE HIS PEOPLE 

The statement, "Who shall stand when he appeareth?" 
should not be understood to imply that all would be standing 
at the time of his appearing. There would be some 
who would think that they were standing, but who would 
really not be in the Lord's favor at all. But the meaning 
of this text, to our mind, is, Who shall stand the test at 
the time of his appearing? As, for instance, at the first 
advent he came unto his own, the Jewish people; but they 
rejected him and crucified him. There were only a few 
who stood the test. John the Baptist said, "He will thoroughly 
purge his floor, and gather his wheat into his 
garner." (Matt. 3:12.) We understand this text to be a 
reference to this work of purification; similarly, today, in 
this harvest time, more fully than throughout the Age, 
there is a testing and trying and proving of the Lord's 
people. Who will stand the test to prove who are the 
people of God? The Lord is now determining who are 
the consecrated class. 

We see that at the first Advent only a remnant of the 
Jewish nation accepted Jesus as the antitypical Mediator 
of the New Covenant, when he began to test the Levite 
class— to prove them. Similarly, today, we find the nominal 
Church falling away, proving unworthy in many 
respects— not falling into everlasting torment, not into 
the Second Death, but rather manifesting that all are not 
worthy to be classed among either the Priests or the 
Levites. We are not to forget that the Gospel Age is 
for the purpose of finding the Priests and the Levites, to 
make them ready as ministers of the New Covenant, 
which is to be for all the people through them. 

We understand that in this picture the Lord quite 
probably used the two metals (both precious, but one more 
precious than the other) to represent the Priests and the 
Levites— the "Little Flock" and the "Great Company." 
We understand also that the New Covenant has been in 
process of inauguration all through this Gospel Age, but 
that this Covenant will not benefit Israel and the world 
until the Millennial Age. First, they must have a Mediator. 
This Mediator was, to begin with, the Lord Jesus 
Christ, the High Priest. Then, in God's arrangement, he 



R4709 : page 356 

was to add an under-priesthood, all these to be the antitypical 
Levites, ministers, servants of the New Covenant. 
The justified humanity of all these constitute the "better 
sacrifices" that are being offered, at the completion of 
which, in the end of this Gospel Age, everything will be 
ready— the Priesthood and the Levites, and the blood of 
the New Covenant— to apply to Justice, forthwith to bring 
the blessings of the Mediatorial Kingdom to Israel, and, 
through Israel, to all people. 

It may be asked, What is the "offering in righteousness" 
here mentioned? The offering now being made to 
God is the offering of the Church— "Present your bodies 
a living sacrifice." (Rom. 12:1.) The High Priest purifies 
these members of his Body by giving them the necessary 
experiences day by day, that they may more and 
more learn the will of God— may more fully lay down 
earthly things and attain to the character-likeness of our 
Lord Jesus. This purging does not come all at once and 
complete the offering; but, in our daily experiences the 
chastisements of the Lord are to the end that his will 
may be accomplished in us more perfectly. He is giving 
us these experiences day by day, so that, as we receive 
them, we may learn what is his will, that we may complete 
the offering in righteousness which has begun. 

If it be asked how we could be members of the great 
Refiner and, at the same time, be of this Levite Company 
whom he is refining, we answer that this is the picture 
uniformly set before us in the Scriptures— that Christ 
is the Head of the Body, in the official sense; and we are 
counted in as members of his Body, even before we have 
been fully and completely and finally accepted as such in 
the "First Resurrection." The Head has passed into 
glory and we are to be with him. From the time of our 
acceptance and begetting of the holy Spirit we are counted 
in as members of his Body in a prospective manner, on 
the supposition that we shall make our calling and election 
sure. Then again, in another sense of the word, the 
Lord uses these very ones whom he is refining as co-laborers 
with him and gives to them a part of the ministry 
of reconciliation; some of the refining work— amongst 
them being some who are instructors of the brethren— 
until, as the Apostle says, they all come to the full stature 
of a Man in Christ. (Eph. 4:13.) So now the refining 
work, the increasing of the Body of Christ, goes on— the 
use of the different members of the Body proceeds, all by 
reason of the fact that our Lord is the Head of the Body. 



R4709 : page 356 

HE SHALL GIRD HIMSELF AND SERVE THEM 



ALAS! how few realize what a dangerous 

thing is liberty; how carefully it must be 

used for our benefit, and how easily it might 

be misused to our eternal danger. Because 

God created us free agents; because this is 

part of his likeness, and because, additionally, 

ambition must be a part of every progressive 

individual, therefore this free 

agency and ambition in conjunction bring 

us all under tests of character. And the 

greater our abilities, the more our talents and the wider 

our influence, the stronger the power of ambition may 

become. Then comes the test. Will this laudable ambition 

be subject to the Divine Will— thoroughly consecrated 

to do the Lord's will even unto death? 

If our devotion to the Lord be absolute, fully in control 
of our thoughts and words and doings, our liberty 
and largest ambition will be rightly directed and eventuate 
in blessings to ourselves and to others. But if the Divine 
will be not first and absolutely in control of our wills, 
the more ambition and the more liberty we have the 
greater will be our danger. Where the Lord is not reverenced 
—obeyed with heart, mind, soul and strength- 
some one else has an influence in our hearts— husband 
or wife, parents or children, or, more than probably, self. 
We cannot be overcomers except as our hearts are absolutely 
loyal to the Lord, with self-will and every other 
will thoroughly subjected to the Divine Will. This is the 
lesson of life to those who would come off conquerors. 
How we rejoice, in every struggle, when finally, by God's 
grace, we recover balance! 

It is not to be wondered at that the more prominent 
brethren have the more severe trials along this line. Of 
this condition of things the Apostle forewarns us, saying, 
Be not many of you teachers, knowing that he who is a 
teacher will experience the more severe trials. The deflection 
of some recognized as teachers will cause special 
trials to others not teachers, and will prove to what extent 
they have a personal relationship to the Lord through 
his Word and through an individual consecration to him 
and through his instructions by his Word and the prophecies 
—in the School of Christ. We fear that too many are 
in an attitude of leaning upon others whose fall might 
bring them disaster. It is because we have long recognized 
this principle that, in our writings, we have presented 
the Lord's message as his message, and not as our 
own, giving the chapter and verse for every doctrine. 

PUTTING ON THE WHOLE ARMOR 

If any are leaning on anything but the Lord's Word for 
guidance, to these we say that we have striven to bring 
all of the members of the Body into direct personal contact 
with the Head, and, while not ignoring the value of 
books and sermons, we have, nevertheless, urged upon all 
the necessity of proving, to the extent of their ability, 



every item of truth which they receive. Notwithstanding 
this we fear that many lean upon us and upon others. 
We fully know that we are in the evil day, and that the 
armor that the Lord provides is to be put on by each one 
of his faithful soldiers of the cross. We will use our 
shield, breastplate, helmet, and sword in the defence, as 
much as possible, of all the Lord's people; but each must 
see to it that he put on this armament for himself. The 
great King of the Universe has provided it, the great 
Captain of our salvation, Jesus, has invited us to put it 
on, and we, as corporal, merely call attention to the Captain's 
order. Whoever is negligent will surely rue it. 

The time for adjusting this armor is very short. The 
battle is on. Many are falling at our side. What we do 
should be done energetically, systematically, thoroughly— 
at once. It is important that we help others to the extent 
of our ability, but still more important, according to the 
Divine Will, that we should take heed to ourselves and 
make our own calling and election sure. It has been our 
observation that some who have come into the Truth 
quite recently are much more clear in it, and have the 
armor better adjusted, and are able to use the Sword of 
the Spirit better, than some who have been in the Truth 
for five, ten, and even twenty years. Indeed, it is our 
observation that some who have been long in the Truth 
are less skillful today in the use of the armor than they 
were years ago. Why is this? And what is the remedy? 
The answer is a simple one, manifest to all. 

Divine Providence has furnished the people of God at 

R4709 : page 357 

this time an outline of the Divine Plan and a detail of 
Bible doctrines such as God's people never before had in 
their possession. Without claiming any inspiration for 
these STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, we surely may claim 
a Divine supervision in respect to the matter which they 
contain and the time of their presentation. Whoever 
admits that we are in the harvest time at all— that we 
have been in it since 1875— must acknowledge this also, 
that the Lord promised that at that time he would cause 

R4710 : page 357 

his people to sit down to a bountiful repast of spiritual 
food and that he would be their servant and bring forth to 
them "things new and old." (Luke 12:37.) All who 
recognize these things must recognize these STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES as being identified with the fulfillment 
of that promise. 

RESPECTING "THINGS NEW AND OLD" 

It would be giving too much honor to any man to 
suppose that the general elucidation of Divine Truth 
through these volumes should be merely one man's opinion. 



No one who understands these things can possibly 
believe that one man in our day could fabricate a theory 
which puts all other theories of this and every other day 
completely into the shadow, as a tallow dip in comparison 
to the most wonderful arc lights of our day. Neither is 
there reason or sense in the attempt of some to claim that 
these SCRIPTURE STUDIES are merely a rehash of what 
has been believed for centuries. True, they present the 
doctrines of Election, Free Grace, etc., but not as these 
subjects were presented nor as they are now presented by 
many. These books discuss the Bible texts and set them in 
order, as showing their relationship to each other. But 
while these presentations are harmonious, they are not 
accepted by Calvinism and Arminianism. Although they 
cannot refute them, they secretly oppose them— oppose 
the only presentation which shows the true significance of 
the Bible texts which they use in a private and isolated 
manner. We repeat, then, that STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
are either of the Lord's providence or else they 
are one of the greatest miracles. 

The secret of the clearness and power of some who 
have come recently into the Truth can be traced to the 
fact that they have been diligently using these Divinely 
provided helps for Bible study. On the contrary, many 
of those who today are less clear in the Truth than they 
were years ago owe their loss of spiritual vigor and clear 
perception of the Truth to the fact that they have neglected 
this Divine provision for their needs. They have 
followed the worldly thought— that, having digested what 
some other man has thought, believed and taught, they 
should break fresh ground for themselves, in hope of 
bringing forth still brighter jewels from the Divine Word. 
Some of these diggers have searched long and carefully, 
but have found nothing, brought forth nothing, that has 
specially sparkled as a gem of Truth for the eyes of the 
Lord's people. Some of them have sought far and near 
for other fruits and viands for the table of the Lord's 
family, but have added little, if anything, to that which 
the great Provider has set before us of "things new and 
old." Some of these would-be new dishes, new viands, 
set before the Church have proven to be unhealthful, indigestible, 
visionary, and calculated to give a fever, rather 
than real spiritual strength. Others, failing of their ambitions 
in these directions, have become destructive and 
have uttered what some of the friends have outlined a 
"Midnight Howl" against the food that the Lord has prepared, 
against his service of his people, etc. 

All these things are tests. The sooner we realize this 
fact, the better for us. We have no fear but that the 
great Shepherd, now present with his sheep and gathering 
out of all the various pens of Christendom those who 
know his voice, will not suffer the wolves to stampede his 
flock, nor to devour them. Has he not said, "The Father 
who gave them to me is greater than all, and none can 
pluck them out of my Father's hand." 

The lesson to us all is, "Humble yourselves under the 



mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." 
Be not heady, high-minded and worldly-wise, but humble, 
teachable and full of faith in the Divine promises, which 
are so rapidly fulfilling and culminating in this day of his 
preparation. 



R4710 : page 357 

ARRAIGNED AS A BLASPHEMER 

-MATTHEW 26:57-68.-NOVEMBER 27.- 

"Who when he was reviled, reviled not again."— I Pet. 2:23. 

WE cannot do better at the opening of this study 
than quote the words of Mr. Chandler. He 
said: "Many remarkable trials have characterized 
the judicial history of mankind. 
The trial of Socrates, before the dikastery 
of Athens, charged with corrupting the 
Athenian youth, with blaspheming the 
Olympic gods and seeking to destroy the 
constitution of the Athenian Republic, is 
still a sublime and thrilling chapter in the 
history of a wonderful people. 

"The trial of Alfred Dreyfus is still fresh in the memories 
of men. The French Republic is still rent by contending 
factions. His friends say that Dreyfus was a 
Prometheus who was chained to an ocean-girt rock while 
the vulture of exile preyed upon his heart. His enemies 
still assert that he was a Judas who betrayed, not God 
nor Christ, but France and the Fatherland. But these 
trials, one and all, were tame and commonplace compared 
with the trial and crucifixion of the Galilean peasant, 
Jesus of Nazareth." 

It is not for us to say that the Jews were wholly excusable 
in their course of injuries toward Jesus, in causing 
his crucifixion by the Romans. On the other hand, it is 
proper for us to consider everything that could be thought 
of calculated to mitigate the severity of our judgment regarding 
the injustices there practised. And it is proper 
also that we should consider what, from their standpoint, 
would seem to be extenuating circumstances. This is 
everywhere recognized as just treatment. The attorney, defending 
a criminal who has pleaded guilty to the charges 
against him, is considered to do only his duty by his criminal 
client when he presents whatever in the circumstances 
of the case would tend to prove that the culprit had cause, 
or thought that he had reason, for his misdemeanor. 

Viewing the Jewish people of nearly nineteen centuries 
ago from this standpoint, we get a more reasonable view 
of the situation than is otherwise possible. We hearken 
first to St. Peter's words respecting the transaction. He 
said, "I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also 



your rulers." Had they known, they would not have killed 
the Prince of life. --Acts 3:15-17. 

The Jews did not for one moment suppose that the 
great Messiah, foretold to be their Prophet, Priest and 
King— like unto Moses, but greater; like unto David and 
Solomon, but greater; like unto Melchisedec, but greater 

R4710 : page 358 

—would appear as "a man of sorrows and acquainted with 

grief." Although those very words were written of him 

by the Prophet, they were hidden from their eyes of understanding 

by the glorious things related of him in other 

prophecies. They saw the glories. They saw not, understandingly, 

the sufferings. To this day they interpret the 

sufferings of their nation as being those which will ultimately 

inure to their advantage. The prophetic descriptions 

are not concentrated nor collected, but scattered, 

"here a little and there a little," so written that they could 

not be understood at the time; nor were they understood 

even by the Lord's disciples until after his resurrection 

from the dead, when he explained them, and, subsequently, 

by the holy Spirit, enabled them still more fully to 

understand that thus it was written in the prophets, and 

thus it behooved the Son of Man to suffer before entering 

into his glory— before he began to bless Israel and all 

the world. 

Yea, today many Christians are as deeply confused 
on this matter as are the Jews. Many have rejected 
entirely the thought of Messiah's glorious Kingdom 
reign for the general blessing and uplifting of Israel 
and all humanity. From their standpoint, if "the sufferings 
of Christ" were intended to prepare the way and 
usher in his Kingdom of glory, then the programme must 
have failed, or else his Kingdom of glory is to be a 
heavenly Kingdom and completely in accord with the 
prayer taught by our Lord, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will 
be done on earth." The trouble is that they will not realize 
that where the sufferings of Christ, the Head, ended, the 
sufferings of the "Body of Christ" began— the sufferings 
of "the Church, which is his Body"— filling up the measure 
of the afflictions of Christ, which are behind. (Col. 1:24.) 
As soon as the "Church, the Body of Christ," 
shall have finished the bearing of the cross, after him, 
following in his steps to the end of the journey, then the 
Kingdom glories will be ushered in. Israel's blindness 
will be turned away, and the blessing of the Lord will 
begin to fill the whole earth. 

The Jews, who caused the crucifixion of Jesus, certainly 
did so in much of the same spirit which led St. 
Paul— then Saul of Tarsus— to cause the stoning of St. 
Stephen. As Saul was forgiven, so Israel is to be forgiven; 
as the Scriptures declare, "The Lord will pour upon 
them the spirit of prayer and supplication," and then they 
will see, with the eyes of their understanding, "him whom 
they pierced, and they will mourn for him" (Zech. 12:10), 



and their mourning will be turned into joy; for, 

as Joseph forgave his brethren, so will this great antitypical 

Joseph of the throne of earth freely forgive those 

who caused his crucifixion. 

POLITICS AND SELFISHNESS AS RELIGION 

The Jews are not so different from other people now, 
nor were they then. History indicates that some of their 
highest offices were held by irreligionists for their political 
influence; thus the chief-priest, at the first advent of our 
Lord, was a Sadducee, who wholly disbelieved in the 
promises of God to Israel, including a disbelief in the 
resurrection of the dead. Similarly today there are high-priests, 
both amongst Jews and Christians, who disbelieve, 
and yet hold high positions. Amongst Christians there 

R4711 : page 358 

are D.D.'s who are unbelievers; and many of the most 

notable rabbis amongst the Jews also declare themselves 

thorough unbelievers. We are not claiming that such unbelieving 

Christian and Jewish ministers would lightly 

espouse and support an unjust procedure against an innocent 

man. We do not know about this. It has yet to be 

tested, perhaps. We do know, however, that when faith 

in a Divine Revelation and in a Divine supervision of human 

affairs is lost the natural effect is that the losers of 

the faith become more and more policy-men and consider 

policy the extreme of human wisdom, particularly in the 

guidance of affairs of Church and State. 

Taking history for it, that the leaders of Judaism at 
the time of our Lord were Higher Critical unbelievers 
(Sadducees), we can readily see that their policy was to 
curry favor with the Roman Emperor and to seek to hold 
the common people in subjection to themselves. To these, 
then, it must have seemed almost a calamity that a poor 
man, although of noble birth, of the family of David and 
the Tribe of Judah, should gather about him a handful of 
nondescript fishermen, tax-gatherers, etc.; that he should 
pronounce himself a king and declare the setting up of 
his Kingdom to be near, and that by the exercise of some 
supernatural power for the healing of their diseases he 
should attract the "common people" to his standard, but 
not the learned. We can well imagine their reasoning 
that, if this thing, the popularity of Jesus, continued to 
increase, it would shortly reach the ears of the Roman 
Emperor, and then all their claims for imperial favors 
would be discounted, and they would be rated as a nation 
of rebels. 

The riding of Jesus into Jerusalem, just before the 
Passover, on an ass, after the manner of the kings of 
Israel and surrounded by a multitude shouting, "Hosanna 
to the Son of David who cometh in the name of the 
Lord," capped the climax, so to speak, and convinced these 
unbelieving Jews, politicians, occupying religious offices, 



that it would be far better that one innocent man should 

die than that the whole nation should be turned into turmoil 

and wrecked by the Romans in consequence. How 

many American preachers, judges, officials, etc., would, in 

this enlightened day, be inclined similarly to decide such 

a matter! And is not this the policy which always prevails 

in monarchies? Fancy such a commotion in the 

capital of Germany, Italy, France, Austria, Russia, Great 

Britain, the United States. Fancy that after such a parade, 

mimic though it might appear, the adored one should 

go to the temple and execute a long-neglected law, and, 

in thus exercising his religious rights, suppose that he 

should drive out the money-changers and merchants from 

the outer precincts of their chief religious Cathedral! 

What would be done to such a person today? Do we not 

know that in the most civilized lands he would be arrested 

and imprisoned, and in the more savage lands he would 

be beaten or executed? When, therefore, we view the situation 

from this standpoint we lose any spirit of antagonism 

which might have been ours; it turns to sympathy— 

that a religious nation should allow itself to get into the 

hands of politicians to such an extent. 

BROUGHT BEFORE CAIAPHAS 

It was very courageous on the part of St. Peter that, 
after having smitten off the ear of the High Priest's servant 
(though the wound was healed by Jesus), he followed 
his Master into the Court of that high-priest to see 
what would be done. The arraignment was at night, although 
it was contrary to Jewish Law to try a prisoner 
at night for any serious offense. But there was an excuse. 
This was a special case; haste was necessary, because 
whatever should be done must be done quickly; the 
very next day the unbelieving officials perceived that 
Jesus had great influence with the common people. They 
believed him to be a brilliant but harmless fraud. He had 
committed no crime, but he was a disturber of the peace, 
and they felt fully justified in taking his life. The Feast 
of Passover was at hand and would last a week, and it 

R4711 : page 359 

would be contrary to their Law that any execution should 
take place during that week. Besides, they feared the 
amount of influence which Jesus might exercise during 
the week, when there would be from one to two millions 
of people in and around Jerusalem from all over Palestine. 
They had already determined that their action must 
be short, sharp and decisive. This was decided before the 
arrest was made. They were ready and waiting at that 
midnight hour to carry out their murderous designs, for 
the good of their nation, as they thought. 

The examination was merely a preliminary one to get 
together such evidence as could be rushed through rapidly 
at a prearranged session the following morning. 



HE WAS CHARGED WITH BLASPHEMY 

They had difficulty in finding a charge; for what had 
Jesus ever done except acts of kindness and the uttering 
of words of wisdom and correction and hope? Blasphemy 
was a serious charge under the Jewish code. They 
would charge him with that as being the easiest to prove. 
He had said, when near the temple, "Destroy this Temple, 
and I will rear it up in three days." "But he spake of the 
Temple of his Body." Some of those who heard him 
understood him to speak of the literal temple. This they 
charged was blasphemy, because it took years to build the 
temple, and for Jesus to rebuild it in three days would 
mean a claim on his part of Divine power. But the charge 
did not seem sufficiently strong, even for those who had 
premeditated his murder. They wanted something to give a 
color of justice, at least, to their findings. So the chief -priest 
thought to get Jesus to commit himself in their 
presence and said, I adjure thee by the Living God to 
tell us whether thou be The Christ, the Son of God. 
Jesus replied that this was true, and that they would yet 
see him in heavenly glory and power at the right hand of 
Divine favor. This, the high priest declared, was sufficient 
proof of blasphemy. "Behold, now ye have heard 
his blasphemy, What reply ye?" And the council answered 
that he was worthy of death. The rabble in the 
Court, hearing the commotion, felt at liberty to abuse the 
prisoner, as they had done others. They showed their 
contempt of him by spitting upon him. They derided him 
by smiting him and saying, Prophesy, tell who smote thee. 
"He was reviled, yet reviled not again." 



R4711 : page 359 

SELF-CONFIDENCE IS WEAKNESS 

-MATTHEW 26:31-35,69-75. -DECEMBER 4.- 

"Let him that thinketh he standeth 
take heed least he fall."— I Cor. 10:12. 

ST. PETER has proven to be one of the most 

helpful of Christ's twelve Apostles, and the 

secret of his assistance lies in the Scriptural 

revelation of his human nature, its 

strength and its weaknesses. He was the 

first of the twelve Apostles to acknowledge 

the Master as the Messiah, the Sent of God; 

he was the first of the twelve to deny him. 

He was the only one of the twelve who 

drew his sword in the Master's defense and 

the only one who, later, swore that he never knew him. 

By Divine arrangement, to him were given the keys with 



which to open the door to the High Calling— to the Kingdom. 
At Pentecost he used one of the keys of power and 
boldly proclaimed to the Jews the opening of the way to 
glory, honor and immortality. A little later, at the appointed 
time, he opened the door to the same High Calling 
for the Gentiles when, by his preaching, Cornelius, 
the first Gentile acceptable to God, was received and begotten 
of the holy Spirit, this fact giving evidence that 
the middle-wall of partition, previously separating Jew 
and Gentile, had been broken down. Yet, after all this 
knowledge and special opportunity, this great man subsequently 
dissembled to the extent of ignoring God's grace 
to the Gentiles as being sufficient, discriminating between 
Jews and Gentiles and their equality before the Lord. 
But in all these experiences St. Peter displayed the 
fact that his heart, at its core, was loyal to God, to truth, 
to righteousness, and that the weaknesses, the faults, the 
blemishes of his character were of his flesh and not of 
his real heart intention. For his denial of the Master 
he wept bitterly. And for his failure to recognize the 
Gentiles he made full reparation most humbly. The same 
exhibition of human nature which makes St. Peter attractive 
is that which made David, the Prophet and king 
of Israel, attractive. He was not so saintly that he could 
not make a mistake. He was not so far above the remainder 
of humanity that they could not realize in him 
a fellow-creature. Yet withal he was not so debased 
as to make him abhorrent. His weaknesses were fully 
offset by the abundant evidence of his heart-loyalty to 
God and to righteousness. His very experiences in stumbling 
and recovery have so saturated his Psalms that 
they touch a responsive chord in nearly every heart which 
is loyal to God and which has had any degree of experience 
with sin and weakness— its own and those of others. 

HOW OTHERS SAW ST. PETER 

Peter remains even today the most fascinating of that 
band of men who surrounded our Lord in the days of 
his earthly pilgrimage. G. C. Morgan said of Peter: 
"Now I am convinced that in Peter we have the greatest 
human revealed in the New Testament. I do not say 
the greatest man in his achievement or in one particular 
capacity of his being, but the most wonderful revelation 

R4712: page 359 

of human nature. This man of intelligence was perpetually 
making blunders. This man of emotions was 
guilty of such impulse that he worked harm in the very 
cause he desired to help." 

Of St. Peter Southouse says: "Peter was an average 
man, and for this reason he comes nearer to us than some 
of his colleagues do. But average men have their splendid 
moments, such as when St. Peter tried to walk on 
the water, for in this action he tried to do a thing for 



which he seemed to have no abilities. He set out to do 
some thing of which he had no experience. A swift 
glance amongst the men and women whom we know will 
be enough to prove that it is never safe to prophesy the 
achievements of which they are capable, for extraordinary 
things have been done by the last man in the world." 

Dr. Davis said about St. Peter: "Peter was intellectual. 
He asked Jesus more questions than any other 
of the Apostles. The capacity for asking questions is a 
revelation of the intellectual. It may also be a revelation 
of ignorance; but the man who never asks a question 
is certainly deficient in his intellectuality. ...Peter 
was a man of heart, sobbing and impetuous. His virtues 
and his faults had their common root in his enthusiastic 
disposition. It is to his praise that, along with the weed 
of rash haste, there grew more strongly into his life the 

R4712: page 360 

fair plant of burning love and ready reception of Truth. 

"TAKE HEED TO YOURSELVES" 

One of the great lessons which the Master taught his 
followers, and which all in the School of Christ must 
learn, is that, with burning love and zeal for God and 
for righteousness, we should also have moderation— exercising 
the spirit of a sound mind. Christ's followers are 
exhorted to be "wise as serpents and harmless as doves." 
Their wisdom is not to be merely the selfish kind, which 
would look out for its own interests, but of the generous 
kind which looks out for the interests of all, and particularly 
for the interests of the Lord's cause and for 
any share therein which he may entrust to us. 

In the course of his instructions, Jesus had said to 
his disciples, in advance of the trying hour of his betrayal 
—"All ye shall be offended because of me this night; 
for it is written (in the Prophets), I will smite the 
Shepherd and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered 
abroad. But after I am risen again I will go before you 
into Galilee. "-Matt. 26:31,32. 

Then spoke the impulsive Peter, "Though all shall 
be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended." 
(V. 33) Alas! how little did this courageous man understand 
the nature of the trials and difficulties immediately 
before him, or realize the weak points of his own 
impulsive nature. Yet if we are grieved with his denial 
of the Master, we must rejoice to note his faith and love 
and zeal, as manifested in his acknowledgment of Jesus 
as the Messiah and his later declaration that nothing 
should ever shake his loyalty. 

However, it is the specially loyal and ardent that 
the Adversary seeks most persistently to entrap. Thus 
Jesus, on this very occasion, explained to St. Peter, 
"Satan hath desired to have thee that he might sift thee" 
(Luke 22:31); that he might separate you from your 



loyalty to Christ and discourage you from discipleship, 

overwhelming you with fear and with your own weaknesses. 

The Master added, "But I have prayed for thee 

that thy faith fail not." We may well understand that 

the same loving Master still assists all of his true, warmhearted 

followers, whatever their weaknesses of heredity. 

We may well understand, too, that he is able to develop 

all such into strong characters, if they abide in his love, 

continuing in their zeal. He is able to make all things 

work together for their good— even the weaknesses of 

heredity may work out for the faithful that "far more 

exceeding and eternal weight of glory" which the Lord 

has promised. 

"BEFORE THE COCK CROW" 

The Master discerned the danger of his loving but 
impetuous follower, and uttered a warning word, that 
before cock-crowing he would deny his Master. How 
improbable this seemed to St. Peter! How he courageously 
declared, "Though I should die with thee, yet 
will I not deny thee." And so said all of the eleven. 
Their hearts were good. And the Lord looketh upon the 
heart. Our study now passes to verse 69. The Master 
had been arrested. The scattered disciples had fled. St. 
John, because of an acquaintance with the high priest's 
family, penetrated further into the palace than St. Peter, 
who stood in the court-yard. A maid of the palace recognized 
St. Peter as one of Jesus' disciples and so declared 
publicly. Fearful that he might share the fate of 
the Master, St. Peter denied his identity, declaring that 
he knew nothing about the matter. A little later another 
declared the same. St. Peter emphasized his denial with 
an oath, declaring that he knew not Jesus. Later the 
word spread throughout the court-yard and many took 
it up, declaring that they believed what the maid said and 
that St. Peter had the Galilean dialect, anyway. To emphasize 
the denial St. Peter began to curse, and to swear 
that he knew not the man. Directly after, cock-crowing 
began. Then St. Peter remembered the words of his 
Master, "Before cock-crowing thou shalt deny me thrice." 

Alas! he had been too sure of his own stability, too 
confident of his loyalty. He was entrapped by the Adversary 
along the very line of his boasting. Another account 
says that Jesus turned and looked at Peter! That look 
was sufficient. It spoke volumes to St. Peter's loyal heart. 
It was not a look of disdain, nor one of anger, we may be 
sure. It was a look of loving sympathy. It melted St. 
Peter's heart. He went out and wept bitterly. The followers 
of the Master today, beset by weaknesses and frailties 
and temptations of the Adversary, have the lesson of St. 
Peter's experience as a warning to be confident in the 
Lord and to look to him for assistance, rather than to be 
self-confident. And those who fail today have St. Peter's 
experience as a lesson of the Lord's sympathy and pity. 
They, too, should weep bitterly for transgressions and 



repent and profit by their experiences. 

R4712: page 360 

THE PRINCE OF LIFE CRUCIFIED 

--MATTHEW 27:33-50.-DECEMBER 11.- 

"He was wounded for our transgressions; he 
was bruised for our iniquities."— Isa. 53:5. 

THE trial of Jesus really took place shortly after 

his arrest, but, on account of the Law requiring 

a death sentence to be passed in 

daylight, a morning meeting of the Sanhedrin 

was appointed, which, in a perfunctory 

manner, confirmed the high priest's 

decision of the night before, that Jesus had 

blasphemed the Creator when he claimed 

that he had come into the world in accord 

with the Creator's long-promised plan that 

he should redeem Israel and the world from the death sentence, 

that in God's due time he might establish the Messianic 

Kingdom for the blessing of Israel and all the 

families of the earth. The matter was rushed through 

lest the gathered multitudes, who had shouted, "Hosanna 

to the Son of David," when Jesus rode upon the ass five 

days before, should undertake again to proclaim him king. 

No execution could take place during the Passover week. 

And if Jesus were held a prisoner they knew not what 

might happen to him or to them. They had, therefore, 

but a few hours in which to carry out the plan which 

they believed would rid their country of a man whom 

they considered a deceiver and one likely to get them 

into trouble with the Government at Rome. 

The Sanhedrin had authority to judge the people along 
the lines of their religion, but was prohibited from 
executing the death penalty. Hence it was necessary, 
after the condemnation of the Sanhedrin, to take the case 
before Pilate, the Roman Governor. Realizing that Pilate 
would not recognize blasphemy as a cause for death, the 
charge against Jesus, before Pilate, was a totally different 
one, namely, that Jesus was a seditionist and raiser of 
disturbance; that he claimed to be a king and that his 
freedom was inimical to the interests of the Roman Empire. 

R4712: page 361 

The foolishness and the hypocrisy of such a charge 
were too transparent to need assertion. Pilate perceived 
that for envy they were delivering him— because he and 
his teachings were having more influence with the common 
people than could be exercised by the chief priests 
and scribes. Pilate relieved himself of responsibility by 



declaring that since the home of Jesus was in Galilee, 
King Herod, the Governor of Galilee, should have the 
jurisdiction of the case, which he was glad to get rid of. 

JESUS BEFORE KING HEROD 

This was an unexpected difficulty, but Herod's palace 
was not far distant. He was glad of the opportunity to 
see Jesus, of whose miracles he had heard much. As he 
looked at the Master's noble features and beheld in him 
purity and gentle dignity, it must have seemed ridiculous 
that such a person should be arraigned as a seditionist 
and a man dangerous to the interests of the peace of the 
country. After a few taunting words and jests, the palace 
guards took a hand with the one whom their master 
treated flippantly. They put upon him a purple robe and 
a crown of thorns and mocked at his unkingly appearance. 
Then Herod declined to act in the case and sent the 
prisoner back to Pilate, perhaps feeling that he had had 
a sufficiency of trouble in connection with the beheading 

R4713 : page 361 

of John the Baptist a year or so before. The matter was 
a joke between Herod and Pilate— dealing with the case 
of a man claimed to be so dangerous that he must die 
thus, when he manifestly was so pure and innocent that 
the weakest would be safe with him. 

PILATE'S PERPLEXITY INCREASED 

Pilate was disappointed when Jesus was brought back 
to his court. The case was an unpleasant one to settle. 
The prisoner manifestly was innocent of any crime, yet 
his accusers were the most prominent men in the nation 
and city over which he had charge. Their good will must 
be preserved, if possible, and they were evidently bent 
on the murder of their innocent captive under the form 
of legality. What a pity it is that religion has been so 
often misrepresented by her votaries in every age of 
the world! A lesson which we all should learn is to 
search the motives and intentions of our own hearts, 
that we be not led into the error of the wicked— into 
violating the rights of others and thus fighting against 
God. 

Pilate heard the accusations, realized that there was 
no truth in them, and then gave his decision: I find no 
fault in Jesus, but, seeing that such a commotion has been 
created, I consider it necessary in the interests of peace 
to satisfy the unrighteous demands of the clamoring multitude. 
I will therefore have the prisoner whipped, although 
I acknowledge he is not deserving of punishment. 
The whipping will be in his own interest, as well as in 
the interests of the peace of the city, for by satisfying 
the clamor of the multitude the life of Jesus will be 
spared. As political decisions go, this was a very fair 



decree. Magistrates recognize that absolute justice is 
not always possible in dealing with imperfect conditions. 

But the rulers would not be satisfied with anything 
short of Jesus' death. The rabble was exhorted to shout, 
Crucify him! Crucify him! It seemed impossible for 
Pilate to appreciate that such a frenzy could be aroused 
against so innocent a person. So he inquired, What evil 
hath he done? But the answer was, Crucify him! 
Alas, how human passion can ignore every principle of 
righteousness! To add to Pilate's perplexity, his wife 
now sent him word, Have nothing to do with this just 
person, for I have had a horrible dream which connects 
itself with him. 

As a last resort Pilate caused Jesus to be brought to 
a prominent place where the multitude could all see him 
and then he cried out to them, "Behold the Man!" See 
the character of the man you are willing to crucify. Note 
that he has most kingly features, such as none of your 
race possess— nor others. Would you crucify the very 
best sample of your race? Consider; be reasonable. 
Behold the Man! It has for years been a custom with 
you that the Government at this season release a prisoner. 
So, then, consider that Jesus has been condemned and 
that your conception of justice has been satisfied and 
that now I release him to you. But the multitude cried 
out so much the more, Crucify him! Release unto us 
Barabbas (a robber and dangerous character). 

Who will explain this strange perversity of fallen 
human nature— that a villain should be preferred to a 
saint? Thus, a few years ago, in the City of Vienna, a 
man who had just been released from serving a term in 
prison made a speech in which he declared that all Jews 
should be put to death. A frenzy seemed to seize the 
people. The bad man became the leader of sentiment. 
He was applauded and, as a mayoralty was impending, he 
was elected mayor of the city on the strength of his 
bravado. Oh, shame! How can we claim that the world 
is ready for liberty while such conditions stare us in the 
face and mark the pages of history? They prove, on 
the contrary, that the world needs just such a strong, 
imperial government as God purposes to give it— the 
Kingdom of God's dear Son, strong for the suppression 
of every wrong and strong for the uplifting of every 
right. 

THOU ART NOT CAESAR'S FRIEND 

The Jewish leaders were shrewd. They knew that 
treason to Rome was one of the most serious offenses 
and in the fact that Jesus had spoken of himself as a 
king they had the lever wherewith to compel his crucifixion. 
They used it, assuring Pilate that if he let the 
prisoner go they would report him to the Emperor. Pilate 
knew that he would have difficulty in explaining such a 
case and that the Roman Government would agree with 
the decision of Caiaphas that one man should die rather 



than have any commotion in their dominion. Thus compelled, 
Pilate finally acceded and wrote the papers of 
execution, but before doing so he took a pitcher of water 
and in the sight of the people washed his hands, saying, 
"I am guiltless of the blood of this just person." 

The execution proceeded. The soldiers already had 
two thieves to crucify and merely added another cross 
and the procession started for Golgotha, a hillside near 
where the face of the rock much resembles a skull- 
Golgotha signifying the place of a skull. It is just to 
the north of the city, outside the wall. New buildings 
and a wall recently erected hinder visitors at the present 
time from getting the skull effect as formerly. The crime 
of each culprit was, by Law, inscribed over his head. 
Above the Master's head was his crime— "Jesus, King 
of the Jews." 

Satan and his deluded dupes evidently thought that 
they had finally disposed of Jesus. The priests and elders 
mocked his declaration that he was the Son of God and 
demanded that, if he were such, he should demonstrate 
it by leaving the cross. They realized not the truth, that 
it was necessary for him to die for man's sin, in order 
that, by and by, he might have rightful authority, in his 
glorious Kingdom, to restore all mankind to full perfection 

R4713 : page 362 

and life under the terms of the New Covenant, of 
which he will be the Mediator. (Jer. 31:31.) At the 
sixth hour, noon, darkness settled down for three hours 
and then Jesus died, saying, "My God, my God, why hast 
thou forsaken me?" In order that he might fully experience 
the weight of Divine Justice which belonged to 
the sinner, it was necessary that the Father should hide 
himself from him, as though he had been the sinner. 
This temporary separation from the Father was evidently 
the severest blow in all of the Master's experience. 



R4713 : page 362 

"NOW IS CHRIST RISEN" 

-MATTHEW 28: 1-20. -DECEMBER 18. 

"Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the 
end of the world (age). "-Matt. 28:20. 

THE Scriptures give very particular details 
respecting the death of Jesus and his burial 
in Joseph's new tomb, wherein none had 
previously been buried and respecting the 
sealing of the tomb and the setting of a 
guard lest the body should be stolen at 
night. But while these matters are interesting 



to us, they probably do not now have 

the same importance that they had when 

they were written. From this distance we 

feel inclined to ask about the general character of Jesus' 

disciples who declared his resurrection, rather than to 

inquire particularly respecting all the details which they 

enumerated. In broad terms we say, If the characters 

of the Apostles prove themselves satisfactory to us, we 

are ready to take their word respecting the resurrection 

of Jesus and his subsequent appearances to them. On 

the other hand, if they were bad men or otherwise unworthy 

to be believed, no amount of details respecting 

the tomb, the watch, the seals, etc., would be satisfactory 

to us, because cunning and designing men could make 

up the story to suit their desires. 

But it was not so at the time of our Lord's death and 
resurrection. It was then very necessary that every little 
detail should be explicitly specified. The parts of three 
days and nights, for instance, were unimportant to them 
because of Jesus' words, which they remembered. He 
likened his period in death to the period in which Jonah 
was in the whale's belly. There are some today disposed 
to quibble over the matter and to claim that Jesus died 
on Thursday and not on Friday. Surely, however, all can 
concede that it matters nothing to us on which day of the 
week he died, nor the number of hours he was in the 
tomb, whether seventy-two hours to the minute or a less 
exact time. With us the important question is, Did he 
die? Did he arise from the dead? Was there a value in 
his sacrificial death, from the Divine standpoint, and how 
is that value or merit made applicable to mankind, and 
have we obtained our interest therein according to the 
Divine terms. 

"HE ROSE AGAIN ON THE THIRD DAY" 

With the majority of Christians for these many centuries 
we agree that Jesus was in the tomb parts of three 
days and nights; that he died on Friday afternoon, and 
that he arose from the dead early on Sunday morning. 
But we are not contentious. Let who likes believe that 
he died on Thursday or Wednesday or Tuesday or another 
day; this is a matter of no importance. The all-important 
matter is, "He ever liveth to make intercession for us." 
(Rom. 8:34.) The stone at the mouth of the sepulchre 
was not a large boulder, as many suppose, but was shaped 
like a wheel— like a large grindstone. It rolled in a 
groove, but, being heavy, would be cumbersome and 
difficult for the women, as suggested. 

The sorrowing friends of Jesus did not realize at the 
time what he had taught them respecting his crucifixion 
and subsequent resurrection. Hence they were surprised 
with every incident of their experience on that eventful 

R4714: page 362 



Sunday morning. The angel appeared in dazzling brightness, 
that he might not be mistaken for a man. He told 
the women who brought spices for the embalming of the 
Lord's body that their Master was risen from the dead— 
that he was no longer dead; that they would see him in 
Galilee; and to so tell his disciples. On the way Jesus 
met them and revealed himself to them. Another account 
tells us that Mary, separated from the others, met 
Jesus alone and, mistaking him for the gardener, asked 
whither the corpse had been removed. Then Jesus revealed 
himself to her. Recognizing her Master she 
clasped him by the feet as though afraid that he would 
leave her; but, different from his previous course, he 
declared, "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to 
my Father and your Father, to my God and to your God." 
Instead of delaying to commune with me, hasten at once 
to tell Peter and the others of my resurrection. How 
careful was the Master that Peter should be mentioned 
by name, lest he should feel that he was forever rejected 
because of having denied him! 

For forty days Jesus was with his disciples and during 
that time he appeared some seven or eight times, 
according to all the different accounts. Once he appeared 
as a gardener. Once he appeared as a traveler 
to two of the disciples going to Emmaus. Again he 
appeared on the shore of the Sea of Galilee to 
some of the disciples who were returning to the fishing 
business. They knew it was Jesus, yet he 
was different from formerly. But we read that they 
did not dare ask him respecting the matter. He 
appeared again to above five hundred believers in the 
mountains of Galilee, and finally, by appointment, he met 
the eleven at the top of the Mount of Olives and ascended 
out of their sight— a cloud receiving him. Only on two 
occasions are we informed that he appeared with nail-prints 
in his hands and the spear wound in his side. And 
on these two occasions we are distinctly told that he appeared 
in their midst, the doors being shut, and that he 
vanished again from their sight. 

Thus did Jesus demonstrate to his disciples the fact 
that he was no longer dead, but alive, and additionally, 
the other fact equally important, namely, that he was no 
longer alive as a man, but as a spirit being. As St. Paul 
declares, "He was put to death in flesh, but made alive in 
spirit." But every precaution was taken to permit their 
natural powers of observation to comprehend the spiritual 
truths revealed to them respecting Jesus' resurrection and 
ascension. It was ten days after his ascension, on the 
fiftieth day from his resurrection, that the holy Spirit 
came, and thus demonstrated at once that the Redeemer 
lived and that he had appeared in the presence of God 
on the spirit plane and that his sacrifice had been presented 
and was acceptable to God; and, on the basis of 
his sacrifice and the imputation of his merit to the disciples, 

R4714: page 363 



the sacrifices which they had presented in his name 
were accepted, and they were begotten of the holy Spirit, 
that they might also become New Creatures and share in 
his Kingdom and glory. 

HIS DEATH AND RESURRECTION NEEDFUL 

It is needless that we seek to dispute as to which was 
the more important event— the death of Jesus or his 
resurrection from the dead. Both were equally important. 
Had he not died there would be no basis for a reconciliation 
of Adam and his race condemned to death. Had he 
not risen there would have been no one to apply the merit 
of his sacrifice. Had he not risen there would have been 
no call of the Church during this Gospel Age to be the 
Bride of Christ. Neither would there have been use for 
the promised Mediatorial Kingdom to be established at 
his Second Coming for the blessing of Israel and the 
world. 

Thus Jesus explained to the two with whom he walked 
to Emmaus on the day of his resurrection, saying, O slow 
of heart to believe all that God hath spoken in the Law 
and in the Prophets! Was it not necessary that Messiah 
should die and should rise from the dead, that in his name 
repentance and remission of sins might be proclaimed? 
How could any be invited to come to God until a way 
had been opened, until the redemption price had been provided? 
Whoever can hear this message and accept it 
may properly be invited to repent of sin and to reform 
and to live contrary to the tendencies of his fallen nature, 
because, in so doing, through the Redeemer, he may attain 
unto eternal life. And if he ask, How about the 
things that are past, the answer would be the same. God's 
provision is for the remission of sins through the merit 
of the sacrifice of his only begotten Son. 

The eleven Apostles were commissioned, "Go ye, 
disciple all nations." (V. 19.) This did not signify, as 
some suppose, a command to convert the world. It meant 
that they should make disciples out of people of all nationalities 
—and not any longer, as formerly, of the Jews 
only. And the Master's injunction has been fulfilled. 
Disciples, followers of him, have been found in all nations. 
But, as Jesus did not say, Convert all nations, 
neither has the Gospel message done this. Those accepting 
discipleship were to be baptized with Christ's baptism 
in the name or authority of the Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit. In all, these have been but "a little flock." (Luke 12:32.) 
But theirs is the "high calling" to joint-heirship 
in his Kingdom, which is soon to bless the world. 

But even this permission to disciple people of all nations 
could not, and did not, begin at once. For three 
and a half years after the cross, in fulfillment of Divine 
prophecy, the Gospel message was kept from the Gentiles, 
until the door for them into this High Calling was opened 
by St. Peter— Cornelius being the first to enter it. 



All disciples of Jesus were instructed to follow him, 
to take him as their pattern and example. Any instructions 
contrary to these are contrary to the words of the 
Great Teacher. And the Master said, "Lo, I am with you 
alway, even unto the end of the Age." He has been with 
his faithful followers to bless them, to comfort them, 
to strengthen them, to fellowship them, to safeguard 
their highest interests, though often at the expense of 
their temporal interests. And this promise of his Word, 
of providential guidance, was to continue until the end 
of the Age— then he would come again in a personal and 
official sense to exalt his Church, to establish his Kingdom, 
to bless Israel with the New Covenant arrangements, 
and thus to bless the world of mankind. 



R4714: page 363 

"GLORY TO GOD IN THE HIGHEST" 

-DECEMBER 25.- 

"For unto you is born this day in the City of David 
a Savior, which is Christ the Lord."— Luke 2:11. 

GOD'S promise that the Seed of Abraham 

should ultimately bless all nations has influenced 

thought the world over, but particularly 

amongst those nations living contiguous 

to Abraham's home and northward 

and westward from there, in the directions 

in which the message of Divine favor has 

gone. At first the Jews thought of this 

promise as being fulfilled in them as a nation 

—that, without assistance from on High, 

they could approve themselves to God through obedience 

to the Law Covenant, and that then, as instructors of 

the world, they would teach all nations to keep that 

Divine Law, and thus bring the world to the blessed state 

of perfection, Divine favor and life everlasting. This 

hope was crushed out as they found themselves unable to 

keep the Law, going down into death, instead of attaining 

to perfection of life. Even Moses, the special servant 

of God, could not, and did not, attain the blessing of 

the Law. 

Then God made them the promise of some better thing 
—of a greater Mediator and of a more successful 
Covenant through that Mediator. The Mediator of the 
New Covenant (Jer. 31:31-34) was to be greater than 
Moses; as he himself declared, "A Prophet shall the Lord 
your God raise up unto you from amongst your brethren 
like unto me (but greater)— him shall ye hear in all 
things whatsoever he shall speak unto you. And it shall 
come to pass that the soul that will not obey that Prophet 
shall be destroyed from amongst the people." (Acts 3:22,23.) 



Thenceforth their hearts and hopes looked 

down through the stream of time to when the glorious 

things hoped for through this great Prophet should be 

accomplished. 

"THE DESIRE OF ALL NATIONS" 

As surrounding nations and those afar off heard of 
Israel's hopes— that to them would come a great Savior, 
Deliverer, who would bless them and exalt them in the 
world and through them bless all peoples, the beauty of 
the thought took root in every direction. Messiah was 
more or less looked for under various names, and the 
glories of his Kingdom were pictured by heathen poets 
as the Golden Age. 

Thus it happened that when our Lord was born, when 
he was made flesh and dwelt amongst us, "All men were 
in expectation of him"— not of Jesus, but of the promised 
Messiah, whom Jesus was. Thus it was that wise men 
in the East were attracted to see and to worship him that 
was born King of the Jews. Thus it was also that during 
Jesus' ministry certain Greeks came to the disciples 
saying, "Sirs, we would see Jesus." They had heard 
of him and recognized that in some respects his magic 
power implied a relationship with the long-expected Messiah. 

R4715 : page 364 

And so it was with the multitudes of Palestine. 
They heard; they listened. They said, Is this he? The 
rulers said, No, this is not the Messiah. Then the people 
asked, When Messiah cometh can he do greater works 
than this man? Never man spake like this man! 

Nevertheless, there were few ready to receive him, 
even amongst his own— only "Israelites indeed," to whom, 
because of worthiness of heart, God specially revealed 
his Son. This was in harmony with the prophecy of old, 
"The secret of the Lord is with them that reverence him 
and he will show them his Covenant." (Psa. 25:14.) 
As again it is written, "I will give him for a Covenant 
of the people." (Isa. 49:8.) Neither Jews nor Greeks 
nor Persian wise men knew to expect that Messiah would 
first appear to offer himself, through obedience to the 
Truth, a living sacrifice for sinners. None of them knew 
that a long period must elapse from the time when Messiah 
would be the man of sorrows and acquainted with 
grief, of whom the people would be ashamed, until he 
would appear in power and great glory to establish his 
Empire under the whole heavens, in fulfillment of the 
prophetic picture of Daniel 2:34; 7:13,14-27. 

Few understand God's great secret or "mystery" hidden 
during past ages and dispensations (Col. 1:26), that, 
during this long period of the Gospel Age a saintly "little 
flock" would be selected from amongst men to be Messiah's 
Bride, and joint-heir with him in his Messianic 
reign. Few see that this "little flock" has been selected 



during these nineteen centuries from every nation, people, 
kindred and tongue, and that they are all saints, in the 
spirit of their minds, at least, and follow the Lamb, 
whithersoever he goeth, walking in the footsteps of Jesus. 
Few understand that, as soon as these join t-sacrificers 
with the Master shall have filled up the measure of afflictions 
appointed, then the Kingdom of glory will be revealed 
and all flesh shall see it together and all shall be 
blessed by it, the Jew, Abraham's natural seed, first, 
and also the Gentile— all the families of the earth. 

A SAVIOR-CHRIST THE LORD 

It was prophetically, of course, that the Babe of Bethlehem 
was called a Savior— he was to be a Savior, The 
Christ, the Lord. But as the Babe he was none of these. 
He became The Christ before becoming the Savior and 
Lord. The word Christ signifies anointed. In the Divine 
purpose it was arranged that Messiah should be anointed 
High Priest of Israel on a higher plane than Aaron— after 
the order of Melchisedec. (Psalm 110:4.) And every 
priest must be anointed to his office before he could fill it. 
Similarly, it was prophesied that Christ would be the 
great King, greater than David and Solomon, who were 
his types and foreshadows. 

The anointing of Jesus was not with literal oil, but 
with that which the oil upon the head of the kings and 
priests of Israel typified— the holy Spirit. He received 
this holy Spirit at the time of his baptism, the Spirit falling 
upon him and abiding with him, anointing him for his 
great work of antitypical Priest and antitypical King of 
Israel, who, as the Messiah long-promised, would bless 
them, and through them, the world. But every priest was 
ordained to offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins, and in 
this also they typified Jesus, who, under the Divine 
arrangement, must first offer up himself as a sacrifice 
acceptable to God for the sin of mankind— in order that he 
might be the Savior or Deliverer of men from the curse 
of sin and death— that he might restore them and their 
earthly home to the glorious condition of perfection 
represented in Adam and his Eden home. Hence it was 
necessary that Jesus should not only consecrate his life 
to the Divine service and be anointed with the holy Spirit, 
but that, sacrificially, he should lay down his life, even 
unto death— even the death of the cross. As a part of his 
reward he was raised to glory, honor and immortality, on 
the third day thereafter. 

As the glorified One he was now fully commissioned 
and empowered to establish the long-promised, Messianic 
Kingdom, but has been waiting while a "little flock" have 
walked in his footsteps— until the elect number shall be 
completed and shall share his glory. Then his Kingdom 
will take the control of earth. Satan shall be bound for 
a thousand years and all the wonderful blessings promised 
in the Law and the Prophets and Gospels and Epistles 
shall be fulfilled. 



"A SAVIOR AND A GREAT ONE" 

We have seen how the Son of God attained his Priestly 
Office, for the sacrifice of himself; how he was anointed 
thereto, and also anointed to be the great King, and how 
he has been merely waiting for the due time for his Kingdom 
to begin. Now we inquire as to the force and significance 
of the word Savior, and how he saves his people 
from their sins! 

In the Arabic, Savior signifies life-giver. The Redeemer, 
glorified as the antitypical Melchisedec, "a priest 
upon his throne," is to be the Savior or life-giver of the 
race, for whose sin and because of whose condemnation 
he died— "the Just for the unjust, to bring us back to 
God," some during this Age and some during the period 
of his Messianic reign. Gradually he, with his saintly 
Bride class, will uplift humanity from sin and death to 
righteousness and life eternal and will destroy all who 
refuse the blessing in the Second Death, from which there 
will be no hope of recovery. 

But the Christ, the Savior of Glory, Bride and Bridegroom, 
will, unitedly, be the world's Savior. The glorified 
Redeemer saves his Church first— by a special salvation 
and High Calling. These are the "elect," called to suffer 
with him and, if faithful, to reign with him on the 
Heavenly plane. These are dealt with now on the basis 
of faith: they pass from death unto life by the exercise 
of faith and their entering into a Covenant with God, of 
sacrifice, through the merit of the Redeemer. Their salvation 
will be made actual when they shall share in his 
resurrection, the "First Resurrection," and become kings 
and priests unto God, to reign with Christ a thousand 
years.— Rev. 20:6. 



R4718 : page 364 

THIS IS MY WILL FOR THEE 

Just to hear my dear Master say, 
"This is My will for thee;" 

Then to whisper the dark night through, 
"This is His will for me." 

Just to keep in the narrow way, 
Painful howe'er it be; 

Just to follow Him day by day- 
All shall be well with me. 

Just to joyfully bear the pain, 
All that He sendeth me; 

Just to suffer the scorn and shame- 
Trust where I cannot see. 



Just to hear, when the day is long, 
"This is My will for thee;" 

Then shall my faith and love grow strong- 
Knowing His will for me. 

Oh, to hear, when the work is done, 

"This is My will for thee— 
Faith and Patience and Love have won— 

Sit in my throne with Me!" G. W. S. 



R4715 : page 365 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

CONCERNING MESSIAH'S KINGDOM 

QUESTION.— Please give briefly your understanding 
of the expression, Messiah's Kingdom, 
and the work of that Kingdom. 

Answer.— Our understanding is that 
Messiah's Kingdom will be a spiritual one, 
invisible to mortals, yet all-powerful, for 
the accomplishment of the great things 
promised in the Law and in the Prophets. 
The Empire which he will establish, invisible 
to men, will take the place of the Empire 
of Satan, likewise invisible. The King of glory will 
replace the Prince of Darkness. Principal amongst Messiah's 
earthly agents and representatives will be Abraham, 
Isaac and all the Prophets, resurrected in full human 
perfection. Instead of their being, as heretofore, the 
fathers, they shall be the children of Messiah, whom he 
will make princes in all the earth. (Psalm 45:16.) With 
this Kingdom the nation of Israel will speedily unite, and 
eventually every nation will come into harmony with Messiah, 
and all people will be privileged to come in under 
Israel's New Covenant, then established by the great 
"Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in."— Jeremiah 31:31-34; 
Malachi 3:1-3. 

The glorious Messiah, whom the Jews identify with 
"Michael, the great Prince, which standeth for the children 
of thy people" (Dan. 12:1), the Mohammedans also 
expect and identify with Mahomet of the past. The 
Free Masons also expect the same glorious personage and, 
in their traditions, identify him with Hiram Abiff, the 
great Master-Mason. This same great Messiah, Michael, 
the archangel, the antitypical Melchisedec, Priest as well 
as King, we identify as "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave 
himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time." 
(I Tim. 2:5,6.) But when the great King shall appear 
in his glory and establish his Kingdom with Israel he will 
be, as promised by the Prophets, "the desire of all nations." 
(Hag. 2:7.) Then all the blinded eyes will be 
opened and all the deaf ears will be unstopped. Then who 



he is and how he should be identified with— Abraham's 

Seed and David's line— will be clearly known to all, in 

heaven and in earth. Not now, but when the King shall 

reign in righteousness, all shall fully understand the significance 

of Zechariah's prophecy (12:7-10) and Psalm 22:16. 

Content that Messiah shall show the Truth in his 

day of revealment, we are glad to point Jews, Mohammedans, 

Christians, all, to the glorious Messiah and the great 

work of blessing for all the nations which he will accomplish 

through the Seed of Abraham, according to God's 

Covenant and his Oath. 



HOW TO GAIN THE GREAT PRIZE 

Question.— Is it the spirit of obedience to the Lord's 
commands that will gain the great prize? 

Answer.— What the Lord is looking for at the present 
time is the spirit of sacrifice or self-denial— not merely 
the spirit of obedience to commands. Few, of course, 
would resist a Divine command, if thundered from heaven. 
Our test is more crucial than that. It is a test of obedience 
to what we understand to be the will of God or the 
privilege of service in his cause. Those who delight to 
do his will, those who delight to serve his cause, even at 
the cost of sacrifice to earthly interests, are the very ones 
he is now seeking. "He seeketh such to worship him as worship 
him in spirit and in Truth" ! "Now is the acceptable 
time"; now is the time for those to come forward who desire 
to offer themselves unreservedly, and who desire that 

R4716 : page 365 

the Lord shall accept their offering, which they know is 
not of great value. The more the sacrifice costs you, the 
more we may be sure it will be appreciated of the Lord. 
For any to give the Lord a thing which has no value in 
their own estimation would be in the nature of an insult, 
instead of sacrifice. 

Our experiences in life should draw us closer to the 
Lord, not only in the form of prayer; but moment by moment, 
in every little emergency of life, we should learn to 
expect heavenly guidance. 

Every accepted sacrificer who fails to carry out his 
sacrifice will surely miss the "high calling," and, if our 
expectations are correct, will share with the "great company" 
in the "destruction of the flesh," which, after consecration, 
they were unwilling to devote day by day. 



RE PHILOSOPHY OF COVENANTS AND RANSOM 

Question.— Is it possible to be both justified and sanctified 
without knowing the philosophy respecting the Covenants 



and the Ransom? 

Answer.— It is true that one might be both justified 
and sanctified through faith in the blood before learning 
anything about the Covenants or the philosophy of the 
Ransom. And one might retain equally justification and 
sanctification through faith in that blood, irrespective of 
philosophies respecting the Divine methods of the applications 
of Christ's merit. This was true in our own case. 
Subsequently, having obtained grace from the Lord and 
some knowledge of his Plan— the philosophies of the 
Atonement, etc.— we served it out to others in his name. 
He advised us through his Word that these things were 
"meat in due season," and that the path of the just would 
shine more and more. In harmony with these promises, 
we have clearer light, increasingly, which is ours to dispense 
to whomsoever has "an ear to hear." 

The Old Law Covenant was to the natural seed of 
Abraham, and similarly the New Law Covenant will be 
instituted with them, as taking the place of the old one 
and bringing them a blessing, which they failed to get 
under the one of which Moses was the mediator. Ours 
is the faith Covenant, the original Covenant, to which the 
old one was added, and to which the new one will be 
added in due time." 



SHOULD WE SELL ALL THAT WE HAVE? 

Question.— Please explain the following text: "Go 
and sell all that thou hast, and come and take up thy cross 
and follow me, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven." 
Should we go and do as the Master advised? 

Answer.— If that young man had assented to our 
Lord's proposition, and had made further inquiry as to 
the particulars, it is our opinion that the Lord would 
have modified his statement to the extent of suggesting 
that the selling and giving to the poor be not done all at 
once, but gradually, as the necessities might seem to open 
up. In the language of the Apostle, "Let your moderation 
be manifest to all." We are to use earthly things and 
earthly opportunities and temporalities with great moderation, 
self-denial, as the case may seem to make 
necessary. 

We are to have bowels of mercy, compassion, sympathy, 
love. Did not our Lord allow Mary to anoint his 
head and also his feet and were not these caresses and 
manifestations of love of an earthly sort? There are 
various items to intimate the Lord's special love for Lazarus, 
Martha and Mary, James and John, and for his 
mother. And this would seem to give us ground for a 
similar course. But as Jesus did not allow those earthly 
loves to hinder him from the Father's service, so we, 
also, must be on the alert about the Father's business. 



R4716 : page 366 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
page 366 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Please accept my apology for asking you for a little of 
your time; but I feel that I have been so greatly blessed by 
reading your sermons and Bible Studies that I have been 
quite a while wanting to write and tell you about it. 

I do not know whether it was just by chance, or accident, 
or whether by the hand of Providence, that a paper was 
handed to me that I might read a report of a surgical operation. 
In that paper I also read a sermon by C. T. Russell. 
I had never read anything of you or of your great work. 

I want to say that that happened last February; and I 
don't believe that a day has passed since then that I have 
not thought of the great work you are doing. I subscribed 
for THE WATCH TOWER, and have read the SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES and quite a number of the tracts and pamphlets. 

THE DIVINE PLAN opened my eyes. I had for a long 
time been looking for light in God's Word; and with the 
series of Bible studies I have taken my Bible and studied 
God's Word every day. I want to say that I have been enabled 
to appreciate God's Word and see his plans as I never 
had before. It is so grand, so sublime, so just! I would 
rather give up every volume in my library— except the Bible 
-than the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. 

I am distributing tracts and the DIVINE PLAN OF THE 
AGES and doing what I can to get people to read them. These 
helps induce me to read and study God's Word, and, thank 
God, they make it so plain to me. Of course, I do not understand 
it all; but it is so different from the plan I had been 
taught. The truth is, I am now reading and studying God's 
plan; before I had been taught man's plan. I am trying to 
see God's plan; and, O how beautiful, how sublime! 
J. D. COLE, M.D.-TENN. 



R4716 : page 366 

MY BELOVED BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

Herein please find my check to be used in the Lord's 
service. We regret that we are not in a position to send 
more. Any and all service we could render is in nowise commensurate 
with the rich blessings we have been enjoying for 
the past ten years. Present Truth has done more for my 
wife and myself than I can ever tell you. It is wonderful, 
marvelous, beautiful, how God's Word (which our parents, 
Sunday-school teachers and preachers so frequently told us 
was never meant to be understood) is now so plain, and has 
been opened up so clearly to our heads and hearts by the 
only key-THE WATCH TOWER publications and STUDIES IN 



THE SCRIPTURES. 

These books, dear Brother, are the real Keys to Holy 
Writ. What could we do without them in the present blinding 
mist and maze of human sophistries? If no others could 
be had, a million dollars could not buy mine. Thank God! 
we have been delivered from the nightmare of Satanic teachings, 
such as were inculcated in our minds by the creeds of 
Christendom, and the labyrinth of mere conjectures concerning 
God's Word; and by his grace, through your publications, 
we now stand in the blazing sunlight of a clarified 
understanding of his Word and his loving character, which 
we now see to be the embodiment of love and mercy. 

And as we rejoice with a joy unspeakable and full of 
glory because of the one hope of our high calling, we also 
rejoice to know that in "The Times of Restitution of all 
things" there will be a universal opportunity for salvation 
for the whole world of mankind— Nero included. 

May God continue to bless you and to use you as an instrument 
in his hands . W . B . SUTTON. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Just one year ago I came into the Truth. I was exceedingly 
rejoiced with the many wonderful truths entirely 
new to me, though I had been educated for the ministry, 
and preached for three years; and had passed normal school 
examinations and taught school for several years. 

My temporal surroundings, as well as my newly acquired 
desire to penetrate the new and unknown fields of the now 
unsealed Book, led me to long for a further unfolding of 
these new and surprising truths. I could wish that there 
were one hundred volumes of such studies, instead of six; 
and instead of contenting myself with a careful assimilation 
and application of that already learned, I sought rather for 
new conquests. 

I began with the help of Strong's concordance to delve 
into the meanings of words. I sought to make pictures and 
draw types from nearly every chapter in the Bible. I tried 
to fit the meaning of every proper name to some one, and 
usually concluded that it referred to Brother Russell. My 
faculty for seeing pictures and types became so developed 
that my eye would skim over a chapter, jumping at a chance 
picture here and there, and missing nearly all the original 
meaning and proper application of the text. 

The Bible I loved was thus becoming quite barren to me 
in respect to its intended use. Instead of using it to supply 
my much-needed armor, I was enjoying it more as one would 
enjoy a picture book or "Grimm's Fairy Tales." 

Since my speculations were unwarranted, they naturally 
contradicted each other. One picture would bring me to one 
conclusion, and another would seem to contradict it. It became 
quite confusing. 

Finally I came to the point where it became quite difficult 
for me to distinguish between Truth and error; and I was 
in danger of losing my appreciation of the Truth and devoting 



myself to the fanciful. Nor did I realize the great danger 

I was in until, a short time ago, the Lord used our dear 

Brother Saphore to point out to me my mistake. I cannot 

express to you what a blow it was to me to see that most 

of my Bible study for a whole year was not only of no account, 

but of a negative influence not only to myself, but to 

those I may have thus influenced. 

I deeply regret my mistake, and have vowed to my Lord 
that henceforth, trusting in his grace to help, I will to the 
best of my ability more zealously appreciate and pursue the 
study of the TRUTH, and cease all speculation and typemaking. 

I am endeavoring, dear Brother, to retrace my steps; to 
learn again to discern between fact and theory, and to make 
no positive statement except that which I know, and can 
prove by the Bible to be Truth— fully warranted and established. 
-Isaiah 8:20. 

The article in the Sept. 15 TOWER, page 297, entitled, "Is 
the reading of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES Bible Study?" has 
been of great help to me; and I am now reading at least 
twelve pages every day and seeking to keep all my Bible study 
within the bounds of that which is known, and given to us 
by the Lord as meat in due season. 

Now, brother, I fear that many are making a similar 
mistake of rash speculation to the end that perhaps many 
will stumble. I pray for such that they may see their mistake 
and the great danger thus impending over those who 
thus build upon speculation, and are sure to see their speculations 
fall. Oh! that our faith may be built upon nothing 
unstable as a part of its foundation, for "This is the victory 
that overcometh the world— even your faith." 

R. G. JOLLY. 

R4717 : page 366 



TO OUR BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in the name of our blessed Savior! We are 
writing to tell you of some of the joys and strength received 
from "the Vow" and from the glorious light on the Covenants 
and the Sin-Offering. 

Before "the Vow" came out I had an intense hunger for 
knowledge and was just beginning to realize that the world's 
literature is full of the wisdom of "the god of this world"— 
Satan. When "the Vow" came, I realized my need of it. 
Now I can remain in a room full of books and not read one, 
but read only the Bible and the Keys which our present Lord 
and Master has provided. 

Sometimes I think of Ezekiel 3:21 as a fitting description 
of how the Lord has used the Vow "to warn the righteous." 
Certainly it was a warning to me. 

When thirteen years ago I came to a knowledge of "Present 
Truth," the fact that The Christ is composed of many 
members was the key to many mysteries; for instance, the 
delay of restitution blessings, etc. Daily the doctrines grow 
more precious to me. My heart is inspired to greater zeal 



and faithfulness, now when I need this very inspiration; 

and I feel more than ever willing to yield to the three burnings, 

just as our Master set the example. Oh, how thankful 

we are to our blessed Master for this wonderful truth 

on the Sin-Off ering! The truth on the Covenants has been 

such a help also. How I enjoy saying to the Jews whom I 

meet, "Have you ever thought of the blessings of the New 

Covenant? These are for your people." 

Now, dear Brother, I come to the object of this letter, 
which is to let you know of our Christian love and how glad 
we are that, like our Master, you have humility enough to 
do the Father's will by proclaiming these truths even though 
you know that you will be misunderstood by many. Would 
that, like John and Mary, we could be a comfort to you in 
the hour of trial. 

At present I am enjoying the Colporteur work more than 

R4717 : page 367 

ever before, due principally to the strength gained from 
"Present Truth." I voice the sentiment of every member 
of our class here when I say, God bless you, Brother Russell; 
for those who keep their consecration vow grow more 
precious to each other. 
Your sister in the "one Body," 

MRS. A. D. MILLER.-IND. 



MY DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

With the sincere hope of encouraging you and holding up 
your hands in this severe hour of trial and determined effort 
of the enemy to hinder the Lord's Harvest Work I have 
been, I trust, directed by our Heavenly Master to write you a 
few lines. I may tell you that I am utterly overwhelmed 
with admiration and thanks to our Heavenly Father for favoring 
me— one, as I feel, so utterly undeserving of being 
favored with an insight into his great scheme for the uplifting 
of the human race and, above all, for calling me to run 
in the good race of the high calling. 

Dear Brother, how especially honored you must be to be 
made God's instrument in presenting these wonderful truths 
to the Church! How I bless God for opening my eyes to 
see them and my heart to receive them, and how I bless him 
for his great love in preserving me from falling back, as some 
have done. Surely there will be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth with those who try to obstruct and hinder the Master's 
work. I am satisfied that they might as well try to keep 
back the waters of the Amazon. I rejoice exceedingly also 
in being favored so highly as to be permitted to do something 
in the way of presenting the message to others. I am happily 
in a position to do a lot of colporteuring and tract distributing, 
and I trust the Lord of the Harvest will give me 
grace sufficient to make the most of the few short remaining 
years of the harvest. 

Again assuring you, beloved Brother, of my loyalty to 



the glorious cause of Christ and to the blessed harvest truths 
as presented to us through THE TOWER, the STUDIES, etc., 
and which I would not exchange or give up for all else besides, 
believe me, my dear Brother, to remain 
Faithfully your co-worker and Brother, 

S. D. COLEMAN.-Australia. 



"MARRIAGE IS HONORABLE IN ALL" 

OUR BELOVED PASTOR IN THE LORD:- 

At this late date what do you think about marriage by those 
who claim to be fully consecrated? I think a timely piece in 
THE WATCH TOWER treating the propriety of marriage would 
do much good. It seems that many do not understand their 
privilege in sacrificing their little all. 

I have certainly enjoyed THE WATCH TOWER, especially of 
late. The expositions on the Great Company and what 
is meant by a full consecration have caused me to make some 
careful self-examinations and more earnest prayers, inquiring 
of the Lord whether or not I have made a full consecration 
of my little all, and am I being faithful in my stewardship. 

Yours in the Lord, 

IN REPLY 

We quite agree with your sentiments, dear Brother, that 
the time is short; that all the consecrated need every talent 
and every moment for the service of the King, to demonstrate 
to him their love and loyalty. We quite agree that many 
marriages have proved disadvantageous spiritually. We do 
not know that all have done so. 

Anyway, we have no option in the matter. The Lord's 
Word clearly declares that marriage is honorable in all. It is 
not, therefore, the province of anybody to forbid marriage, 
directly or indirectly. The most we are privileged to do is 
to call attention to the words of St. Paul, a Divinely inspired 
instructor for the Church, whose admonitions have 
brought blessing to us all many times. He says, "He that 
marrieth doeth well. He that marrieth not doeth better." 

For our part, therefore, we leave the matter in the hands 
of the dear friends, content to point out the Apostle's advice, 
not forgetting that there might be instances in which this 
general rule might not apply. It is for each of the Lord's 
people to decide this matter in harmony with his or her own 
judgment and convictions. "Let us not judge one another, 
but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block in 
his brother's way."— Rom. 14:13. 



VALUE OF BEREAN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

You might be interested in the result of some observations 



made concerning the relative development of members of 
Bible classes that I have been privileged to visit. The degree 
of progress seems to be largely influenced by the character 
of meetings and the method of study adopted. 

Some of the classes closely adhere to the Berean Studies, 
as set forth in THE WATCH TOWER. Other meetings are devoted 
to DAWN Studies, each member of the class taking part 
therein; and at least one meeting per week to prayer, praise 
and testimonies, with an occasional discourse. All such appear 
to be making progress in the development of knowledge 
and the graces of the Spirit. 

Other classes do not have Berean studies; do not use the 
DAWNS at the class meetings, seldom have a prayer, praise 
and testimony meeting, but instead largely depend upon the 
leader of the class, who prepares a lesson on some chapter in 
the Bible and at the meeting states his conclusions, and then 
calls upon the class for expressions of opinion. Such classes, 
it is quite evident, make little progress. 

Since all who have come to a knowledge of "present 
truth" concerning God's Plan, obtained it by the use of the 
six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and other WATCH 
TOWER publications, it would appear to be a serious mistake, 
in the class studies, to ignore these God-given helps. No member 
of the class can grow without an individual exercise of 
his faculties, and where the leader is depended upon to prepare 
a lesson and recite it at the meeting of the class, the 
benefit resulting to the class is reduced to the minimum. 

The Society now publishes, in pamphlet form, the Berean 
questions on TABERNACLE SHADOWS and on Vol. V., STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES, besides the current Berean questions on 
Vol. VI. appearing in THE TOWER. No better material can 
be had for three meetings each week. The majority of the 
friends are so situated that they can have four meetings per 
week. Some of the classes thus situated, and which have not 
used the Berean studies from their inception, are now having 
for one meeting the Berean questions on TABERNACLE 
SHADOWS, for another, Berean questions on Vol. V., and for 
another, the current Berean study on Vol. VI. In this manner 
the new members, as well as others of the class, get the 
benefit of all back lessons, at the same time keeping abreast 
with THE TOWER lessons. The fourth meeting of the week 
is devoted to praise, prayer and testimonies recounting the 
experiences and blessings of the week. The result shows it 
would be profitable for others to pursue a similar course. 

If you are in harmony with the thoughts herein expressed, 
you may be pleased to find some way of calling the attention 
of the friends thereto. 

In the love and service of our King, 

J. F. RUTHERFORD. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I know that you will rejoice with me when I tell you that 
after about two years waiting, the dear, loving heavenly 



R4718 : page 367 

Father has opened my eyes concerning the Vow. 

Sister Frances Thompson has written you in her letter 
about our experiences, so it will not be necessary for me to 
repeat them. I have made the Vow my own, and have been 
rejoicing in the blessings and help derived therefrom. 

It seemed such a foolish thing to think of taking a Vow 
like that. Why did I want to pledge myself, or tie myself 
up to a Vow? But thanks to the dear Father for his 
loving kindness and favor towards me. He has shown me 
that I was the foolish child, and that the Vow was just what 
I needed. 

To me it is just a line of suggestion of how to carry out 
our consecration. This is what I have needed for so long, 
but did not know it. It has made me more watchful of my 
words and thoughts and actions. It has been the means of 
pulling me back into line when this mean old self would 
come to the front and demand its rights. It has caused me 
to rely on the assistance of the promised grace to help in 
every time of need. SISTER SCHEIDLER. 

page 367 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR DECEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for December follow: (1) 30; 
(2) 37; (3) 6; (4) 152; (5) 230; (6) 32; (7) 226; (8) 
95; (9) 235; (10) 273; (11) 73; (12) 208; (13) 123; 
(14) 60; (15) 145; (16) 15; (17) 47; (18) 127; (19) 
283; (20) 279; (21) 4; (22) 112; (23) 258; (24) 327; 
(25) 222; (26) 7; (27) 5; (28) 178; (29) 62; (30) 
264; (31) 113. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 371 

Labor and Anti-Militarism 371 

The Worm at the Social Core 372 

The New and Wonderful Torpedoes 372 

Fifty-Seven Methodist Preachers Resign 372 

Germany as War Instructor of Non-Christian 
Nations 373 

Baptist D.D.'s Disagree 373 

Morgan to Manage Church Unity 

Movement 374 

The Recent London Meetings 375 

Jacob and Esau in a New Light 376 

The Young Man's Error 377 

King Rehoboam's Unwisdom 377 

Ability and Opportunity Misused 378 

National Reform of Old 379 

The God of Battle 380 

Hidden Things Shall Be Revealed (Poem) 380 

Some Interesting Letters 381 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 382 

page 370 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, NY., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



ALLEGHENY, PA., DEC. 9 

Meeting for the interested at 7:30 p.m., in the Chapel, 612 
Arch Street. 

CHICAGO, ILL., DEC. 10 

Afternoon Service for the interested at 3 o'clock. Jewish 
Mass Meeting at 8 o'clock, specially requested by Chicago 
Jews desirous of hearing on Zionism in prophesy. Both 
meetings to be held in the Seventh Regiment Armory, 34th 
St. and Wentworth Ave. For entertainment of friends who 
remain over night, address Dr. L. W. Jones, 3003 Walnut St., 
Chicago. 

OMAHA, NEB., DEC. 11 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10 
o'clock. Discourse for the interested at 7 o'clock in the evening. 
All services in the Omaha Auditorium, corner 15th and 
Howard Sts. 

DES MOINES, IA., DEC. 12 

Meeting for the interested at 3 p.m. Public meeting in the 
Auditorium at 8 p.m.; subject, "Abraham's Two Seeds." 

HARTFORD, CONN., DEC. 18 

Morning Rally at 10:30 o'clock, and discourse for the interested 
at 7:30 p.m. in Mascot Hall, 234 Pearl St. Discourse 
for the public at 3 p.m., in Parsons Theatre. 

CHATTANOOGA, TENN, DEC. 25 

Morning Rally, 10:30 o'clock, at Knights of Pythias Hall, 
Walnut St. Discourse for the public at 3 p.m., in the Bijou 
Theatre, 6th and Walnut Sts. Topic, "Hereafter." 



MOBILE, ALA., DEC. 26 

Morning Rally at 10 o'clock, in the Central Trades Council 
Hall, St. Michael St. Discourse for the public at 7:30 p.m., 
in the Battle House Auditorium. Topic, "Hereafter." 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JAN. 1 

ST. PETERSBURG, FLA., JAN. 8 

PHILADELPHIA, PA., JAN. 15 



ITEMS AGAIN IN STOCK AND NEW ONES 

Spiritism, Hell and Tabernacle Booklets in Swedish, 10c. 
each, 60c. per doz. 

Volume 4, Swedish, 35c. 

Spiritism and Tabernacle Booklets in Norwegian, 10c. 
each, 60c. per doz. 

Volume 4, in Norwegian, 35c. 

Heavenly Manna in German, cloth-bound, 50c. 

Italian, "Our Lord's Great Prophecy," Matt. 24, 10c. each. 

Syrian, "What Say the Scriptures About Hell," 10c. 

Syrian, "Calamities! Why Permitted?" tract pamphlet. 

Greek, DAWN-STUDIES, Vols. 3 and 5, 35c. each. 

Greek, "Hell" and "Spiritism," 10c. each, 60c. per doz. 

Greek, "The Great Pyramid" (Chap. 10, Vol. 3), 10c. each. 

Greek, "Our Lord's Great Prophecy," Matt. 24, 10c. each. 

Greek, "Sabbath, Baptism and Passover" (Chaps. 8, 9, 11, 
Vol. 6). Prices, 10c. each, 60c. per doz. 

THE WONDERFUL STORY OF GOD'S LOVE 

A beautiful little booklet, appropriately illustrated and 
suggested for a Christmas token. Price, 10c, $1 per doz. 

MARKED NEW TESTAMENTS 

We still have a goodly supply of the Marked New Testaments. 
The markings are in red ink, making prominent, 
verses which are specially forceful as respects the various 
features of the Divine Plan for our salvation. The Ransom, 
Justification, Sanctification, the Second Coming of our Lord 
and the Resurrection are made quite prominent in these 
markings. Price prepaid, two for 20c, or $1 per doz. by express 
not prepaid. The publication, markings, etc., are not ours. 

[FOR OTHER ITEMS SEE PAGE 383.] 

page 383 

ITEMS AGAIN IN STOCK AND NEW ONES 



[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 370.] 

SWEET BRIAR ROSE BOOKLET 

These attractive little booklets are especially appropriate 
for enclosure with your correspondence. They contain a 
beautiful commendation of "The Divine Plan of the Ages." 
To facilitate their wide circulation we offer them at an extremely 
low price, $1 (4s. 2d.) per hundred, postpaid. 

VOLUNTEER MATTER IN OTHER LANGUAGES 

In German, a large assortment of tracts, old TOWERS and 
PEOPLES PULPIT. 

In Hollandish, we have a large supply of the "Do You 
Know?" tract for use among your Dutch neighbors and 
friends. 

In Swedish, French, Italian and Greek, we have an ample 
supply for Volunteer purposes. 

In Polish and Hungarian, PEOPLES PULPIT in quantities 
for distribution. 

Order as many of the above as you can judiciously use; 
they are free for prompt distribution to all who desire thus to 
engage in the dissemination of the Gospel message. 

FIRST VOLUMES IN LEATHER AS XMAS PRESENTS 

We call attention to the desirability of the first volume 
of the SCRIPTURE-STUDIES in leather binding for use as an 
inexpensive and at the same time missionary gift for the 
holiday season. We have some specially desirable for this 
purpose since the covers are not stamped with the volume 
number. Price 60c. postpaid. Also the leather STUDIES in sets. 

CROSS AND CROWN PINS 

No. 1. Cross and Crown design in ten-carat gold, five-eighths 
inch in diameter. The crown is burnished. The surrounding 
wreath is rustic in design— brilliant gold. The cross 
is of dark red enamel, with only the outlines showing gold. 
The pin has a patent fastening. Price, $1.15. 

No. 2. This is exactly the same as No. 1, except that instead 
of the pin it has a screw-clamp at the back, making it 
more desirable for men's wear. Price, $1.15. 

No. 3. Exactly the same as No. 2, except that it is three-eighths 
inch in diameter. Price, $ 1 . 

No. 4. Exactly the same as No. 1, except that it is three-eighths 
inch in diameter. Price, $ 1 . 

No. 5. Like No. 1, except that it is of silver instead of 
gold and wreath is washed in green. Price, 35c. 

These prices all include postage and are very much less 
than jewelers would charge, as we have them manufactured 
in large quantities for your convenience. 

POST-CARDS 



Just received an excellent assortment of Scripture post-cards 
of our own selection, both Birthday and for general 
use. Price, 20c. per doz., $1.50 per 100 assorted, postpaid (40 
birthday and 60 general). 

QUESTIONS ON "TABERNACLE SHADOWS" 

We have these printed in cheap form and will supply them 
free to those who have "Tabernacle Shadows" and who will 
request them. 

1910-MOTTO CARDS-1910 

Very beautiful, very cheap; will close them out five for 
20c, postage prepaid. See description Nov. 15, 1909, TOWER. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR JANUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family 
listens to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," 
then joins in prayer. At the breakfast table the 
MANNA text is considered. Hymns for January follow: 
(1) 62; (2) 133; (3) 135; (4) 191; (5) 109; (6) 
260; (7) 267; (8) 67; (9) 95; (10) 130; (11) 264; (12) 
288; (13) 222; (14) 245; (15) 33; (16) 93; (17) 152; 
(18) 145; (19) 176; (20) 284; (21) 4; (22) 238; (23) 
87; (24) Vow; (25) 246; (26) 127; (27) 325; (28) 7; 
(29) 94; (30) 107; (31) 327. 



R4718 : page 371 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

LABOR AND ANTI-MILITARISM 

FROM THE DISTRICT LEDGER, B.C., CAN. 

THE growing sentiment of anti-militarism is 
now noticeable in almost every country in 
Europe. The trials and troubles of the British 
recruiting sergeants have been described 
at length by these "harpies" of the army, 
who, with multi-colored ribbons, flying from 
their headgear, and a braggadocio swagger, 
lure unsophisticated yokels to accept the 
"Queen's shilling." 

That it is by appeals to their vanity and 
not to any intelligent appreciation of the merits of the 
case is amply demonstrated by the study of the birthplaces 
of those who make up the personnel of many Scottish regiments 
when the preponderance of those entitled to wear 
the kilts will be found to be natives of countries outside of 



Scotland. Today the great plaint of those interested in 

the upkeep of Scottish traditions is that although the regiments 

who don the picturesque garb of various clans are 

quite numerous, there are not more than two who have 

not a large admixture of others than sons of Caledonia. 

All the dialects found between Giants Causeway and the 

Cove of Cork can be found in one regiment, and the Forty-second, 

better known as the Black Watch, is a Babel. 

All of these facts are in themselves straws showing 
the decadence of "local" patriotism, and indicative of the 
waning devotion of those martial pursuits that in the past 
have formed so thrilling a theme of song and story. That 
it is the costume rather than the much-vaunted love of 
country that attracts was unanimously the verdict of the 
recruiting sergeants in England, tacitly given, of course, 
when they declaimed so loudly against khaki replacing the 
brilliant red coat because of its deterrent effect upon prospective 
animated packages of food for powder. 

The practical suppression by the newspapers of all 
news regarding the opposition in different countries to 
military service is a recognition of its development and a 
realization that if the reports of outbreaks from time to 
time be allowed free circulation the effect will necessarily 
be antagonistic to the exploiting class. 

The riots in various parts of Spain at the different 
ports from which reinforcements were being shipped to 
Melilla for the Moroccan campaign were protests on the 
part of those who, awakening from the hypnotism of past 
generations, realize that war is prosecuted only for the 
gratification of those desiring profit therefrom, and all the 
talk about the "defense of honor," upholding the flag, freedom's 
cause, are so many catchpenny phrases that have 
outlived their usefulness. 

The increase of Socialistic philosophy in Germany, 
with its concomitant anti-militarism, goes on apace 
despite the outbursts of censure from the Kaiser stigmatizing 
these subjects as "vaterlandlos," etc. It is very 
likely that an impasse may be reached in the kingdom of 
Prussia in 1912. 

There are reports current that the army will be mobilized 
in that year, which means temporary disfranchisement, 
whereby a diminution of the Socialist vote may be 
affected and candidates more favorable to imperialistic 
policies elected. 

There is this "fly in the ointment"— the fear is felt, 
and more or less openly voiced, that, inasmuch as the supporters 
of Bebel, Singer, Auer, et al., know the motive 
for the mobilization is because those deprived of the privilege 
of voting are opposed to the present regime, a coup 
d'etat would very probably be, not only attempted, but carried 
to a successful issue. 

It is not very generally known by the world at large 
who do not read Labor's papers that when Sweden and 
Norway dissolved partnership there was a strong element 
among the jingoistically inclined for a resort to a trial by 
combat, and that it was averted as a result of the conferences 



between the workingmen's unions of the two 

countries deciding that their members would refrain from 

so fratricidal a war. Much praise was given to the late 

King Oscar concerning his tact and diplomacy in that controversy, 

but he was merely the Deus ex machina of the 

commonsense workingmen of the two countries interested. 

In Canada all the available machinery of press and 
pulpit has been called into requisition for the purpose of 
engendering the war fever; but this propaganda, though 
most extensive, has not met with much favor, and as a 
consequence Canadians have been called "ingrates" to 
the Mother Land. 

Why should this country burden herself with the expenses 
incident to floating junk piles in the shape of battleships, 
cruisers, torpedo-boat destroyers? Junkpile may 
be considered a wrong term to use for these Leviathans 
of the sea, but let the inquisitive look into the cost, life 
and final resting-places of these monuments to man's 
stupidity! 

R4718 : page 372 

THE WORM AT THE SOCIAL CORE 

The Rev. Dr. Charles Townsend, of Orange, was one 
of the speakers at the Park Presbyterian Church Men's 
Club banquet recently and told this story of one of the 
troubles of the original ancestor: 

"Adam had eaten the elaborate repast furnished by 
his helpmeet with every indication that he relished every 
morsel. He complimented her upon the dainty manner in 
which the blue-points were served, the flavor of the puree 
of pea, the seasoning of the fish and entree, and finally 
reached a delicious salad. Adam paused, and with a worried 
look on his face, he demanded of Eve where she 
found the ingredients. She enumerated all except the lettuce. 
'Where did you get those leaves?' he demanded. 
'Why, they were lying on a bush in the back yard,' she 
replied, sweetly. 'Well, they were my best Sunday 
trousers,' sobbed Adam, adding, 'Ah, woe is man,' which 
was corrupted into 'Woman,' the term by which we know 
Eve's daughters."— Newark Star. 

The above is a fair sample of clerical wit. It is also 
valuable as a finger-post pointing the way, showing how 
the Bible account of creation has been abandoned by Presbyterian 
orthodoxy and has become ridiculous, silly and 
absurd even to those who profess to believe the Bible is 
an "inspired book."— The Philistine. 



Is it any wonder that the rising generation thinks 
lightly of the holy Scriptures when all the modern ministers 
and brightest college professors make light of its 
statements? Yet these men think that they are but doing 
their duty to benighted people who have not enjoyed their 



opportunities of examining the Bible along the lines of 
Higher Criticism. They do not wish to be sacrilegious. 
They have themselves lost all faith in the Bible and cannot 
always keep up an outward pretense of respect for it. 

The effect upon Christendom is growing terrible. The 
God of the Bible is ignored, if not dethroned, from the 

R4719 : page 372 

minds of humanity. Instead, mammon is worshiped— 
riches, money. The result is summed up by The Christian 
and Evangelist, from which we extract the following: 

LOSING THE SENSE OF SIN 

"We are finding that there are crowds at all the Legislatures, 
State and National, buying legislation all the 
time. And the horror of all this is that many of these 
men have not moral sense enough to realize that they are 
both dishonest and dishonorable! They are surprised that 
such a turmoil is aroused over the mere giving and receiving 
of bribes. Now, these men are our so-called respectable 
men. They are the men who wear high hats 
and frock coats, and go to church and have boxes at the 
opera or symphony concert. Have they lost all sense of 
honor and honesty? Has their moral nature become 
atrophied by the handling of bribes as are the hands of 
certain men paralyzed who work in certain chemicals? 
And when we turn to our own neighborhood, we find 
contractors cheating the builders by poor material, and 
laborers cheating the contractors by slovenly, deceitful 
work. The city employes are cheating the city in every 
way— by short hours, exorbitant and unearned salaries, 
illicit favors shown by one to another, bills entered for 
things never bought. 

"When we turn to business we find graft being practised 
everywhere: merchants paying for markets, employes 
being bribed to get trade of their employers, newspapers 
being controlled by advertisers. Any employer of 
numbers of young men will tell how rare the sense of 
honor and honesty is among them; how they will shirk 
work, and feel no constraint to render full and interested 
service. Young men steal stamps and even money to pay 
betting debts. Even college boys cheat in entrance examinations. 

"Now, if this goes on much longer, where can we issue 
except in moral chaos? We need a new sense of honor; 
we need a new generation of men with such a sense of 
honor that they will despise and turn from anything that 
deprives them of pure hands and clean hearts, who will 
hate a lie in any form." 



THE NEW AND WONDERFUL TORPEDOES 

As dreadnaughts increase in number and size and 



power, invention prepares fresh agencies for their destruction. 
These sometimes are from unexpected quarters. 
The world is evidently getting ready for a most 
sanguinary conflict. When it is ended, in a most dreadful 
desolation, the world will be sick of war and will be ready 
to learn Messiah's more excellent way. God will make 
the wrath of man to praise him and the remainder he 
will restrain. In permitting this dreadful condition of 
warfare to culminate the Lord will be giving humanity a 
needed lesson and, in the language of the Prophet, he will 
thus command them, "Be still, and know that I am God." 
The latest invention of torpedoes is by a truck gardener 
of Missouri, named Ikerman. His torpedoes have 
been tested on the battleship Texas. One naval officer is 
quoted as saying that with twelve men and enough of 
Ikerman's torpedoes he could withstand the attack of the 
combined navies of the world. 



FIFTY-SEVEN METHODIST PREACHERS RESIGN 

The September number of the Upper Iowa Methodist 
Conference this year faced the fact that fifty-seven 
"charges" in the Conference have been vacated. Newspapers 
say:— "Fifty-seven men, the greater number of 
them young and in the prime of life, will quit the ministry 
at this time to engage in secular lines of work. Many of 
these men are only a few years out of the university and 
seminary. The general complaint is that the salary paid 
is not sufficient." 



Such a condition of things should not cause astonishment. 
Nearly all of the ministers that have been graduated 
from all colleges and seminaries within the last 
fifteen years left the Alma Mater Higher Critics— unbelievers 
in the Bible— and many of them skeptical as respects 
a personal God. This is the general teaching of all 
the colleges and seminaries, male and female— not openly 
and avowedly sometimes, but really and truly, nevertheless. 
If there are exceptions, they are rare. 

What incentive is there for the preaching of a message, 
which the preacher does not believe, from a text 
which he considers uninspired and believes he could improve 
upon himself? The motives must be either pride, 
money, approbativeness or ease. The world is holding 
out greater inducements to-day along all these lines, for 
clericalism is growing in disesteem and it is becoming 
more and more difficult to squeeze money out of unconsecrated 
pockets. 

How much ministers and people both need the true 
Gospel, which shows the harmony of Divine Justice, Wisdom, 
Love and Power, and mankind the Divine inspiration 
of the Bible, showing its complete harmony with 



itself and with the true principles of godliness ! 



CHURCH FEDERATION ACCOMPLISHED 

This is the view of Dr. Lyman Abbott as set forth in 
a recent issue of the Outlook:— 
"These instances of united action indicate only a primitive 

R4719 : page 373 

form of Federal Union. Nothing more could be expected 
within nineteen months. But, primitive though it 
is, it is real. The American States, when they were first 
federated, were as truly a nation as they are to-day. They 
were a weak nation, an immature nation, but a nation, 
nevertheless. To-day the Federal Council demonstrates 
that not only Church Union is practicable, quite wise, but 
also that it has been achieved." 



"TIMES OF RESTITUTION" 

A cablegram from Sheffield, England, announces that 
Drs. Hutchinson and Russell, who have been experimenting 
in soil fertility, made a report to the British Association, 
proclaiming the discovery of a micro-organism 
which demonstrates bacteria essential to the fertility of 
the soil. One speaker declared this the most important 
agricultural discovery in fifty years. 



"LOVERS OF PLEASURE MORE" 

It cannot be proved that the Rev. C. J. Tu thill, Congregationalist 
of Massachusetts, is a prophet, but here is 
his idea of heaven as he revealed it from the pulpit recently:— 

"Heaven is only an evolution of this world. A Christian 
may love a baseball game and, loving it, remain a 
Christian. Why, then, is it not safe to prophesy that even 
the game of baseball will have its place in some spiritual 
form in heaven? Imagine an everlasting rivalry for the 
pennant! Think of the new eternal question, 'What's the 
score?'" 



UNION OF THE CHURCHES 

A veritable bombshell was thrown at the annual conference 
of the Western Reform Union, opened at Sheffield, 
England. The newly elected president, J. H. Freeborough, 
speaking on the hope for the future unity of the 



Christian Church, said he firmly believed the great agency 
for the unification of Christendom was the Roman Catholic 
Church. No other Church, he said, had the outlook, 
machinery, tradition or wealth and ability to bring together 
all the forces of Christendom. 

It was a strange thing to say in a Protestant union, 
he continued, but the secret lay there, and if they could 
move that great power to the hearts and needs of humanity 
the day of Christ's coming would be in our time.— 
North Eastern Gazette. 



GERMANY AS WAR INSTRUCTOR OF NON-CHRISTIAN 
NATIONS 

There is a strong agitation in military circles of Germany 
against that country acting any longer as war instructor 
of other nations. It is a well-known fact that 
the Turkish, the Japanese, and also the Chinese army, 
which is long past the first stages of modern development, 
has been organized and developed by German officers. 
After the war with Russia the Japanese gladly admitted 
that their magnificent victory over the much more powerful 
and resourceful enemy was due to the German 
schooling and strategy. Since the war in Manchuria 
many more Japanese officers have entered the German 
army for the purpose of study than ever before, and also 
Chinese are coming in ever greater numbers. Against 
this, even military authorities, irreproachable for either 
pessimism or hatred of foreigners, are now objecting. It 
is asserted that the strategical schooling of the half-barbarians 
of the far and near east by Germany must be 
brought to an end if the "yellow peril" is not to become 
a fearful reality. Sooner or later this willingness of instruction 
on the part of the Germans will avenge itself on 
that country, and it is even now being made merchandise 
of by England and the other powers as a reason for suspicion 
and attack upon Germany. 



CHURCH FEDERATION REALIZED 
HOW MUCH MORE SHOULD WE EXPECT? 

The Federation of Churches and Religious Organizations 
of Greater Boston became a reality at a meeting at 
Ford Hall not long since. Twenty-eight churches and 
organizations were represented at the meeting, which was 
presided over by the Rev. George L. Paine. 

The general object of the federation is to inform, associate 
and assist the churches and religious and civic organizations 
of Greater Boston for intelligent, aggressive 
co-operative work in behalf of the spiritual, educational, 
social economy and physical interests of its individual 
family and community life.— Boston Post. 



BAPTIST D.D.'S DISAGREE 

We clip the following from the daily press. Comment 
is unnecessary:— 

"A declaration by the Rev. Dr. Charles E. McClellan, 
pastor of the Fairhill Baptist Church, that 'Protestantism 
in the United States is fast decaying and will soon be a 
thing of the past,' aroused a storm of protest at the fifty-third 
session of the North Philadelphia Baptist Association, 

R4720 : page 373 

in the Fiftieth Baptist Church, at Seventh street and 
Susquehanna avenue. 

"Other ministers were on their feet in an instant, declaring 
that Doctor McClellan must be mistaken. Instead 
of dying out, they said, Protestantism is now at its zenith, 
with unbounded opportunities for advancement on all 
sides. 

"Doctor McClellan spoke on what he called the decline 
of Protestantism while making his report as chairman 
of the missionary committee. 'The spirit of Protestantism 
is dying in the United States, and it will soon be a thing 
of the past,' he said. 'Philadelphia, both denominationally 
and religiously, is going to perdition at a rapid rate. 

'"Recently I attended the services in one of our 
churches, at which I had been invited to speak. I found 
in attendance nineteen adults and one child. The same 
condition exists all over the city. We have large, magnificent 
churches, but small congregations, showing that it 
is easy to get money, but hard to get men. 

'"In some of our churches we find $5,000 expended 
annually for music, as against $5 for missionary work. A 
new spirit is the need of the hour. I have tried to be an 
optimist, but I cannot.'" 



FERTILE LANDS OF THE GLOBE 

"It has been estimated that the fertile lands of the 
globe amount to 28,000,000 square miles, the steppes to 
14,000,000 and the deserts to 1,000,000. Fixing 207 persons 
to the square mile for fertile lands, 10 for steppes 
and one for deserts, as the great population that the earth 
could properly nourish, the conclusion has been arrived at 
that, when the number of inhabitants reaches about 6,000,000,000, 
our planet will be peopled to its full capacity. At 
present it contains a little more than one-quarter of that 
number, says Harper's Weekly. If the rate of increase 
shown by recent censuses should be uniformly maintained, 
it is thought that the globe would be fully peopled about 
the year 2072."— Exchange. 



The writers of the above cannot be accused of having 
any sympathy with THE WATCH TOWER presentations of 
the Divine purposes respecting our earth. Notwithstanding 
the fact that such statements are published and republished 

R4720 : page 374 

in the newspapers of the world, public thought 

is very slightly influenced by such statistics. Professors 

in colleges and seminaries prate about the age of the earth 

and humanity inhabiting it and about millions of years to 

come and the wonderful things that Evolutionists will accomplish. 

They totally ignore facts— statistics like the 

above. Why is this? Evidently the human mind is peculiarly 

constituted! 

We remind our readers again that we recently published 
reports from physicians of Great Britain and America 
which declare that the world is rapidly becoming insane 
and that, at the present rate of progress, the whole 
world would be insane in two hundred and sixty-eight 
years. We published not long ago statistics showing that 
at the present rate of increase in the use of coal the 
world's supply would be exhausted in less than two hundred 
years. Reports from the lumber interests in the 
world show that timber must soon be cultivated to supply 
the present population of earth, not taking into consideration 
a future great increase. Now we have, as above, statistics 
showing that in one hundred and ten years all the 
tillable earth of the whole world will be under cultivation 
and its regular produce will be necessary for the maintenance 
of the human family without any off-years. What 
would the world do for food in two hundred years from 
now? 

THE ONLY LOGICAL ANSWER TO THE QUERIES 

The Bible alone gives the answer to the problem of 
human life prolonged upon this earth and the Bible answers 
only through its proper interpretation. It assures 
us that now, soon, before these dire calamities would be 
due, the whole matter will be solved satisfactorily, happily, 
blessedly, in the establishment of God's Kingdom- 
Messiah's Kingdom— by the rolling back of the curse- 
by the Divine blessing instead, making the fields fruitful 
and lifting mankind from dust and ashes and death to 
nobler heights, mental, moral and physical— up to perfection 
and everlasting life. The earth has an abundance of 
room, as we have already shown, for all of Adam's race 
that have ever lived. All that it will need will be more 
fertility and, if necessary, more continents can be raised 
from ocean depths. The blessing of the Lord shall fill 
the whole earth. In Messiah's day the righteous shall 
flourish and the evildoer shall be cut off in the Second 
Death. 



MORGAN TO MANAGE CHURCH UNITY MOVEMENT 

The announcement of members of The World's Christian 
Unity Commission was the most important feature 
of the closing session of the House of Deputies at 
the Episcopal convention. 

J. Pierpont Morgan is to be financial manager of the 
commission, which has for its purpose the bringing together 
of all Christian denominations of the world. 

The appointment of this commission is the most far-reaching 
action of the forty-third triennial convention. 

Morgan, it was announced, is treasurer of the commission; 
Bishop C. P. Anderson, of Chicago, president, 
and Robert H. Gardinier, of Gardinier, Me., secretary. 

Bishop C. D. Williams, of Michigan, at the mass meeting 
on social responsibility, said:— 

"It is high time the Church saw to it that the Jericho 
road is cleared of thieves and robbers. We cannot preach 
chastity without considering the tenement-house problem, 
or temperance without realizing that poverty leads to 
drunkenness, as well as drunkenness to poverty." 



Undoubtedly many dear people have a zeal for God 
and for Church Federation— not, however, according to 
the wisdom from above, as we see it. Nevertheless, what 
they are attempting will succeed, and, according to the 
Scriptures, will be the beginning of the end of 
"Churchianity." 

To us its success is an encouragement as demonstrating 
the fulfilment of prophecy. To the unionists it is a 
hollow self-deception to assume that any union in unbelief 
and ignoring of the Bible and of conscience can work 
real good. 



YELLOW AND WHITE MEN AND MONEY 

In an exceedingly interesting address delivered in 
New York a short time ago Moreton Frewen, the English 
economist and author, pointed out some features of 
the world's currency problems which have been overlooked 
for the most part by the man in the street. The 
subject of his paper was "The Serious Depreciation of 
Gold." 

The speaker took up the subject of the relation of Asia 
to the situation. "The most serious aspect of the depreciation 
of gold," he said, "or, to word it more simply, 
of the great rise of gold prices, is that it is stimulating 
the industrial development of Asia with eight hundred 
millions of people, and involves a competition which, 
though little noticed thus far, is a menace to our Western 
civilizations. The great abundance of the new gold inflates 



our currencies, but there is no equivalent inflation 
of the silver currencies of the Far East. The result is a 
great stimulus to all that Asia exports to us and if the rise 
of gold prices continues during the next quarter of a century, 
as I believe it will, we shall hand over the control of 
many great industries, such as steel and coal, cotton, 
leather and jute, to an awakening China. 

"Within the past few months a steel rolling mill has 
commenced to roll rails of the highest quality at Hankow. 
The wages per hand paid in the mill are one-fifteenth of 
the wage at Pittsburg and the efficiency of this skilled, patient 
Chinese labor is, I understand, estimated by Mr. 
Watson, an inspector of the United States Steel Corporation, 
at 90 per cent, of the highly paid skilled white 
workers at Pittsburg. The wage of coal miners in China 
and of ordinary unskilled coolie labor there is much 
lower still; not more than six to eight cents per day gold. 

"In the past thirty years, because of falling silver exchanges, 
the entire character of England's trade with 
Asia has changed. Instead of an improving market for 
our exports of manufactured goods, cheap silver is making 
of Asia one vast factory. When I think of the creations 
I have myself seen— the cotton mills of Bombay, the 
jute mills of Calcutta, the boot factories of Cawnpore, 
and now this terribly ominous competition of Hankow, 
Shanghai, Hongkong— I find myself wondering what 
white industries menaced by this murderous Mongolian 
competition will survive. 

"I suppose that there is no man living today who 
brings a wider mental horizon to these economic problems 
than your distinguished countryman, Mr. James J. 
Hill. A friend has given me an important letter written 
to him a few weeks since by Mr. Hill, with a portion of 
which I may properly conclude my remarks:— 

'"It appears certain that as long as the workers of the 
Orient are content to accept silver at par for their low 
wage, while merchants and manufacturers can sell their 
products abroad for gold and turn it into silver at current 
rates of exchange, not only must our exports to the Orient 
tend to decrease rather than increase, but it will presently 
become a question whether the markets of the rest of the 
world can be saved from a competition stimulated by exchange 

R4720 : page 375 

conditions that we are powerless to control.' 

"The crises of 1893 and 1907 will not be found where 
you are looking for them; they were not either in your 
banking or in your currency systems. The trouble is in 
your foreign exchanges. In that direction you must find 
the remedy. We must discover a way to obtain much 
higher rates of exchange with Asia; that is the road to 
your safety and to ours."— Bulletin of the American Institute 
of Banking. 



ELECTRICAL ENERGY DISCOVERED 

A scientific gentleman in England startles the world 
with the declaration that he has discovered a certain electric 
ray that can be focused like light and be used to 
paralyze armies as easily and as quickly as though lightning 

R4721 : page 375 

had desolated their ranks. This new weapon of destruction, 
it is said, has been tendered to the British War 
Department. It is called an "attribute of high-frequency 
electric current," which can be separated and, by mechanical 
contrivance, be deflected and aimed in much the 
same way as a stream of water from a hose pipe. The 
Scientist says:— 

"The most striking experiment of all had a horse for 
its subject. By a mechanical device, which is, of course, 
a secret invention, it was brought to bear upon the horse 
at a range of four miles. The results could not have been 
more rapid or more destructive had the range been four 
yards. The brute staggered as though dazed by a blow 
from some unseen hand, then fell stone dead. The same 
thing would have happened had the range been doubled or 
trebled, and the fate of a horse might have been the fate 
of an army corps." 



Surely the increase of knowledge of our day can be 
safely entrusted only to perfect beings controlled by the 
Law of Love, or controlled by a higher power, until their 
uplifting shall have been effected— or their destruction in 
the Second Death, exactly as the Bible shows. 



R4721 : page 375 

THE RECENT LONDON MEETINGS 

IN harmony with previous appointments the 

Editor of THE WATCH TOWER spent three 

weeks in London, visiting Manchester and 

Glasgow before returning. We left New 

York Wednesday morning, October 12th. 

A representative of the American Press Association 

and Brother P. E. Thomson, our 

stenographer, comprised the party. On the 

pier, waving us goodbye, were nearly a 

hundred New York Bible Students. Their 

words of good cheer and loving manifestation of interest 

in our welfare cheered us on our journey. Later, in 

our stateroom, we found reminders of them in certain 

comforts— fruits, nuts, sweets, flowers. The fragrance 



of the love behind all these made them doubly precious. 

We had an uneventful journey, which afforded opportunity 
for our literary work. We arrived at London on 
the evening of October 17th. On the platform we were 
surprised and cheered by meeting about fifty friends from 
London and vicinity, waiting for us, extending the glad 
hand and a cheering welcome. We thanked God and 
took courage. 

ROYAL ALBERT HALL 

On this occasion we devoted nearly all of our attention 
to London, the greatest city in the world. Three 
Sunday evenings in succession we occupied that superb 
auditorium, The Royal Albert Hall. The attendance was 
estimated to vary from 4,600 the first night, to 6,000 the 
second night, and 7,600 the last night. Our themes were:— 

(1) "God's Message to the Jews."— Isa. 40:1,2. 

(2) "God's Message to Christendom."— Isa. 40:3-7. 

(3) "The Great White Throne. "-Rev. 20:11. 

On all three occasions the interest manifested by the 
audience was splendid. We could not have asked for better. 
We feel much encouraged with the evidences of a 
class possessing deep spirituality in Great Britain, and 
with an apparently increasing interest in Present Truth. 
We will not here give any details of the discourses, as we 
understand that they were reported very widely all over 
America and in some of the English papers. We will 
assume that those interested in reading them not only 
secured them for themselves, but sent encouraging words 
to the editors and purchased extra copies for their friends. 

Between these more public services at the great hall 
we had six district meetings in London in fine, large 
town halls, with which English cities are so much better 
supplied than our own. At East Ham Town Hall, at 
Acton Baths Hall, Woolwich Town Hall and at Bermondsey 
Town Hall the theme was the same— "Times of Restitution 
of all things which God hath spoken." At Alexandra 
Palace our topic was, "Where are the Dead?" At 
Shoreditch Town Hall, in the Jewish district, our topic 
was, "Zionism in Prophecy." We feel sure that our readers 
can well imagine our treatment of these themes, hence 
we will not dilate upon them here. The pleasurable matter 
we have to relate in connection with the meetings 
is that in all of them we had splendid attention and audiences 
which ranged from six hundred to twelve hundred. 
We were surprised to have so good audiences and so intelligent 
a hearing on mid-week evenings. 

We had one special meeting with the London Church. 
We enjoyed that meeting very much, and hope that the 
friends there enjoyed it also. We would have liked to 
have several more meetings of the fellowship order 
with them, but our time and theirs was fully occupied. We 
were hunting again for more satisfactory office accommodations, 
etc., while many of the dear friends were extremely 
busy in doing their part to make successful the 



nine public meetings. That they worked very hard will 
be known when we state that over six hundred thousand 
copies of PEOPLES PULPIT, advertising these meetings, 
were circulated. If the Lord smiles upon our projects we 
will have more meetings in London and more Pilgrim 
service throughout Great Britain shortly. Surely there is 
a large wheat field there to be harvested— as well as here. 

FOUR MANCHESTER MEETINGS 

The Class of Bible Students at Manchester numbers 
about 400, and they are very zealous. They would have 
preferred, of course, Sunday meetings with large halls, 
but were nevertheless pleased with the best we had for 
them, under all the circumstances, namely, addresses to 
the Household of Faith on the afternoons of Friday and 
Saturday, October 4th and 5th. The attendance was good, 
although, of course, many of the dear friends, obliged to 
attend to their secular pursuits, were unable to be present. 
We endeavored to speak some words of cheer and comfort 
which we hoped, under the Lord's Providence, might build 
them up still further in the most holy faith. 

On Friday evening we had a public service in the new 
Auditorium of the Y.M.C.A. About 1,000 were present, 

R4721 : page 376 

mostly middle-aged people, intelligent, thoughtful. They 
gave close attention to our discourse on "The Great White 
Throne of Judgment." 

On Saturday evening we had a hall in the Jewish 
neighborhood, and spoke specially to the Jews. Our topic 
was, "Zionism in Prophecy." The hall was not a large one 
and many desirous of hearing were unable to gain admission. 
Seven hundred had seats, and about 500 more 
were tightly packed in all the aisles and clear out to the 
street. We never addressed a more representative Jewish 
audience; they were from all classes and conditions of 
life. All but a very few heard us with many manifestations 
of interest, especially after we had reached the 
center of our theme and they perceived that we were not 
trying to get them into some Christian sect, but drawing 
their attention as Jews to the promises of God through 
their own prophets. Many of their faces lighted up with 
hope, and some wept. 

At the conclusion, in harmony with a request, we gave 
opportunity for questions. These developed the fact that 
the three questioners were opponents, unbelievers in the 
Bible and its promises— young infidels. The audience 
noticed this and spoke out against them. When we answered 
that a man who did not believe the Bible, and who 
did not trust in the promises made to Abraham, was not 
really a Jew, and had no proper right to ask a question at 
a meeting called for the discussion of "Zionism in 
Prophecy," the audience drowned our opponents with their 
applause. 



We gave Glasgow, Scotland, also two days of two 
meetings each. The regular meetings of Bible Students 
at Glasgow, we understand, number about 500 every Sunday. 
They seemed to be in good spiritual health. The 
programme at Glasgow was practically a repetition of the 
one at Manchester. 

The second of the meetings for the interested was a 
Question Meeting. The questions were extremely good 
ones and indicated thoughtfulness and deep penetration in 
the knowledge of the Truth. 

The meeting for the public in Glasgow was well attended. 
The audience was estimated at 3,200. The Glasgow 
meeting for the Jews was our last in Great Britain, 
the attendance being about 1,400. They listened with 
keen interest, and on our conclusion gave us very warm 
applause. 

OUR RETURN JOURNEY 

After the meeting we took a train for Southampton 
and there got good steamer connection for New York. 
About seventy of the Glasgow friends sang and waved us 
goodbye from the platform. 

We had a stop-over in London of an hour between 
trains. Quite a number of the London Bible Students 
were on the platform and bade us goodbye. 

Our homeward journey was quite an uneventful, pleasant 
one. We had excellent opportunity for literary work, 
and trust that at least two grains of wheat were found 
on the boat. 

At the landing pier in New York City we were met 
by three of the brethren as a committee for the whole 
family. Soon we were at Bethel and had the pleasure 
of greeting the family at their noonday meal. On our 
entering the room all of this dear family of God arose 
and sang a verse:— 

"Blest be the tie that binds 

Our hearts in Christian love; 
The fellowship of kindred minds 
Is like to that above." 

We gave thanks to the Lord, and then briefly recited 
to the family our experiences abroad, as herein presented 
to the family at large. 



R4722 : page 376 

JACOB AND ESAU IN A NEW LIGHT 

A TRAVELER and lecturer acquainted with 
the habits and customs of the Arabs throws 
a fresh light upon the transaction between 
Jacob and Esau respecting the birthday and 
the deception practised upon Isaac. It is 
claimed, and apparently on good grounds, 



that the customs of the Arab in Mesopotamia 

to-day are in all respects what they 

were thirty-five hundred years ago, when 

Abraham dwelt there, and was a great sheik, 

with flocks and herds and servants. Hence the ideals and 

customs prevailing amongst them furnish a good criterion 

as respects those in vogue in the days of Isaac, Jacob and 

Esau. 

It is declared that to this day the first-born son of the 
family is the heir of the estate, with full authority next 
to his father. It is the custom amongst the Arabs that 
the elder son shall recognize by fast the birth date of a 
celebrated ancestor, from whom he has received patrimony. 
On the other hand, other members of the family 
celebrate such a day as a festival. For the elder son to 
partake of the feast on such an occasion would mean the 
renouncement of his birthright to the next one in 
succession. 

Applying this to Esau and Jacob: Presumably the occasion 
was a celebration of the birthday of their grandfather 
Abraham, from whom proceeded the great blessing 
of God, which, as the elder son of the family, Esau had 
inherited. It was a day, therefore, in which it was incumbent 
to fast, but a holiday and special lentil festival 
to Jacob. As the elder son it would not have been necessary 
for Esau to purchase victuals from his brother, 
for, as the head of the home next to his father, he could 
have commanded whatever he desired. But on this occasion, 
when he asked Jacob for the savoury food, the latter 
was astonished and practically said: "Do you mean it, 
or are you joking? Do you really mean that you wish 
to abdicate your rights as the first-born by partaking of 
the stew? If you do mean it, I shall very gladly assume responsibility 
and I will do the fasting as the first-born." 
Esau replied, "Yes, I mean it. Why should I fast? I 
have no confidence in the old Scripture promises anyway, 
and have serious doubts if God had any more communication 
with father Abraham than with others." Still doubting 
his sincerity, Jacob, after the manner of the people of 
the East to this day, said, "Swear it and I will believe it." 
So Esau swore that he voluntarily voided his rights to his 
brother Jacob, who was glad to go under the conditions 
because of his faith in the promises made to Abraham. 

WHY ISAAC WAS DECEIVED 

Our informant further declares that amongst the 
Arabs it is still considered entirely proper to deceive the 
aged, for the purpose of saving them from sorrow. For 
Isaac to learn that his first-born son had so disesteemed 
his privileges, it was surmised, would cause heartache and 
sorrow. Hence his wife and Jacob arranged to deceive 
him. Esau was dishonest in attempting to take the blessing 
which he had forfeited and that with an oath. He 
seems to have feared that the blessing of the first-born 
would carry the bulk of Isaac's estate to Jacob. Apparently 



R4722 : page 377 

it was the earthly things that he desired and not 
the spiritual blessing of God through Abraham. So soon 
as Jacob left all the earthly inheritance in Esau's hands 
the latter seemed satisfied. And Jacob, too, was satisfied, 
because he got the portion which he specially desired and 
prized above everything else. 

In full harmony with this the Scriptures denounce 
Esau as a profane, worldly-minded person, who sold his 
birthright share in God's special promises for a mess of 
pottage— for temporal, earthly refreshment. The Scriptures 
similarly praise Jacob because of his willingness to 
deny himself earthly comfort for the heavenly promises. 



R4722 : page 377 

THE YOUNG MAN'S ERROR 
[WHICH LOST HIM A KINGDOM.] 

-I. KINGS 12:6-16. -JANUARY l.~ 

"He that walketh with wise men shall be wise; a companion 
of fools shall be destroyed." (Proverbs 13:20.) "Wherewithal 
shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking 
heed thereto according to thy word."— Psalm 119:9. 

THE opening of the New Year with all the possibilities 

thereof for good or for evil 

strongly resembles the opening of life's maturity 

to a young man or a young woman. 

To the thoughtful and experienced there is 

something very pathetic in the life start of 

bright boys and girls. Their hopes and anticipations 

run so high, their ideals are so 

grand, they have so many air castles. Experience 

shows that, alas, the great majority 

of these result disastrously and usually from unwisdom. 

How often would loving counsels from their 

seniors assist them and save them from wrecks and calamities! 

We may well thank God that in his Providence 

the mistakes of youth, while serious, do not necessarily 

spell eternal disaster. Once, perhaps, we wrongly so misunderstood 

the Divine purpose— understood that all who 

do not become saints will suffer eternally. Thank God 

for our better vision of the present, which shows us that 

the saintly ones indeed choose the better part and its exceeding 

great reward; nevertheless those not favored 

with the hearing ear and the understanding heart and 

the call Divine in the present time will share the great 

privilege of human restitution under Messiah's Kingdom. 

Thus the mistakes of nine hundred and ninety-nine out 

of every thousand, in not choosing the better part, may 



not only bring bitter lessons, sorrows and tears, but eventually 
bring greater wisdom and lead on to bliss in Eden 
restored. 

KING REHOBOAM'S UNWISDOM 

When the great king, Solomon, died he left the kingdom 
to his son Rehoboam— a kingdom extending from the 
wilderness on the South to the Euphrates on the North, 
in all nearly as large as England and Wales. It was God's 
Kingdom; as we read, "Solomon sat upon the throne of 
the Kingdom of the Lord." Rehoboam was about twenty-one 
years of age when he came to the throne at the death 
of his father, Solomon. He was inexperienced. His 
mother was a princess from a nearby heathen kingdom 
and apparently she never renounced her heathen religion. 
Evidently she was very beautiful and the favorite of Solomon's 
household. The son probably inherited personal 
beauty from both of his parents. The riches of the kingdom 
had been chiefly gathered to its capital, Jerusalem, 
and King Solomon's annuity is supposed to have been more 
than ten million dollars. No young man probably ever 
stepped suddenly into greater opportunities than Rehoboam, 
and few ever dissipated good fortune more rapidly; 
but while few have so great opportunities financially 
and politically to lose, yet each has character possibilities 
and a kingdom of his own will, valuable beyond all monetary 
calculations. Let us all learn lessons from the successes 
and failures of others. Let us all set before us 
proper ideals that their attainment may be a blessing and 
not a curse. 

THE CRISIS AND THE ERROR 

Although the nation of Israel was a monarchy, it had 
connected with it elements of a democracy. That is to 
say, each of the tribes, except the Levites, maintained a 
political organization and a measure of independence. 
Thus King David reigned for seven years over Judah 
and Benjamin before he was accepted as king by the other 
ten tribes. Although the nation was a theocracy in the 
sense that God was their King, and the earthly monarch 
merely his representative, it can readily be seen that the 
religious faith of the nation had much to do with the regulation 
of the king. 

King Solomon, the wise, although reverent toward 
God, was evidently much less zealous, much less religious 
than his father David. His heathen wives, the riches of 
the kingdom and his political intercourse with the surrounding 
nations made him what might be termed a 
bright-minded man rather than a religious one. This was 
reflected upon his son and successor and also upon the 
people he governed. 

Besides this, Solomon's great enterprises, palatial 
buildings, etc., brought the revenue and glory to his capital 
city, Jerusalem, and did not evenly distribute it 



throughout the nation. Indeed, following the custom of 

other kings, wealth was gathered largely from the enforced 

labor of his subjects, who were compelled to labor 

at his capital for the common weal without pay. They 

were drafted and put under task -masters. In Solomon's 

day this was borne, though sometimes resentfully, but 

when his son came to the throne the northern tribes determined 

that they would not acknowledge him as king 

unless he gave them what might be termed a bill of rights 

—a Magna Charta. 

They sent to Egypt for one of their leaders, whom 
Solomon had exiled for his outspoken criticisms. Through 
him the ten tribes had a general conference of tribe leaders 
and informed Rehoboam that they were not satisfied 
with the way they had been treated by King Solomon. 
They inquired what he would promise them in the way of 
a reform government. Rehoboam, who had already been 
recognized king by the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, was 
at the conference and properly enough asked for three 
days in which to consider the question. He and all 
realized that a crisis in the affairs of the kingdom had 
come. The matter was too weighty to be decided hastily. 
He called for the secretaries of the kingdom, his father's 
counsellors, elderly men, to know their advice. Their 
recommendations were good. They recommended that he 
be a servant of the people; that instead of accumulating 
wealth at the capital and being personally great, he should 
serve the entire nation, looking out for all of its interests 
and forwarding the same— exactly what the ten tribes 
desired. 

Next, Rehoboam called the young men, his friends and 
acquaintances, his schoolmates, whom he was disposed 

R4723 : page 378 

more and more to bring into power with himself. Their 

advice was that the one way for a monarch to be successful 

is to intimidate his subjects and rule them with a 

heavy hand. The young king had not been rightly taught 

the principles of justice in human affairs. Wise as his 

father was, he had neglected to prepare his son for a 

proper decision in the crisis upon him. Pride and inexperience 

said, Hold to your power. If you yield an inch 

they will consider you weak and inefficient and will ask 

for more and more until shortly you will be a king in 

name only. Pride and ambition are dangerous counsellors. 

THE GRIEVOUS DECISION 

The king followed the advice of the young men and, 
in figurative language, said, "You claim that my father 
made your load heavy, and you ask me to make it light. 
Instead, I will add to your load; my father chastised you 
with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions— a 
whip with metal pricks at the ends of the thongs." The 
unwise decision lost the king the greater part of the kingdom. 



The ten tribes revolted, and the adjacent kingdom, 

which had been under Solomon's sovereignty also, deflected, 

and left the king but a small minority of his empire, 

although it was the richest, most influential portion. 

The ten tribes answered, "What interest have we in David 

and his family? He belongs merely to the tribe of Judah." 

Thus they separated. 

THE POINT OF THIS STUDY 

There is a lesson in this study for all, namely, the importance 
of wisdom in our decisions, especially at the 
start of life and at various partings of the ways, as we 
come to them in life's journey. To all there is a lesson 
worth learning in the matter of pride and ambition, 
threats and attempted coercions and the unwisdom of such 
courses, as well as their injustice. Wealth, power, influence, 
gained through oppression and injustice, are unworthy 
of noble minds, and this principle can be applied 
on the smaller scale as well as on the larger. In homes 
the principle operates between parents and children, between 
husbands and wives. Alas! too often in the home 
control is held by force rather than by love and esteem 
and the appreciation of justice and the general welfare. 
Such a headship or rulership in the family is an unworthy 
one and should be remodeled forthwith. 

Another lesson is that in every enterprise of life we 
should seek counsel. In this connection let us remember 
the words of the Apostle that we seek the wisdom that 
cometh from above, that is "first pure, then peaceable, 
easy of entreatment and full of mercy and good fruits." 
—James 3:17. 

This should be the decision of every one of us as respects 
the New Year, 191 1 -God first! 

"We shape ourselves the joy or fear 

Of which the coming life is made, 
And fill our future atmosphere 

With sunshine or with shade. 

"The tissue of the life to be 

We weave in colors all our own, 
And in the field of destiny 

We reap what we have sown." 



R4723 : page 378 

ABILITY AND OPPORTUNITY MISUSED 

-I. KINGS 12:25-33.-JANUARY 8.- 

"Thou shalt not make unto thee 
any graven image."— Exodus 20:4. 



TODAY'S Study brings to our attention a man 
of large natural ability and of quite unusual 
opportunity. It shows us his disastrous error, 
which resulted from his endeavor to be 
worldly wise and to neglect his God and 
his religion. It furnishes an illustration 
which can be applied, not only to every political 
and every commercial enterprise, but 
also to the life hopes of each individual. 

Jeroboam as a young man attracted the 
attention of King Solomon, who perceived that he possessed 
great executive talent and that he was a natural 
master and director of men. King Solomon put Jeroboam 
at the head of one of his corps of drafted workmen who 
were engaged after the manner of that time in building 
palaces and fortresses for the king— without pay 
other than very plain food and clothing. These labor 
armies were obliged to work for a number of months and 
then were replaced by others similarly conscripted. 

Of the tribe of Ephraim, the largest of the ten tribes 
which separated from the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, 
naturally Jeroboam may have felt something of the spirit 
of discontent as he perceived that the wealth of the nation 
was being principally gathered at Jerusalem— that 
all of the tribes were being taxed, and that most of the 
benefit went to the tribe of which the royal family were 
members. Jeroboam became the leader of a party of discontents, 
and an incipient rebellion was the result. This 
was quickly suppressed by King Solomon and thereupon 
Jeroboam fled to Egypt, from whence he returned at the 
death of Solomon and became the leader and spokesman 
of the ten tribes when they demanded of Rehoboam the 
reform of the government's policy. 

JEROBOAM'S FIRST MISTAKE 

It should be remarked that one of God's prophets had 
specially foretold to Jeroboam that he was to be the king 
of the ten tribes. It was doubtless this that led him to 
head the insurrection. He should have followed the example 
of King David, who was anointed king of Israel 
several years before the death of King Saul. Young David 
was content to wait God's time for bringing him to the 
throne. The fact that God had indicated that this would 
be so did not indicate that the time had come, hence 
David waited on the Lord and meanwhile learned valuable 
lessons of self-control and trust in Divine Providence. 
Not so Jeroboam, who was evidently a very different type 
of man, no doubt possessed of more confidence in himself 
than of trust in God; possessed of more impatience to be a 
king than of loyalty and patriotic zeal to serve God and his 
people. This first mistake should be noted by all. "Wait 
ye upon me, saith the Lord!" The man who ignores God 
is not wise; the man who opposes God is a fool. 

JEROBOAM'S SECOND MISTAKE 



When the ten tribes revolted against King Rehoboam, 
Solomon's son, they promptly accepted Jeroboam, one of 
Solomon's servants, as their king, in harmony with the 
Prophet's declaration of years before. Finally the boy 
of humble birth had reached a high station of influence 
—a grand opportunity for service for his God and his 
people. Whoever occupies a position of prominence- 
political, social, literary— should recognize that thereby 
he has come under special responsibility and obligations 
toward all with whom he has to do. Such opportunities, 
whether in business life, in politics or in literature, should 
be used humbly, faithfully, as a responsible service. 

R4723 : page 379 

But Jeroboam, king of the ten tribes styled Israel, took 
the course, alas, too commonly taken— the selfish course. 
He looked not to the Lord to serve him, nor to the people, 
to serve their best interests. He looked selfishly to his 
own interests. He reasoned thus: If I would establish my 
family in the kingdom of these ten tribes, I must separate 
them effectually from the influence of the kingdom of 
Judah. And since, in God's Providence, the Temple is in 
the land of Judah, and all the religious rites and interest 
of the people center there, I must as unobtrusively 
as possible turn the attention of the nation I rule away 
from sympathy with their fellows of the kingdom of 
Judah, and away from the regulations which God has 
established there. 

Every worldly politician would declare Jeroboam a 
master spirit as a ruler, as a politician. He was worldly 
wise. God through the Prophet had assured him, "If thou 
wilt hearken to all that I will command thee, and wilt 
walk in my ways, and do right in my sight to keep my 
statutes and my commandments, as David my servant did, 
thy kingdom will be prolonged." (I Kings 11:38.) God 
explained that the reason for giving Jeroboam rulership 
of the ten tribes was that Solomon's course of dealing 
with the nations round about was gradually breaking 
down the true religion and leading the people toward 
idolatry. Jeroboam should have had all this in mind, and 
should have applied his heart with special fervor to the 
banishment of idolatry. 

Instead, however, for policy's sake, he led the nation, 
of which he was king, directly into idolatry. He did not 
come out plainly and say to them, I wish to separate you 
and alienate you from God and the religious institutions 
of your nation by attracting your attention away from 
Jerusalem, its religion, its worship, its Temple. Under 
the pretext that it was too far for the people to go to 
Jerusalem, he erected a golden bull near the northern 
extremity of his kingdom, and another near the southern 
line, and the people went from one to the other. Additionally, 
he established near each of these golden bullocks 
(wood overlaid with gold) a house of high places. In 



these buildings lustful practices were carried on in the 

R4724 : page 379 

name of religion and in the manner of heathen peoples, 
this form of religion pandering to the fallen appetites and 
commending itself to the people who were not at heart 
religious. 

Thus a man of great opportunities and of great natural 
ability for serving his God and his people dishonored the 
One and led the other astray. The lesson to each of us 
should be, See that thou do differently. Make not 
Jeroboam's mistake. 

THE THING WAS OF THE LORD 

Lest we should suppose that the affairs of Israel's 
Kingdom, under Divine supervision, were neglected and 
allowed to go astray, we are particularly informed that 
"the thing was of the Lord." From this standpoint of 
faith and from no other the history of Israel should be 
studied. 

God had chosen to give Israel the Law Covenant 
for the very purpose of developing in them as a nation 
holiness, faithfulness. Their lessons of the past had 
been to this end, and now the time had come to do a 
sifting and a separating work. The kingdom of Judah 
had been enriched, and to it had been gradually gathered 
the more religious and the more intellectual of the nation. 
By the conspiracy of the ten tribes God purposed to 
humble Judah and to draw that people nearer to himself. 
To this end the ten tribes of less religious people were 
separated under Jeroboam. 

But this did not work disadvantage to any true Israelites 
amongst the ten tribes, for we read that the Levites 
and the most religious of the people removed to the kingdom 
of Judah. Contrariwise we are safe to assume that 
the irreligious of Judah who favored idolatry, etc., had 
full opportunity for removing to the land of the ten tribes. 
Thus a sifting work was done which was beneficial to 
those loyal to God and to the kingly family which he had 
indicated in "his sure mercies of David." 



R4724 : page 379 

NATIONAL REFORM OF OLD 

--II CHRONICLES 15:1-15.-JANUARY 15.- 

"Be strong, therefore, and let not your hands 
be weak; for your work shall be rewarded." 

THIS Study shows us a young king whose environments 
in youth had been unfavorable, 



in that his father was far from being a 

good man, and his early years were under 

the influence of a grandmother who was an 

idol worshipper. In the midst of this unfavorable 

setting Asa quickly developed a 

loyalty to God and soundness of judgment 

beneficial to his kingdom. We have all had 

experience with characters of this kind. 

We have occasionally seen children of evil parentage 

who seemed to see the evil of the parental course, and 

to be nauseated therewith, and by this led into right paths. 

It has at times appeared as though Divine Providence 

occasionally interposed in prenatal influences which 

made the child very different in bent of mind from either 

of its parents. St. Paul seems to indicate something of 

this kind in his own case when he declares that Divine 

Providence had favored him from his mother's womb. 

(Galatians 1:15.) Nothing in this, however, interferes 

with the will of the individual— his free agency. 

Asa did much to abolish idolatry in his kingdom, and to 
sway the minds of the people to reverence and obedience 
of Almighty God. In consequence, he had peace for ten 
years, during which time he encouraged his people and 
spurred himself on to activity in the training of an army, 
and in the completing of fortified cities on the extremity 
of his kingdom, for protection against attacks of enemies. 

Following the ten years of peace came Zerah, an 
Ethiopian prince, and an army of a million and three 
hundred chariots of war, to attack the kingdom of Judah. 
After the custom of the times they foraged on the country 
through which they passed, appropriating, devastating, 
etc.— "taking spoil." This was the very occasion for 
which Asa had made preparation during his ten years of 
peace. He went forth with his army to beat the invader. 
Nevertheless, his faith looked up to God for the victory, 
realizing that with him was the power to give or to withhold 
victory. In the battle which followed, Asa and his 
army were successful; their foes were smitten, discomfitted, 
scattered, and the spoils went with the victory. 

RENEWED CONSECRATION TO GOD 

Returning from the victory with hearts grateful to 
God they were met on the way by a Prophet— Azariah— 
who in the name of the Lord counselled the king and his 
people that they had all done well and faithfully, and 
that, therefore, God's blessing was with them, and that 

R4724 : page 380 

the continuance of Divine blessing would depend upon 
their faithfulness to God and to the requirements of his 
Law. The hour of victory is a more dangerous one than 
the hour of distress; the heart is more apt to be proud 
and self-conscious and to feel its own importance. The 
Divine warning helped the King and his people to appreciate 



the situation and to take a firmer stand than ever 
for righteousness. A second and more thorough reformation 
was thus inaugurated— no idolatry was thenceforth 
permitted in the kingdom under penalty of death, and the 
Lord's blessing continued with the kingdom— Judah. 

THE GOD OF BATTLE 

Benevolent people, interested in peace congresses, etc., 
sometimes inquire how we should understand the fact 
that the God of the Old Testament Scriptures was a God 
of Battle— sometimes commanding war and the utter destruction 
of many. The answer to this question can be 
appreciated only when the situation is viewed from the 
proper standpoint, which is this: 

The whole world was lost in sin and was under condemnation 
to death as unworthy of life, unworthy of 
Divine favor. Whether, therefore, God permitted them 
to die by famine, pestilence, or by what we sometimes 
designate natural death, mattered not— the death sentence 
must sooner or later be executed against them at any rate 
—all must go down to the tomb. We thank God, however, 
that his gracious plan has provided a redemption of 
Adam and all of his race from the tomb and from death, 
and a full opportunity eventually, by resurrection, to come 
to a true knowledge of God and righteousness, and, if 
obedient thereto, to return ultimately to Divine favor and 
to more than was lost in Eden— all of this recovery accomplished 
through Calvary. 

The nation of Israel was no exception to this reign of 
sin and death, but God chose them as a nation to make 
of them types, shadows, illustrative of his gracious purposes. 
It was to this intent that he entered into a typical 
Covenant with them, through a typical Mediator, under a 
typical Atonement for their sin, effected by typical sacrifices 
for sins. They became his typical people, and he 

R4725 : page 380 

their king, whom they pledged themselves loyally to obey. 

Thus in a figurative way Israel stood as representatives 
of God and his righteousness in the midst of an 
idolatrous world, and, later, when the ten tribes broke 
away, it left the kingdom a specially representative kingdom 
of God, to which the loyal-hearted of all the tribes 
religiously resorted. From this standpoint God's promise 
to this nation was his Divine blessing in giving them 
peace and earthly prosperity in proportion as they would 
be loyal to him, and war, famine, pestilence, insurrection, 
trouble, in proportion as they would neglect their Covenant 
with him and fail to render obedience to him as their 
Monarch, as their God. All of God's dealings with that 
nation typed greater blessings for the future. We are 
not to understand that either then, or since, any other 
nation has occupied this same relationship toward God, 
nor that he similarly rewards and punishes faithfulness 



or unfaithfulness with particularity in each nation. 

Spiritual Israel, St. Peter tells us, is a "Royal Priesthood, 
an holy nation, a people for a purpose, that they 
should show forth the praises of him who has called us 
out of darkness into his marvelous light." This Spirit-Begotten 
Israel is not an earthly nation, has no earthly 
wars with carnal weapons. This Holy Nation has no 
promise of earthly peace and prosperity, as rewards of 
obedience to God, but, contrariwise, is assured that in the 
world she shall have tribulation, hatred, opposition, suffering 
and that her reward will be spiritual. She will now 
have the peace of God which passeth all understanding, and 
by and by, through the "First Resurrection," "an abundant 
entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ." 

LESSONS WE MAY LEARN 

Nearly every page in history may teach lessons to 
those who are desirous of learning them. The experiences 
of King Asa may, for instance, give us the lesson that in 
the years of our youth we should properly put away all 
idolatry of money, of fame, of honor of men, and should 
seek to know and to do the will of the Lord from the 
heart. In the early years of life we should erect the 
fortresses of character which will serve us as a defence 
against attacks of the world, the flesh and the Devil in 
our later years, and when the battle comes, thus prepared, 
we are still to look to the Lord for victory, realizing the 
force of the Apostle's words, "When I am weak in myself 
then I am strong in the Lord." 

Nor should a great victory elate us and make us careless 
and self-sufficient. Warned of the Lord as was Asa, 
we should make our consecration still more thorough and 
thus continue to fortify ourselves, that we may be strong 
in the Lord and in the power of his might. 
"It matters not how strait the gate, 

How charged with punishments the scroll; 
I am the master of my fate, 
I am the captain of my soul." 



R4724 : page 380 

HIDDEN THINGS SHALL BE REVEALED 

Not understood, we move along, asunder, 
Our paths grow wider as the seasons creep 

Along the years; we marvel and we wonder 
Why life is life, and then we fall asleep, 
Not understood. 

Not understanding, we gain false impressions, 

And hug them closer as the years go by, 
Till virtues often seem to us transgressions; 



And thus men rise and fall and live and die 
Not understood. 

Not understanding, souls with stunted vision 
Oft measure giants by their narrow gauge; 

The poisoned shafts of falsehood and derision 

Are oft impelled 'gainst those who mould the age, 
Not understood. 

Not understood, the secret springs of action 
Which lie beneath the surface and the show 

Are disregarded; with self-satisfaction 

We judge our neighbors, and they often go, 
Not understood. 

Not understood, how trifles often change us; 
The thoughtless sentence or the fancied slight 

Destroys long years of friendship and estrange us, 
And on our souls there falls a freezing blight- 
Not understood. 

Not understood, how many hearts are aching 
For lack of sympathy! Ah! day by day 

How many cheerless, lonely hearts are breaking, 
How many noble spirits pass away 
Not understood! 

Oh, God! that men would see a little clearer, 
Or judge less hardly when they cannot see! 

Oh, God! that men would draw a little nearer 
To one another! They'd be nearer Thee, 
And understood. 

THOMAS BRACKEN. 



R4725 : page 381 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
GETTING HOTTER IN GERMANY 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I do not know if you are aware of the fact that the 
conflict between the political and religious factions here in 
Germany is getting hotter and hotter. Various conditions, 
higher taxes and higher prices for the necessities of life, especially 
food and rents, and for the luxuries of tobacco and 
beer, have raised quite a commotion among the working 
classes. 

The hosts of Socialism are rapidly increasing here. 
Since the last elections to the Reichstag, in which they had 
lost in the number of seats, they have since gained in eight 
cases, where substitutes for deceased representatives were 
elected. It seems evident that in the general elections of 
next year they will elect more representatives to the Reichstag 



than any other party. Moreover, the liberals of other 
smaller parties are preparing to co-operate with the Socialists 
in various measures, and vise versa. The Government is 
compelled to seek the support of the Catholic party. As a 
consequence we see how the latter are coming forward boldly 
with their claim to Divine rights in matters of education, 
etc. The annual Catholic day recently was an occasion for 
using "great swelling words," praising the Pope and the 
Kaiser and practically calling to arms every nominal Christian 
in the country, not only of the Catholic faith, but of 
every shade of belief. The war cry is: Down with the 
liberals, and let us get control of the educational systems, 
schools, books and newspapers. 

The Kaiser on his part has not failed to show color recently. 
He took occasion to praise his great-grandfather 
and grandfather for having relied upon their "Divine right" 
to govern the people, and to say that he, too, would follow 
in the course which he was destined to go, and that he would 
take no notice of public opinions. 

A storm of protests and mass meetings instantly followed 
all over the country, protesting against this antique notion 
of his. In one case a resolution was unanimously adopted, 
saying that the voters of the country were equally destined, 
and that since he would ignore the people, they were compelled 
to ignore the opinions of the Kaiser. Another distinguished 
speaker in Stuttgart reminded the crowded assembly 
that many thousand marks had been used as a bribe 
to secure the crown to King Frederick II. of Prussia. Thus 
the Divine right of kings was made ridiculous. 

Recently the International Socialist Congress convened in 
Frankfurt on the Main and brought about 40,000 people together, 
most of these, of course, from the city. Representatives 
from Sweden, France and England spoke in German 
and used great plainness of speech. In all countries, they 
pointed out that the fight was against the Reactionaries, 
monopolies and against war and for liberty and the rights of 
the people in general. 

The papacy, you may know, has undertaken to fight the 
modernists. The Berlin Tageblatt brings a very interesting 
item to the point, showing that these manifestations on the 
part of the Vatican, the Kaiser and the Bavarian prince, who 
recently prided himself for having been born a Catholic, 
serve only to hasten the day of liberty from civil and religious 
potentates! 

I see from a dispatch in the press that the Vatican proposes 
to have a year of mourning in 191 1, it being the 40th 
year since the united Italy made Rome its capital. No doubt 
the papacy will have more reasons than that for mourning. 

This is certainly a wonderful day in which we are living. 
How unsettled everything earthly is! Old things are 
passing away, and all things are being renewed, or are preparing 
to be renewed. We hail Messiah's Kingdom with the 
earnest prayer, "Thy Kingdom come!" Surely, the perplexed 
nations and the groaning creation of mankind need a 
righteous rule. 

Your brother in our dear Redeemer and King, 



O. A. KOETITZ. 



GLASGOW CONVENTION 
[A BELATED LETTER.] 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We have just returned from a sweet season of refreshing 
from the presence of the Lord. The Lord who said, "Wherever 
two or three are gathered together in my name, there 
am I in the midst," fulfilled his word this time also. Not only 
were we blessed as by the gracious presence, but we were 
constrained to shout aloud as we realized that "The Holy 
One of Israel was in our midst." It was a time of restful 
joy and the four days during which we were together were 
all too short for us. As was the case with the Celoron Convention, 
so here; there was a note of triumph, as if from a 
gathering sense of an increased knowledge of the Lord and 
of strength in him. There were no signs of lack of spirituality, 
nor any sense of fatigue; there was apparently none 
with loose hands or feeble knees, and surely, had anyone attended 
who might have been touched with the spirit of fear 
planted by the enemy, the joys of the Lord, and the manifested 
graces of the Spirit would have been evidence enough 
to restore such a one to faith and hope and love. 

When we met in the opening meeting the signs of the times 
were on us. Many loved faces were missing. This Convention 
has provided for the brethren in this country the first 
clear showing of the signs of the end of the Harvest. The 
home Church (Glasgow) has in the past year lost many 
brethren. Our dear Brother Edgar, who labored so earnestly 
all the time of his consecration, has gone to be with the Lord. 
We missed him sorely. Others have, we believe, been joined 
to the happy throng now with the Lord; some have gone to 
other parts of the world, and some are no longer with us, 
having gone out from us. The addresses seemed very acceptable 
to the brethren, and were evidently of the helpful character, 
which is to be expected. The testimony meetings were 
as good or better than ever, and added much to the pleasure 
of the Convention. 

At the baptismal service 6 1 brothers and sisters symbolized 
their vow of consecration to the Lord. This was a specially 
sweet and encouraging time, for of the 6 1 there were 
about eight young brethren who have been stirred to consecration 
through the death of Brother Edgar, amongst them 
being his two sons and three other members of the family. 

R4726 : page 381 

Our eyes filled as we watched a mother wipe away her tears 
before she could properly see to help her daughter out of the 
water. It is good to see many for whom there has been long 
waiting coming into the light of the Lord and into the fellowship; 
and it is wonderful to behold the ease with which 
they lay hold upon the deep things of the Lord. Of course, 



the Truth is ever becoming plainer and there are more to 
help, but it is wonderful all the same. It is the Lord's doings. 

When we were about to part a Brother suggested a message 
be sent to Brother Russell, and all the congregation 
stood while this message was read— "I thank my God, making 
mention of thee always in my prayers, hearing of thy love 
and faith, which thou hast towards the Lord Jesus and 
towards all saints; that the communication of thy faith may 
become effectual by the acknowledgment of every good thing 
which is in you in Christ Jesus. For we have great joy and 
consolation in thy love, because the bowels of the saints are 
refreshed by thee, brother."— Philemon 4:7. 

Praying the Lord's blessing upon your labors, and that the 
joy of the Lord may be your strength in the strenuous labors 
of the Harvest Work, 

I am your brother in his grace, J. HEMERY.— London. 



A WORD FROM AUSTRALIA 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Here in Melbourne the position does not show any change 
from what has been previously reported. We count about 
thirty that attend the meetings and several who, through infirmity, 
cannot attend, but are among the most faithful all the 
same. I believe that there is good progress among the 
friends that meet with us; I feel that almost all are truly consecrated. 
Our Thursday night study on "The New Creation" 
is a feast; I think it is the best meeting we have.... 

We have just had an interesting case of a man who, after 
belonging to the Salvation Army, Seventh Day Adventists, 
etc., had become agnostic, at the same time being possessed 
of the spirits. He got Vol. 1 and that made the spirits mad 
at him; they would not give him rest while he tried to read. 
But he had got enough of the volume to be sure that it was 
right and fought hard. He came to us for advice, and 
thought that we should exorcise the spirits. While he talked 
with us they shook him up in a terrible way bodily. We told 
him that we did not have authority to command them to come 
out, but felt sure that if he was really determined to be the 
Lord's and to make a consecration of everything to him, that 
the Lord would deliver him. After prayer several times and 
much distress on his part, they finally laid him out on the 
office floor. He gained the victory in appealing to the Lord 
and was made free; he has never been bothered with the spirits 
since. He has told us that his boy also would continually 
waken up at nights screaming and saying that he could see 
things and that they were after him. But now that the 

R4726 : page 382 

father is free the boy sleeps all right, as though the spirits 
were operating through the father to torment the son.... 
With Christian love, R. E. B. NICHOLSON. 



TRUTH LITERATURE FOR THE BLIND. 

MY DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

Although your time is so much taken up, yet I beg a few 
minutes to present a little in regard to the work for the 
blind, the spiritual eyes of some of whom are being opened 
to see the grand and glorious Truth. 

The work has been going on steadily, and, by the Lord's 
grace, I have been enabled to help quite a number to reading 
matter in the English braille type. I have also been able to 
get out two or three tracts in the American braille, and a 
few in the New York point system, thus endeavoring to accommodate 
all classes of the blind. These different systems 
are used by blind people in different parts of the country. 
We have Volume 1 in the English braille, and this has done 
good work, but it has not reached all who would like to read 
it, for I have had a number of calls from those who felt they 
could not learn a new system. 

I want to give you one instance of the loving zeal of a 
blind sister in Canada. So anxious was she to do something 
to help scatter the Truth abroad that she wrote me asking 
permission to re-write from the English braille into New York 
point some of the tracts that I had sent her. She has sent 
me three tracts already. Others also are doing good work in 
copying, both blind and seeing; and so, under the Lord's 
guidance, the work goes on. 

I know the time is short for you to receive this and send 
me an answer, but I have written as soon as I could ascertain 
that I could get the work done. I hope I may get just 
a word from you which will enable me to push on, feeling 
that the Society will stand back of me financially. 

And now, wishing you God's richest blessing on all your 
work, and assuring you of my continued prayers in your 
behalf, I am, 

Yours with Christian love, F. B. GOULD. 



page 382 

DEAR SIR:- 

A few months ago a gentleman called here from whom 
I obtained three volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. I 
am so deeply interested in them that I would like to get the 
other three. They have aroused a hunger for all the information 
possible to be gained on the all-absorbing topic. Surely, 
we are privileged whose lot is cast in the glorious dawn of 
the Millennium. 

Your precious books were a grand surprise to me— my 
first intimation of the finding of the key to the wonderful 
prophecies. Although I have long noticed the changes constantly 
going on in the world, and have felt for years that 
the time was drawing near, yet I owe to you the realization 
of the great truth and desire to know if I may at once subscribe 



for your semi-monthly publication by addressing you 
in Brooklyn; or have you an agent in our city of whom I 
can procure tracts and other books, both for myself and others? 
Being in my 79th year, the time may be very short for me, 
and I hope I may be permitted to distribute to at least a few 
the glorious tidings. 
Yours respectfully, MRS. M. A. COOPER.-Mo. 



DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

TOWER of Oct. 1 to hand, containing notice of your departure 
for England, also Brother Harris' letter in respect 
to reading DAWNS, etc., as published in TOWER of Sept. 15, 
1910, which is but a reiteration of the same notice published 
in THE TOWER of June 15, 1900, with only the remarks about 
failure to read added. 

Your verbal instruction given the Elders, etc., at Celoron 
Convention is thus brought forcefully to mind, to wit: To 
preach by teaching; not to preach Pastor Russell, but to teach 
"Present Truth," God's revealed Word, properly holding the 
Head, looking to God through the merit of the Master's sacrifice, 
teaching that he is now present a Spirit Being, who hath 
girded himself and is spreading the feast. 

In my own case, if it were not for the DAWNS and THE 
TOWER Bible Comments on the Scriptures relative to the Divine 
Plan, I would still be a skeptic and avowed Socialist, as 
I was for seven years after withdrawing from the M.E. 
Church and previous to obtaining Vol. 1, which, by the way, 
was received at the same hand as did Brother Van Amburgh, 
at Huron, S.D., though Brother Van is years in advance of 
me in the Truth. However, it took the testimony of that 
Stone Witness, "The Pyramid," treated in Vol. 3, to set me 
making use of the Bible to see if it indeed be true, and that 
God really loved mankind— was indeed a God of mercy. 

Yet other seven years transpired before I had read all six 
volumes and become a subscriber to THE WATCH TOWER. 
Though it is twenty-one years since withdrawing from 
Churchianity, it is only three years since I fully consecrated 
to be dead with Christ, symbolizing shortly afterward 
upon the occasion of Brother Bundy's pilgrimage to the coast, 
and taking the Vow subsequently, rejoicing and abiding with 
confidence in the joy of the Lord. 

I ask a further continuance and interest in your prayers, 
that I and mine may abide in the faith, properly holding the 
Head, duly recognizing the sign board, "That Servant," the 
Channel through which we are privileged to partake of the 
meat, the strong meat, due in its season. Praying your safe 
return to the United States and that the prophecy of Ezekiel, 
"I have done as thou hast commanded," may be fulfilled in 
its due time. 

Your feeble fellow-servant in Christ, 

LOWELL G. FULLER. 



R4726 : page 382 

BELOVED PASTOR:- 

Quite recently we learned that you are pleased to receive a 
note when one has taken the Vow of consecration to the Lord. 

We take the opportunity your visit affords of notifying 
you that my wife and myself registered the Vow about May 
30, 1910. 

It was a step that seemed to require a deal of consideration, 
but from the other side of the Vow (after having taken 
it) it was as plain as possible. 

You can understand how great has been our blessed experiences 
since that stand was taken. 

We are conscious that the keynote of all experience in 
Christ is love chiefly, and we are glad to say that that gift 
is growing more and more in us. 

We are consuming the food you are privileged to supply to 
us and believe we are daily being strengthened to sacrifice 
more to the Lord, through our dear Saviour and the Truth. 

Your loving brother and servant in the Lord, 
ARTHUR KNIGHT. 



page 382 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study III.-The Call of The New Creation. 
JANUARY 1 

(91) What did the anointing of the High Priest typify? 
P. 131, par. 2. 

(92) What did the holy anointing oil represent? P. 
132, par. 1. 

(93) Why are the marks of sanctification in the New 
Creation not admired or approved by the world? P. 132, par. 2. 

(94) While sanctification has its two parts, God's and 
man's, what additional element is essential? P. 133, par. 1. 

(95) Explain the operation of the Word, or "wisdom of 
God" through Christ, toward us as New Creatures, and our 
attitude toward it. P. 133, par. 2. 

(96) What is the blessed result of full consecration experienced 
by these New Creatures who appropriate the exceeding 

great and precious promises of God? P. 134, par. 1. 

(97) Explain how the experiences of the fully consecrated 
vary according to temperament. P. 134, par. 2. 

(98) If consecration does not signify human perfection, 
how can God accept our sacrifices? (P. 136, par. 1.) How does 
Christ impute to us his merit? P. 109. 

JANUARY 8 

(99) What is our first and continual duty with respect to 
our imperfections in the flesh? P. 136, par. 2. 



(100) What effect will true sanctification have upon our 
lives? P. 137, par. 1. 

(101) What should be the mainspring of all our energies? 
P. 137, par. 1, last part. 

(102) Our Lord prayed, "Sanctify them through thy 
Truth." What kind of Truth can produce the sanctification 
acceptable unto God? Pp. 137, 138. 

(103) What most excellent admonition along this line is 
given us by the Apostle Paul? P. 139. 

(104) How much emotion should be expected in Sanctification? 
Is there Scriptural reason for expecting unusual 

page 383 

outward manifestations or emotions as a proof of our acceptance 
with the Lord? P. 140. 

(105) Contrast the experiences of those consecrated persons 
who have been born of Christian parents with those of 
others not so favored. P. 141, par. 1 and P. 142, par. 1. 

(106) What is evidently the Lord's intention in leaving 

so many things comparatively obscure to our human judgment? 
P. 142, par. 2. 

JANUARY 15 

(107) What is signified by "the opening of the eyes of our 
understanding," and how is this typified in the Tabernacle 
pictures? P. 143, par. 1. 

(108) Since our feelings depend so largely upon our temperaments, 
how may we experience the perpetual blessing of 

the joys of faith? P. 143, par. 2. 

(109) What is the cause of "earth-born" clouds, which 
sometimes come between the consecrated and their Lord? 
P. 144, par. 1,2. 

(1 10) To what kind of diseases does the Psalmist refer 
saying, "Who healeth all thy diseases?" Psa. 103:2-5? And 
how are they healed? P. 145, par. 1. 

(111) What mistake is frequently made by many New 
Creatures with respect to soul-sickness or disease? P. 
145, par. 2. 

(112) What course should properly be pursued in these 
cases? P. 146, par. 1; P. 147, par. 1. 

(113) What three difficulties may be experienced by some 
New Creatures in coming to the Throne of Grace? P. 147, par. 2. 

(1 14) What are the proper remedies for these difficulties? 
P. 148, par. 1. 

(1 15) Mention another class of consecrated but spiritually 
diseased, and the prescribed remedy for this condition of 
things. P. 148, par. 2; P. 149. 

(116) What should be the attitude of the other New Creatures 
toward those who "Walk disorderly?" P. 150, par. 1. 

(117) How should the Lord's consecrated ones who are 

in a lean and starved condition be dealt with? P. 150, par. 2. 

JANUARY 22 



(118) Is consecration implied in acceptable justification? 
P. 151, par. 1. 

(119) Is it possible under present conditions to go far 
along the path of justification without reaching the gateway 
of self-denial— full consecration unto death? P. 152, par. 1,2. 

(120) What is the character of some of the by-paths outside 
this gateway of full consecration? P. 153, par. 1. 

(121) In what way only can the fullness of joy and peace 
which come with the acceptance of Christ as our Redeemer 
be retained? P. 153, par. 2. 

(122) Are those who refuse to consecrate immediately cut 
off from Divine favor? P. 153, par. 3. 

(123) To whom only do the exceeding great and precious 
promises of God belong? P. 154, par. 1. 

(124) May those who fail to consecrate properly continue 
to enjoy the privileges of prayer? P. 154, par. 2. 

(125) What course should be pursued by any of these 
who desire further favor from the Lord? P. 155, par. 1,2. 

(126) What should be done by any who are "feeling after 
God," yet not fully ready for a complete surrender to the will 
of God? P. 155, par. 3. 

(127) In view of the fact that the "high calling" ended in 
1881, what difference should this make with respect to the 
consecration? P. 156, par. 1,2. 

JANUARY 29 

(128) Mention one erroneous view of sanctification held 
by the "Holiness People." P. 157, par. 1,2. 

(129) Explain the error of holding that the entire object 
of sanctification is the avoidance of sin. P. 158, par. 1. 

(130) What is the thought contained in the word redemption? 
P. 158, par. 2. 

(131) How was this redemption obtained and how does 
it apply to the New Creation? P. 159, par. 1. 

(132) Explain the use of the word Apolutrosis in Luke 21:28 
and Ephesians 4:30. P. 159, par. 2, first part. 

(133) Explain Ephesians 1:7 and harmonize these two 
uses of the word redemption. P. 159, par. 2, last part. 

(134) Explain Romans 3:24 and 8:20-23. P. 160, par. 1. 

(135) How does believing on the Lord Jesus Christ give 
us "everlasting life?" P. 160, par. 2; P. 161, par. 1. 

(136) In what manner are our Lord's sufferings, death 

and resurrection identified with our redemption (deliverance) 
present and future? P. 161, par. 2,3. 



page 386 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 



This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, five 
vols.; in Swedish, Vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, four vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish, 
Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. each.; bound in cloth, uniform 
with English edition, prices the same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 each. 



page 385 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXI DECEMBER 15 No. 24 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

1910-The Annual Report-1910 387 

Perilous Times at Hand 389 

"Men of Your Own Selves Shall Arise 



Speaking Perverse Things 390 

"From Such Turn Away 391 

The Precious Truth Is God's Message 392 

The Different Forms of Evil 392 

Actions, Words and Thoughts 393 

Iniquitous Government Successful 394 

Lessons Here for Us 394 

Antitypical Ahab and Jezebel 395 

Jehoshaphat's One Mistake 395 

Three and a Half Years Without Rain 396 

The Gifts and Fruits of the Spirit 397 

Gifts of Spirit Were for Early Church 397 

Fruits of Spirit Necessary to Success 

in Race 398 

The True Shepherd and His Flock 398 

Some Interesting Letters 399 

page 386 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



CHATTANOOGA, TENN., DEC. 25 

Morning Rally, 10:30 o'clock, at Knights of Pythias Hall, 
Walnut St. Discourse for the public at 3 p.m., in the Bijou 
Theatre, 6th and Walnut Sts. Visiting friends will be cordially 
welcomed. 

MOBILE, ALA., DEC. 26 

Morning Rally at 10 o'clock, in the Central Trades Council 
Hall, St. Michael St. Discourse for the public at 7:30 p.m. 
in the Battle House Auditorium. Visiting friends will be cordially 
welcomed. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JAN. 1 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle. The evening meeting at 7:30 
o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse for the public 
at 3 p.m. in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette 
Ave. and St. Felix St. Topic, "Fear Not." 

ST. PETERSBURG, FLA., JAN. 8 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10 o'clock. Discourse 
for the interested at 11 a.m. Public lecture at 3 p.m. 
All sessions will be in the Auditorium, Second Av., between 
Second and Third Sts. 

CHARLESTON, S.C., JAN. 9 

Discourse for the Public in German Artillery Hall at 8 p.m. 
Visiting friends will be cordially welcomed. 

PHILADELPHIA, PA., JAN. 15. 

BUFFALO, N.Y., JAN. 22 

WASHINGTON, D.C., JAN. 29 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., FEB. 5 



R4726 : page 387 

1910-THE ANNUAL REPORT-1910 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
DECEMBER 1, 1909, TO DECEMBER 1, 1910. 

Supplementary Report from Foreign Branches, January 1. 



THE nearer we get to the grand consummation 
of our hopes, the more swiftly do the years 
go by, and the more interesting and meaningful 
do they become to us. If we realize 
our hopes, four more years will see the 
"elect" little flock of God all gathered; and 
the world's time of trouble begun, in which 
brethren of the "great company" will share 
and wash their robes in the blood of the 
Lamb. Is it any wonder that we all feel a 
fervency of zeal? Surely not! 

We admit, as we have always done, that "We walk by 
faith and not by sight— that our chronology is not indisputable 
—that our opinion of it is fallible— that it is not 
clear to us just how all of the "little flock" can pass into 
death so speedily! Nevertheless, we rejoice in faith and 
love and zeal. And this year's Report shows that the 
dear friends everywhere are of one mind and of one 
heart on the subject. They have accomplished this year 
exploits in the publishing of the Truth which put all 
other years in the shade in many particulars. 

The sentiment of all seems to accord with our own- 
that the chronology (and the prophetic times and seasons 
which so wonderfully interlock with it and seem to prove 
it) has brought great joy and refreshment, even if later 
on it should appear that we have not located the end of the 
Times of the Gentiles exactly. Their end is surely near, 
if not on October 1st, 1914, as we still believe. 

At any rate, even if we were in the same "outer darkness" 
as the world on subjects chronological, have we not 
more than all others to rejoice us in respect to The Divine 
Plan of the Ages? We surely have the only satisfying 
portion we know of, anywhere. 
"It satisfies our longings 
As nothing else could do." 

This satisfaction, and the joy and peace and rest and 
zeal which accompany it, are reflected in our Report of 
the past year's work. The dear friends have not only 
contributed more than ever to the funds which make the 
wheels of the work move, but they have also been more 
energetic than ever before in the distribution of the Volunteer 
literature and in encouraging the Newspaper work. 

Only in the Colporteuring of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES are 
we disappointed. The circulation of these "Bible Keys," 
as some term them, has lagged. Let us watch, pray and 
labor for more wisdom and blessing for the year 191 1. 
The people are more open-minded than ever before, and 
seemingly more willing to read. This branch of the service 
has been specially blessed and used of the Lord hitherto, 
and we must not let it lag by reason of any inattention 
on our part. Any of the dear Colporteurs who may 
think that they see the reason of the decline, the President 
of the Society will be glad to hear from re the matter. 

CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT 



LETTERS AND CARDS RECEIVED (BROOKLYN), 112,085. 
LETTERS AND CARDS SENT OUT (BROOKLYN), 144,311. 

We are glad to hear from our numerous readers frequently. 
We consider our wonderful mail service a God-given 
blessing, and desire to use it more and more in the 
harvest work. However, we do not pretend to answer all 
letters, but only such as require an answer. 

Many delightful letters thus go unanswered. Some of 
these tell of having taken "The Vow," and the great blessings 
since experienced. Others recite family history covering 
years and pages, some curious and some interesting. 
Others tell us the Plan of God, presumably that we may 
know that they comprehend it as we do, or to emphasize 
some point of difference. We are glad to have the dear 
WATCH TOWER readers thus unbosom themselves. It does 
them good as well as us. But we do not reply to such letters. 

We reply to letters needing replies— to questions, etc. 
And many of our replies are brief, referring the questioner 
to the SCRIPTURE STUDIES volumes, or to back issues 
of THE WATCH TOWER, because these answer more 
thoroughly than could a letter of remarkable length. But 
continue to write us of your interest in the Truth and 
your love and prayers, even though you get no reply. And 
when you send questions, number them and write them 
on a separate page or sheet. 

PILGRIM SERVICE IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA 

Number engaged in Pilgrim service 57 

Number of miles traveled 477,247 

Number of cities visited by Pilgrims 3,521 

Number of public meetings held 3,297 

Number of parlor meetings held 7,416 

This department of the harvest work continues to 
demonstrate its worth to the household of faith. Our 
readers will be interested in the below summary. 

page 388 

During the past six months we have added a new 
feature, with excellent success. It combines an increased 
public service for the Pilgrims and at the same time increases 
the Volunteer work, in which all may engage. It 
is as follows:— 

Sunday appointments for the traveling Pilgrims are 
given preferably to those cities whose classes have signified 
their desire and ability to secure fine auditoriums 
and to advertise the service thoroughly. To such we send 
special issues of the PEOPLES PULPIT, bearing the announcement 
on the last page, for free circulation— sufficient 
for the city. We also send window-cards (requiring 
but little printing). 

The result has been much larger public meetings by 
several of the Pilgrims and additional millions of copies 



of PEOPLES PULPIT circulated. We commend the plan to 
all the classes located in large cities. 

To ascertain the quantity of PEOPLES PULPITS necessary 
to put one copy in the home of every English-speaking 
family perplexes some. Decide thus: Ascertain approximately 
the number of English speaking population 
and divide that number by five. The result will be the 
number necessary to supply every family. 

THE WATCH TOWER 

We published 30,000 WATCH TOWERS every issue- 
occasionally more. Some of these went out as "sample 
copies." Quite a large number went to "the Lord's Poor" 
—paid for out of a special fund. Altogether, we reckon 
that the profit on THE WATCH TOWER just about offsets 
the yearly loss on SCRIPTURE STUDIES, sold mostly to Colporteurs, 
and at a loss— counting foreign translations and 
"bad" accounts. 

Some of our old readers have taken offense that their 
names were stricken from our lists. We again assure 
them that they are welcome to this journal so long as it 
is published— regardless of the subscription fee. But 
they must ask for it. Either ask it free, paid for from 
the special fund, or ask it on credit, payable at convenience; 
even if that should mean never. If you never pay 
for it you will have it free. We are anxious that our 
lists contain the names of all in sympathy with THE 
WATCH TOWER'S teachings. 

We explain again that because our Government carries 
newspapers at such a very cheap rate, it now exercises 
a careful inspection of the lists of all publications to 
insure that no names continue on newspaper lists long 
after expiration. 

We still feel that our list of WATCH TOWER subscribers 
but poorly represents the total number of the interested. 
We ask the aid of all our readers to the desired 
end. All who feel profited by the reading of THE 
WATCH TOWER are requested to recommend it to others 
who have read the STUDIES, explaining to them our very 
liberal terms and our desire that it go to all the brethren 
regularly. 

"SCRIPTURE STUDIES" AND BOOKLETS 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES put into circulation 600,157 

Mannas 21,000 

Booklets 25,000 

This is a great showing, even though it does not in 
every feature exceed the records of 1908 and 1909. The 
figures include those of Great Britain. 

We take this opportunity to remark that the circulation 
of the MANNA appears to be second only to the 
STUDIES in beneficial effects. One Colporteur followed 
his canvass for STUDIES with the HEAVENLY MANNA. He 



sold these where he had failed to sell STUDIES. Some 
months after he again canvassed with STUDIES. He was 
agreeably surprised that nearly all who had purchased 
the MANNA were ready and anxious for STUDIES. They 
asked, eagerly, "Are those books from the pen which 
wrote the MANNA comments? If so we want them!" 
Surely no more desirable Christmas gifts could be found 
than STUDIES, MANNA, THE WATCH TOWER and the 
DIAGLOTT. Every gift should represent the giver, either 
as his handiwork or as expressing his sentiments— is our 
suggestion to friends of the Truth. 

FREE LITERATURE CIRCULATED 

Our tract work goes on amazingly. By it all of the 
Lord's people, poor or rich, have opportunity for service. 
They are realizing this more and more. As their consecration 
and zeal deepen they send us money for the 
printing and assist in the circulation. Hence the astounding 
report of this year, the like of which no one ever 
dreamed of. We presume it safe to say that no other 
organization ever put out one-tenth this amount of free 
literature in a year, although some have dollars to our 
pennies. 

We trust that nearly every reader of this Report can 
say to himself, as he reads the summary below, "God 
blessed me with the opportunity to share in this branch 
of the harvest work, and I used it as a blessed privilege. 
I have had an active share in this labor of love. I invested 
a portion of my Talent' thus instead of hiding it 
in the earth— in pleasure or business or cares of this life." 

Let any who have had a hand in this blessed service 
be on the lookout how they may double the use of their 
talent next year— extending their labors to nearby towns 
not yet served. And let such as have not yet taken a hand 
in the work resolve that they will not miss the golden opportunity 
next year. We doubt not the Lord will supply 
the financial means. We start the new year with faith 
that he will, with a firm belief that a great work is yet 
to be accomplished, that the Lord still has "much people" 
in Babylon to whom he would have us carry the good 
tidings which have so blessed us. 

PEOPLES PULPIT proves itself more attractive for 
tract-work than any other we have ever used. It is more 
dignified than any other, both for distributors and readers. 

Total pieces of English literature, tracts, chiefly 
PEOPLES PULPIT, given free in America and Great 
Britain 20,797,165 

This, represented in ordinary tract pages, would 
mean in pages 350,957,360 

These figures are so great that but few can comprehend 
their significance. 

"PEOPLES PULPIT" IN OTHER LANGUAGES 



CIRCULATED FREE IN UNITED STATES, CANADA AND MEXICO. 

Swedish Copies 210,500 Pages 3,368,000 

Spanish " 32,000 " 512,000 

Polish " 80,000 " 1,280,000 

Hungarian " 38,000 " 608,000 

German " 5,000 " 80,000 

Greek " 21,000 " 176,000 

Italian " 53,500 " 856,000 



Total 440,000 6,880,000 

THE NEWSPAPER WORK 

Our friends and our foes are alike astounded at the 
success which the Lord has granted to the work of newspaper 
evangelization. More than a thousand papers in 
the United States and Canada are now publishing our sermons 
and Bible Studies weekly. The circulation of these 
papers varies from 2,500 to 300,000 per issue. The syndicate 
handling the matter assure us that thus these 
weekly presentations of the Truth enter at least ten million 
homes. 

page 389 

And, more and more they are being read. Hundreds 
of letters tell us of this, and the Colporteurs are finding 
that they sell the STUDIES the more readily by telling that 
they are from the same source as the sermons. 

"DIE STIMME" TO THE JEWS 

God's Message to the Jews is being heard the world 
around. Not only were several of our sermons to the 
Jews published to the extent of 107,600 copies in Jewish 
papers in the English language, but in 655,000 copies of 
the Yiddish papers besides 325,000 copies of Die Stimme. 
These have been republished, we learn, in Russia and 
elsewhere. True, there was some opposition, but this, 
we believe, led the Jews to take more careful notice of 
the Message. 

It is not our expectation that the Jews will become 
Christians now. It will be after they shall have returned 
to Palestine and the spirit of prayer and supplication 
shall have been poured on them, that they will "look upon 
him whom they pierced." Our message is to comfort 
them and to turn their eyes toward Palestine and to their 
glorious promises centering there. The Scriptures seem 
to imply that the "Great Company" will have the honor 
and privilege of leading them to recognize Jesus as 
Messiah, during the time of trouble. 

OUR FINANCIAL SHOWING 

Having in mind the foregoing work it might be expected 



that millions of money had been expended in order 

to its accomplishment. But, dear friends, economy is associated 

with every part of the work. No salaries are 

paid— merely moderate expenses. Yet we are all comfortable 

and very thankful and happy. 

Expended for above work in 

America $139,743.80 

Expended elsewhere: 

In Great Britain $7,965.55 

In Germany 3,673.27 

In Australasia 487.06 

In India 522.37 

In S. Africa 1,438.62 

In Sweden 1,675.82 

In Norway and Denmark 3,494.58 

In Jamaica 935.29 

In France, Italy and Swiss 295.73 

In Greece 396.45 

InMexico 50.50 

20,935.24 

Total expenditure $160,679.04 

Receipts: 

Balance from 1909 $ 9,718.38 

Good Hopes, Tract Fund, etc 139,058.72 

148,777.10 

Shortage $ 11,901.94 

This is close for the extent of the work, and if other 
"Good Hopes" be realized this balance will be wiped out 
before January, 1911. 

We congratulate all of our dear co-laborers and praise 
God for the privileges thus represented. 

Very truly your servant in the Lord, 

C. T. RUSSELL, President. 



R4728 : page 389 

PERILOUS TIMES AT HAND 

"This know also, that in the last days 
perilous times shall come."— 2 Tim. 3:1. 

REALIZING that we are now living in the very 
times referred to by the Apostle, some may 
inquire, How can this be? Are not these 
times, in comparison with times past, especially 
favorable to the prosperity of the 
Church? Time was when fire and sword 
and guillotine and rack were systematically 



employed to exterminate the true saints of 
God, when the Word of God was a book 
prohibited, and when the prison and the dungeon 
rewarded the faithful searching of the Scriptures. 
And is there not also more Truth due and understood 
now than formerly, as well as full liberty (if a man is 
pleased to exercise it) to believe and teach, either in private 
or in public, whatever he believes to be Truth? 

Yes, such are the favorable conditions of our day. 
Never, in all the history of the Church, has there been a 
day of such privilege and blessing— such increase of 
knowledge and general intelligence, such facilities for 
the general diffusion of knowledge and such breadth of 
individual liberty— of conscience, of speech and of action 
—as today. The spirit of liberty is abroad in the earth, and 
though the wily enemies that once fettered and handcuffed 
and imprisoned it still live, and would fain imprison 
it as before, they regretfully realize that the soaring 
eagle is on the wing and may never be pinioned again. 
But hand in hand with all these advantages, strange to 
say, comes the Church's greatest peril. True, there is 
little peril to physical life, or earthly property; but these, 
to the true saints, are of minor importance, for they 
count not their earthly life dear unto them if by any 
means they may attain the divine nature and glory to 
which they are called. 

The peril of these times is to the spiritual nature of 
the saints and to their valuable inheritance in the exceeding 
great and precious promises of God, which are 
all yea and amen in Christ Jesus. Subtle influences are 
now at work seeking to dwarf and extinguish the spiritual 
life and to rob the saints of their glorious hope, to sap 
stealthily the very foundations of Christianity, and thus 
effectually to overthrow the whole superstructure of the 
Christian faith in the minds of many, causing them thus 
to stumble and lose their glorious inheritance as joint-heirs 
with Christ. 

The present besetments, being of this subtle character, 
are the more calculated to delude and ensnare, so that if 
one allows himself to be for a moment off his guard, the 
agencies of the Adversary will gain an advantage and 
use it to entrap the unwary one. And God will permit 
such snares because only those who are loyal and faithful, 
and therefore ever watchful, are counted worthy to 
escape their strong delusion. "Watch ye, therefore, and 
pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape 
all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before 
the Son of man. "-Matt 21:36. 

MANNER OF APPROACH OF THESE TIMES 

The Apostle forewarns the Church, not only of the 
certainty of such perils, and of their character, but also 
of their manner of approach. On one occasion he said, 
"For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous 
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. (Such 



were the great and destructive papal powers.) Also of 
your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things 
to draw away disciples after them." (Acts 20:29,30.) 
Some of these Paul and the early Church encountered in 
their day. 

Paul was often in peril among false brethren who, 
concerning the faith, had made shipwreck, and who 
greatly withstood his words— his efforts to build up the 

R4728 : page 390 

Church in the most holy faith. (2 Cor. 11:26; I Tim. 1:19; 

2 Tim. 4:14-17.) And he shows that from such 

false brethren, brethren who have erred from the Truth 

and become teachers of false doctrine, will come the 

Church's greatest peril in these last times. (2 Tim. 2:16-18; 

3:5.) And in order that we might recognize 

and beware of them, he very minutely described them, 

though the clear significance of the warning is somewhat 

beclouded by a faulty translation, which reads as 

follows:— 

"For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, 
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, 
unthankful, unholy,* truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, 
fierce, despisers of those that are good; traitors, 
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure more than 
lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying 
the power thereof; ever learning, and never able to come 
to the knowledge of the Truth." 

The description as here translated, the reader will observe, 
is incongruous; for men of such villainous character 
could have no form of godliness. Read the description 
again and consider, How could a proud, covetous, 
boastful blasphemer, a truce-breaker, a false accuser, incontinent 
and fierce, a despiser of those that are good, 
a heady, high-minded, pleasure-loving traitor, have any 
form of godliness whatever, or deceive any one in this 
respect? Such a fierce character and bold blasphemer 
could not possibly palm himself off as a child of God; 
nor would he attempt it. The fact is that our translators 
did not fully comprehend the Apostle's language, and in 
rendering it into English they put the heaviest possible 
construction upon the Greek words, and thus the picture 
of these persons is overdrawn. Thus, for instance, the 
Greek word here rendered "blasphemers" (V. 3) is 
blasphemos, which signifies one speaking injuriously, or 
an evil-speaker. 

Now, judging merely by the word, regardless of the 
context, we would not know whether in this instance the 
evil-speaking is carried to the extent of revilings or not; 
but as it stands related to the context— in view of the 
after statement that these have a form of godliness 
(V. 5), though lacking its real power— we must conclude 
that those milder or more subtle forms of evil-speaking, 
which would be consistent with hypocritical forms of 
godliness, are referred to, and therefore that our English 



word blaspheme, though it means evil-speaking, is too 
strong a term by which here to translate the Greek word 
blasphemos; for the full and generally understood significance 
of the English word blaspheme is— "To speak of 
the Supreme Being in terms of impious irreverence, to 
revile or speak reproachfully of God, Christ, or the holy 
Spirit— to speak wickedly of, to utter abuse or calumny 
against, to speak reproachfully of."— Webster. 

So also the word apeithes rendered "disobedient," 
signifies not persuaded; and the expression "disobedient to 
parents" would consequently signify not of the same persuasion, 
or not of the same mind as were the parents. 
The word anosios, rendered "unholy," which signifies unkind, 
or unholy, would likewise, in view of the context, 
be better rendered by the milder English term, unkind. 
The word aspondos rendered "truce-breakers" (V. 3), 
signifies irreconcilable or implacable— i.e., stubborn or 
constant in enmity. The word akrates, rendered "incontinent," 
signifies more properly, without strength, or 
without self-control. Though this thought is also in the 
English word "incontinent," a coarser meaning generally 
attaches to the word. The word anemeros, rendered 
"fierce," signifies not mild, savage. That is, it may be a 
great or a small lack of mildness, amounting in some 
cases to savage bitterness. But, again, the fierce or 
savage idea is not compatible with any pretentions to 
godliness, as intimated in verse 5. The word aphilagathos, 
rendered "despisers of those that are good," would thus 
be better rendered not friendly to the good. 

Thus revised, the Apostle's language reads as follows: 
"For men shall be lovers of their own selves (selfish), 
covetous, boasters, proud, evil-speakers, not of the same 
mind as were their forefathers (i.e., devisers of new 
doctrines), unthankful, unkind, irreconcilable, false accusers, 
without self-control, not mild, not friendly to 
those that are good— traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers 
of pleasure more than lovers of God (i.e., preferring 
their own will or pleasure to the will or pleasure of God); 
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; 
ever learning, and never able to come to a knowledge 
of the truth." 

"MEN OF YOUR OWN SELVES SHALL ARISE SPEAKING 
PERVERSE THINGS" 

It should be observed also that the word men, in verse 2, 
is emphatic in the Greek text, as shown in the Emphatic 
Diaglott, thus indicating that a particular class of men is 
here referred to, which, according to the description, can 
be none other than those mentioned in Acts 20:29,30, viz., 
men "of your own selves (men of your own company, 
men whom you have hitherto regarded as members of 
the Body of Christ, and who still claim to be such), who 
shall arise speaking perverse things (perverting the 
Truth. 

But why, you ask, should any one who had once 



received the Truth desire to pervert it? The Apostle answers 

that their object is) to draw away disciples after 

them." And for this purpose, of leading away disciples 

after them, they keep up the form of godliness, although 

they deny its power— the only power by means of which 

any of the fallen race can be reckoned godly or righteous 

in God's sight, viz., the power of the precious blood of 

Christ, which cleanseth us from all sin, as long as we appreciate 

and accept this salvation through faith in 

his blood. 

Well may we inquire, as we realize that we are living 
in the last days here referred to, Is there such a class of 
enemies to the Truth and to the Church actually in existence 
today? Truly, the voice of prophecy has never set 
up a false alarm, or foretold an uncertain event. The 
perilous times have come and the foretold perils are all 
about us. Side by side in the same communities with the 
humble, faithful, consecrated saints— in the same little 
assemblings together of those who have escaped from the 
bondage of Babylon, in the same households, and often at 
the same table of the Lord, there has also been developing 
a class who are "lovers of their own selves (selfish), 
covetous (of honors and distinction and the praise of 
men— ambitious), boasters (as though the credit of the 
Truth now due and received were in some way due to 
them, and as though they had a right therefore to alter 
and amend it at their pleasure), proud" (of that knowledge 
which should be received with only humility and 
thankfulness, and which can be retained only under these 
conditions). 

Because the light of the newly unfolding Truth has 
dawned upon their pathway, they, in common with the 
faithful saints, no longer are of the same mind as were 
their parents; but the goodness of God thus manifested to 
them, instead of cultivating in them a spirit of thankfulness 



*The Sinaitic, the oldest and most reliable MS., omits the 
words, "without natural affection," they being no part of the 
original text. 

R4728 : page 391 

and co-operation, which is its design, seems to arouse 
a spirit of pride and ambition, which does not long hesitate 
to make merchandise of the Truth for ambitious ends, 
however trivial and foolish those ends may be. And in 
pursuance of the ambitious policy, by degrees they become 
"evil-speakers (against the doctrine of Christ and 
those who believe and teach it), unkind, unfriendly to 
those that are good (who hold fast the Truth in righteousness), 
and false accusers" (of such). As they proceed 
in this way they seem to lose all former strength of 
Christian character. They become irreconcilable to the 
Truth, so that neither Scripture, nor reason, nor the example 



of the faithful, has power to restore them. Loving 
their own wills more than the will of God, they grow 
more and more proud and boastful of their attainments- 
high-minded and heady. Not submitting themselves to 
the Head of the Body, Christ Jesus, they are ambitious 
to head new factions themselves, and thus they turn traitors 
to the Truth. 

They claim, too, to be very earnest students of the 
Word of God; and so they are, but they never come to a 
knowledge of the Truth. They are after something new, 
some new and peculiar "find" in the mine of God that will 
attract the wondering gaze of many curious disciples. 
But, alas for their purposes! There are no such real curiosities 
in the blessed Word of God; but the zeal of these 
ambitious ones is equal to the emergency, and one after 
another the actual truths are beclouded, distorted and 
perverted to this ignoble end and presented as newly-found 
truths. And the unwary receive them as such, not 
recognizing at first that they are subversive of the entire 
system of Divine Truth. Thus their faith in the truths 
already learned is unwittingly undermined; they are 
caught in the snare of the Enemy; and as they continue 
to give ear to these seductive influences they become more 
and more entangled, until, having lost their anchorage, 
they find themselves adrift on a vast sea of unbelief, floating 
they know not whither. Like their leaders, they may 
retain the form of godliness, but have lost its power. 

THEIR POLICIES SHALL BE VERY SEDUCTIVE 

But there is another feature of the description of these 
false teachers, whose ambitions place so many perils in 
the pathway of the saints, which should not be overlooked. 
Verses 6 and 8 describe, or rather illustrate, the manner 
in which the influence of such teachers will be brought to 
bear upon the Church. Their opposition is not expressed 
in bold, defiant terms, and emphasized and enforced with 
vehemency. As here intimated, their policy is crafty, deceitful, 
sly, under pretentions of godliness, love of truth 
and zeal for the truth. Their influence will be exerted 
somewhat after the manner of a vile class mentioned in 
verse 6, who "creep into houses and lead captive silly 
women, laden with sin, and led away by various inordinate 
desires." Not that such will be the actual immoral 
character of these teachers, but that their policy will be 
similarly seductive. 

Their actual course is more particularly described in 
verse 8 thus: "Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood 
Moses, so do these also resist the Truth— men of corrupt 
minds (corrupted or turned aside from the Truth), reprobate 
concerning the faith." Thus we are shown that 
the opposition to the Truth will be manifested in a subtle, 
deceptive course similar to that of those opposers of 
Moses. They opposed Moses by doing something similar 
to what he did, thus confusing the people. God had given 
Moses power to do certain miracles in order to prove to 



Israel that Moses was his Divinely empowered agent. 
And Satan forthwith empowered his agents to duplicate 
those miracles, which they did to some extent, not perfectly, 
thus endeavoring to confuse the minds of the 
people and to unsettle their confidence in Moses and his 
leading and teaching. 

Just so it is today. The studied effort of false teachers 
—false brethren developing in the very midst of the 
Church— is to offset the Truth by plausible forms of error, 
to unsettle confidence both in the Truth and in all teachers 
of the Truth, thus to lead away disciples after them and 
their theories. And in consequence of the allurements 
of these false teachers, and of the unfaithfulness of many 
to the love and service of the Truth which they have received, 
a class in the midst of the Church will give much 
encouragement to the ambitions of these false brethren; 
"for," says the Apostle (2 Tim. 4:3,4), "the time will 
come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after 
their own desires (desires for something new) shall they 
gather to themselves teachers, having itching ears (for 
new and strange things); and they shall turn away their 
ears from the Truth, and shall be turned unto fables." 

Nor will this class be only a small minority; for, in 
order that the faithful may not be discouraged when 
brought face to face with these things, they are forewarned 
(Psa. 91:7) that, before this conflict ends, a 
thousand shall fall at their side and ten thousand at their 
right hand. Thus, realizing that God foreknew it all and 
that the accomplishment of his glorious purposes is not in 
the least endangered thereby, they may still have confidence 
and joy in view of the glorious consummation of 
his Plan, and of their promised position in it. 

"FROM SUCH TURN AWAY" 

But how shall the faithful believers act towards these 
false brethren in their midst? Shall they take them by 
the hand, as formerly, and bid them God-speed? Shall 
they recognize them as brethren in Christ? Are they 
owned of God as sons? Shall we indeed walk with them 
and be guiltless? What does the Apostle say we shall 
do? He says, "From such turn away." (V. 5.) "Be not 
ye partakers with them; for ye were formerly darkness, 
but now are ye light in the Lord; walk as children of 
light... and have no fellowship with the unfruitful 
works of darkness, but rather reprove them." (Eph. 5:6-1 1.) 
And the Apostle John (2 John 1 1) emphasizes 
Paul's counsel, saying, "If there come any unto you and 
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, 
neither bid him God-speed; for he that biddeth him God-speed 
is partaker of his evil deeds." 

Such "evil men," says Paul (V. 13), "shall wax worse 
and worse (more and more bold and aggressive, as they 
receive encouragement from that rapidly increasing class 
who will no longer endure sound doctrine), deceiving 
(others) and being deceived" (themselves— becoming 



more firmly intrenched in the snares of their own weaving, 
so as to make it impossible to extricate them). But, 
nevertheless, the time is coming when they shall proceed 
no further; for their folly shall be manifested unto all 
men, as was the folly of Jannes and Jambres, who could 
not forever withstand the teachings of Moses, the servant 
of God.-V. 9. 

Then Paul proceeds to call attention to the ground 
of Timothy's confidence in himself as a faithful teacher 
of Divine Truth, saying, "But thou hast fully known my 
doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, 
charity, patience, persecutions, afflictions which came unto 
me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions 
I endured; but out of them all the Lord delivered 
me."~Vs. 10,11. 

Such are always the marks of a true teacher. His 

R4728 : page 392 

doctrine will be that which the most thorough investigation 

of the Scriptures most clearly proves and establishes 

beyond all peradventure. His manner of life will be consistent 

both with his faith and with his consecration to 

the Lord. His purpose will be the building up of the 

Church in the most holy faith. His faith will be positive 

and clear— not mere guesswork, but knowledge based 

upon the sure Word of God, with whom is no variableness 

nor shadow of turning. And his great love for the Church 

will be manifest, as was Paul's, and as was Moses' love 

for Israel, by long-suffering, patience and meek endurance 

of persecution, both from an opposing world and from 

false brethren arising in the midst of God's people. And 

in such persecutions no true teacher will be lacking; for 

"all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.' 

(V. 12.) Such has been the experience of every 

true teacher that God has ever raised up to deliver and 

guide his people. Witness Noah, Moses, Paul and Luther. 

But, Beloved, our advice to you in these perilous 
times, when error is taking on its most baneful and deceitful 
forms, and when it is finding its most active agents 
amongst false brethren and sisters in your very midst, and 
when fidelity to Truth, therefore, occasions the severing 
of some of the tenderest social ties you have ever known, 
even among those with whom you once held sweet converse 
as you walked together to the house of God— yes, 
in these times let us again urge the counsel of Paul— 
"Continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and 
hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned 
them"; for it is written (John 6:45), "They shall be 
all taught of God." Whoever the human agent may be 
that God has made use of to bring you to a knowledge 
of the truth, he was simply an index finger to help you 
trace it for yourself on the sacred page; and in humility 
and faithfulness he made no greater claim than this, assuring 
you that the holy Scriptures to which he ever and 
continually pointed are indeed "able to make you wise 



unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus"; 
and that "all Scripture, given by inspiration of God, is 
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction 
in righteousness, that the man of God may be 
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works." 

THE PRECIOUS TRUTH IS GOD'S MESSAGE 

Therefore, dearly beloved, what you have learned concerning 
God's glorious Plan of the Ages, and concerning 
your privileged place in that Plan, as heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, his Son, and concerning 
the conditions upon which you hold this precious promise 
and may finally realize it, and concerning that great 
foundation doctrine of our redemption from sin and 
death through the precious blood of "the man Christ 
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all," upon which 
fact rests the whole superstructure of the wondrous and 
glorious Plan, hold fast these things, knowing of whom 
you have learned them. This precious Truth is God's 
message to you, not man's. No such high and glorious 
hope could ever have entered the mind of mortal man had 
not God revealed it by his Spirit, as he has done through 
faith in his Word, in his own due time. It is all in that 
Word. Search and see for yourselves; and be not faithless 
but believing. It comes not to you on the miserable 
authority of vain imagination, or dreams, or doubtful 
visions, but on the authority of God's most holy and 
authentic Word. True, it is almost too good to believe, 
but is it not just like our God? Does it not gloriously illustrate 
the breadth of his mighty mind, the scope of his 
marvelous wisdom and power, and the depth of his love 
and grace? 

Continue, therefore, in the things which thou hast 
learned, and hast been assured of (having proved them 
yourselves from the Scriptures), and be not of them who 
turn away their ears from the Truth and are turned unto 
fables. And observing those who have a form of godliness, 
but who, nevertheless, by their false teachings deny 
the power thereof, "from such turn away," and "have no 
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but 
rather reprove them." 

We cannot serve two masters; we cannot espouse the 
cause of Truth and the cause of error as well; nor can 
we retain the friendship of God and of the advocates of 
error also. Who is on the Lord's side? Let them rally 
around the Lord's standard. All told, they will be only 
a "little flock." Like Gideon's band, the company now 
gathered by the proclamation of the harvest-message of 
Truth must be tested and sifted until only the loyal, faithful, 
true-hearted, brave and valiant soldiers of the cross 
remain; and to these, though their numbers be small, will 
the laurels of victory belong when Truth and righteousness 
finally prevail. Let no man boast of numbers now 
when the highest interests of the elect of God are all 
bound up with the faithful few, to whom it will be the 



Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom. 

"Count me the swords that have come." 

"Lord, thousands on thousands are ready." 

"Lo, these are too many, and with them are some 
Whose hearts and whose hands are not steady. 
He whose soul does not burn, 
Let him take up his tent and return." 

"Count me the swords that remain." 

"Lord, hundreds on hundreds are daring." 

"These yet are too many for me to attain 
To the victory I am preparing. 
Lead them down to the brink 
Of the waters of Marah to drink." 

"Lord, those who remain are but few, 
And the hosts of the foe are appalling, 

And what can a handful such as we do?" 

"When ye hear from beyond my voice calling 

Sound the trump ! Hold the light! 

Great Midian will melt in your sight." 



R4728 : page 392 

THE DIFFERENT FORMS OF EVILS 

"Abstain from every form of evil."— I Thess. 5:22. 

IN the Revised Version the word appearance 

is rendered form— "abstain from every form 

of evil." Evils have different forms. Sometimes 

they are crude and repulsive forms; 

sometimes they are attractive forms. No 

matter what the form, if we know the thing 

to be evil, sinful, injurious, either to ourselves 

or to others, we are to abstain from 

it. The Apostle has enumerated some of 

these forms of evil, namely, "Adultery, 

fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, 

hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, 

heresies, envying, murders, drunkenness, revelings and 

such like, of the which I have told you before, that they 

that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God." 

(Gal. 5:19-21.) He says that these are the works of the 

flesh and that they are manifest. 

To Christians these forms of evil must be very repulsive, 
because to be a Christian at all, one must have the 
New Mind. And the New Mind, in proportion as it is 
developed, will cleave to that which is good. We are to 
remember, however, the Scriptural admonition that all 

R4728 : page 393 



of these grosser evils have, for the Christian, a more refined 
form, as, for instance, when our Lord declared that 
"He that hateth his brother is a murderer." This is quite 
a fine line of distinction that applies to the Christian. We 
can see that that spirit in a Christian which would content 
itself with hating, instead of killing, a brother would be a 
very evil condition for the heart and would mean death 
to the New Creature. 

Our Lord defines adultery as not merely the outward 
act, but also the having of an adulterous feeling in the 
heart— the having of a purpose or willingness in the heart. 
Hence the New Creature, taking this standpoint, should 
be earnest and zealous to guard his heart. And so with 
Covetousness. It is covetous to be discontented with what 
we have and desirous of obtaining what others have. 
This is one form of selfishness, and the spirit of selfish 
desires is evil. In fact, we might say that every form of 
evil, so far as we can discern, is a form of selfishness. 
No evil thing that we can think of in humanity would be 
apart from selfishness— the desire to have something, to 
be something. These things, leading on to their culmination, 
would mean a desire to be a usurper of power— to 
grasp things that are not our own— an improper condition 
of lust for power, lust for wealth, etc. 

ACTIONS, WORDS AND THOUGHTS 

Evils may be summed up into three forms— actions, 
words and thoughts. Evil actions are those which would be 
easily discerned by others. Evil words might not be quite 
so manifest. Evil thoughts, along any of the lines referred 
to by the Apostle, or along any other lines, are 
injurious, sinful, and should be abstained from. If, by 
reason of the weaknesses we have inherited and which 
belong to our mortal body, we be not fully able to master 
these evil propensities, we must show God that we are 
striving against them to the best of our ability. And as 
to what is the ability of each, is for himself and God to 
determine. 

We should abstain not only from the evil things, but 
we should also seek to abstain from every appearance of 
evil. We should abstain, so far as possible, from doing 
things that we know to be good, if our friends or neighbors 
might misunderstand and consider these things to be 
evil. In order that our influence for the Truth may be 
the greater, we should avoid, not only evil in its every 
form, but everything that has an evil appearance. 

To our mind, evil thinking is one of the greatest evils 
with which God's people have to contend. They can 
restrain actions and words to a considerable extent and 
they are, as the Apostle says, to seek to bring also every 
thought into obedience to the will of Christ. This does 
not mean that an evil thought would not cross the pathway 
of the mind. But the character of the thought should 
be discerned, whether it is mean or hurtful, and if so, it 
should be considered as a deadly foe and immediately a 



warfare should be waged against it, lest it fasten itself in 
some degree. 

Has the Apostle suggested an impossibility when he 
says, "Abstain from every form of evil"? It is possible 
for us to abstain as New Creatures, to be out of sympathy 
with all forms of evil— to be antagonistic thereto. But on 
account of the imperfections of the flesh, one may not 
always be able to do this actually. The flesh is merely 
reckoned dead. It is the duty of the New Creature to 
see that the evil thought is battled against, if, indeed, it 
should ever attain full development. It is to wage this 
warfare against sin that we have enlisted with the great 
Captain of our salvation. He showed his own fidelity to 
righteousness and is the Father's Agent for abolishing sin. 

And it is for those who would walk in the Master's 
footsteps to join in this crusade against sin. The first place 
to begin the crusade is in our own minds, in our own dealings. 
The Scriptures tell us to fight a good fight in our 
own flesh— not against sin in someone else. And to this 
our Lord refers when he warns us to overcome in ourselves 
ambition, pride, lasciviousness, etc.— not to let them 
conquer us as New Creatures. We are to conquer these 
things in the fallen flesh, in which we all share— some 
more and some less. According to our zeal we will have 
the Lord's approval. And according to unfaithfulness in 
this matter, we shall lack that approval. 

All who serve the Lord's cause in any capacity— as 
Pilgrims, Colporteurs, etc.— should seek to keep their 

R4729 : page 393 

bodies under and live after the manner of the teachings 
of the Scriptures— and they will be blessed proportionately 
as they do this. And in proportion as they are less careful, 
they will be less blessed— less skilful in the preaching 
of the Word and in the service of the truth. 

GOD'S DEALINGS UNDER THE DIFFERENT COVENANTS 

The Decalogue of the Law Covenant was composed 
of prohibitions— "Thou shalt not." God's dealings with 
those who will become members of the "House of Sons" 
seem to be different from this. Instead of telling us 
what we shall not do, he tells us what we shall do. 

How will it be with those with whom God will deal 
during the existence of the Messianic Kingdom, under the 
New Covenant arrangement? We answer that during the 
reign of Christ they will be under a very similar arrangement 
to that of the Jews under Moses. Thou shalt, and 
Thou shalt not, will be enforced by the great Mediator. 
And the enforcing will be necessary, because of the sins 
and imperfections and degradation in which the people 
will be. In harmony with this we read that "Whosoever 
will not obey that Prophet will be destroyed from among 
the people." (Acts 3:23.) The word obey implies a command 
and that the command is backed up by the authority 



to enforce. 

The fact is that there will be a reign of Law in 
Messiah's Kingdom. "And many people shall go and say, 
Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, 
to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us 
of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for out of 
Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord 
from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:3.) And those who will not 
fall into line with this law will have tribulation that they 
may learn righteousness. "The judgments of the Lord 
will be abroad in the earth" (Isa. 26:9) and the people 
will take notice of these. They will not be dealt with as 
under the Covenant of Grace. The will will not be taken 
as instead of the deed. And they will not have the 
Advocate. 

On the contrary, the great Mediator will, during the 
thousand years of the Mediatorial Kingdom, instruct and 
reward and bless and uplift all the willing and obedient, 
to the intent that all those during that reign who desire 
to be helped will be helped and will be ready to be turned 
over to the Almighty at the close of the Age. "And 
when all things shall be subdued under him, then shall 
the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all 
things under him, that God may be all in all." (I Cor. 15:28.) 
Not, therefore, until the end of that Age will 
any of the World, under the New Covenant arrangement, 
reach sonship. But if, by that time, they have been perfected 
as sons, and will endure the tests then given, the 
Father will accept them and give them the blessings of 
eternal life, etc., as sons. 

R4729 : page 394 

A certain Scripture gives us intimation of how this 
will proceed. This Scripture shows us the injunctions and 
precepts God will put upon the world. "And this shall be 
the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, 
after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my Law in their 
inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and I will be 
their God, and they shall be my people." (Jer. 31:33.) 
He also says, "And I will give them one heart; and I will 
put a new spirit within you; and I will take away the 
stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart 
of flesh." (Ezek. 11:19.) This brief statement implies a 
full restitution to all that was lost in Adam. 

Adam was created perfect, but the depravity of mankind 
and the intensification of this in many cases have 
brought the world today to a condition of stoniness of 
heart, until the inhumanity of man toward man is appalling. 
The precepts of God will be gradually brought 
before the human mind and engraved and interwoven in 
the whole fibre of his being, so that man at the end of the 
Millennial Age will be as Adam was in the beginning— 
fully in accord with every principle of righteousness and 
sympathetic with everything that is good and unsympathetic 
with everything that is evil. This condition will 



come to be the very fibre of human nature again and only 
to such as will attain this will come the blessing of eternal 
life. 

We read that God will test all whom he will receive. 
We read of how Satan, at the close of the Mediatorial 
reign, will be loosed to test all whom God will have 
lifted up out of human imperfection. This will not be 
done to see whether or not they are perfect, because they 
will be perfect, but it will be to see whether or not, in 
their perfection, they will be loyal to God. All such as 
will not stand this test will be destroyed as not worthy of 
having the great blessings of eternal life and Divine 
favor! 



R4729 : page 394 

INIQUITOUS GOVERNMENT SUCCESSFUL 

--JANUARY 22.--I KINGS 16:23-33.- 

"Righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin is 
a reproach to any people."— Proverbs 14:34. 

THE Omri dynasty of Israel was a successful one 

according to worldly standards, but a failure 

from the Divine standpoint. Omri, a great 

general, succeeded to Israel's throne after 

the death of Jeroboam. He was very successful 

and conquered the Moabites, to the 

East of the Jordan, putting them under an 

annual tribute of the fleece of two hundred 

thousand sheep. He built a new Capital, the 

city of Samaria, and successfully outranked 

Jeroboam as a misleader of his people, along religious 

lines. According to Israel's Covenant with the Almighty 

there was but the one Levitical priesthood and the one 

holy temple of Jehovah's presence for the whole people 

of Israel, and it was at Jerusalem. As worldly wisdom 

guided Jeroboam to completely separate the ten tribes 

from the two tribes by establishing new places of worship 

and simplifying the worship and symbolizing God by a 

golden calf, so the same spirit of worldly wisdom suggested 

to Omri a still further departure from God and a 

still closer approach to the customs and idolatry of surrounding 

nations. 

Omri died, or, according to the records, "Omri slept 
with his fathers." We are not from this declaration to 
draw the inference that as a wicked man he went to 
eternal torment and that the nature of the torment is 
sleep. Neither are we to think of Omri as saintly and 
going to heaven and to imagine that those in heaven are 
asleep. Neither are we to think of him as having gone 
to Purgatory and that the experiences there are drowsy. 
We must leave all such unscriptural notions respecting the 



dead, good and bad. We must come back to the Bible 

and from it learn that all who die, like St. Stephen 

(Acts 7:60), fall asleep to await the morning of the resurrection, 

when the Redeemer will call all forth from the 

tomb. (John 5:28,29, Rev. Ver.) Then, as Daniel declares, 

"Many that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake"; 

a few to glory and honor, the many to shame and age-lasting 

contempt— from which they will be obliged to 

purge themselves by obedience to the Divine requirements 

under Messiah's glorious reign of righteousness. 

-Dan. 12:2. 

AHAB AND JEZEBEL 

Ahab's name signifies, "Like his father." And surely 
he was! His name was appropriate. His was a reign 
still more successful in unrighteousness. For twenty-two 
years he devoted himself to the further undermining of 
true religion and to the introduction of the worst forms 
of licentious, heathen idolatry. He was greatly assisted 
in this course by his wife— Jezebel, the daughter of the 
King of the Sidonians. Her name signifies chaste; yet 
she used her great influence with her husband and 
throughout the nation for the furtherance of unchastity 
in connection with the orgies known as the religious rites 
and ceremonies, connected with the worship of Baal and 
of "Ashtoreth," the female divinity worshipped. In connection 
with this worship human lives were sacrificed, 
usually those of children— just as was found in Alaska 
when, in 1867, it came into the possession of the United 
States— human sacrifices were frequent— particularly in 
connection with the laying of a foundation for a great 
house. 

LESSONS HERE FOR US 

All civilized people are deeply interested in earthly 
governments and their success. We all crave social and 
financial prosperity. Nevertheless it is still true that 
prosperity is injurious in proportion as it separates the 
people from the Divine arrangements and the blessings 
which thereto attach. Only righteousness can truly exalt 
a nation. Every form of iniquity is injurious, however 
it may at the time seem contrary to this. Ours is the 
day of the greatest worldly prosperity this earth has ever 
known. But alas! it is not a day of religious prosperity. 
On the contrary, there never was a time when unbelief in 
a personal God and in the Bible as his revelation was so 
general amongst intelligent people. Our church edifices 
are becoming temples of fashion, concert and lecture halls, 
while the real worship which alone is pleasing to the 
Almighty is far removed— little thought of. 

The worship of Mammon, the bowing to the golden 
calf, the sacrificing of lives to the acquirement of wealth, 
belong to our day as truly as to that of Ahab— but on a 
more refined scale and therefore the more deceptive and 



insidious. It affects the poor as well as the rich, too. The 
poor often are merely the unsuccessfully ambitious, hence 
often bitter and discontented. 

Continually we find that God uses the wrath of man 
to praise him. The effect of the prosperity of Ahab and 
Jezebel was two-fold: it ensnared and degraded one class, 
while it aroused and separated from itself another class— 

R4730 : page 395 

those who worshipped God in spirit and in truth. Such 
left the ten-tribe kingdom and its idolatry and identified 
themselves with the two-tribe kingdom of Judah and its 
true worship. 

So it is today. The success of Mammon, the rejection 
of the Bible by the Higher Critics and their lordly boasts 
of ability to give us something better than the Word of 
God, and in general Mammon worship, is awakening the 
more saintly people of our day to separate themselves 
and to say in the language of Joshua, "Choose ye this day 
whom ye will serve; as for me and my house, we will 
serve the Lord." 

ANTITYPICAL AHAB AND JEZEBEL 

As all Christian students know, Jezebel, Ahab and 
Elijah were used of the Lord as types, and their experiences 
foreshadowed much greater things in the experience 
of the Church, spiritual Israel, during this Gospel 
Age. 

Ahab typified civil power. Jezebel typified a religious 
system. The improper marriage of Ahab and Jezebel, 
contrary to the Jewish Law, typified the marriage or union 
of Church and State. The progress of evil under this 
union is portrayed in the Book of Revelation, where Jezebel 
is specially mentioned by name. (Rev. 2:20-23.) The 
Lord charged that the antitypical Jezebel, the Church system, 
was suffered or permitted to teach and seduce his 
people from the proper course of Christian living. The 
same Scriptures represent Elijah, who was persecuted by 
Jezebel, through her husband, as a type of true believers 
of this Age persecuted by a false Church through the 
arm of civil power. 



R4730 : page 395 

JEHOSHAPHAT'S ONE MISTAKE 

-JANUARY 29.-II CHRONICLES 17:1-13.- 

"Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness; 
and all these things shall be added unto you."— Matt. 6:33. 

WHILE Ahab was king of Israel, Jehoshaphat 



succeeded to the throne of Judah. He had 

the advantage that his parents were godly 

people— a great advantage. As suggested in 

our last study, the iniquity and idolatry of 

Israel reacted favorably upon Judah, just 

as the drunkenness and profligacy of a parent 

sometimes reacts upon his children, who 

perceive his folly and learn by his mistakes. 

Moreover the idolatry of Israel, which drove 

its most saintly characters of all the tribes to Judah, enriched 

the latter nation in moral tone and character. This 

included all of the priests and Levites who were still 

loyal to God and to the worship which he had established. 

All these things produced a healthy sentiment which 
the young king Jehoshaphat shared and, as the head of 
the nation, exemplified. 

Encouraged thus, the young king began a general crusade 
against every idolatrous place and custom in his 
kingdom. As Ahab exceeded his father Omri as an evil-doer, 
so Jehoshaphat exceeded his father Asa as an upholder 
of the Divine Law. Indeed we remember that in 
Asa's later years he became proud and self-conscious and 
in a measure for a time rebellious against the Divine 
arrangements. 

PROSPERITY IN DIVINE FAVOR 

Jehoshaphat's kingdom prospered. He fortified its 
various boundaries, especially toward the land of Israel, 
Judah's nearest neighbor. Neighboring smaller nations 
sought Judah's favor and for it paid tribute and presents 
until Jehoshaphat's kingdom was very prosperous. Thus 
fidelity to the Lord was rewarded with prosperity. If 
some from this are trying to draw the lesson that all prosperous 
persons and nations are honorable, righteous and 
in Divine fellowship, they surely err. Those also err who 
claim that adversity, poverty, sickness are sure evidences 
of Divine disfavor and a sinful life. 

Not only should we remember that the bad kings, Omri 
and Ahab, were prosperous, but we remember also that 
many wicked nations and iniquitous customs have prospered 
and are prospering today. Prosperity, therefore, is 
not always a sign of Divine favor. To Jehoshaphat and 
his kingdom, however, prosperity was a sign of favor 
because Judah still represented God's chosen nation in a 
special manner. According to God's Covenant with them 
they would be blessed in proportion as they maintained 
their loyalty to their agreement— their loyalty to God. 
But this promise or Covenant was not made with mankind 
in general, but merely with the one nation of Israel, 
which, at the time of our study, was specially represented 
by the Kingdom of Judah. If we would see that righteousness 
does not always bring peace and worldly prosperity, 
we have only to look at the Master himself and 
at his most faithful followers to see the contrary. Moreover 
this is the Master's assurance to his followers: "In 



the world ye shall have tribulation, but in me ye shall 
have peace"; "Marvel not that the world hateth you; ye 
know that it hated me before it hated you." "Whosoever 
will live godly in this present time shall suffer 
persecution." 

In other words, the systems of rewards and punishments 
which justice would indicate are not now being enforced. 
God now arranges that his spiritual family shall 
walk by faith and not by sight; and to give them trials 
of faith he frequently permits their suffering and disadvantage 
in earthly interests to test their loyalty and obedience 
—to demonstrate them as overcomers, faithful unto 
death, in their adherence to principles of righteousness. 
To these the promise is that when found worthy they 
shall receive the heavenly inheritance. Then will come 
the world's trial time. 

But when Messiah's reign shall begin, all this will be 
changed and every wrong act and word and thought will 
receive prompt punishment, and every good effort will be 
rewarded and encouraged. Thus the Scriptures declare, 
"When the judgments (righteous dealings) of the Lord 
are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will 
learn righteousness." The blessed opportunities of that 
time will belong to all mankind except the Church. The 
specially called class of this Age have the special blessing 
of hearing ears and understanding hearts and a call to 
the heavenly portion— the "High Calling." Thus, my 
dear readers, we see that our trials and difficulties, rightly 
appreciated and accepted, are blessings for us, because 
they thus work out for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory— than the world will receive. The 
highest rewards for the world will be restitutionary, 
earthly— to attain perfect manhood. Thus we see God's 
provision in Christ to be eternal human life for mankind 
in general, and eternal life on the spirit plane for the elect 
Church, and eternal death for those who, after experiencing 
to the full Divine mercy and opportunity, shall 
sin wilfully. 

JEHOSHAPHAT'S ONE MISTAKE 

Like others, this king, no doubt, made many mistakes, 

R4730 : page 396 

blunders, but his most important mistake was in affiliating 
with Ahab, king of Israel. There is a lesson here for all 
of God's people. "Be not unequally yoked together with 
unbelievers"— neither by marriage ties nor by business 
partnerships and close friendships. "What communion 
hath light with darkness?"-2 Cor. 6:14-18. 

Ahab made war and invited Jehoshaphat to go with 
him. It was expected to be an easy conquest, but 
the Lord's blessing was not with it, as Jehoshaphat later 
learned, escaping barely with his life. But his still earlier 
mistake was in arranging a marriage between his son and 



the daughter of Ahab and Jezebel. No doubt he considered 
this a wise method of ultimately re-uniting the two 
kingdoms— but it was worldly wisdom— foolishness— contrary 
to the wisdom from above. The Lord's disapproval 
of Jehoshaphat's fellowship with Ahab was indicated. The 
Prophet was sent to him, saying, "Shouldst thou help the 
ungodly and love them that hate the Lord? Therefore 
wrath is upon thee from before the Lord."— 
IlChron. 19:2. 

God's people can readily draw a lesson from all this, 
without further suggestions from us. 

Our Golden Text refers to the Kingdom to which spiritual 
Israelites are now invited. To seek it means to 
seek a place with the Redeemer in the glory and power 
of his coming Kingdom. Those who seek it may apparently 
lose in temporal advantages, but by faith they recognize 
that all things, even trials, difficulties and privations, 
are working together for good to their spiritual advantage, 
preparing them for the Kingdom. 



R4730 : page 396 

THREE AND A HALF YEARS WITHOUT RAIN 

-FEBRUARY 5. -I. KINGS 17:1-16.- 

They that seek the Lord shall not 
want any good thing.— Psa. 34: 10. 

ELIJAH the Prophet was God's messenger for 

reproving King Ahab, Jezebel his wife, and 

the ten tribes of Israel who supported them. 

As we have seen, wickedness and idolatry 

flourished for a time with national prosperity. 

Then there came a change, a drouth 

for three and a half years— a special dispensation 

of Divine providence— a retribution 

or punishment upon Israel. We do not wish 

R4731 : page 396 

to convey the thought that every drouth, 
famine, pestilence, etc., should be considered a judgment 
from the Almighty. The whole world is under Divine 
sentence or condemnation of death, and God permits 
cyclones, earthquakes, drouth, famine, pestilences, without 
sending them, except that in a general way they stand 
related to the present reign of sin and death, as of the 
curse not yet lifted. 

But in the case of Israel matters were different. At 
Mt. Sinai Israel entered into Covenant relationship with 
God and he with them. The special terms of that Covenant 
were that God should deal with their nation differently 
than with others— that he would treat them as 



his people and protect them from the evils incidental to 
the curse, if they would serve and obey him. Under that 
compact not only were they to receive blessings if faithful, 
but equally they were sure to receive stripes, punishments, 
if they were disobedient and forsook the Lord and 
their share of the Covenant. The three and a half years' 
famine described in this study was, therefore, in Israel's 
case, specifically a punishment from the Lord for their 
sins. 

This is the signification of the Lord's statement 
through the Prophet, "Is there evil in the city and the 
Lord hath not done it?" Some have mistakenly interpreted 
this to mean that God holds himself responsible for 
all the moral evils of mankind. Quite to the contrary, the 
Lord declares respecting his own Government that "His 
way is perfect." The word evil in this text is old style 
English, signifying any disaster or trouble or affliction. 
With the Israelites God wished it to be clearly understood 
that he was responsible, both for their blessings and 
for their tribulations, all of which were intended to 
purify them. 

ELIJAH THE PROPHET 

Under Divine guidance, Elijah, at the appropriate time, 
presented himself to King Ahab, clothed according to his 
custom, in exceedingly plain garments. In the name of the 
Lord he reproved the king for the idolatries practised in 
his kingdom and announced what the king doubtless considered 
a vain boast; namely, that there would be neither 
rain nor dew in the land of Israel until Elijah would command 
it. And the drouth came as the Prophet of the 
Lord predicted. 

As months grew into years and the drouth continued, 
the king caused search to be made for Elijah, with a view 
to either entreating or threatening him, to the intent that 
the drouth might be broken. But Elijah, under the Lord's 
direction, secreted himself near the Brook Cherith, where 
the ravens brought him food morning and evening until 
the brook dried up and, under the Lord's direction, Elijah 
went elsewhere. 

While this story that the ravens fed Elijah sounds 
mythical, it has its parallels. The raven is a wise bird. 
A story is told of a young man sick in prison, to whom 
a raven brought food. Bishop Stanley's History of Birds 
tells of another incident thus: "Coming into the inn yard 
my chaise ran over and bruised the leg of a favorite 
Newfoundland dog, and while we were examining the injury, 
Ralph, the raven, looked on also. That night the 
dog was tied up under the manger with my horse and 
the raven not only visited him, but brought him bones and 
attended him with particular marks of kindness." 
"Nor is it a wonderful case, 

The wonder is to be renewed; 
And many can say, to his praise, 

He sends them by ravens their food. 



Thus worldlings, though ravens indeed, 

Though greedy and selfish their mind, 
If God has a servant to feed, 

Against their own wills can be kind." 

THE WIDOW OF ZAREPHATH 

Divine providence guided Elijah to the home of a 
poor widow, to whom the drouth and continued scarcity 
had proved a great trial. She had a little coarse flour 
left, which alone stood between herself and her son 
and starvation, so far as she could discern. The 
Prophet, meeting her, asked for a drink of water and a 
small cake of bread. This was a severe test to the 
woman's faith and generosity. She explained the situation, 
indicating her desire to accede to the Prophet's 
wishes, yet loth to part with her all. Elijah replied, Fear 
not. Bake for yourself and for your son, but the first 
cake make for me and bring to me. Then he explained 
to her the Lord's message: "The barrel of meal shall 

R4731 : page 397 

not waste, neither shall the cruise of oil fail until the day 
that the Lord sendeth rain upon the earth." The word 
of the Lord was fulfilled. Miraculously the supplies were 
increased little by little, just as required for use. 

There is a lesson for the Lord's people in this— a lesson 
that, even in our own extremities, we should exercise 
sympathy towards others in like condition or worse. The 
Lord loveth a cheerful giver. Those who give not, and 
those who give grudgingly miss, therefore, much of the 
Lord's blessing. We should not be foolish in our giving; 
but, while we have evidence that there is need, and particularly 
if the needy one be a child of God, we can well 
divide even our necessities with such. Our reward will 
be a realization of Divine approval and an increase in 
ourselves of the mind of the Lord. To such the Lord's 
promise is of his superabounding care. They are assured 
that all things shall work together for good to 
them, because they love God and are following in the path 
to which they were "called according to his purpose." 

The Scriptures declare: "There is that scattereth and 
yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than 
is proper and it tendeth to poverty." This widow scattered 
or divided her slender supply and thereby she increased 
it for many days, in harmony with this text. Our 
Golden Text, also, should not be forgotten: "They that 
seek the Lord shall not want any good thing"— shall not 
lack anything good for them. The Lord in his wisdom 
may not give them riches or prominence. They must trust 
to his wisdom, his judgment, as to what things will be for 
their best, their highest good. 



R4731 : page 397 

THE GIFTS AND FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT 

"And now abideth faith, hope, love, these three, 
but the greatest of these is love."— I Cor. 13:13. 

FAITH may be viewed from two standpoints- 
belief and trust. In the Scriptural use of 
the word faith, we understand it to be a 
belief in God and the things that we have 
reason to recognize as being of God— God's 
prophecies, the promises of his Word, etc., 
and a heart reliance on him— and not a belief 
in anything. The latter would be what 
we would term credulity. And the person 
who could believe anything would be foolish; 
whereas, he that believes what God has said has the Wisdom 
that cometh from above, and is, therefore, wise from 
the Scriptural standpoint. 

We understand that the purpose and determination of 
the Christian should be to have this faith largely developed, 
and he should obtain it from the Scriptures. 
Many people have faith which they believe to be of God, 
but which, on investigation, they find to be unscriptural 
and not a faith in what has come from God, in what he 
has expressed, but from the traditions of the "Dark 
Ages" and from college professors, etc., and is quite contrary 
to the "faith once delivered to the saints." 

In this particular sense we would understand faith to 
represent a heart-quality of trust in the Lord— something 
that has been acquired through the knowledge of God- 
through acquaintance with him by the various means by 
which he has been pleased to reveal himself. This is a 
faith which cannot continue to subsist or increase unless 
knowledge shall increase, based upon the Divine Revelation, 
and full acceptance of it and the coming into 
harmony with the Almighty, so as to be able to apply the 
promises and to recognize that they belong to the 
individual. 

We would consider faith, then, as belief in God and in 
his promises, as personal trust in God, giving one the 
rest and peace of God. As to how these views of faith 
agree with the words of our Lord, "When the Son of 
man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth," and as to 
how they agree with the statement of the Apostle Paul in 
Corinthians respecting faith as a gift of the holy Spirit, 
we would say that in the first of these passages the rendering 
should be, "When the Son of man cometh, shall he 
find The Faith on the earth?" The implication is not that 
he will find no faith, but, Shall he find "The Faith (the 
Doctrine) once delivered unto the saints"; hence we 
understand our Lord's words to mean that when the Son 
of man cometh he will not find, save in a few, "The Faith 
once delivered unto the saints," but will find instead 
misconceptions. 



And so we find that many Christian people, when talking 
on this subject, do not know what they are talking 
about. They have not "The Faith once delivered to the 
saints." Thus we are reminded of the statement of the 
Scriptures that "the inhabitants of the world have been 
made drunk" with the false doctrines which have perverted 
the Word of God. Instead of the "good tidings of great 
joy" they have been told bad tidings of most horrible torture. 
It is intimated in the Word that some will have The 
Faith. But the Lord implies that it will be a very small 
number who will possess it. 

GIFTS OF THE SPIRIT WERE FOR EARLY CHURCH 

Respecting the gifts of faith: At the very beginning 
of this Age gifts of speaking with tongues, gifts of interpreting 
tongues, gifts of healing, etc., were bestowed so 
that they might be exercised for the benefit of the people. 

R4732 : page 397 

It would require a great deal of faith to be able to say, 
as did Peter to the impotent man at the temple, "Arise and 
walk." One would need the "gift" in order to do this. 
And so with those who spoke with tongues. It would need 
to be a miraculous gift which would enable them to master 
any unknown language. 

Those gifts which God chose to give were granted 
because the Church was in its infancy and needed them 
for encouragement. The gifts were given also for a witness, 
because the Church did not then have the Bible. The 
Old Testament was heard only occasionally in the synagogues 
of the Jews. The New Testament had not as 
yet been written. The early Church needed some means 
for instructing one another. Had it not been for these 
gifts there might have been frivolity, etc., among them. 
And so one would arise and speak in an unknown tongue; 
a gift of interpretation would be given to another, and he 
would rise and give the interpretation. These gifts were 
given amongst them as a sort of drawing power to cause 
the Lord's people to assemble themselves together. Thus 
was the Word of God sent out for a time through this 
imperfect channel. 

We should not think that a higher development was 
indicated by the possession of these gifts, but, rather, these 
gifts were granted during the infancy of the Church, and 
we should not pray for them. The Scriptures show that 
either they were the gifts possessed by the Apostles or 
else, subsequently, they were the result of the impartation 
of the holy Spirit and laying on of the hands of the 
Apostles; as, for instance, when Philip, the deacon, sent 
the Apostle that he might lay hands upon the people that 
they might receive the gifts; evidently Philip had not the 
power to do this of himself. 

R4732 : page 398 



THE FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT NECESSARY TO SUCCESS IN 
THE RACE 

As to the desire for speaking with unknown tongues, 
the Apostle gave them a warning reproof. He said, "I 
would rather speak five words in the Church with my 
understanding— that by my voice I might teach others 
also— than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue." 
(I Cor. 14:19.) He tells them that if any man possessed 
the gift of speaking with tongues, let him pray that he 
might interpret— that he might be able to express himself 
intelligibly to those to whom he was speaking, rather 
than in dark sayings. And then he proceeds to say that 
this strong desire for emulation in the possession of the 
gifts did not of itself indicate deep consecration to God. 
He tells them that if they spoke with the tongues of men 
and of angels, it would profit them nothing, if they did not 
have love. The possession of an unknown tongue did not 
imply that a man had reached a higher attainment and relationship 
to God. 

He says that the fruits of the Spirit are more to be 
desired, which are these— meekness, gentleness, patience, 
fortitude, self-control, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, 
love. St. Peter tells us, "If ye do these things, ye shall 
never fall, for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you 
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ." (2 Pet. 1:10,11.) But we might 
have all the gifts of the early Church and have no evidence 
whatever that we would be sure of a place in the 
Kingdom. Love excels all the other virtues, because it is 
the most enduring. 

When we shall see and know thoroughly faith will, 
practically, have come to an end. And hope will be practically 
at an end when our hopes in our Heavenly Father's 
promises have reached fruition. But love had no beginning 
and it will have no end. God is love. Since God was 
without beginning, so Love was without beginning; because 
it is his character, his disposition; and as he endureth 
forever, so Love will endure forever. 



R4732 : page 398 

THE TRUE SHEPHERD AND HIS FLOCKS 

"When he putteth forth his own sheep, 

he goeth before them, and the sheep 

follow him, for they know his voice."— John 10:4. 

WE understand that the sheepfold was the Law 
Covenant arrangement under which Israel 
was placed at Sinai, that they were glad to 
be thus folded or put into the Lord's special 
care, and that Moses did all that he could 



for them as a kind of shepherd, but was not 
able to give them the liberty from the Law 
which they needed. Various others who 
pretended to be shepherds came afterwards. 
The Lord says that all these false shepherds 
who came before him were thieves and robbers. They 
did not come in through the door. They were endeavoring 
to take advantage of the sheep; hence they were 
selfish. He who is the Good Shepherd is willing to lay 
down his life for the sheep. It required the true Shepherd 
to bring about the conditions and the relationship thus 
expressed. "When he putteth forth his own sheep, he 
goeth before them." They needed to be led out into the 
green pastures. The fold is a place for rest and protection, 
but not a place for feeding. 

So as respects the Law. The Apostle says that the 
Jews were shut up under the Law. Until the due time 
should come there was no way of escape. There was 
only the one door, which had not been opened, and which 
none of these would-be leaders could open. That door 
was the Door of Redemption. Our Lord, by laying down 
his life for the sheep, could open that door. 

Having made satisfaction for the sins of his people, 
our Lord gained the right to be their Shepherd 
or Leader. When he puts them forth, he shows them the 
way they should walk. He is not only the Leader, but 
also the Shepherd to watch over and care for them. Thus 
he leads them through green pastures and finally will 
bring them to the heavenly fold. Jesus became the door 
of egress from the Jewish sheepfold, and there is no 
other egress. Any of the Jews who came out came 
through Christ. Any of them who did not come out 
through Christ are still shut up under the Law— to remain 
until the Mediatorial reign. Others might take advantage 
of the offer through Christ now, that they might 
have life and have it more abundantly. He is the good 
Shepherd. A stranger will the sheep not follow, because 
they know not the voice of strangers. This indicates 
that in the voice of the True Shepherd there is something 
that has the proper ring. And the sheep will not follow 
another having a different voice— a different sound or 
message. 

Now is the Harvest time. The voices of the false 
shepherds who have temporarily bewildered some of the 
"sheep" are losing their influence and more are listening 
to the Voice of the True Shepherd, which is unlike that 
of any other voice, and which is unmistakable. In the 
sound is the chord of Justice mingled with those of Love 
and Wisdom and Power. All other theories and doctrines 
have no such power or harmonious sound as the 
glorious message of "good tidings" which the Father has 
sent us through his Son. The voice of the True Shepherd 
satisfies the longings of the sheep as nothing else can do. 

"Send out thy light and truth, O Lord; 
Let them our leaders be 



To guide us to thy holy hill, 

Where we shall worship thee." 

The question has been suggested, In what way could 
we apply our Lord's statement to the Gentiles, "My sheep 
hear my voice and they follow me?" Our answer is that 
the Lord had sheep amongst the Gentiles; that is, those 
who were seeking to serve him. But at that time he had 
not received anyone from amongst the Gentiles— the 
middle wall of partition was still standing. But subsequently 
they had the opportunity of hearing his voice and 
following him, the middle wall of partition then being 
broken down. A little later than when he used the above 
words he said: "Other sheep have I; these also I must 
bring and there shall be one fold and one Shepherd." 
While this may be particularly applicable to the sheep of 
the next Age, it may not be amiss to apply it now to those 
who are received from amongst the Gentiles. In the next 
Age he will receive some from the natural house of Israel 
and some from the Gentiles. At the present time he is receiving 
some from the natural house and some from the 
Gentiles. During the next Age there will be but one fold 
and one Shepherd; and all the sheep will be brought into 
full harmony with God. 

To carry out the thought of Revelation 7, and viewing 
the number of the Lord's people of the "little flock" 
as one hundred and forty-four thousand, this offer being 
originally made to the twelve tribes of natural Israel, 

R4732 : page 399 

others subsequently were permitted to take the places of 
those who were first called or first recognized as sheep, 
and who proved unworthy. 

When Christ said, "All that ever came before me were 
thieves and robbers," we understand that these to whom 
our Lord thus referred were those who attempted fraudulently 
to palm themselves off on the Jewish people as 
their leaders. These are particularly referred to by 
Gamaliel in his address to the Sanhedrin, when he said 
to them, "Ye men of Israel, take heed to yourselves what 
ye intend to do as touching these men. For before these 
days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be somebody; 
to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined 
themselves; who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed 
him, were scattered, and brought to naught.... And now 
I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them 
alone; for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will 
come to naught."— Acts 5:35-38. 



page 399 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I take this opportunity to write you a brief letter re 
advertising for public meetings addressed by traveling brethren 
sent out by the Society. 

During the past two years such meetings have been much 
better attended than formerly. Am sure that one of the principal 
causes of increased attendance is the more extensive and 
intelligent advertising carried on during that period by the 
brethren at many appointments. They have been doing remarkably 
well, and give evidence of increasing efficiency. 

We are convinced that the advertising methods recommended 
by the Society are excellent— the very best, indeed— 
viz., PEOPLES PULPITS, distributed from door to door, window 
cards and brief announcements in the newspapers. 

We have noticed that whenever only newspaper advertisements 
have been used, the attendance has been less than 
when the other methods also have been employed. Indeed, 
my observation has led me to conclude that well-placed window-cards 
are more effective than newspaper ads., particularly 
in large towns and cities. 

Of course, to engage a good room, and to advertise thoroughly 
involves the expenditure of some money and time. 
But what a glorious cause we are serving and what a blessed 
privilege it is to engage in such wonderful service. 

You will be pleased, I am sure, to know that the friends, 
generally, are taking hold of this matter with considerable 
zeal and intelligence. But, while this is true, some may not 
fully realize how good the Society's advertising methods are, 
particularly the PULPITS and window-cards. 

Yours in the interest of the blessed cause we all love so 
dearly, FRANK DRAPER. 



DEARLY BELOVED BRETHREN:- 

When we received notice of Pilgrim visit and the suggestion 
as to the method of advertising for a public meeting, we 
decided to do as nearly as we could according to those 
suggestions. 

Personally, I was very hopeful and confident that the place 
of the gathering would be full. Some of the brethren were 
not so hopeful. However, heretofore usually we had only a 
small attendance, without any favorable results so far as we 
have perceived. We were inclined to feel disappointed, but 
each time hoped for better results when we would put forth 
efforts afresh. 

Well, this time the hall was crowded and many were 
unable to get in. We also have found some who have become 
interested since this effort. 

We, of course, do not look for numbers, but how glad we 
are that some come to see to some extent the length and 
breadth and height and depth of God's great plan of salvation. 

We realize that the time is drawing nigh when we shall 
not be able to work any more, and we desire to do what we 
can while it is called today. Our hearts are filled with pity 
for those who oppose the Harvest message. Praise the Lord 



for his goodness. 
Your brother in the Faith once delivered to the saints, 
S. J. DE GROOT. 



DEAR PASTOR:- 

Please find enclosed $5 to be applied to "Good Hopes." 
This was collected in a peculiar manner. We have a little 
bank hung up in our home. A great many of the dear friends 
frequent our home and when any of us say anything we 
ought not to or complain about anything we are fined five 
cents, which goes in the bank. This amount is the proceeds 
so far. Needless to say we are all getting more control 
of our tongues. God bless you. 

Your brother and sister in Christ, C. E. HEARD. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have been waiting for your return from England to 
express to you my appreciation of my visit at Bethel Home. 
My stay there was both pleasant and profitable. Because I 
understand the situation and conditions there better than 
before, my interest is increased, my sympathy is more substantial, 
my love is enlivened for you and your earnest co-laborers 
in the continual service there. I can now pray for 
the Bethel family with spirit and understanding. Surely 
you are all laying down your lives for the brethren— to supply 
sustenance for the spiritual sheep. 

Considerable was crowded into the few weeks I was there 
—a wedding, a public meeting at Brooklyn Academy of 
Music, a Jewish meeting in New York Hippodrome, your 
sailing for England, etc., besides the regular routine of Chapel 
services, table-talks and work at Tabernacle. The last mentioned 
I particularly appreciated, and, so far as I know, 
the friends there survived my stay, so no harm was done. 
I thank you heartily for your hospitality and kindness, and 
desire to be remembered to the dear family there. 

The morning worship was a delight to me. I think of it 
every day as I read the Manna and "the Vow" and sometimes 
sing the hymn. There is not always time for the hymn— at 
least in the morning. 

A few days ago I was amazed to learn that some of the 
"natives" here have been accrediting me with the Brooklyn 
Tabernacle Bible Studies appearing in one of our local papers. 
I modestly disclaimed the honor, but my denial seemed 
to be held in doubt, at first, until I explained the matter 
quite fully. 

My daughter Ruth is still in Iowa doing colporteur work. 
The work there has been considerably retarded by delays in 
getting books to deliver. Their expenses have thus been increased 
also. But she loves the work. Once, after a delivery, 
she wrote she had never been so tired in all her life— and 
never so happy, because the Lord had permitted her to do 
something not easy in his service. I am sure she has been 



homesick sometimes, but she has not complained and is very 
thankful for the opportunity she has had. 

I wish there were more opportunities for service with 
fewer handicaps. The winters here are hard for me, and 
I have wondered if I could arrange to do colporteur work in 
January and February some place in the South. I wish I 
knew some of the Southern friends to whom I could write 
concerning it. 

The past three months have been crowded full of blessings. 
I am grateful for them all. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, HATTIE O. HENDERSON. 



MY DEAR SIR:- 

I have received the Bible Studies, No. 1, and feel that as 
a Christian I am just beginning to live. 

I have studied the Bible for thirty years and have been 
blind, as my teachers and Pastors have been blind. Ministers 
are not giving their people these things and they are starving, 
spiritually. 

I thank so much some one who placed on my porch a 
copy of the PEOPLES PULPIT last summer. 

I cannot think that I or mine are among the "Elect," but 
I am going to see that every one I can reach shall know 
about these precious truths. 

My little daughter, who has been wrongly taught in Sunday 
School and at home, said, when I read aloud about the 
future of the heathen, "O! I am so glad they will have an 
opportunity." 

And now I will write on separate sheet an order for 
more good things to pass along. God bless you again for 
the good, glad news you are spreading over the world. 

Sincerely, MRS. L. K. THOMPSON-Minn. 



