Patterns of Gold on Steel
BY AWAKE! WRITER IN SPAIN
VÍCTOR is a 74-year-old man whose sight has dimmed after countless hours of focusing on small objects. Still, his eyes light up whenever he is asked to describe his 50 years’ experience of hammering gold onto steel. Víctor, who began learning his trade at the age of 14, is a skilled craftsman in the art of damascene.
“For me, creating damascene objects is much more than a trade,” explains Víctor. “Sometimes I have stayed awake for 24 hours, totally immersed in my work.” As he handles the well-worn tools of his venerable craft, his face beams with the memories of a lifetime of producing these unique works of art.
From Damascus to Spain
What is damascene? It is the process by which a metal surface is decorated with etched or inlaid patterns of gold or silver. Archaeologists have found in Egyptian tombs some damascene pieces dating back to the 16th century B.C.E.
Although the first damascene articles may have been produced in China or Egypt, the name itself comes from the ancient city of Damascus. Skilled artisans in that Syrian capital created objects of such beauty that the technique became synonymous with the city. Lying at an important crossroads between the eastern Mediterranean lands and the countries of Mesopotamia and the Orient, Damascus became a center of trade. This commercial prominence resulted in the export of the city’s traditional crafts, such as damascene, to lands far from Syria.
Within a few centuries, damascene craftsmanship became established in Europe, and by the 16th century, the Spanish city of Toledo had emerged as the chief center of the art. Toledan swords, armor, and shields, as well as more delicate objects, were embellished with the damascene touch of elegance and distinction.
An Art of Contrasts
The damascene art of Toledo highlights the brightness of inlaid gold and silver against an intense black background of steel. It combines ornamental motifs such as Kufic script (ancient Arabic characters) with floral and geometric forms typical of the Arab and Mudejar cultures. Let us take you briefly to Toledo to discover how the craftsmen conserve this skill.
As you wander through the narrow, winding streets of old Toledo, it is easy to imagine that you have been transported to medieval times. And you will soon discover that the art of damascene has not been lost. You will notice that a wide range of damascene objects, such as brooches, bracelets, cuff links, tiepins, pillboxes, thimbles, earrings, and ornamental plates, are on display in many shop windows. Moreover, in some shops you can even watch traditional craftsmen skillfully wielding gold thread with one hand while using a steel punch to hammer it onto a metal base with the other hand. This is how gold filament is inlaid onto steel, the essence of damascene artwork.
A Laborious Technique
As you get closer, you will notice that the artisan has several sheets of steel cut into various shapes and sizes. Choosing a round sheet of steel, he begins the initial process, that of scoring. This involves crisscrossing the surface of the metal with a pattern of fine scratched lines, using a burin, an engraver’s cutting tool made of highly tempered steel. Afterward, he uses the burin to draw a rough outline of the design he wishes to execute.
Having completed this initial task, the craftsman places the metal plate on top of an adjustable wooden base covered with a resinous substance called Greek tar. This supports and cushions the plate for the process that follows.
Now the inlaying process begins. Holding the gold thread with one hand, the artisan softly hammers it onto the metal plate using a punch, until the whole design is completed. The plate may now be covered with attractive arabesque markings, geometric patterns, birds, flowers, or even a panoramic view of the old city of Toledo. Some craftsmen combine several of these motifs in one overall design.
The next stage is the fixing process, which requires a broader punch. With precise beats of his punch, the artisan finishes encrusting the gold thread onto the etched steel surface.
The intricate designs are highlighted by the next step, called bluing. The plate is immersed in a bath of caustic soda and potassium nitrate at 1,500 degrees Fahrenheit [800°C]. This treatment oxidizes the metal base and gives it an intense black color. This underlying metal surface—now as dark as a black velvet cloth—accentuates the characteristic golden designs of damascene art.
As a final step, the craftsman chisels and burnishes the designs that decorate the plate. With the chiseling, the golden drawings come to life. All the tiny details, such as the feathers of a bird or the petals of a flower, are shaped. Then the artwork is burnished with a piece of agate, giving the gold thread a sparkling color that contrasts dramatically with the dense black background. At last, a glittering picture emerges!
The unique qualities of damascene artifacts are a credit to the many craftsmen who kept this ancient skill alive through the centuries. Thanks to them, we can find delight today in these beautiful patterns of gold and silver on steel.
[Picture on page 16]
Decorative sword letter opener
[Picture on page 17]
Toledo, Spain
[Picture on page 17]
Earrings
[Picture on page 17]
Pendant
[Picture on page 17]
Antique jewelry box
[Pictures on page 18]
Scoring
Inlaying
Fixing
Bluing
Chiseling
Burnishing
[Picture Credit Line on page 16]
All photos: Agustín Sancho
[Picture Credit Line on page 17]
Corners of page, pendant, and jewelry box: Agustín Sancho

