Are You Able to Auxiliary Pioneer?
1 Jesus encouraged his followers to give of themselves freely in the ministry, and he assured them that following this course would bring them happiness and many spiritual blessings. (Matt. 10:8b; Acts 20:35) Last April over 69,000 individuals experienced firsthand the joys of increased activity as auxiliary pioneers. Are you able to share in these blessings this year by enrolling as an auxiliary pioneer during either March or April or perhaps both months?​—Ps. 34:8.
2 Examining Your Circumstances: As you consider the experiences cited below, ask yourself: ‘Do I see myself in any of these examples? How could I make needed adjustments that would open the way for me to auxiliary pioneer?’
3 One sister was able to auxiliary pioneer even though she has five children and works secularly. How was she rewarded? Her husband and children gave her excellent support, and as a result of the sister’s good example, the husband was moved to become an unbaptized publisher the following month.
4 In one congregation all the elders and ministerial servants served as auxiliary pioneers during one month. Most of them had secular jobs, but they were intensely occupied with spiritual activities on weekends. The fine lead they provided in preaching and in organizing the field service benefited the entire congregation. Of the 77 publishers, 73 shared in some form of pioneer service during the month.
5 A 15-​year-​old schoolgirl used her two-​week spring vacation to share in the auxiliary pioneer service and says: “I can really see the difference, especially an improvement in conversation. I was able to hold many more conversations with people at the door.”
6 Those who have retired from secular employment often have excellent opportunities to pursue Kingdom interests. After the death of her husband, an 84-​year-​old sister wrote: “All my children had grown up and were married and had families. They did not neglect me, but their visits could not overcome the feelings of loss and loneliness. Then one of the elders in our congregation suggested that I try auxiliary pioneering. I hesitated but finally decided to try it. What a joy! I felt that Jehovah had permitted me to live to this age so that I could experience auxiliary pioneering. I have continued as an auxiliary pioneer every month since.”
7 A brother who sells real estate adjusted his schedule for showing homes so as to allow time for pioneer service. Others have similarly adjusted their employment to make room for such increased activity.
8 Make Your Plans Now: Why not make positive plans now to auxiliary pioneer in March and April? To be successful, careful planning is needed. This is evident from the experiences of those who were able to auxiliary pioneer even though they had family responsibilities, full-​time secular jobs, and other Scriptural obligations. Talk with others who have successfully pioneered to get the benefit of their experience. Also, approach Jehovah in prayer, asking for his help.​—Isa. 40:29-31; Jas. 1:5.
9 There is no question about it, many are the joys of those who arrange their affairs to serve as auxiliary pioneers. If you are not already in the full-​time service, could you be enjoying this privilege? If you make the effort to expand your privilege of sharing the good news with others, Jehovah will certainly pour out upon you a rich blessing.​—Mal. 3:10.

