Be Sure to Call Back
1 As ministers of the good news, we are commanded to make disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Making return visits is a vital part of our disciple-​making work. We appreciate that lives are involved, so we want to make every effort to cultivate the initial interest shown.
2 We should consider each individual with whom we have placed literature as worthy of a return visit. Placing literature, though, should not be the sole basis for making a return visit. Many are willing to discuss the Bible’s message but decline the literature. So if interest is detected, we should by all means call back and try to cultivate it.
3 Following Up Placements: Since literature placements far exceed the number of return visits, there is a great potential for improvement. A pioneer placed a book but noticed very little interest on the part of the householder. One afternoon after making all his other calls, the brother decided to call on this person. A Bible study was started.
4 One brother placed two magazines with a man but forgot about him, thinking he was not really interested. A few days later, the man wrote a letter to the local congregation to request baptism. A missionary sister was asked what she felt was the most outstanding factor in her having been able to help 74 persons to become publishers. She said: “We did a lot of magazine work, and I kept making return visits on people who accepted the magazines until I was able to start Bible studies with them.”
5 At times we may only be able to leave a tract with the householder on the initial visit. Often, tracts can be effectively used on return visits to demonstrate a Bible study. A circuit overseer, working with another publisher, left a tract with a woman. It was a very brief call, but he encouraged the sister to return. The sister made a return visit and immediately started a Bible study.
6 When Interest Is Shown: When the householder does not take literature on the first call, this does not always mean that he is not interested. Making a return visit on a young couple, a publisher found that they already had some of our literature and had studied previously. They readily agreed to resume their study. A special pioneer sensed latent interest in a woman who always refused to accept the magazines. The pioneer put the magazines aside, and the woman was willing to discuss a few paragraphs in one of the booklets. After a few more calls, she was having a Bible study twice a week.
7 Each one who dedicates himself to Jehovah should feel a responsibility to share in the disciple-​making work. As we regularly call back on all who show interest, we will reap fruitage that will bring rich blessings both to ourselves ‘and to those who listen to us.’​—1 Tim. 4:16.

