Prepare Your Presentation for February
1 During February, we are featuring any 192-​page book published in 1983 or earlier or the Worldwide Security book. Any of these fine publications can be used to present the good news in a variety of ways. No doubt you will find it practical to learn and use one or all of the following suggested presentations.
2 The Earth​—Man’s Lasting Home: If you want to start conversations with people who are concerned about the earth and its environment, try the theme “The Earth to Last Forever as Mankind’s Home.” This topic is flexible enough to capture the attention of family-​oriented people, nature lovers, and environmentalists. The scripture to use is Ecclesiastes 1:4. The theme and scripture are explained in the Worldwide Security book, pages 98-9, paragraphs 2 and 3.
3 After introducing yourself, you could say:
▪ “I am calling briefly to discuss a matter of deep concern to many of us. The earth is our home, and no doubt you too are concerned about the way it is being ruined. Scientists and environmentalists keep warning that if the pollution continues, the earth could become uninhabitable. Do you see any solution to the problem? [Pause for householder to comment if he desires.] Briefly, I would like to show you what the Bible says about the future of the earth at Ecclesiastes 1:4.” Read the text, and show comments in paragraphs 2 and 3 on pages 98-9 of the Worldwide Security book.
4 Wickedness to Be Removed: To appeal to people who are concerned about crime, violence, and war, you may want to converse with them on the theme “Wickedness to Be Removed So That Those Who Love God Can Enjoy Life and Peace.” Psalm 37:9-11 makes this point, and it is explained in the Worldwide Security book, pages 118-20, paragraphs 13-15.
5 Following a customary introduction, you could say:
▪ “Do you think a time will ever come when we will not have to contend with crime and violence? [Allow for householder’s response.] The Bible points to the lasting solution here at Psalm 37:9-11.” Read the text and turn to pages 118-20 in the Worldwide Security book to read selected portions of paragraphs 13-15.
6 The Resurrection Hope: Since at some time everyone has lost a loved one in death, it could be comforting to initiate conversations on the topic “Kingdom Rule to Restore Life to Dead Loved Ones Under Paradise Conditions.” You could use either John 5:28, 29 or Luke 23:43 and show the comments on the topic and scripture that are found in the Worldwide Security book, pages 166-7, paragraphs 12 and 13.
7 You could begin your conversation with the third introduction on page 14 of the “Reasoning” book and then say:
▪ “From time to time most of us think about loved ones we have lost in death. But do you feel that we might see them again? [Give householder opportunity to express himself.] Many people we talk to are surprised to learn what God’s Word has promised and that this prospect will be realized right here on earth. Note the Bible’s promise at . . . ” Use either John 5:28, 29 or Luke 23:43, and tie in the comments in paragraphs 12 and 13 on pages 166-7 of the Worldwide Security book or the illustrations on pages 164-5.
8 Prepare and use one or all of these presentations this month. It should not be difficult to locate appropriate quotations and illustrations in any of the publications you use. If little interest is shown, offer a tract that deals with a related subject.

