Showing Support for the Pioneers
1 God’s people are known for their zealous share in the ministry. Though not all have circumstances that allow them to pioneer, we should strive to develop the pioneer spirit, being whole-​souled in what we do. We rejoice with and encourage the many who are able to enter the pioneer service.
2 Becoming and remaining a pioneer is a big undertaking. Pioneers shoulder a large portion of the preaching and teaching work. This is not accomplished without much effort and sacrifice. How can others support and encourage these zealous full-​time servants?
3 What Can Be Done: Pioneers need the support of the elders. Much encouragement is provided when elders work with the pioneers. Many elders try to work with each pioneer in the congregation at least once a year. In this way the elders are able to give commendation for what the pioneers are doing and help them make further progress. Pioneers may need to readjust their schedule to be in service at a time when the elders are available. Also, elders will want to make sure that sufficient territory is available for the groups. Additional meetings for field service could be scheduled in the afternoons or evenings to accommodate the schedules of the pioneers. This would be especially true during those months when there are a number of auxiliary pioneers.​—Isa. 40:11.
4 Ministerial servants are in a fine position to assist pioneers by supporting them in the ministry and by diligently caring for congregation arrangements. Pioneer sisters appreciate having brothers take the lead in organizing the field service groups. Those handling the literature and magazines can make sure that there are sufficient supplies available. Taking care of such matters enables the pioneers to focus on their ministry.
5 Everyone Can Help: Publishers can help by making themselves available more often to work with the pioneers. Pioneers enjoy the company and support of the other publishers. Perhaps you can arrange to work with the pioneers once a week or twice a month. Material things can be shared with the pioneers, and this generosity is much appreciated by the pioneers.​—Phil. 4:14-19.
6 Families can do much to assist their members who are pioneering. Often, household chores can be rearranged to permit one or more family members to pioneer. One sister with three children works two days a week. Her sons help out by caring for the shopping and doing work around the home. The daughter helps with the cleaning and cooking. Since her graduation, she too has begun pioneering, alternating workdays with her mother. Such cooperation within the family enables more to pioneer and brings blessings to the family.
7 Diligent pioneers prove themselves to be a blessing to the congregation in many ways. Their zeal and example encourage many to do more in the service. Certainly, we should want to do what we can to support them. Such united efforts bring joy to all and result in praise to Jehovah.

