Starting the Conversation When You Return
1 To be effective in starting a conversation with someone who has shown interest on the initial call, try to build on what was established on that earlier occasion. The objective is to help the person appreciate the value of the thoughts and literature left with him previously.
2 Take time to prepare for making the return visit. Select interest-​arousing comments that are in the publication you are featuring. Exercise discernment in determining how much material to cover and how long to stay. In most cases a brief discussion of one or two points is best unless unusual interest is manifested. Consider the following themes:
3 What future conditions can we expect to be brought about on earth if it is to be man’s lasting home? This discussion is based on Isaiah 11:6-9 and Isa 65:25, as explained and illustrated in the Worldwide Security book on pages 172-5.
The conversation can be introduced by saying:
▪ “When I last visited, we discussed how God has purposed that the earth last forever. But I left a question for you to think about: What conditions must then prevail? I am happy to return and briefly share the Bible’s answer with you.”
4 What we must do to enjoy life under God’s Kingdom. This theme can be developed by using John 17:3 and Jeremiah 31:34, as explained in the Worldwide Security book on pages 119-20.
To begin, you could say:
▪ “I enjoyed my conversation with you on God’s promise to end wickedness. [Ask person to get his Worldwide Security book.] A question that should concern each of us is, What can we do to be on hand to benefit from this change? Note what Jesus said at John 17:3, as quoted in your book on page 120.”
5 What needs will be satisfied in the Paradise earth? You can use either Psalm 65:9-13 and Ps 72:16 or Isaiah 11:6-9 and Isa 65:25. Appropriate comments are made in the Worldwide Security book on pages 174-5.
Your opening words might be:
▪ “When I was here last [give day], we took note of God’s promise through his Son to resurrect dead loved ones into a Paradise earth. What are some of the blessings to be enjoyed then? Your book Scripturally points out what some of these will be.” Based on the references above, read one or two cited texts from the Bible and comments from the book, perhaps paragraphs 7-10.
6 Many people have shown interest in the Kingdom message we preach. In many cases, we discerned enough interest on their part to leave our literature. In other cases, we noted appreciation for our initial Scriptural conversation. Therefore, make return visits on all who have shown interest, and try to teach them the truth.​—Matt. 10:11; 28:19, 20; John 21:17; Rev. 22:17.

