





A Letter From the Governing Body




Dear Fellow Believers:
As worshippers of Jehovah, we love his Word, the Bible. We are convinced that it provides accurate history, reliable guidance for living, and heartwarming evidence of Jehovah’s love for the human family. (Psalm 119:105; Luke 1:3; 1 John 4:19) We deeply desire to help others learn the precious truths contained in God’s Word. To that end, we are very pleased to make available this book, Lessons You Can Learn From the Bible. Allow us to tell you a little about it.
For the most part, this book has been prepared with children in mind. However, it can also be used to help adults who desire to learn more about the Bible. And since the Bible is a book for everyone, no doubt all of us will benefit from reviewing its lessons, which can help us to be truly happy.
Using accounts from the Bible, this book tells the story of the human family from creation onward. Every effort has been made to present the Bible accounts in a clear and simple manner and, as far as possible, in the order in which they occurred.
This book, however, does more than merely relate Bible accounts. Both the text and the artwork have been prepared in a way that brings the Bible accounts to life and captures the feelings of those depicted.
This publication helps us to see how the Bible is a book about people​—those who obeyed Jehovah and those who did not. And it prompts us to draw lessons from their examples. (Romans 15:4; 1 Corinthians 10:6) The book is divided into 14 sections. At the beginning of each section is a summary of some of the lessons that we can learn.
If you are a parent, you might read a lesson with your child and discuss the related artwork. Then the two of you could read the Bible passages that the lesson is based on. Help your child to connect what he or she reads in the Bible with the lesson in the book. A similar approach may be effective when helping an adult to get an overview of the Bible’s message.
It is our hope that this publication will help all righthearted ones​—young and old—​to learn from God’s Word and to apply its lessons in their life. As a result, they too can worship him as members of his beloved family.



Your brothers,
Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

