





LESSON 40
David and Goliath




Jehovah told Samuel: ‘Go to the house of Jesse. One of his sons will be the next king of Israel.’ So Samuel went to Jesse’s house. When he saw the oldest son, he thought: ‘This young man must be the one.’ But Jehovah told Samuel that this was not the one. Jehovah said: ‘I see what is in a person’s heart, not just what he looks like on the outside.’





Jesse brought six more of his sons to Samuel. But Samuel said: ‘Jehovah has not chosen any of them. Do you have other sons?’ Jesse said: ‘I have one more, my youngest boy, David. He’s out taking care of my sheep.’ When David came in, Jehovah told Samuel: ‘He is the one!’ Samuel poured oil on David’s head, anointing him as the future king of Israel.





Some time later, the Israelites were at war with the Philistines, who had a giant warrior named Goliath fighting for them. Day after day, Goliath mocked the Israelites. He shouted: ‘Send me a man who will fight me. If he wins, we will be your slaves. But if I win, you will be our slaves.’
David came to the Israelite army camp with food for his brothers who were soldiers. He heard Goliath and said: ‘I will fight him!’ King Saul said: ‘But you are just a boy.’ David replied: ‘Jehovah will help me.’
Saul tried to let David use his armor, but David said: ‘I can’t fight in this armor.’ David took his sling and went to a stream. He chose five smooth stones and put them in a pouch. Then David ran toward Goliath. The giant shouted: ‘Come here, little boy. I will feed you to the birds of the sky and to the wild animals.’ David wasn’t afraid. He shouted back: ‘You come with a sword and a spear, but I come in the name of Jehovah. You are not fighting against us; you are fighting against God. Everyone here will see that Jehovah is more powerful than a sword or a spear. He will give all of you into our hand.’
David slipped a stone into his sling and swung it as hard as he could. With Jehovah’s help, the stone shot out and sank into Goliath’s forehead. The giant fell dead to the ground. Then the Philistines ran for their lives. Do you trust in Jehovah, as David did?



“With men it is impossible but not so with God, for all things are possible with God.”​—Mark 10:27

Questions: Who did Jehovah choose as the next king of Israel? How did David defeat Goliath?
1 Samuel 16:1-13; 17:1-54


