





LESSON 79
Jesus Performs Many Miracles




Jesus came to earth to declare the good news of God’s Kingdom. To show what Jesus will do as King, Jehovah gave him holy spirit to perform miracles. He could cure any sickness. Wherever he went, sick people came to him for help, and he cured them all. The blind could see, the deaf could hear, paralyzed people could walk, and those controlled by demons were set free. Even if they just touched the edge of his clothing, they would be healed. People followed Jesus wherever he went. Even when he wanted to be alone, Jesus never turned anyone away.
One time, people brought a paralyzed man to a house where Jesus was staying. But the house was so crowded that they could not get in. So they made a hole in the roof and lowered the man down to Jesus. Then Jesus told the man: ‘Get up and walk.’ When he did, the people were amazed.
Another time, as Jesus entered a village, ten men with leprosy stood at a distance and shouted: ‘Jesus, help us!’ In those days, lepers were not allowed to come near other people. Jesus told the men to go to the temple, as Jehovah’s Law said lepers must do after being cured. On their way there, they were healed. When one of the lepers realized that he had been cured, he came back to thank Jesus and praise God. Of the ten, only this one thanked Jesus.
A woman who had been sick for 12 years was desperate to be cured. She came up behind Jesus in a crowd and touched the edge of his outer garment. Immediately, she was healed. When that happened, Jesus asked: “Who touched me?” The woman was frightened, but she came forward and told him the truth. Jesus comforted her by saying: ‘Daughter, go in peace.’
An officer named Jairus begged Jesus: ‘Come to my house! My little daughter is very sick.’ But before Jesus could get to Jairus’ house, the girl died. When Jesus arrived, he saw that many people had come to mourn with the family. Jesus told them: ‘Don’t cry; she is only sleeping.’ Then he took the girl’s hand and said: “Child, get up!” She sat up immediately, and Jesus told her parents to give her something to eat. Just think how her parents must have felt!








“God anointed him with holy spirit and power, and he went through the land doing good and healing all those oppressed by the Devil, because God was with him.”​—Acts 10:38

Questions: Why was Jesus able to cure all kinds of sicknesses? What happened to Jairus’ daughter?
Matthew 9:18-26; 14:36; Mark 2:1-12; 5:21-43; 6:55, 56; Luke 6:19; 8:41-56; 17:11-19


