





LESSON 88
Jesus Is Arrested




Jesus and the apostles walked through the Kidron Valley to the Mount of Olives. It was after midnight, and the moon was full. When they arrived at the garden of Gethsemane, Jesus said to them: “Stay here and keep on the watch.” Then Jesus went a little way into the garden and fell on his knees. In great distress, he prayed to Jehovah: “Let your will take place.” Then Jehovah sent an angel to encourage Jesus. When Jesus went back to the apostles, he found three of them sleeping. He said: ‘Wake up! This is not the time to be sleeping! The hour has come for me to be given into the hands of my enemies.’





Soon Judas arrived, leading a large mob armed with swords and clubs. He knew where to find Jesus because they had often come to this garden. Judas had told the soldiers that he would identify Jesus for them. He went right up to Jesus and said: ‘Greetings, Teacher,’ and then he kissed him. Jesus said: ‘Judas, are you betraying me with a kiss?’
Jesus stepped forward and asked the mob: “Whom are you looking for?” They said: “Jesus the Nazarene.” Then he answered: “I am he,” and the men drew back and fell to the ground. Again Jesus asked the mob: “Whom are you looking for?” Again they said: “Jesus the Nazarene.” Jesus answered: ‘I told you that I am he. Let these men go.’
When Peter realized what was happening, he pulled out a sword and cut off the ear of Malchus, a slave of the high priest. But Jesus touched the man’s ear and healed him. Then he said to Peter: ‘Put your sword away. If you fight with a sword, you will die by a sword.’ The soldiers seized Jesus and tied his hands, and the apostles ran away. Then the mob took him to Annas, the chief priest. Annas interrogated Jesus and sent him to the house of High Priest Caiaphas. But what happened to the apostles?



“In the world you will have tribulation, but take courage! I have conquered the world.”​—John 16:33

Questions: What happened in the garden of Gethsemane? What can you learn from what Jesus did that night?
Matthew 26:36-57; Mark 14:32-50; Luke 22:39-54; John 18:1-14, 19-24


