From Our Readers
TV and Reading
I want to thank you for the article entitled “Don’t Let TV Crowd Out Reading.” (August 22, 1982) My wife and I used to watch a lot of television, but since we have stopped watching it so much we have had more time to study and to communicate as husband and wife should.
R. D., North Carolina
The British Monarchy
I was very interested in your article on the British Monarchy (August 22, 1982), in which you mention the cost of supporting it. This is more than offset by the revenue from tourists who like to see our ceremonials. I think that the disgruntled M.P. and others forget the amount of employment that is engendered by our Monarchy. They are our best invisible exports.
R. W., England
I have been interested in reading books about the history of the Kings and Queens of England. Therefore, I enjoyed tremendously the article “Disappearing Monarchies​—Will Britain’s Survive?” I was very impressed with the respectful way in which it was written. It would be wonderful if members of the Royal Family could also read it; it was just so well presented.
M. M., Canada
Selling the Tobacco Company
I have just finished reading the account by Edward George ‘I Quit Church, Smoking, Business’ in the August 22, 1982, issue. While I am impressed by his determination to do the right thing, I am puzzled over his decision to sell his business. He was aware of the bad effect tobacco had on others (and himself) and how smoking and selling tobacco products are counter to God’s wishes, and yet he sold the business for money to someone else who could continue to cause people harm by selling tobacco.
C. L., New Jersey
I have just read the article written by Edward George. Why did he not destroy his tobacco business instead of selling it? All he has done is move his sin to somebody else who may poison the people who smoke. Why was not that truth pointed out to him?
D. R., England
The article is a factual account of the problems faced by the writer as he began to grow in knowledge of Bible principles, and how he endeavored to solve them. Those teaching Edward George would not tell him what to do to solve his problems, but having shown him certain Bible principles would leave it up to him to work out matters according to the state of his conscience. Some persons might reason that since the business was legal there would be no harm in selling it to someone whose conscience would not be bothered by selling such products, even as there are plenty of people willing to purchase the products in good conscience. One might compare the situation to that referred to at Deuteronomy 14:21 where an Israelite was not to eat the flesh of an animal found dead, but he could sell it to a foreigner whose conscience was not under the same restrictions.​—ED.

