Your Future​—It Can Be Happy
FROM this brief discussion we have seen a few things that we can do to make our future a little more secure. But there are many things we just cannot do anything about. Some matters are out of the control of even the world’s rulers. They are certainly out of our personal control. We must look beyond mankind. How can we do that?
For thousands of years a book has existed that points to a superhuman solution for man’s problems. That book is the Bible, and it points us to our Creator as the One who can give us a secure future.
It may be that you do not believe in the Bible. Or perhaps you do accept it but do not feel that it is relevant to today’s problems. However, the fact is this: The Bible gives the most comprehensive and successful guide to living that has ever been recorded.
Consider once more those matters raised at the beginning of this discussion and see what the Bible says about them.
PERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS:
With regard to caring for aging parents, it says: “If anyone does not provide for those who are his own, and especially for those who are members of his household, he has disowned the faith and is worse than a person without faith.”​—1 Timothy 5:8.
The Bible also teaches responsible parenthood and responsibility in marriage. “Let marriage be honorable among all, and the marriage bed be without defilement,” exhorts one Bible writer. (Hebrews 13:4) In another Bible book the same writer says: “Be in subjection to one another in fear of Christ. Let wives be in subjection to their husbands . . . Husbands, continue loving your wives . . . Children, be obedient to your parents . . . Fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.”​—Ephesians 5:21, 22, 25; 6:1, 4.
You may feel that such counsel is excellent but idealistic. Really, though, it provides us high standards to aim for. And the truth is, millions of people today try hard to live according to such standards and their lives are happier because of it.
YOUR HEALTH:
Consider this advice: “Quit mixing in company with anyone . . . that is a fornicator or a greedy person . . . or a drunkard.” (1 Corinthians 5:11) Or this: “Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit.” (2 Corinthians 7:1) Any who obey this advice avoid the venereal diseases and many of those other sicknesses that were mentioned previously.
For the sicknesses that we cannot avoid, the Bible mentions another remedy that we will refer to later.
FINANCIAL SECURITY:
There is also abundant advice to help us during these difficult economic times. Take just two examples of the Bible’s counsel: “If anyone does not want to work, neither let him eat.” Also: “Whatever you are doing [including secular work], work at it whole-souled as to Jehovah, and not to men.” (2 Thessalonians 3:10; Colossians 3:23) This advice helps us to make the most of whatever economic situation we find ourselves in.
In addition to this, Jesus once made a remarkable promise. Speaking of the problem of getting enough food and clothing, he said: “Keep on, then, seeking first the kingdom and [God’s] righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.” (Matthew 6:33) This is God’s promise to care for his servants. Does God keep his promise? Millions testify that he does.
PERSONAL SECURITY:
The Bible counsels us about how to conduct ourselves wisely in these dangerous times. But it is undeniable that most problems having to do with security, whether we are speaking of crime or we are speaking of the threat of war, should be solved more by governments than by individuals. In this regard the Bible also proposes a solution. It frankly says that man is unable to govern himself without help: “It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” (Jeremiah 10:23) And it encourages us to look to God’s Kingdom for successful government.
Another Kind of Government
As a matter of fact, people have been praying for a long time for God to take over the rulership of the earth. When they utter the familiar Lord’s Prayer, they say: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matthew 6:9, 10) What is that, if not a prayer for God instead of man to rule the earth? The Bible even gives us a vision of the fulfillment of that prayer: “The kingdom of the world did become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will rule as king forever and ever.”​—Revelation 11:15.
Under that Kingdom many things that are only too familiar today will disappear: “Evildoers themselves will be cut off, but those hoping in Jehovah are the ones that will possess the earth.” (Psalm 37:9) “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.” (Psalm 72:16) “He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.” (Psalm 46:9) No more warfare, crime or hunger under this rulership!
How about sickness and death? Listen to this promise: “[God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” (Revelation 21:4) This is the future as promised by the Bible. You may feel that it is just a dream. But consider: Since human rulers cannot solve the dangerous problems of this century, what future is there for mankind? If God’s Kingdom is not a reliable hope, what is the alternative?
In apostolic times Christians pointed everyone to God’s Kingdom as the only hope for a secure future, and today Jehovah’s Witnesses preach the same message to people of this generation. They try to apply in their day-to-day life the principles of the Bible, and they find that these work. When they face difficult problems they look to God for help and he gives it. They are familiar with many events happening today that, in the light of Bible prophecies, prove that God’s Kingdom is a reality. They view themselves as subjects of that Kingdom. And they know that it will do all the things that God says it will.
If the scriptures we have quoted describe the future as you would like to see it, why not talk to Jehovah’s Witnesses about it? Learn of the truly happy future that is offered to all men of goodwill. Find out how to be among those referred to in the Bible when it says: “Watch the blameless one and keep the upright one in sight, for the future of that man will be peaceful.”​—Psalm 37:37.

