Missionaries Who Will Fulfill Christ’s Commission
SHORTLY before ascending to the heavens, Jesus gave a commission to his followers. He said: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them . . . , teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.”​—Matthew 28:19, 20.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are keenly aware of that commission. Hence, in 1943, they opened the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead so as to train missionaries to spearhead the disciple-making work around the world. This school has played a pivotal role in the fulfillment of Jesus’ words in our days.
Gilead School is located in the United States of America, and its courses are taught in English. Witnesses from other language backgrounds have had to learn English so as to attend the school and become missionaries, and they have been happy to do so. Nevertheless, in September 1981, German-speaking Christians were delighted to hear of the opening of a Gilead Extension School in Wiesbaden, Germany, which would teach the Gilead course in the German language.
Two classes have now graduated from this Extension School. Has it been successful? Yes, indeed, if we are to judge by the happiness and enthusiasm reported from the graduation exercises of the second class, which were held on April 25, 1982.
Enthusiastic New Missionaries
The twenty-three students of this second German class came from Luxembourg, Switzerland, the Netherlands and Germany. Their assignments are taking them to Brazil, Ecuador, Colombia, Paraguay, Suriname and Zaire. In a letter they expressed their appreciation for this extension school. “It allowed us to concentrate completely on the spiritual food presented,” they said, “rather than having to struggle with the problems of language.”
All the 1,140 in attendance, as well as the students themselves, were aware that Jesus’ great commission to make disciples still applies. And now the students wanted to play a fuller part in this. One married couple said: “We accept our assignment to Brazil with grateful hearts and hope to put into operation all that we have learned here.”
Before departing for their assignments the students heard some fine last-minute advice from speakers with long experience in the Christian ministry. One of these was Werner Rudtke who gave comments based on Paul’s words to the Colossians: “Continue putting up with one another.” (Colossians 3:13) Egon Peter, a student at Gilead School in 1952, mentioned the tests they had taken during the course and reminded them of the important test to which God himself was subjecting them.​—Psalm 7:9.
One of their instructors, Dietrich Forster, warned them that they might meet up with opposition in their foreign assignments. However, they should never stoop to the level of the opposers, but always “keep conquering the evil with the good.” (Romans 12:9-21) Lothar Kaemner, another instructor and one-time missionary in Venezuela, reminded the students not to lose sight of their mission. “No man serving as a soldier involves himself in the commercial businesses of life,” said the apostle Paul. (2 Timothy 2:4) Christian missionaries should have the same dedication.
Some of Christendom’s representatives have given the term “missionary” a bad name because of their political meddling or other wrong conduct. Others, busy working in schools and hospitals, are undoubtedly providing services. But they are not fulfilling Christ’s commission. Dedicated Christians are grateful that the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead trains and sends out missionaries exclusively to make disciples and teach the Bible. And the graduates of the second Gilead Extension School in Germany are glad to have enjoyed the provisions of that historic school in their own language. Now they will be real Christian missionaries.

