Do You Remember?
Have you enjoyed reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will no doubt find it interesting to recall the following:
▫ What convincing proof was given by the various operations of the holy spirit in the first century?
These operations provided visible evidence that God was no longer using the 1,500-year-old congregation of Israel as his special people, but his approval now rested with the new Christian congregation, established by his only-begotten Son. (Compare Hebrews 2:2-4.)​—8/15, page 5.
▫ What accounts for the phenomenal growth experienced by Jehovah’s Witnesses?
Primarily, this is due to God’s blessing. It is God’s work. What Jehovah’s Witnesses teach in their evangelizing work is based on the Bible. Another key to their success is their full recognition of Christ Jesus as the appointed Head of the Christian congregation.​—9/1, page 19.
▫ Why did Jehovah show David mercy in regard to his great sin with Bath-sheba?
This was principally because of the Kingdom covenant that God had made with David, but it was also due to David’s own mercifulness and his genuine repentance. (1 Samuel 24:4-7; 2 Samuel 7:12; 12:13; Psalm 51:1, 2, 17)​—9/15, pages 10, 11.
▫ What three types of evidence do the Christian Greek Scriptures give in support of Jesus’ Messiahship?
Jesus’ lineage is the first line of evidence. (Matthew 1:1-16; Luke 3:23-38) Another evidence is fulfilled prophecy. There are literally scores of prophecies, such as that found at Daniel 9:25, identifying Jesus as the Messiah. The third line of evidence is God’s own testimony; he provided this on three occasions with his own voice. (Matthew 17:5; Luke 3:21, 22; John 12:28)​—10/1, pages 10, 12.
▫ What did Jesus mean when he said, as recorded at Matthew 24:37: “Just as the days of Noah were, so the presence of the Son of man will be”?
Noah was building the ark and was warning the wicked for a period of decades before the Flood arrived and wiped out the corrupt world system. Likewise, Christ’s invisible presence lasts over a period of some decades, during which a global witness is given, before it too culminates in a great destruction.​—10/1, page 16.
▫ What are some of the essentials for a good family Bible study?
Time has to be bought out for the study. We should not allow it to be crowded out by TV or other diversions. The particular needs of the family must be considered. Use viewpoint questions to make sure the children understand what they are learning. (Matthew 17:25) Keep the atmosphere relaxed. Be enthusiastic, and get everyone involved in the study.​—10/15, page 17.
▫ How concerned should Christians be that blood components may have been added to food products?
Christians should guard against becoming disturbed by mere possibility or rumor, and reasonableness is needed even as to checking labels or making inquiry of butchers. However, if it is known that blood is widely used locally​—whether in food or in medical treatment—​Christians should be careful to obey God’s command to abstain from blood. (Acts 15:28, 29)​—10/15, pages 30-1.
▫ How does the book of Proverbs highlight the spiritual depth of the teaching methods used in Israel?
The book of Proverbs shows that its purpose was to teach “inexperienced ones” such elevated things as wisdom, discipline, understanding, insight, judgment, shrewdness, knowledge, and thinking ability​—all in “the fear of Jehovah.” (Proverbs 1:1-7; 2:1-14)​—11/1, page 12.
▫ What balanced view of education should young people take today?
Christians should regard education as a means to an end. Their purpose in these last days is to serve Jehovah as much and as effectively as possible in the full-time ministry if they can.​—11/1, page 18.
▫ Why did Jehovah require the nation of Israel to pay tithes?
First, so that they could show in a tangible way their appreciation for Jehovah’s goodness. Second, so that they could contribute to the support of the Levites, who could then concentrate on their obligations, including the teaching of the Law. (See 2 Chronicles 17:7-9.)​—12/1, page 9.
▫ What is the tithe that Christians are invited to bring? (Malachi 3:10)
The tithe represents the portion of what is ours that we bring to Jehovah or use in his service. This is a token of our love for him and of our realization that we belong to him.​—12/1, page 15.

