How Can the Gospel Benefit You?
THE Bible is highly regarded for its literary value​—even by some atheists. Really, though, few read it in order to apply what it says. Moreover, since the good news it contains dates from nearly two thousand years ago, many people seem to believe that it should be modernized, brought up-to-date. Is the Gospel archaic or obsolete? Not at all.
There are men and women, young and old, numbering into the millions, who know that the Bible is an invaluable source of help. It is as the preface of Today’s English Version reads: “The Bible is not simply great literature to be admired and revered; it is Good News for all people everywhere​—a message both to be understood and to be applied in daily life.”
What does the Gospel mean to you? Do you use it as a guide in your daily life? Consider how the good news benefited some who listened to it in the first century and how some have benefited in our time.
People Helped by the Gospel
In Jesus’ day individuals such as hardworking fishermen and housewives were attracted by the good news and learned the truth about God’s purpose for man. The good news radically changed their lives and often brought them profound relief. For example, Mary Magdalene was cured of demon possession. Zacchaeus, formerly a chief tax collector, abandoned his greedy way of life. (Luke 8:2; 19:1-10) The blind and the lepers were helped when they came to Jesus, the one preaching the good news. (Luke 17:11-19; John 9:1-7) Jesus could rightly say: “The blind are seeing again, and the lame are walking about, the lepers are being cleansed and the deaf are hearing, and the dead are being raised up, and the poor are having the good news declared to them.”​—Matthew 11:5.
More important than their healing, though, was the way the good news changed many of those disadvantaged individuals as persons. Honesthearted ones were filled with hope for the future. They put their trust in God’s Kingdom​—something better than any social gospel. (Matthew 4:23) Their hope was not frustrated by Jesus’ death. Describing matters even after that event, Acts 5:42 says of his disciples: “Every day in the temple and from house to house they continued without letup teaching and declaring the good news about the Christ, Jesus.” In the first century, people in many lands received spiritual help because they responded to such preaching.
The Kingdom was the best of news back then. Is the Kingdom message still good news?
What Does the Good News Mean Today?
If you long for a peaceful, secure world, then the news of the Kingdom surely is good. In fact, in a world with hundreds of millions of undernourished and starving people, with frightful diseases threatening everyone, with an alarming increase in crime, and with spreading political instability, it is the only real and lasting good news. It represents the only hope of true improvement.
That is why Jesus prophesied concerning our day: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.” (Matthew 24:14) These words are being fulfilled in a remarkable way as Jehovah’s Witnesses preach the good news in more than 200 lands. A Catholic publication, Nova Evangelização 2000, commends the Witnesses for this, saying: “Where do we find Jehovah’s Witnesses? On the doorsteps of the homes. And to be a Witness of Jehovah, besides belonging to Jehovah, one has to be a witness. Therefore, we find them working, announcing, presenting, what they have experienced.”
However, no one benefits automatically from the good news. It will help only those who listen and obey. In order to demonstrate this point, Jesus gave the parable about a man going out to sow seed. The different kinds of soil that the seed fell on illustrated the different kinds of heart condition that hearers of the good news demonstrate. Jesus said: “Where anyone hears the word of the kingdom but does not get the sense of it, the wicked one comes and snatches away what has been sown in his heart . . . As for the one sown upon the fine soil, this is the one hearing the word and getting the sense of it, who really does bear fruit and produces, this one a hundredfold, that one sixty, the other thirty.”​—Matthew 13:18-23.
As in the first century, most people today make little effort to understand the good news. They do not get the sense of it, and thus they lose out. Others show appreciation for the good news and learn how to bring their lives into harmony with God’s will. In this way they are blessed. To which group do you belong?
The Power of the Gospel Today
Experiences testify that understanding the good news helps those who “had no hope and were without God.” (Ephesians 2:12; 4:22-24) Roberto from Rio de Janeiro needed help. Since his youth, he had led a debauched way of life, being involved in drugs, immorality, and thievery. Eventually he ended up in prison. While there Roberto studied the Bible with a visiting Witness. He progressed so well spiritually that his prison term was greatly reduced.
After being released, Roberto met a young girl he had once mugged and threatened with a gun. She too was studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. What happened? The following is part of a letter relating the incident: “They met each other in the Kingdom Hall for the first time after the assault. The encounter was touching. Both shed tears of emotion and embraced as brother and sister. Now both the ex-thief and his victim praise Jehovah.”
Another individual, Isabel, also needed help, for she was known for her bad temper. She was deeply involved in spiritism and witchcraft and was tormented by demons. As she studied the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, she found that the good news really helped. After some time, she shook off the control of the demons and changed her personality​—finally learning to control her temper. Now she is a faithful Christian, known as a person who is kind in dealing with others.
Yes, the good news is not merely theory. It has real power to transform lives. (1 Corinthians 6:9-11) It does even more than that. It also points to future blessings.
Blessings Yet Ahead
According to God’s Word, the future holds marvelous prospects. We will see the fulfillment of Jesus’ prayer for God’s Kingdom to come and for His will to be done on earth as it is in heaven. (Matthew 6:10) Shortly, the present system of things with its depressing corruption and violence will be removed, and God’s heavenly government, his Kingdom, will rule over righthearted individuals who were willing to listen to and obey the good news.​—Daniel 2:44.
Radical improvements will follow as faithful humans are directed to transform the earth into a paradise where meek ones will live forever. (Psalm 37:11, 29) Surely, it is good news that crime, disease, famine, pollution, and wars will disappear forever! Can you envision yourself and your family living in that new world in peace and perfect health without fear of sickness or death?​—Revelation 21:4.
True, many consider such good news to be simplistic or imaginary. But they are wrong. The good news is based on the most solid evidence, and it has already changed millions of lives. Therefore, never be intimidated if others do not believe.
Imagine a prudent individual who buys land in a developing area, hoping to profit from his investment. Would anyone blame him for investing his money in this way? No. More likely, people would say he is acting wisely. Why not, then, be foresighted with regard to the Kingdom and invest, as it were, in the good news? Since accepting the good news means salvation, no other investment will bring better returns.​—Romans 1:16.
How can you invest in the good news? First, be willing to be taught by God. Then act in harmony with what you learn. Follow the basic requirements, as listed by the ancient Hebrew prophet: “What is Jehovah asking back from you but to exercise justice and to love kindness and to be modest in walking with your God?” (Micah 6:8) Learning to walk with God takes time and effort. Nevertheless, Jehovah’s Witnesses, who helped Roberto and Isabel, will be delighted to assist you in this regard​—as they have assisted millions of others over the years.
While awaiting the fulfillment of God’s promises, nurture your investment by living according to the good news, enjoying peace of mind and building a closer relationship with God. Your investment will be safe​—no economic depression or political upheaval will threaten it. And finally, it will bring you a wonderful return. What is that return? The apostle John wrote: “The world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.”​—1 John 2:17.
[Picture on page 7]
Seeds of the good news fall on different kinds of soil
[Credit Line]
Garo Nalbandian

