Predicting the Future of the World Economy
THE instability of economic markets and a lack of confidence in analysts who failed to predict the 1987 stock market crash have made some businessmen turn to astrology to predict their financial future, claims the London magazine Accountancy Age. The magazine notes that “financial astrologers are gaining an impressive list of prestigious clientele for their detailed market predictions.”
One consultant compares the cycles he detects in 30 years of daily financial data with the movement of the planets. On this basis he offers his predictions. Although many clients were reluctant to heed his advice before 1987, he now finds even hardheaded financiers prepared to listen.
Another financial astrologer draws charts based on dates of birth to assess a person’s character and also to seek out “cues for the timing of likely business developments.” Yet another believes that fluctuations of the silver market follow a lunar cycle. But when compared with regular financial analysts, this astrologer finds that his clients give him “very little scope for getting it wrong.”
There is, however, one financial forecast that is sure to come true, and it has nothing to do with astrology. This forecast is registered in the Bible and inspired by Jehovah, the God who gives himself absolutely no “scope for getting it wrong.” He is the God “who cannot lie.” (Titus 1:2) He had his prophet Ezekiel declare: “Into the streets they will throw their very silver, and an abhorrent thing their own gold will become. Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to deliver them.”​—Ezekiel 7:19.
When will this be? During the coming “great tribulation” foretold by Jesus Christ, which Ezekiel termed “the day of Jehovah’s fury.” (Matthew 24:21; Ezekiel 7:19) Financial prosperity will not secure survival, despite what astrologers may predict. It is only trust in Jehovah God, the Great Deliverer, that can guarantee security during this worldwide upheaval in which all corruption will be removed​—political, religious, and commercial.​—Proverbs 3:5, 6; Zephaniah 2:3; 2 Peter 2:9.

