Reaching “All Sorts of Men” in Belgium
THE apostle Paul reminded his fellow anointed Christians of God’s will that “all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” For this they were to pray that they be granted “a calm and quiet life” so that they might proclaim the Kingdom good news to all who had a hearing ear.​—1 Timothy 2:1-4.
Today, reaching “all sorts of men” with the good news takes on special meaning for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Belgium. Since the end of World War II, this small country, which would easily fit into Lake Tanganyika or half of Lake Michigan, has undergone drastic changes in its ethnic and cultural makeup. In addition to its three traditional communities​—Flemish (Dutch), French, and German—​there is now in Belgium a diversity of linguistic and cultural groups. There are Arabic, Turkish, Indian, Chinese, Filipino, African, and American populations, to name just a few. It is estimated that 1 out of every 10 people in Belgium is of foreign extraction.
Thus, the Witnesses in Belgium, like their fellow Christians worldwide, are faced with the challenge of reaching “all sorts of men” with the good news. What is it like preaching among such a variety of nationalities? How does one approach individuals who have a totally different cultural and religious background? And what is their response to the Bible message?
Initiative Brings Results
Talking to “all sorts of men” about the Kingdom good news is a happy and exciting experience. On the busy streets, in the market places, on public transportation, from house to house, people from all continents are to be found. With a little initiative, the Kingdom publisher can easily strike up a conversation, and often this leads to rewarding results.
At a bus stop, a Witness initiated a conversation with an African lady simply with a warm smile. The lady soon expressed her joy at hearing about God’s Kingdom, and she wanted to know more about the Bible. She accepted the Watchtower and Awake! magazines and gave her address to the Witness. When she said that she would visit her soon, the lady objected. “No! No! Let’s make a definite appointment so that I will be at home when you come.”
Three days later, when the Witness was to make the call, she discovered that she had lost the lady’s address. But remembering the street name, she went and checked at every house to see if she could find an African name. She came to the end of the street without finding what she was looking for. What a great disappointment! As she was getting ready to leave, suddenly, as if appearing from nowhere, standing in front of her was the very lady she was looking for, and it was exactly the time they had agreed upon for the call! A home Bible study was started.
What about the different customs, beliefs, and traditions? For example, what about Hindu beliefs? Well, one pioneer recalled what she had read in the book Reasoning From the Scriptures. It says: “Instead of trying to deal with the complexities of Hindu philosophy, present the satisfying truths found in the Holy Bible. . . . The clear truths in his Word will reach the hearts of those who hunger and thirst for righteousness.”
That was exactly what the pioneer did when she met Kashi, a woman from India who accepted a Bible study. Kashi made steady progress, and soon she was talking to all her friends about what she was learning. One day the pioneer met an ambassador’s wife, who asked: “Are you the one who teaches Kashi the Bible?” How surprised the pioneer was when the lady said: “What a teacher she is! She has been able to convince me on many points. Imagine, her, a Hindu, teaching me, a Catholic, the Bible!”
When you meet the Filipinos, you immediately realize that most of them love the Bible. They are warmhearted and hospitable, and it is very easy to start a conversation with them. One Filipino lady readily accepted two magazines, but being a Catholic, she threw them away. Some weeks later she again accepted two magazines, which she left in her handbag. One night she felt like reading. After searching around for something interesting, she came upon the magazines. Hesitantly, she started reading, and her interest grew. Shortly thereafter, a Witness called at her home, and the lady asked many questions. This was the first time she had ever compared her Catholic beliefs with what the Bible says. The logical, Scriptural presentation convinced her that she had finally found the truth.
“Send Out Your Bread”
Many of the foreign residents are in Belgium for business reasons or to work at one of the 150 accredited embassies or the European Community Commission. Most of them stay only a few years. Witnessing to and studying the Bible with them may seem fruitless at first. But the Bible reminds us: “Send out your bread upon the surface of the waters, for in the course of many days you will find it again.” (Ecclesiastes 11:1) Often the results are surprisingly rewarding.
This was the case with an American woman who regularly received the magazines from a Witness. In time the Witness pointed out the benefit of studying the Bible regularly, and she offered to study with her. The woman accepted the offer and made rapid progress. Soon she saw the difference between true religion and false. She therefore rid her house of all religious images. Then the time came for her to return to the United States. Did that mean the end of her spiritual progress? Imagine the joy and surprise of the Witness when she received a phone call from a Witness in the United States telling her that the lady had continued her study, had dedicated her life to Jehovah God, and had been baptized! In fact, she was already serving as an auxiliary pioneer minister.
The same was true of Kashi, the Indian woman, and of the Filipino lady mentioned earlier. When Kashi returned to India, she and her husband resumed their Bible study. Eventually both of them dedicated themselves to Jehovah and shared in the preaching work. Since they lived in an area where there were no other Witnesses, they offered their home for a Congregation Book Study. Kashi served as an auxiliary pioneer to the extent her health permitted, and she has been conducting six home Bible studies, involving a total of 31 people. Similarly, in time the Filipino woman moved to the United States, progressed to dedication and baptism, and became a regular pioneer. Such happy results are among many that the Kingdom publishers in Belgium enjoy as they continue to preach to the people in their territory.
The Challenge of Languages
In order to accomplish the task of preaching to “all sorts of men,” the branch office has to have on hand Bible literature in over a hundred languages. There are now Belgian congregations in ten languages. Of the 341 congregations, 61 are in foreign languages, and of the 26,000 Kingdom publishers, 5,000 are of foreign nationality. One congregation includes men and women from 25 different countries. Imagine the color and variety at their meetings! Yet the love and unity among the brothers is a powerful testimony to true Christian discipleship.​—John 13:34, 35.
Since there are so many residents in Belgium needing to hear the good news in foreign tongues, some publishers have accepted the challenge of learning difficult languages, such as Turkish, Arabic, and Chinese. Their efforts have been richly rewarded.
Those who work among the Arabic population find that they can often kindle interest in the Bible by highlighting its practical value. One Kingdom publisher had an interesting discussion with an Arabic professor, then for three years thereafter was not able to find the professor again. Not being easily discouraged, the publisher decided to leave a note with some Bible questions for the professor. This so intrigued him that he was willing to make an objective examination of the Bible. He was so amazed by what he found that he and his wife, both Muslims, set aside certain evenings to read the Bible together.
Those trying to help the large Chinese population in the major cities have another obstacle to overcome in addition to the language barrier. Most of the Chinese do not believe in God as the Creator or in the Bible as God’s Word. Yet, they are curious and want to know what it is all about. They are also avid readers. It is not unusual for them to finish reading whatever Bible literature is left with them, or even much of the Bible, in just a few days. If their heart is right, they are moved by the power of God’s Word.
One Chinese lady found it very difficult to accept the idea of a Creator. But during the second study, tears came to her eyes when she said: “Now I do believe in Jehovah God, for if the Bible was written over a period of 1,600 years by 40 different men and yet is in complete harmony with one theme, then it must be that Jehovah God was directing the writing. That’s so logical!”
Another Chinese lady was approached by a Witness on the tram. “Are you a Christian?” she asked the Witness. She then said that she was very disappointed to see so much contradiction among those who claim to be Christians. The Witness agreed with what she said but explained that the Bible does not contradict itself. Just then the lady had to get off. She gave the Witness her address, and when she visited her, the lady exclaimed: “If only I had known, I would have taken the tram one year earlier!” When asked what she meant, the lady explained: “That was the first time I went to the university by tram. Can you imagine? I wasted one year!” She was so happy to be able to study the Bible even for just a few months before returning to China.
Experiences such as these have taught the Belgian Witnesses a lesson. “In the morning sow your seed and until the evening do not let your hand rest,” the Bible says, “for you are not knowing where this will have success, either here or there, or whether both of them will alike be good.” (Ecclesiastes 11:6) The efforts put forth to overcome the barriers of language, custom, and tradition are well worth the results. The heartwarming responses prove, above all, that God is truly “not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.”​—Acts 10:34, 35.

