Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting August 14
Song 163
15 min: Local announcements. Discuss “New Special Assembly Day Program.” Announce the date of the next special assembly day if available. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the August 15 Watchtower and the August Awake! In one of the demonstrations, show how to handle the potential conversation stopper “I’m not interested in Jehovah’s Witnesses.”​—See Reasoning book, pp. 17-18.
15 min: “Special Issue of Awake! to Be Featured in September.”a When considering paragraph 4, have a brief demonstration showing a teenager offering the September issue of Awake! to a teacher.
15 min: School Friendships​—How Close Is Too Close? Talk and audience discussion based on pages 17-19 of the April 2006 Awake! Invite those in the audience who were raised in Christian households to comment on how their parents prepared them to face challenges and apply Bible principles at school. One or two comments may be arranged in advance.
Song 164 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 21
Song 62
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Discuss “New Circuit Assembly Program,” and announce the date of the next circuit assembly if known.
15 min: Benefiting From the Watchtower Study and the Public Meeting. Talk and audience discussion based on Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, page 59 to the subheading on page 64.
20 min: Plan Now to Auxiliary Pioneer! Talk and audience discussion. Encourage setting a goal to auxiliary pioneer at least one month during the new service year. (1 Cor. 9:26) Some may choose a month of special activity or a month that has a holiday or extra weekends. Ask the audience: “How have you overcome challenges in the past so as to auxiliary pioneer? What blessings result from auxiliary pioneering? If you have the desire but are unsure, why should you make it a matter of prayer? (Acts 4:29; 2 Cor. 4:7; Jas. 1:5) Why is it also good to discuss this with your family and others in the congregation, especially with those who have similar circumstances? (Prov. 15:22) When are you planning to auxiliary pioneer?”
Song 216 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 28
Song 17
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for August. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the September 1 Watchtower or the September Awake! while making a return visit on a magazine-route call.
15 min: You Can Be a Source of Encouragement. (Rom. 1:11, 12) Talk and audience discussion. Mention the number of regular pioneers in the congregation. Outline ways we can encourage them, such as by giving commendation, speaking positively of the pioneer ministry, working with them in service, sharing a meal, and assisting with travel expenses. Invite regular pioneers to comment on how they have been encouraged by others. If the congregation has no regular pioneers, discuss how we can encourage those who auxiliary pioneer.
20 min: Can You Start a Bible Study in September? Talk and demonstrations. During September we will make a special effort to start Bible studies on the initial call, using the Bible Teach book. This means that at the time we place the book, we will endeavor to discuss a few paragraphs with the householder. Using subjects that are appropriate for the local territory, have two demonstrations. In each demonstration, show how to make definite arrangements to return and continue the discussion.
Song 37 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 4
Song 90
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Show Personal Interest​—By Preaching Impartially.”b When discussing Romans 1:14, cited at the end of paragraph 2, include brief comments on Insight, Volume 1, page 255, the first paragraph under the subject “Barbarian.” After discussing paragraph 3, review the three steps outlined on page 2 of the booklet Good News for People of All Nations, and demonstrate how to use the booklet with people in the local territory who speak another language.
Song 225 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

