Show Personal Interest​—By Preaching Impartially
1 In a vision, the apostle John saw an angel flying in midheaven declaring everlasting good news to people of “every nation and tribe and tongue and people.” (Rev. 14:6) Do we follow the angel’s lead by preaching impartially? Without realizing it, we could have views that are biased or prejudiced. Our attitude toward people we meet can affect the way we present the good news to them. Therefore, we need to demonstrate genuine loving concern when preaching to people of a different background.
2 Consider Your Territory: Are there immigrants or refugees living in your territory? They could easily be overlooked. Take the initiative to search out these ones and try to get to know them better. What are their needs and concerns, their likes and dislikes, their fears and prejudices? Endeavor to adapt your presentation of the Kingdom message accordingly. (1 Cor. 9:19-23) Like the apostle Paul, we should feel an obligation to share the good news with everyone in our territory, including those who are from a foreign country, those who have a different culture, those who speak another language, and those who are very wealthy.​—Rom. 1:14, ftn.
3 How, though, can you witness to someone who speaks another language? Make good use of the booklet Good News for People of All Nations. You might also carry some tracts or brochures in the languages that are commonly spoken in your territory. (See the July 2003 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 4, pars. 2-3.) In addition, some publishers have put forth the effort to learn a greeting and a simple presentation in other languages. People are often impressed to hear someone trying to speak to them in their own language, even in a very limited way, and this may attract them to the good news.
4 Imitate Jehovah: By reaching out to people of different backgrounds, we imitate our impartial God, Jehovah, “whose will is that all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.”​—1 Tim. 2:3, 4.

