Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● How did Jesus Christ, as stated at Romans 8:3, ‘condemn sin in the flesh’?
By doing God’s will perfectly, Jesus Christ as a man proved that sin is not a necessary or an inherent thing for fleshly persons.​—P. 261.a
● To whom did the apostle Paul mainly refer when writing to the Philippians about persons who were “preaching the Christ through envy and rivalry”?​—Phil. 1:15.
They were mainly Jews who claimed to be Christians but who had fallen away from pure apostolic teaching. They were afraid of persecution and reproach. Lacking pure motive, they stirred up doubts, strife and divisions and tried to undermine the work of the apostle Paul.​—P. 296.
● How are Christians transformed into God’s image “from glory to glory”?​—2 Cor. 3:18.
By declaring God’s truth and conforming ever closer to his personality and ways, Christians make progress from glory to greater glory. Their words and actions bring increasing glory to the God whose image they seek to reflect.​—Pp. 327, 328.
● What strong assurance do we have that Jehovah God will always do what is just?
We have the dependable record of his dealings with Noah, Abraham and many others, giving us clear indication that he will never commit any unrighteousness. He will always act according to his unchanging standard of justice.​—Pp. 340-342.
● Why was God’s choosing of the Israelites as his people not an act of partiality?
The choice did not depend upon greatness or numbers but on God’s love for their devoted forefathers. (Deut. 4:37) No partial treatment resulted, as the Israelites had a more serious account to render before Jehovah God than did peoples who were without his laws. The Most High was also working matters out for the blessing of all mankind and permitting all to benefit from his bountiful provisions for life. Individuals of other nations were not prevented from turning to him and receiving his favorable attention.​—Pp. 355, 356.
● How can we avoid arousing feelings of improper jealousy in ourselves and others?
We should endeavor to cultivate greater love for our fellow humans and learn to appreciate their fine qualities and accomplishments. We should give thought to our words and actions so as not to arouse others’ jealousy.​—Pp. 388, 389.
● As shown at Hebrews 4:12, how was the ‘word of God alive’ in connection with the promise made to Israel?
The Israelites who were delivered from Egyptian bondage had the promise of entering into God’s rest, that is, enjoying during their lifetime in the Promised Land a rest from former slavery and oppression. That word of promise was not dead but alive, certain of fulfillment. Those who exercised faith in the promise did enter into a rest in the Promised Land.​—P. 439.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1976.

