Why You Can Trust Bible Prophecy
KING PYRRHUS of Epirus in northwestern Greece was engaged in a long-term conflict with the Roman Empire. Desperately desiring a clue regarding its outcome, he went to consult the oracle of Delphi. But the answer he received could be understood in either of the following two ways: (1) “I say that thou son of Æacus canst conquer the Romans. Thou shalt go, thou shalt return, never shalt thou perish in war.” (2) “I say that the Romans can conquer thee, son of Æacus. Thou shalt go, thou shalt never return, thou shalt perish in war.” He chose to understand the oracle in the former way and therefore waged war against Rome. Pyrrhus was utterly defeated.
Such cases made ancient oracles notorious for being vague and enigmatic. But what about Bible prophecy? Some critics maintain that the prophecies found in the Bible are no better than the oracles. These critics speculate that Biblical predictions were merely shrewd foretelling of future events by very clever and keenly perceptive individuals, usually of the priestly class. Supposedly, just by experience or through their special connections, these men foresaw the natural development of certain situations. By comparing the various characteristics of Bible prophecies with those of oracles, we will be better equipped to draw proper conclusions.
Points of Contrast
The trademark of oracles was their ambiguity. At Delphi, for example, the answers provided were uttered in unintelligible sounds. This made it necessary for priests to interpret them and create verses capable of opposite interpretations. A classic example of this is the answer given to Croesus, king of Lydia. When he consulted the oracle, he was told: “If Croesus crosses the Halys, he will destroy a mighty empire.” Actually, the “mighty empire” destroyed was his own! When Croesus crossed the river Halys to invade Cappadocia, he met defeat at the hands of Cyrus the Persian.
In sharp contrast with pagan oracles, Bible prophecies are noted for their accuracy and clarity. A case in point is the prophecy regarding the fall of Babylon, which is recorded in the Bible book of Isaiah. Some 200 years before this event took place, the prophet Isaiah predicted in a detailed and accurate way the overthrow of Babylon by Medo-Persia. The prophecy disclosed that the conqueror would bear the name Cyrus, and it revealed the very strategy of drying up a moatlike river defense and entering a fortified city through open gates. All of this was accurately fulfilled. (Isaiah 44:27–45:2) It was also correctly prophesied that Babylon would eventually be totally uninhabited.​—Isaiah 13:17-22.
Consider, too, the explicit nature of this warning declared by the prophet Jonah: “Only forty days more, and Nineveh will be overthrown.” (Jonah 3:4) There is no ambiguity here! The message was so dramatic and straightforward that the men of Nineveh immediately “began to put faith in God, and they proceeded to proclaim a fast and to put on sackcloth.” As a result of their repentance, Jehovah did not bring calamity upon the Ninevites at that time.​—Jonah 3:5-10.
Oracles were used as a means of political influence. Rulers and military leaders often cited the interpretation that they favored in order to promote their own personal interests and undertakings, thereby giving such a “divine cloak.” However, God’s prophetic messages were given without deference to personal considerations.
To illustrate: Jehovah’s prophet Nathan did not hold back from reproving erring King David. (2 Samuel 12:1-12) During the reign of Jeroboam II over the ten-tribe kingdom of Israel, the prophets Hosea and Amos delivered stern criticism to the rebellious king and his supporters because of their apostasy and God-dishonoring conduct. (Hosea 5:1-7; Amos 2:6-8) Especially caustic was Jehovah’s warning to the king by the mouth of the prophet Amos: “I will rise up against the house of Jeroboam with a sword.” (Amos 7:9) Jeroboam’s house was annihilated.​—1 Kings 15:25-30; 2 Chronicles 13:20.
Most of the time, oracles were given for a price. The one who paid more would receive the oracle he liked. Those consulting the oracles at Delphi paid dearly for worthless information, thereby filling the temple of Apollo and additional edifices with great treasures. In contrast, Bible prophecies and warnings were given without cost and with no partiality whatsoever. That was the case regardless of the position or wealth of the person to whom they were directed, for a true prophet could not be bribed. The prophet and judge Samuel could sincerely ask: “From whose hand have I accepted hush money that I should hide my eyes with it?”​—1 Samuel 12:3.
Since oracles were available only at specific places, an individual had to put forth considerable effort to travel there in order to receive them. For the average person, most of those places were extremely difficult to reach because they were situated in such locations as Dodona on Mount Tomarus in Epirus and Delphi in mountainous central Greece. Usually, only the rich and powerful were able to consult the gods at such oracles. Moreover, “the will of the gods” was revealed on only a few days during the year. In striking contrast, Jehovah God sent his prophetic messengers directly to the people in order to proclaim the prophecies that they needed to hear. During the Jews’ Babylonian exile, for instance, God had at least three prophets serving among his people​—Jeremiah in Jerusalem, Ezekiel with the exiles, and Daniel in the capital of the Babylonian Empire.​—Jeremiah 1:1, 2; Ezekiel 1:1; Daniel 2:48.
Oracles were generally given in private so that the one receiving them could exploit their interpretation to his own advantage. In contrast, Bible prophecies were often given in public so that all could hear the message and understand its implications. The prophet Jeremiah many times spoke publicly in Jerusalem, although he knew that his message was unpopular among the leaders and the inhabitants of the city.​—Jeremiah 7:1, 2.
Today, oracles are viewed as a part of ancient history. They have no practical value for people living in our critical times. No such oracles deal with our day or with our future. In notable contrast, Bible prophecies are part of “the word of God [which] is alive and exerts power.” (Hebrews 4:12) The already fulfilled prophecies of the Bible provide a pattern of Jehovah’s dealings with people and reveal vital features of his purposes and personality. Additionally, important Bible prophecies await fulfillment in the near future. Describing what lies ahead, the apostle Peter wrote: “There are new heavens [the heavenly Messianic Kingdom] and a new earth [a righteous human society] that we are awaiting according to [God’s] promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.”​—2 Peter 3:13.
This brief comparison of Bible prophecy and false religion’s oracles may well lead you to a conclusion similar to that expressed in the book entitled The Great Ideas: “So far as the foreknowledge of mortal men is concerned, the Hebrew prophets seem to be unique. Unlike pagan diviners or soothsayers, . . . they do not have to employ arts or devices for penetrating divine secrets. . . . For the most part, their prophetic speeches, unlike those of the oracles, seem to be unambiguous. At least the intention seems to be to reveal, not to conceal, God’s plan on such matters as He Himself wishes men to foresee the course of providence.”
Will You Trust Bible Prophecy?
You can trust Bible prophecy. In fact, you can build your life around Jehovah and the fulfillment of his prophetic word. Bible prophecy is not a dead record of already fulfilled predictions. Many prophecies found in the Scriptures are now in the course of fulfillment or await realization in the near future. Judging from the past, we can be fully confident that they too will be fulfilled. Since such prophecies focus on our times and involve our very future, we do well to take them seriously.
You can surely trust the Bible prophecy found at Isaiah 2:2, 3: “It must occur in the final part of the days that the mountain of the house of Jehovah will become firmly established above the top of the mountains . . . And many peoples will certainly go and say: ‘Come, you people, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, . . . and he will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths.’” Today, millions of people are indeed embracing Jehovah’s elevated worship and are learning to walk in his paths. Will you grasp the opportunity to learn more about God’s ways and take in accurate knowledge respecting him and his purposes so as to walk in his paths?​—John 17:3.
The fulfillment of another Bible prophecy requires urgent action on our part. Regarding the near future, the psalmist prophetically sang: “Evildoers themselves will be cut off . . . Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more.” (Psalm 37:9, 10) What do you think is needed in order to avoid the impending destruction of the wicked, including those who scoff at the Bible’s prophecies? The same psalm answers: “Those hoping in Jehovah are the ones that will possess the earth.” (Psalm 37:9) To hope in Jehovah means to put implicit trust in his promises and to conform our life to his standards.​—Proverbs 2:21, 22.
What will life be like when those hoping in Jehovah possess the earth? Again, Bible prophecies reveal that a glorious future is in store for obedient mankind. The prophet Isaiah wrote: “At that time the eyes of the blind ones will be opened, and the very ears of the deaf ones will be unstopped. At that time the lame one will climb up just as a stag does, and the tongue of the speechless one will cry out in gladness. For in the wilderness waters will have burst out, and torrents in the desert plain.” (Isaiah 35:5, 6) The apostle John penned these reassuring words: “He [Jehovah] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away. And the One seated on the throne said: . . . ‘Write, because these words are faithful and true.’”​—Revelation 21:4, 5.
Jehovah’s Witnesses know that the Bible is a book of reliable prophecy. And they fully agree with the apostle Peter’s exhortation: “We have the prophetic word made more sure; and you are doing well in paying attention to it as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until day dawns and a daystar rises, in your hearts.” (2 Peter 1:19) Our sincere hope is that you will be heartened by the splendid prospects that Bible prophecy holds out for the future!
[Box/​Pictures on page 6]
THE ORACLE OF DELPHI was the most celebrated in ancient Greece.
Intoxicating vapors brought the priestess into a state of ecstasy
[Pictures]
The priestess sat on a tripod and uttered her oracles
The sounds that she uttered were believed to contain revelations from the god Apollo
[Credit Lines]
Tripod: From the book Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities; Apollo: The Complete Encyclopedia of Illustration/​J. G. Heck
[Picture on page 7]
Predictions given at the oracle of Delphi were totally unreliable
[Credit Line]
Delphi, Greece
[Pictures on page 8]
You can have complete confidence in Bible prophecy regarding the new world

