
When Hatred Will Be Gone Forever!

Even if we root out hatred from our own heart, we cannot control the actions and attitudes of others. Innocent people continue to be victims of hatred. So, what is the permanent solution to the problem of hatred?
Only Jehovah God can fully and permanently break the cycle of hatred we see today. That is exactly what the Bible promises he will do.​—Proverbs 20:22.



GOD WILL ELIMINATE THE ROOT CAUSES OF HATRED

1. SATAN THE DEVIL. Satan, the rebellious angel, is ultimately behind the hatred we see today. God will destroy Satan and all those under his hateful influence.​—Psalm 37:38; Romans 16:20.

2. SATAN’S HATE-FILLED WORLD. God will eradicate all evil elements of this world, including corrupt politicians and religious leaders who stir up hatred. God will also eliminate the greedy commercial system along with its corruption and exploitation.​—2 Peter 3:13.

3. HUMAN IMPERFECTION. The Bible explains that all humans have inherited imperfection​—the tendency to think, feel, and do what is wrong. (Romans 5:12) Harboring and expressing hatred for others is one of those sinful tendencies. God will help humans to conquer all such imperfect inclinations so that all traces of hatred will be removed forever.​—Isaiah 54:13.





THE BIBLE PROMISES A WORLD WITHOUT HATRED

1. NO ONE WILL EXPERIENCE INJUSTICE. The world will be ruled by God’s Kingdom, a just and lasting government based in heaven. (Daniel 2:44) Prejudice and intolerance will not exist. God will correct all the injustices that people now face.​—Luke 18:7.

2. EVERYONE WILL EXPERIENCE PEACE. No one will suffer as a result of violence or war. (Psalm 46:9) The earth will be a safe place occupied only by peace-loving people.​—Psalm 72:7.

3. EVERYONE WILL LIVE FOREVER IN IDEAL CONDITIONS. All earth’s inhabitants will show genuine love of neighbor. (Matthew 22:39) No one will be distressed, not even by unpleasant thoughts or memories. (Isaiah 65:17) At that time, a hate-free human race “will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”​—Psalm 37:11.


Do you long to live in a world like that? Even now, many people are learning to let go of hatred by applying Bible principles. (Psalm 37:8) That is true of the millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world. Although they come from many different cultures and backgrounds, they enjoy a familylike bond of love and unity.​—Isaiah 2:2-4.





Jehovah’s Witnesses would be happy to share what they have learned about how to deal with injustice and discrimination. What you learn can enable you to replace progressively any trace of hatred with love. You can find out how to treat all people kindly​—even those who seem ungrateful or who show hatred. As a result, you will be happier now and your relationships with others will only get better. Above all, you will learn what you can do to live under God’s Kingdom when hatred will be gone forever.​—Psalm 37:29.



You can find out more by examining the free Online Bible Study Lessons or the brochure Enjoy Life Forever! on jw.org.


