Do You Remember?
Have you given careful thought to recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will find it interesting to recall the following:
▫ What is a principal difference between man and animals?
A major difference centers on the structure, capacity, and functions of the brain. In animals nearly all the cerebral functions have been programmed in what has come to be called instinctive wisdom. This is not the case with humans. God endowed humans with the faculty of free will. (Proverbs 30:24-28)​—4/15, page 5.
▫ What part did singing play in temple worship of the Israelites?
Music, especially singers, occupied an important place in worship, not necessarily to instill the weightier matters of the Law, but to provide the right spirit for worship. It helped the Israelites to worship Jehovah in a spirited way. (1 Chronicles 23:4, 5; 25:7)​—5/1, pages 10, 11.
▫ What kind of attention do children need from infancy?
Parents have to give almost constant attention to a newborn. Paul wrote: “From infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation.” (2 Timothy 3:15) So the parental attention Timothy received, even from infancy, was also of a spiritual kind.​—5/15, page 11.
▫ What are four lines of evidence that prove that the Bible contains God’s message for all mankind?
(1) Availability. The Bible is available to some 98 percent of the world’s population. (2) Historicity. The Bible contains historical facts, rather than unprovable legends. (3) Practicality. Its commands and principles outline a way of life that bring benefits to those who adhere to them. (4) Prophecy. It is a book that tells in detail what will occur in the future.​—6/1, pages 8, 9.
▫ What responsibility goes with knowing the right religion?
Once we have identified the right religion, we must build our lives around it. It is a way of life. (Psalm 119:105; Isaiah 2:3)​—6/1, page 13.
▫ Why is personal study of the Bible so essential?
All of God’s servants need to have their joy and strength renewed from day to day by finding new or deeper aspects of the truth of God’s Word. In this way they keep themselves spiritually stimulated.​—6/15, page 8.
▫ What is meant by the word “sin” as used in the Bible?
In their verb forms, the Hebrew and Greek words generally used in the Bible to denote “sin” mean “miss,” in the sense of missing or not reaching a goal, mark, or target. The first human pair fell short of the glory of God, missing the purpose of their being created in God’s image. In other words, they sinned. (Genesis 2:17; 3:6)​—6/15, page 12.
▫ Why is it very unwise to read apostate literature?
Some of the apostate literature presents falsehoods by means of “smooth talk” and “counterfeit words.” (Romans 16:17, 18; 2 Peter 2:3) All apostate writings simply criticize and tear down. Nothing is upbuilding.​—7/1, page 12.
▫ Was Greece the cradle of democracy?
In ancient Greece, democracy was practiced only in a few city-states, and even in these only males voted. This meant that four fifths of the population were left out. That was hardly popular sovereignty or democracy!​—7/1, page 16.
▫ What causes a Christian marriage to flourish?
When husband and wife respect God’s view of wedlock and endeavor to live by the principles of his Word. (Ephesians 5:21-33)​—7/15, page 10.
▫ How can your family study be enjoyable?
Try to keep all the children involved. Be positive and upbuilding, warmly commending your children for their participation. Do not simply cover material but try to reach the hearts of your children.​—7/15, page 18.
▫ What is implied by the expression: “Whenever it is that they are saying: ‘Peace and security!’” (1 Thessalonians 5:3)
Note that the Bible does not say that the nations will achieve “peace and security.” But they will at least be talking about it in a unique way, expressing an optimism and a conviction not hitherto felt. The chances of achieving peace and security will appear to be closer than ever before.​—8/1, page 6.
▫ Name three ways in which Jehovah demonstrates reasonableness.
Jehovah has demonstrated his being ready to forgive. (Psalm 86:5) He has been willing to alter a contemplated course of action as new circumstances have arisen. (See Jonah, chapter 3.) Also, Jehovah has shown himself to be reasonable in the exercise of authority. (1 Kings 22:19-22)​—8/1, pages 12-14.

