Opening Eyes to the Good News
“THE sky is not less blue because the blind man does not see it,” says a Danish proverb. But in our busy day-to-day lives, do we see that the sky is blue, as it were? Do we view the future with confidence? Do we really believe the good news that God’s Word, the Bible, presents?
In the preceding article, we considered aspects of literal blindness. Let us now examine a type of vision that is far more important. It involves our lasting happiness as well as the prospects for our loved ones.
Without doubt, we face “critical times hard to deal with.” (2 Timothy 3:1) What happens as people struggle to make a living, put up with health difficulties and family problems, and cope with social injustice and lack of love? Sadly, many find that their trust in fellowmen, religion, and government wanes. Sensing that there is no way out, some conclude that their problems will never be solved in a normal way. In the Brazilian newspaper Jornal da Tarde, Jacob Pinheiro Goldberg observes: “People, in the face of brutal reality, feel so annoyed by errors that they do not reason logically, and they rely on exasperating mysticism.” Yet, even when things go wrong, we want to use good sense, do we not?
Imagine for a moment that you need a home for your family, and money is no object. Perhaps you look around and visit various houses in different neighborhoods. Though real-estate salesmen try to accommodate your wishes, the home you have in mind remains elusive. Yet, since the contentment and well-being of your family are involved, you do not give up, do you? Now envision the happiness when at last you find the house of your dreams.
Just as you would spend time looking for a new home, why not examine the Bible to see a solution to your problems? Just as we have to weigh the facts when making decisions about a home, so we need to reason soundly on what we read in God’s Word. And even more beneficial than finding a home is our seeing and accepting the truth about Jehovah God and Jesus Christ. Jesus said: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”​—John 17:3.
But if the Bible’s message is so valuable, why do so many remain blinded to its good news? For one thing, and this may surprise many, “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.” (1 John 5:19) As a result, Satan the Devil “has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, that the illumination of the glorious good news about the Christ, who is the image of God, might not shine through.” (2 Corinthians 4:4) Although we see with our eyes, it is the brain that interprets the light entering the eye. Hence, being blind is also defined as being “unable or unwilling to discern or judge.” This calls to mind a popular saying: “None so blind as those who won’t see.”
A blind person cannot see what is in front of him, so he may be in danger of injury. The literal blindness of many cannot now be reversed, yet no one is obliged to remain spiritually blind.
Overcoming Spiritual Blindness
Just as poor sanitary conditions can weaken the eyesight, a degrading environment can contribute to moral blindness. Moreover, Jesus Christ warned against man-made doctrines and traditions. He made it clear that religious leaders back then were misleading their flock: “Blind guides is what they are. If, then, a blind man guides a blind man, both will fall into a pit.”​—Matthew 15:14.
Instead of being deceived by blind leaders, how happy are those who open their eyes to the good news about God’s Kingdom! Declared Jesus: “For this judgment I came into this world: that those not seeing might see.” (John 9:39) How, though, can spiritually blind ones come to see? Well, let us continue our review of literal blindness.
Various provisions are now available to the visually impaired. This was not always the case. No really serious attempts were made to aid the blind before Valentin Haüy established a special school for the blind in 1784. Later, Louis Braille invented the system that bears his name; he did so to help visually impaired ones to read.
What about the spiritually blind? In recent years serious efforts have been made to declare the good news even in the remotest parts of the earth. (Matthew 24:14) Jehovah’s Witnesses are pleased to bring hope to both the figuratively and the physically blind.
A Brazilian woman wrote: “I want to say that despite my physical deficiency, I can see​—spiritually. What a wonderful God! We are happy to know that ‘Jehovah will open his hand and satisfy the desire of every living thing.’” (Psalm 145:16) And Jorge, who is physically blind, recalls: “My life can very well be divided into two parts: before and after the Witnesses. . . . By means of them, I began to see the world with clarity and brightness. I enjoy an excellent rapport with everyone in the congregation.” Delightful as that is, the Bible gives us assurance that soon no one on earth will be blind​—literally or spiritually. How will that be? How will it prove true earth wide that “Jehovah is opening the eyes of the blind ones”?​—Psalm 146:8.
The Only Permanent Cure​—God’s Kingdom
Despite increased medical know-how, a host of diseases continue to cause blindness, pain, and death. What, then, is needed to eliminate malnutrition, poor sanitary conditions, and the distress that take away both vision and the joy of life? Jesus’ curing of the blind and others was a small-scale pattern for the future. Happily, his teaching and healing work foreshadowed blessings to be extended to earth under God’s Kingdom government.
Healing on a worldwide scale is near.a This divine healing program is beautifully illustrated by the apostle John: “He showed me a river of water of life, clear as crystal, flowing out from the throne of God and of the Lamb down the middle of its broad way. And on this side of the river and on that side there were trees of life producing twelve crops of fruit, yielding their fruits each month. And the leaves of the trees were for the curing of the nations.”​—Revelation 22:1, 2.
Expressions such as “water of life” and “trees of life” illustrate that after today’s wicked system has ended, curative provisions of God’s Kingdom will gradually lift mankind to perfection. In fact, the benefits of Jesus’ ransom sacrifice (including complete forgiveness of sins), together with knowledge of Jesus Christ and his Father, will bring about perfect health and everlasting life.​—John 3:16.
Happiness in God’s New World
Visualize, then, the earth without crime, pollution, or poverty. Envision your family living peacefully in the restored Paradise. (Isaiah 32:17, 18) What a delight it will be to observe the variety of color with perfect mind and senses!
“The natural condition for the human being is to live in a constantly changing environment​—of light, color, forms. There’s no such thing as a monotonous environment in nature,” says Faber Birren. “Color is one of the natural delights of this world. It is the rule of nature, not the exception, and much of the good life depends on it.”
How precious the gift of sight is! What joy it will be when the eyes once blind​—literally or spiritually—​will see!
Yes, in the coming restored Paradise, blindness and other disabilities will no longer cause unhappiness! No one will be misled anymore. Since genuine love will prevail, all will be enlightened spiritually. That, and much more, lies just ahead, but right now is the time to become approved by the One who will fulfill his prophetic promise: “At that time the eyes of the blind ones will be opened”!​—Isaiah 35:5.
[Footnotes]
Please examine the evidence presented in the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, chapter 18, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Picture on page 7]
At that time the eyes of the blind ones will be opened!

