“A Sexual Crisis” Among the Clergy
“A SEXUAL crisis is tearing at the central nervous system of the Catholic Church,” stated Jason Berry, a Louisiana author who received a Catholic Press Association award for his coverage of pedophilia in the National Catholic Reporter. Regarding perverted sexual acts against children by the clergy, Berry went on to say in The Washington Post:
“Since 1985, scores of pedophilia cases involving priests or brothers have been recorded throughout America and Canada. As a result, U.S. dioceses have borne steep losses in law suits, and insurance coverage for such actions has evaporated. These changes have arrived amid a number of reports that as many as 10 to 20 percent of U.S. priests may be homosexually active.”
The Providence Sunday Journal of Rhode Island states: “Bishops in 29 states . . . have faced claims of damages by victims of sex abuse by Catholic clergy, and the Church has paid at least $60 million so far in judgments and settlements.” In Louisiana a priest admitted to molesting 35 boys and was sentenced to 20 years in prison, although, the Journal says, it was clear that he “had assaulted at least 75 children over 10 years.” And a Rhode Island priest pleaded guilty to 26 counts of sex abuse involving young boys.
An investigation of Covenant House, a shelter for runaway youths in New York City, revealed that the priest in charge had engaged in sexual misconduct with a number of young men and boys. And the Roman Catholic archbishop of Atlanta resigned after it was acknowledged that he had carried on a two-year sexual relationship with an unmarried mother.
A conference of U.S. Catholic bishops received a report on the “catastrophe” of priest pedophile litigation. The 100-page report, states the Journal, “detailed a strategy for limiting the Church’s liability from civil lawsuits to $1 billion [$1,000 million] based on the 30 suits then pending.” The lawsuits are being brought by the Catholic parents of the children involved. And psychiatrists who treat the young victims of these crimes report long-term, often permanent, damage.
God’s Word speaks of such “disgraceful sexual appetites” by which males are “inflamed in their lust toward one another, males with males, working what is obscene,” and adds that the “righteous decree of God” is that “those practicing such things are deserving of death.”​—Romans 1:26, 27, 32; see also 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10.
Undoubtedly, much of the problem arises because of the unscriptural practice of celibacy, forbidding priests to marry. Yet, the Bible, God’s Word, states clearly that those in the Christian ministry may marry. As the Catholic Douay Version of the Bible expresses it: “It behoveth therefore a bishop to be . . . the husband of one wife.” (1 Timothy 3:2) And it also states that “forbidding to marry” is an evidence that “some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to spirits of error, and doctrines of devils.”​—1 Timothy 4:1-3.

