VOL. XXXVII. NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6045 



CONTENTS 

Death of Charles T. Russell . . . .338 

"The Earth Trembled"-And Fell . . .339 
Lightning Flashes From the Throne . 339 

One of the Master's Forceful and Beautiful 

Lessons 341 

Proper Consideration of the Lily . .341 
Rest and Peace in Perfect Trust . . 342 

"How Long, Oh Lord, How Long?" (Poem) . 342 



"Jesus Christ— the First and the Last" . 343 
What the Beloved Disciple Saw . . 344 
The Master's Comforting Message . . 344 
"In His Right Hand Seven Stars" . .345 

"Faithful Unto Death" 346 

The Lord's Second Coming .... 347 

Some Items of Interest 348 

Holiday Remembrancers 348 

Interesting Letters 350 

Whom the Lord Loves He Chastens . . 350 
British Conditions Grow Serious . .351 
Carefully Studied Vow— Then Accepted It .351 

R5988 : page 338 



DEATH OF CHARLES T. RUSSELL 



The sudden death of Pastor Charles Taze Russell, 
Editor of THE WATCH TOWER, has created a profound 
impression upon his many friends throughout 
the world. Hundreds of letters and telegrams received, 
further evidence the love and esteem in 
which he was held, and express unqualified desire to 
cooperate in continuing the great cause for which 
he stood so many years. 

Brother Russell left Brooklyn in the evening of 
October 16, to fill appointments in the West and 
Southwest, but was obliged to start homeward before 
his scheduled time, owing to ill health. 

It was on a Sante Fe train at Pampa, Tex., that 
he died. Brother Menta Sturgeon, who accompanied 
him on the trip as his Secretary, telegraphed 
the information to the headquarters of the WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY at Brooklyn, adding 
that "he died a hero." 

The body lay in state at Bethel Home Saturday, 
and at The Temple throughout the day Sunday. 

In the afternoon at the hour of 2, funeral service 
was held for the congregation, and in the evening 
a service was conducted for the public. 

At about midnight the body was taken to Allegheny, 
Pa., where in the Carnegie Hall, at 2 in the 
afternoon of Monday, service was held by the Pittsburgh 
congregation, of which he had been resident 
Pastor for many years. 

Interment took place in Rosemont United 
Cemeteries at Allegheny, in the Bethel Family plot, 
according to his request. 

We rejoice to know that instead of sleeping in 
death, as the saints of old, he is numbered among 
those whose "works follow with him." He has met 
the dear Lord in the air, whom he so loved as to 



lay down his life faithfully in His service. 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agenciesr-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



A MEMORIAL NUMBER 

Owing to the fact that this issue of THE WATCH TOWER 
was ready for press at the time of Brother Russell's death, 
the Society decided to insert a brief notice, with the announcement 
that the following issue, December 1, will be in the 
nature of a Memorial Number. 

Brother Russell's Will provides for the continuance of the 
publication of THE WATCH TOWER, for which he left ample 
manuscript to insure its publication for an indefinite period. 
The affairs of THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
will likewise be continued according to provision made by 
him before death. 

Anyone desiring extra copies of the Memorial Number 
will please advise us immediately. Extra copies at the usual 
price— 5c each. 



WATCH TOWER BIBLES 
Our present stock is nearly exhausted. The prices of 



these Bibles will be advanced on November 15, 1916. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF DECEMBER 

QUESTIONS FROM 
MANUAL ON SERIES THIRD 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY VIII.-"RESTORATION OF ISRAEL" 
Week of Dec. 3..Q. 8 to 14 Week of Dec. 17..Q. 22 to 28 
Week of Dec. 10..Q. 15 to 21 Week of Dec. 24..Q. 29 to 35 
Week of Dec. 3 1 ....Q. 36 to 42 



R5989 : page 339 

"THE EARTH TREMBLED"-AND FELL 

"His lightnings enlightened the world; 
the earth saw, and trembled."— Psalm 97:4. 

GOD'S holy Prophets of the Old Testament and 

of the New give us numerous pictures of 

our day and the events now taking place in 

the world. The Psalmist David, taking 

prophetically a standpoint of observation 

future from his day declared, "The Lord 

reigneth; let the earth rejoice; let the multitude 

of isles be glad thereof!" (Psalm 97:1.) 

As we have shown in SCRIPTURE 

STUDIES, Vol. III., Study 9, this began to be 

true when our Lord Jesus, having returned to earth to set 

up His Kingdom, took unto Himself His great power. Yet 

not until His Kingdom has been fully established in the 

earth will His glorious Reign be clearly recognized. 

That the Prophet David is referring especially to the 
present time, from 1878 down to the full inauguration of 
the Kingdom, is clear from his succeeding statement: 
"Clouds and darkness are round about Him; righteousness 
and judgment are the habitation of His Throne. A 
fire goeth before Him, and burnetii up His enemies round 
about." How true it is that the storm clouds are all about 
us in this Day of the Kingly presence of Jehovah's great 
Representative, the Executor of His great Purposes! 
Daily the darkness of gloom and perplexity deepens on 
every side for those not acquainted with Jehovah's purposes. 

"A FIRE GOETH BEFORE HIM" 

If we inquire. Why is this Day of His presence such 
a Time of Trouble and distress of nations? the answer 
comes. Because righteousness and judgment are the habitation 
of His Throne, and He is judging the nations and 
weighing them in the balance. Judgment is being laid to 



the line and righteousness to the plummet (Isaiah 28:17), 
to the intent that ere long the equitable principles of His 
Government may be established in all the earth. Not 
only will all unrighteousness be made manifest, but "a fire 
goeth before Him and burneth up His enemies." (Psalm 97:3.) 
All the wilful and persistent opposers of His 
righteous course shall be "cut off," "destroyed," "burned 
up," "devoured with the fire of His jealousy."— Zeph. 3:8. 

This work of judgment and the consequent Time of 
Trouble being a necessary preparation for the glorious 
Reign of Righteousness that shall immediately succeed it, 
and all being wisely directed by the High and Holy One, 
who is "too wise to err, too good to be unkind," the 
Prophet bids us discern in it an abundant cause for rejoicing 
and gladness. (See Psalm 96:9-13; 98:1-9.) Indeed, 
there is great cause for rejoicing, not only among 
the saints, but in the whole earth; and it is the privilege 
of the saints to tell the glad tidings to all who will hear. 

But whether men hear or whether they forbear, let us 
tell it out, and by and by when the great afflictions of 
this Judgment hour begin to seal the instruction upon the 
hearts of men, then the blessed testimony will be as healing 
balm. They will see that He who smote them in His 
wrath, and scourged them in His hot displeasure, is also 
merciful and gracious, and unwilling that they should 
perish, but desirous rather that they should turn unto 
Him, obey His counsels and live. 

LIGHTNING FLASHES FROM THE THRONE 

It is in the midst of the clouds and darkness of this 
Day of Trouble incident to the setting up of Messiah's 
Kingdom that the statement of the Prophet is verified: 
"His lightnings enlightened the world; the earth saw, and 
trembled." How apt is this figure! Truly like lightning 
flashes in the midst of the gloom and perplexity of this 
cloudy day, come to men the remarkable glimpses of the 
great principles of Truth and Righteousness in contrast 
with which the world's present disorder is so manifest! 
A flash of lightning from the obscured Throne discloses 
here one error, and there another, and another. 

Soon the whole world will be aroused. Already it is 
largely so. Every day adds to the intensity of the trouble, 
and the whole world trembles for fear, not knowing what 
the outcome will be, but dreading the worst. The editorials 
of some of our great newspapers read as if 
written from the standpoint of Present Truth, so remarkably 
do they foretell what they declare to be almost certain 
to follow this present terrible war. Revolution and 
black anarchy are freely prophesied, to precede a great 
reconstruction period. The great French Revolution is 
referred to in contrast, as an April shower compared to a 
destructive hurricane of the tropics. How truly are the 
Master's words concerning this time being fulfilled — 
"Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for apprehension 
of the things coming on the earth"!— Luke 21:26. 



It is remarkable that these lightning flashes are continually 
calling attention to the Word of God, to the 
Golden Rule, to the equal rights and privileges of human 
brotherhood, to the faultless character and loving and 
self-sacrificing disposition of Jesus Christ, to the Law of 
Love in contrast with the law of selfishness everywhere 
prevailing. It seems remarkable, too, how often in these 
days of war and stress worldly men are drawing attention 
to the prophecies of the Scriptures, and wondering 
whether present conditions, and the troubles which all intelligent 
people see just ahead, are not fulfilments of these 
Bible prophecies. All this is leading men to reason of 
righteousness and of coming judgments (Acts 24:25), 
when they hope and believe that in some way present 

R5989 : page 340 

wrongs will be righted and righteousness established. 

By the sudden, and now increasingly frequent, flashes 
of light which issue from the storm clouds that surround 
the invisible, spiritual presence of our glorious King, 
these principles of the Word of God are being illuminated 
and brought to the front for the consideration of all men. 
They are discussed not only in the daily press, but in our 
popular periodicals, in the official labor organs, in stores 
and factories, in counting-rooms, in the market-places, at 
public gatherings. Even heathen nations are discussing 
them, and are contrasting both the daily lives of professed 
Christians and the present course of the professed Christian 
nations with the character and the teachings of the 
great Founder of the Christian religion, extolling the 
latter and ridiculing the former. 

"THE EARTH SAW- AND TREMBLED" 

As a result of God's lightning flashes which are enlightening 
the world, there is great commotion everywhere 
manifest. Never before have such conditions prevailed. 
There are ominous mutterings of dissatisfaction, unrest; 
and the whole current of popular thought throughout the 
earth is set in a revolutionary direction. The lightning 
flashes are revealing the corruption in the world, the dishonesty 
in high places, and showing men that they are 
living far below the dignity of manhood. But how to 
right things they are not able to see; and the conflicting 
ideas, voices, theories and threats, reveal the facts which 
the Prophets foretold; for "the nations are angry," "the 
heathen [Gentiles, peoples] rage," and the whole earth 
trembles from the din of a wordy conflict and from the 
blows which even now are beginning to arouse the world. 

"ZION HEARD-AND WAS GLAD" 

But in the midst of all this trouble and tumult in the 
world, what is the attitude of the Lord's truly consecrated 
and faithful people? Are they, too, in fear? As the 



judgments of the Lord fall heavily upon the wayward and 
disobedient so that the whole earth reels and staggers as 
a drunken man (Psalms 107:27), are the saints in dismay 
and distress? Ah, no; for it is written, "Zion heard, and 
was glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoiced, because of 
Thy judgments, O Lord!" It is the "sinners in Zion" 
that are "afraid." Psalm 91 and 46 show why the saints 
rejoice and are restful of heart while others weep and 
lament. It is because they "dwell in the secret place of 
the Most High [represented by the Holy of the typical 
Tabernacle], and abide under the shadow of the Almighty" 
(as the typical Tabernacle was covered by a pillar of 
cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night). It is because 
God is their "Refuge and Strength." "The secret of the 
Lord is with them that reverence Him, and He will show 
them His Covenant."— Psalm 25:14. 

These dwellers in the secret place of the Most High 
are provided in these perilous times with a clear knowledge 
of the Divine Plan, with its times and seasons, which 
enables them to see both the necessity for the present 
method of Divine discipline upon the world and also the 
peaceable fruits of righteousness which shall result therefrom. 
In the midst of the storm and battle of this great 
Day of the Lord, they hear the commanding voice of the 
Lord of armies, and their hearts rejoice; for they have 
full confidence in His ability to bring order out of all the 
confusion. They realize that in the judgments of this 
Day it is the Lord that speaks from Heaven— from the 
high place of authority and control; therefore they give 
thanks at the remembrance of His holiness (Psalm 30:4) 
—of His Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power, which insure 
His doing all things well. 

THE HEEDLESS WHO WILL NOT HEAR 

But the Psalmist intimated that, while the world at 
large would be in ignorance of the real portent of present 
events, and therefore in fear and dread, and while the 
saints, with clear knowledge, will be rejoicing and lifting 
up their heads, because they see the outcome, some- 
heedless both of the world's distress and of the Voice 
which speaketh from Heaven— will still boast themselves 
of their idols. He says, "Confounded be all they that 
serve graven images, that boast themselves of idols." 
These words call to mind the warning of the Apostle Paul: 
"See that ye refuse not Him that speaketh from Heaven." 
(Hebrews 12:25.) St. Paul addresses these words to 
those who know the Lord's voice and recognize it, warning 
them against at any time refusing longer to heed it, 
when He speaks in wrath and judgment. 

But alas! there are some who heed not the warning, 
and who, although they recognize the voice of the Lord, 

R5990 : page 340 

refuse longer to obey it. They turn away from Him that 



speaketh from Heaven, toward the idols which their wayward 
hearts have set up instead of God. These "graven 
images" are indeed the work of their own hands— the 
human philosophies, and science— "falsely so called"— of 
this evil day. And those who reject the testimony of 
God, when once they have heard it, invariably fall into 
some one of the many forms of idolatrous worship now 
so prevalent; or else they drift restlessly from one to another 
of them. 

All such shall surely be confounded; they shall be put 
to shame and confusion; their idols shall be destroyed. 
The wilful sinner, once enlightened and blessed with the 
hallowed influences of the Holy Spirit and the Truth, shall 
not, the Apostle declared, escape the just punishment for 
his deeds. Heb. 12:14-19 points out this danger to the 
children of God, and warns them of the fearful penalties 
of turning away from the holy commandment delivered 
unto them. The Apostle Paul here depicts the scenes accompanying 
the inauguration of the old Law Covenant, 
and shows it to be a picture of events which will accompany 
the establishment of the New Law Covenant, at 
the close of this present Age, under the greater than 
Moses— our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The Mountain (Kingdom) of the Lord's House is now 
being established in the top of the mountains, superseding 
the great kingdoms of this world, and is being exalted 
above the hills— the smaller governments. (Isaiah 2:2.) 
Clouds and darkness, trouble and perplexity and distress 
of nations are round about; and the thunderings and 
lightnings are making all the earth to tremble as did 
Israel at Mt. Sinai. (Exodus 19:1-25.) And now— since 
the Spring of 1878— God has "set His King upon His Holy 
Hill of Zion." (Psalm 2:6.) Therefore, if those who 
refused to obey Moses, and presumptuously disgraced the 
ceremonies of the occasion at Sinai, met with instant 
death, how can we escape if we disregard the voice of the 
great Mediator of the New Covenant, and the remarkable 
circumstances which now accompany its establishment? 

CLOSING THOUGHTS 

We see the deepening clouds of trouble. We hear the 
thunder tones of judgment that "call the earth from the 
rising of the sun unto the going down thereof" (Psalm 50: 1 ) 
—from the east to the west. We see the lightning 
flashes of Truth and Righteousness, and observe how the 
whole earth is now in the shaking process which will 
eventuate in the complete overthrow of all existing institutions, 
systems and governments. Present events indeed 
speak in trumpet tones. How shall we regard these 
things? Surely, dear brethren, it will be with thoughtful 

R5990 : page 341 

and reverent hearts! Surely we shall watch and pray, lest 
"a promise being left us of entering into His rest, any of 



us should seem to come short of it!" (Hebrews 4: 1.) We 
shall guide our course with the greatest carefulness that 
we may make our calling and election sure. 

In this eventful period everything that can be shaken 
will be shaken, that only the unshakable things of truth 
and righteousness may remain. (Hebrews 12:25-29.) 
Every one called to share in the coming Kingdom must 
be a lover of righteousness, one who will courageously 
and lovingly stand for the Truth however much it may be 
spoken against. All others will be shaken out of this 
company. The snares and delusions of this "evil day" are 
accomplishing this very work. In the end only the true 
will remain. "Seeing that we look for these things [let 
us] be diligent, that we may be found of Him in peace, 
without spot, and blameless" (2 Peter 3: 14), ready for 
the entrance into that rest which yet remains. 



R5990: page 341 

ONE OF THE MASTER'S FORCEFUL AND BEAUTIFUL LESSONS 

"Consider the lilies of the field, 
how they grow."— Matthew 6:28. 

MANY and varied are the precious lessons 
taught by the Master during His earthly ministry, 
and they never grow old. To the true 
disciple of Christ they are ever new, ever 
fresh. Whether He taught by the seaside 
or on the mountains or by the wayside, as 
He walked and talked with His chosen 
Twelve, His words of wisdom and grace 
come to us vibrant with meaning, pulsating 
with life, full of strength and power, cheering, 
encouraging and blessing our hearts. 

In using these words under our consideration, our 
Lord, as was His custom, drew an illustration of something 
familiar to all His hearers. God's care over the 
lilies seemed a fitting reminder of His greater care over 
His own people, of His infinite Wisdom, Power and Love. 
He who so carefully supervised the clothing of the simple 
flower— which bloomed only to fade in a day— that its 
robes were more regal than the kingly vesture of Solomon. 
would surely provide for the clothing of those who 
trusted in Him! 

SOME HAVE HIS PROMISE-SOME HAVE NOT 

Undoubtedly much that our Lord said to the Jews 
would not have been said to Gentiles; for the Gentiles 
were then under the general curse and condemnation 
—the whole world was alienated from God. The people 
of Israel alone had been brought back into covenant relationship 
with God, through the Law Covenant made at 



Mount Sinai; hence different words would be applicable 
to them. Having come into relationship with God, His 
promises were theirs. All things should work for their 
blessing— their cattle, their fields, everything, would be 
blessed of the Lord, if they would be faithful to Him. 
Our Lord was, therefore, in line with this thought, exhorting 
the children of Israel to have greater confidence 
in God, greater trust in Him who had chosen them to be 
His peculiar people. 

We, like the Master, should make a clear distinction 
between the persons to whom we would give consolation 
and assurances of God's care, and all others. We are to 
remember that some have come into His family and some 
have not! that some have His promises as theirs, and 
some have not. We are not to deceive others and to 
imply that they have a right to claim as their own, 
promises which were never given to them. Rather, we 
shall do them more good if we point out that these 
promises are conditional— only for those who make a 
covenant with the Lord under the special arrangement 
open during this Gospel Age. To the Christian this 
lesson of unfailing trust and confidence in God is a very 
important one, and to have learned it represents a very 
considerable growth in grace and in knowledge— in the 
spirit of love, which casts out all fear. It means a nearness 
to God, a fellowship with Him, which those who have 
not learned this lesson cannot enjoy. 

THE WORLD'S HEAVY BURDENS 

To the people whom the Master generally addressed, 
the matter of providing for the necessities of life was a 
very important one. He rarely had the very rich amongst 
His audience, generally the poor; and the poor in Palestine 
and other Eastern countries find it very difficult to 
obtain food, clothing, etc. In many parts of the world 
today, especially in India, there are people who scarcely 
ever go to bed without going hungry; and to these the 
necessities of life are a very important consideration. 

Our Lord Jesus indicated that this was so in His time, 
saying that the important consideration with most people 
was, "What shall we eat and what shall we drink, and 
wherewithal shall we be clothed?" They were anxious 
and worried. "After these things do the Gentiles seek," 
said the Master. Their object in life was to procure 
food and raiment. That was the burden of their prayer. 
And even the Jews, though professedly the people of God, 
had not learned implicit trust in Him, but were to a large 
extent grasping after the material things, seeking chiefly 
worldly gain rather than the true riches. Our Lord said 
that His disciples were to realize that God knew what 
things they had need of before they asked Him, and 
should rest fully content in the matter of what God would 
provide them respecting their temporalities. Jesus wished 
them to be sure that God would so supervise their interests 
that they should not want anything really good 



and needful to them. 

This seems to be the whole lesson that our Lord was 
inculcating in bringing in this illustration from nature— 
"Consider the lilies of the field." It was a forceful reminder 
that the things of the Kingdom were the things 
of paramount importance, and that in seeking these things 
first, they might have the assurance that all needed earthly 
things should be theirs. 

PROPER CONSIDERATION OF THE LILY 

What is it that we are to consider about the lilies? 
"How they grow!" What does this mean? Jesus Himself 
answers, "They toil not, neither do they spin; and yet I 
say unto you. that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed 
like one of these." That is, the lilies grow in a 
very reasonable way; they develop grace and beauty, and 
are adorned in robes of loveliness without putting forth 
unnatural, unusual stress or effort. They are not worried 
about growing. The lily does not wake up in the morning 
and say, "Now, I wonder if I can make another quarter 
of an inch today. I wonder if I shall be able to grow as 
fast and to look as beautiful as that lily over there; and 
I wonder what people will think about me." It simply 
assimilates what it can absorb from the earth, and from 
the atmosphere what God has provided for it there. It 
does not say, "I think that I shall go to another place, I 
cannot grow here," but it does the best it can wherever 
it happens to be. 

The lilies of Palestine to which our Lord referred 
were evidently not the kind of flowers that we generally 
term lilies, but were apparently of some other plant 
family, and a very numerous species, we should judge, 

R5991 : page 342 

growing everywhere. Those who are accustomed to the 
flowers of Palestine point to a common reddish flower 
which they think was meant by "the lilies of the field." 

Our lesson, then, as New Creatures, is that since we 
have given our hearts to the Lord we are not to be worried, 
anxious, about the things of the present life. Nor 
are we to be over-anxious regarding our spiritual growth. 
We are simply to do our best, and trust the growing to 
Him. But we are to be particularly engaged respecting 
the things God has promised us as New Creatures in 
Christ, that we may make our calling and election sure 
and attain to the glories which our Father has in reservation 
for those who love Him. If we give our attention 
to these things, the Master assures us, the Heavenly 
Father will so supervise our affairs that we shall not 
lack any necessity of a spiritual kind or of an earthly kind. 
He will give us whatever of spiritual blessings and of 
temporal blessings we need as spirit-begotten children of 
God that we may finish our course with joy. 

We are not to interpret our Lord's words to mean 



that we are to neglect our proper duties in life; that He 

would not have us do any more spinning or toiling than 

the lilies do; that He would not have us labor with our 

hands and our brains in order to care for our family, 

home, etc. Surely not! for these things are inculcated 

in the Word of God. Here, evidently. He is merely impressing 

us with the thought that while we are doing 

to the very best of our ability in harmony with the surroundings 

and conditions which God has provided for 

us, we are not to be worried. We are to be as free from 

anxious care as are the lilies, to be fully content and to 

look up in faith to our Heavenly Father, expecting and 

accepting His providential care and overruling in all our 

affairs and interests. 

"Just leave all with Him; lilies do, and they grow; 

They grow in the rain and they grow in the snow. 
Yes, they grow. 

They grow in the darkness, all hid in the night, 

Or if in the sunshine, revealed by the light. 
Still they grow. 

They ask not your planting; they need not your care 
As they grow; 

Dropped down in the valley, the field, anywhere. 

There they grow- 
In garments of beauty, arrayed in pure white. 

All radiant in glory from heaven's own light- 
Sweetly grow." 

REST AND PEACE IN PERFECT TRUST 

God knows all about our circumstances. If we need 
to be transplanted to another place, into a different kind 
or soil, where our new nature can better thrive and expand, 
or where our reasonable, temporal needs can be 
better obtained. He can arrange for it. He knows just 
what is good for us, best for us, temporally and spiritually. 
It is our part to look for His leadings, not attempting to 
take the helm into our own hands, nor concluding that 
the Lord will never change our conditions, etc. If it is 
best for us that they shall be changed. He will change 
them, if we trust in Him; and surely, if we are His children, 
it is His will that we desire, not our own! We are 
to be perfectly restful under whatever conditions or circumstances 
we find ourselves, restful in the thought, "Your 
Father knoweth what things ye have need of before ye 
ask Him."— Matthew 6:8. 

Will this not mean sometimes strong tests of faith 
and endurance, if the conditions of our lot are painful 
and hard to bear? It may be such; but if the Lord's 
providence does not for a time offer a way of escape, we 
may be sure that the test will prove one of the "all things" 
that will work out our good, if we submit sweetly to His 
will and wait for Him to point out a different way, if it 
shall seem best to Him. Let us as lilies of His planting, 
bloom for the glory of our Heavenly Husbandman. 



ASKING FOR DAILY NEEDS 

While Jesus tells us that we should ask, "Give us this 
day our daily bread," this is not a specification of what 
we would prefer to have in a temporal way. We are not 
to specify things that would be most pleasing to our 
palate. We are to leave that part to Him. We are merely 
to acknowledge that we are dependent upon Him for the 
necessities of life, that we are looking to Him, that we 
are waiting on His providence and will accept those 
things which His Wisdom provides as proper for us in 
connection with the instructions of His Word. 

So on we go, growing daily, happy and content in God, 
and preparing for the Kingdom; for Christians who cannot 
learn now, under present conditions, to trust in God, 
would probably not be able to learn this lesson under 
other conditions. Present conditions are especially helpful, 
indeed, for those who would cultivate trust, dependence 
upon the Lord. In this respect we see that the poor 
have an advantage over the rich; and it was those who 
were poor, like the lilies of the field, that our Lord Jesus 
was addressing in the words of our text. And it is to 
those who are poor in spirit, who realize their own impotency, 
who long for the rest and peace that Jesus alone 
can give, who come to Him for this rest, that all the 
Master's gracious promises and lessons of wisdom, comfort 
and instruction are given. 

"O flower of Heavenly birth, blooming in earthly soil. 
Taking on fairest hues from sun and wind and rain. 

Soon shall thy beauty grace the Heavenly realms Above, 
Transplanted to a fairer clime to bud and bloom again!" 



"HOW LONG, OH LORD, HOW LONG?" 

How long, oh Lord, how long 
Shall weakness serve the strong? 
How long shall Might make Right, 
And darkness hate the light? 

How long, oh Lord, how long. 
Till Truth shall crush the wrong. 
Till darkness turn to day. 
And sorrow flee away? 

How long till wars shall cease. 
This turmoil end in peace? 
How long the sin-cursed Earth 
Await her second birth? 

How long. Lord, must I feel 
The proud oppressor's heel? 
I'm weary of the night. 



I long for morning light! 

I long to see Thy face, 
I long for Thine embrace- 
How long. Lord, till I come 
To my long-promised home? 



Not long, my child, not long; 
Be brave, be true, be strong! 
The Day-star doth appear. 
The Kingdom draweth near! 

Look up, my child, look up, 
The last drop's in thy Cup! 
Trust where thou canst not see— 
I soon will call for thee! 

GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5991 : page 343 

"JESUS CHRIST-THE FIRST AND THE LAST" 
-DECEMBER 3.-REVELATION 1:1-8,17-20.- 

THE MESSAGE OF THE RISEN CHRIST-THE APOSTLE JOHN 

REPRESENTATIVE OF THE FEET-MEMBERS OF THE BODY OF 
CHRIST-IN A TRANCE HE SAW A SERIES OF VISIONS 

OF THE LEADING EVENTS OF THE GOSPEL AGE, THE SEVEN 
STAGES OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE GOSPEL CHURCH 
AND THE SETTING UP OF THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM-A 

SYMBOLICAL PICTURE OF OUR GLORIFIED LORD-THE WORD 
LIKENED TO A TWO-EDGED SWORD. 

"Fear not; I am the First and the Last, and the Living 
One; and I was dead, and behold, I am alive for 
evermore."— Verses 17, 18. R.V. 

VISIONS are not realities, although symbolically 
representing them. This is true, whether 
the visions come as Daniel the Prophet describes 
his or whether they come in broad 
daylight, as did the transfiguration scene, 
which our Lord declared was a vision. 
(Daniel 7:1; Matthew 17:9.) The visions 
granted to St. John, recorded in the Revelation, 
are in no sense to be understood as 
realities; and this is the significance of his 
statement, "I was in the spirit on the Lord's day." 

Note the simplicity of the introduction to this most 
wonderful Book. The Apostle did not write the title as it 
appears in our Bibles— "The Revelation of St. John the 
Divine." On the contrary, he claims no credit for the 



revelation; for it was not his. As he distinctly explains, 
it was from our Lord Jesus Christ, and to Him from God 
the Father. Nor was it even to St. John in any special 
sense; but, as he again declares, unto God's servants, sent 
by His "servant John." This simplicity, common to all 
the Apostles, commends them to us as men of humble 
mind— the very kind we should expect our Lord to use as 
special messengers to His people. This simplicity, this 
absence of boastfulness, so noticeable in the writings of 
all the Apostles, marks them as being in the ministry, not 
for the gratification of vanity, or for earthly rewards of 
any kind, but simply as the servants of God, who delighted 
to do His will, and to tell the Good Tidings, to 
the utter ignoring of themselves, except in so far as mention 
of themselves and their affairs might be necessary. 
St. John was instructed to write, to make clear, to 
God's people the things already brought to his attention, 
and other things subsequently to be thus brought, to the 
intent that God's people might be enabled to comprehend 
with all saints the lengths, the breadths, the heights and 
depths of the Love of God, which passeth understanding, 
and which can be received only through revelation from 
God. And here let us note the force of the Apostle's 
statement (Verse 3) to the effect that there is a blessing 
upon those who read this revelation, even though they do 
not understand, and a special blessing upon those who 
hear and understand the words of this prophecy, and who 
conform their lives to the things therein written. 

THE RISEN CHRIST'S MESSAGE 

At the time of this vision St. John was a prisoner, 
exiled to the Isle of Patmos, a penal colony of those days 
—a rocky, barren island in the Aegean Sea. The crime 
for which he suffered this banishment was his faithfulness 
as the Lord's mouthpiece. At the time he must have been 
about ninety years of age— supposing that none of our 
Lord's disciples were younger than Himself at the beginning 
of His ministry. 

St. John, the beloved disciple, in some measure or 
degree represented the last living members of the Body 
of Christ. Doubtless this was the meaning of our Lord's 
statement, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that 
to thee?" (John 21:20-23.) St. John did not tarry; but a 
class whom in some respects he illustrated are represented 
as tarrying— a class that see with the eyes of their understanding 
the visions and revelations which the beloved disciple 
saw in symbols in a trance. 

If, then, St. John's exile in any degree represents 
ostracism which the Lord's followers may expect in the 
close of this Age— a complete isolation from others and a 
treatment implying that they are prisoners— they may take 
comfort from the thought that as our Lord's favor and 
revelation to St. John more than offset his persecutions, 
so the opening of our eyes of understanding and the 
granting to us of greater knowledge and appreciation of 



our Lord and of the Divine Plan will far more than offset 
the various experiences which in His providence God 
may permit to come upon us. His assurance is that 
all things shall work together for good to those who love 
God. Whoever rests his faith securely upon the Divine 
promise may indeed with the Apostle Paul count all things 
else as loss and dross for the excellency of the knowledge 
of Christ Jesus our Lord.— Philippians 3:8. 

Presumably the Apostle had this vision on the first day 
of the week, now generally called Sunday. To Christians 
it is peculiarly the Lord's day— the day on which our 
Savior rose from the dead, and on which all the promises 
of God's Word received life and our hopes through 
Christ were quickened. We may see in the expression 
also a reference to the Millennial Age, called frequently in 
Scripture "The Day of the Lord." According to our understanding 
of Bible chronology we today are living in the 
early dawn of this Day of Christ; and it is here, properly 
enough, that we begin to see the wonderful things of the 
Divine Character and Plan. But to see and to understand 
we must be "in the spirit." Only those who have 
become New Creatures in Christ can be expected to appreciate 
spiritual things; and this is the class which the 
Apostle John represented. 

There are many reasons for concluding that while the 
messages were given to the seven churches specified, and 
were applicable to them, nevertheless these messages 
should properly have a still wider application to the whole 
Church of Christ, the number seven representing completeness 
and the order representing different epochs in the 
history of the Church. Thus the Church at Ephesus 
would represent the condition of the Church at the time 
of the writing of the messages; while the Laodicean 
Church would represent the Church in our day— in the 
end of the Gospel Age. The other churches would correspondingly 
represent different epochs intermediate, between 
then and now. 

To think otherwise would be to attach too much importance 
to these seven comparatively small churches of 
Asia Minor, and would have implied an ignoring of other 
churches more influential than they; for instance, the 
churches at Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, etc. Furthermore, 
the details of the messages given these churches fit 
historically the one Church of the Living God, over 
every member of which our Lord has a care. This 
thought that the number seven signifies completeness we 
find emphasized in other symbolical representations— seven 
spirits, seven golden candlesticks, seven stars, etc. 

"THE FIRST-BORN OF THEM THAT SLEPT" 

Verse 5 clearly teaches what the creeds of Christendom 
ignore, and what is in direct antagonism to their statements; 
namely, that the risen Christ was "the first 
born of the dead." That is to say, our Lord was the 
first to experience a resurrection in the full sense of the 



word, the first to experience a resurrection to perfection 

R5991 : page 344 

and eternal life. Although some before Him were temporally 

awakened, they relapsed again into death; for 

they were only partial illustrations of resurrection, to assure 

men of the Divine Power to accomplish it fully in 

the due time appointed of God. 

Verse 7 clearly teaches that at the time of our Lord's 
Second Advent the world will be far from converted to 
God; for "all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of 
Him." Some Scriptures taken disconnectedly seem to 
teach that the world will be converted before His return; 
but when God's Word and Plan are viewed as a whole, 
these will be found to favor the opposite view— that 
Christ comes before the conversion of the world and for 
the very purpose of converting all mankind; and that the 
glorified Church of the Gospel Age shall share with her 
Lord and Head in His Reign, which is God's appointed 
means of blessing the world. 

Christ and the glorified Church, made "partakers of the 
Divine nature," will be spirit beings, invisible to men. 
Our Lord's presence will be manifested to the world by 
exhibitions of power and great glory. He will not be 
visible to natural sight, but to the eyes of understanding, 
as these shall open to an appreciation of the great changes 
which earth's new Ruler shall effect. His presence and 
His righteous authority will be recognized in both the 
punishments and the blessings which will flow to mankind 
from His Reign. 

Our King will reveal Himself gradually. Some will 
discern the new Ruler sooner than will others. But ultimately 
"every eye shall see [Greek, horao, discern] Him." 
But "He cometh with clouds." And while the clouds of 
trouble hang heavy and dark, when the mountains— kingdoms 
of this world— are trembling and falling, when the 
earth— organized society— is being shaken and disintegrated, 
some will begin to realize that Jehovah's Anointed 
is taking to Himself His great power and is beginning 
His work of laying justice to the line and righteousness 
to the plummet. For He must reign until He shall have 
put down all authority and laws on earth which are contrary 
to those controlling in Heaven. 

WHAT THE BELOVED DISCIPLE SAW 

St. John's attention was first attracted by a trumpet-like 
voice of Christ from behind him. The fact that its 
location is mentioned implies that it has a symbolic meaning. 
It signifies that the beginning of this Message was 
not in St. John's day, nor in the future, but that the 
things revealed had already commenced and were already 
to some extent in the past. As some features of the 
Revelation show, the voice from behind went back to the 
time of our Lord's earthly ministry. 



Turning and looking, the Apostle saw in symbol what 
the Lord's people may now see with the eye of faith and 
understanding. He saw One like a son of man— like a 
man, like a priest, as implied by the clothes described- 
walking amongst seven golden candlesticks, caring for 
them, trimming the wicks, seeing to the supply of oil, etc. 
Thus our Lord Jesus, our glorified Master, although absent 
from us, has protected the interests of His Cause 
throughout the past eighteen centuries, and has directed 
respecting His people's affairs, especially inspecting and 
caring for the Church as a light-bearer, a candlestick. 
Alas, how poor the wicks have sometimes been! How 
feeble the light that has sometimes shone out into the 
darkness of this world! How much trimming has been 
necessary, and how much more may yet be required! 

In the Tabernacle, and subsequently in Solomon's 
Temple, the Golden Candlestick was placed by the Lord's 
direction— not seven candlesticks, but one with seven 
branches, representing the whole Church during this 
Gospel Age. In the Revelation the same candlestick, or 
Iampstand, is brought to our attention; but the parts are 
separated— the union, the relationship between them, being 
supplied by our Redeemer, the antitypical High 
Priest. The Iampstand symbolized the Lord's nominal 
people of this Gospel Age, including the members of His 
mystical Body. It holds forth the light of life, which 
shines in the darkness and which He directed should be 
let so shine that men might see our good works and 
glorify our Father in Heaven.— Matthew 5:16. 

Alas! The Master evidently found but few good 
works, found but little glorifying light shining out from 
His earthly representatives in many of the seven epochs 
of the history of the Church. This fact is indicated by 
His messages, chidings, encouragements, etc., given to 
each of these epoch-churches represented by the different 
candlesticks, or lampstands. It is to be noted that the 
candlestick, or Iampstand, represents the nominal Church 
of Christ, rather than the true Church. This is shown by 
the fact that in addressing each of these churches the 
Lord finds fault with the many and approves the faithful 
few, especially so in the last, the seventh, the Laodicean 
Church of our day. 

THE APPEARANCE OF CHRIST 

We are not to regard the word picture of Verses 13-16 
as a portrait of our Lord in glory; for it is merely symbolical. 
When we shall see Him in glory He will not look 
as here described. Nevertheless this symbolical picture 
has precious lessons for us, more valuable than an attempt 
to describe to our minds the appearance of our 
Lord as a Spirit Being, "dwelling in light which no man 
can approach unto," and which we cannot appreciate until 
we shall be changed to "be like Him and to see Him as 
He is."— 1 John 3:2; 1 Cor. 15:50-53. 

His head and His hair as white as wool and snow tell 



us of His wisdom. His splendor and His glory. His eyes 
like a flame of fire tell us in symbol that our Master is 
all-seeing, omniscient; that He is not deceived by outward 
forms and ceremonies; but that He can, and does, read 
every thought and intent of the heart. The contemplation 
of His glance should of itself purge and purify our hearts 
to the extent of our ability, to put far from us everything 
which would have His disapproval. 

Having described the head, St. John mentions the 
hands and the feet. The remainder of the body was 
covered with a garment reaching from the head to the 
feet. This may possibly represent the fact that the glory 
of Christ was manifested in His own person, in His own 
ministry, and in that of His Twelve Apostles, His representatives 
—St. Paul taking the place of Judas; and that 
with their death the body of Truth was almost veiled 
throughout the eighteen centuries intervening, until now, 
in the end of the Age, the Feet members of the Body of 
Christ will be illuminated by the Truth and will shine 
forth— not like the Head, but as polished brass. 

THE MASTER'S COMFORTING MESSAGE 

When we think of the great advantage which we of 
the present day possess, we are inclined to say, "What 
manner of persons ought we to be in all holiness of living 
and God-likeness!" We have shining upon us with almost 
burning brightness the focused rays of Divine inspiration 
and revelation from the past 6,000 years. How it should 
consume in us all the dross of selfishness! How it should 
purify us! How humble it should make us! Even in our 
flesh we should be polished, bright, luminous representatives 
of our glorious Lord and Head. 

The countenance of the majestic One present amongst 

R5991 : page 345 

the candlesticks is said to be like lightning. So great was 
the splendor that St. John fell as dead when he beheld it, 
just as Daniel did in the presence of the mighty One 
whom he saw, and just as Saul of Tarsus did before the 
majesty presented to him. (Daniel 10:4-1 1; Acts 9:3-9.) 
So it is symbolically with the Christian, when once he gets 
a glimpse of the glories of the Divine character. When 
once we get a true view of Him with whom we have to do, 
as the great Heart-searcher and Caretaker of His Church, 
we fall before Him, humbled to the dust, realizing that 
we are imperfect, that we cannot stand before our Master, 
that we are unworthy of His favor and blessing. 

But as our Lord touched St. John gently, raising him 
up, so He has spoken to us comfort, peace and love, assuring 
us that we have a High Priest that can be touched 
with a feeling of our infirmities. One who is able to sympathize 
and mercifully to assist. One who has bought us 
with His own precious blood, and who has accepted us and 
will number us as His Body members as long as we abide 



in Him, seeking in our hearts to know and to do His will. 
To us His comforting assurance is: 

(1) "Fear not." The same message the Father has 
sent us through the Prophet, saying, "Their fear of Me is 

not of Me, but is taught by the precepts of men." (Isaiah 29: 13.) 

This is one of the first lessons which we must 

learn. We cannot come into close sympathy with our Lord 

and be taught of Him respecting other features of His 

Plan until we learn to fear not, learn to have confidence 

in Him as the One "who loved us and bought us with 

His own precious blood," and whose purposes toward us 

continually are for our welfare and, if we submit ourselves 

to His guidance, will bring us off conquerors and more 

than conquerors. 

(2) "I am the First and the Last." We must recognize 
that our Lord is the One who was the beginning of 

the creation of God and the end of it, the One by whom 

are all things, the One who is next to the Father, His 

very Representative in everything pertaining to the affairs 

of the Universe. (Colossians 1:15; Revelation 3:14; John 1:1-3; 

1 Corinthians 8:6.) (3) We must recognize Him 

as the One who was dead, the One who really died for our 

sins, but who was as really raised out of death by the 

Father. (4) We must realize that He is alive for evermore, 

that death has no more dominion over Him, that 

the work is finished, that neither sacrifices of the Mass nor 

death in any sense or form ever will be needed. His work 

is perfect; and, as He cried on the Cross, "It is finished!" 

(5) We must recognize that He has the keys, the 
authority, the power over the tomb, to deliver from it all 
who are therein imprisoned. We must also realize that 
He has the key, the power over death, in order that those 
whom He liberates from the prison-house of death, like 
those who have not yet gone into the tomb, but who are 
under the death sentence, may all be ultimately delivered, 
set free from the dominion of Sin and Death, delivered 
into the full liberty of the Sons of God— righteousness 
and life everlasting.— Romans 8:21. 

"IN HIS RIGHT HAND SEVEN STARS" 

This One whom we thus know, thus recognize, as the 
Instructor and Caretaker of the candlesticks, we are also 
to recognize as having in His right hand— in His favor as 
well as His power— seven stars, the angels, the messengers, 
of the seven Churches. Apparently the stars represent 
special ministers, or servants of the Church. In 
Revelation 12:1 the Church is pictured as a Woman 
crowned with twelve stars. These stars evidently represent 
the Twelve Apostles as the special lights of the 
Church. Similarly, in the picture before us, the seven 
stars which the Lord holds in His right hand seem to represent 
special light-bearers in the Church— in each of its 
seven phases or stages of development. That they are in 
His right hand seems to teach us that these should be considered 
as in some special sense under the Master's 



guidance, protection and care in the interest of the 
Churches which they represented. 

It will be noticed that the messages to the various 
Churches are addressed to these stars, messengers, angels, 
as though our Lord would have us understand that the appropriate 
message for each appropriate epoch in the 
Church's experience would be sent by the Lord through a 
particular star, or messenger, whom He would especially 
commission as His representative. Our Lord Himself is 
represented by the great light of the sun; and His special 
messengers in the Church throughout the entire period of 
the Gospel Age are consistently enough represented as stars. 

The difference between the symbols of the star and the 
candlestick is manifest. The star light is the Heavenly 
light, the spiritual enlightenment or instruction. The lamp 
light is the earthly light, representing good works, obedience, 
etc., of those who nominally constitute the Lord's 
Church in the world, and who are exhorted not to put 
their light under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, and to 
let it so shine that it will glorify their Father in Heaven. 

No part of the description could more thoroughly convince 
us that the description of our Lord given here is a 
symbolic one than does the statement that out of His 
mouth proceeded a two-edged sword. As a symbolic picture, 
however, it is full of meaning, speaking to us of the 
Word of the Lord, the Sword of the Spirit, "sharper than 
any two-edged sword." (Ephesians 6:17; Hebrews 4:12.) 
It reminds us that our Lord's words are not one-sided, 
not directed merely against sin in one class, but that His 
word is sharp, cutting in every direction, that sin is reproved 
by Him as much when found in His most earnest 
followers as when found elsewhere. It assures us that 
none need attempt to pluck out the mote from his brother's 
eye without first getting rid of the beam in his own eye; 
and that if we do not show mercy to those who are our 
debtors we must not expect mercy from Him who has 
proposed to extend His mercy toward us. 

How heart-searching is God's Word when we understand 
it— not merely as a compendium of rules and regulations, 
but when we catch the spirit of it! Then we come 
to see that its requirement is love out of a pure heart; 
first, to the Heavenly Father; secondly, to our Lord and 
Head; thirdly, to all His brethren; fourthly, to the world 
in general, groaning and travailing in pain, waiting for 
the blessings of the coming Day of Christ; and fifthly, 
toward our enemies also, sympathetically realizing that 
they are warped, twisted and blinded through the deceitfulness 
of sin and through the machinations of the great 
Adversary.— 2 Corinthians 4:4. 



"Blessed Bible, precious Word! 
Boon most sacred from the Lord; 
Glory to His name be given. 
For this choicest gift from Heaven. 



"Tis a ray of purest light. 
Beaming through the depths of night; 
Brighter than ten thousand gems 
Of the costliest diadems. 

"Tis a fountain, pouring forth. 
Streams of life to gladden earth. 
Whence eternal blessings flow- 
Antidote for human woe. 

"Tis a mine, aye, deeper, too, 
Than can mortal ever go; 
Search we may for many years. 
Still some new, rich gem appears." 



R5992 : page 346 

"FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH" 

-DECEMBER 10.-REVELATION 2:1-17.- 

THE REVELATION A BOOK OF SYMBOLS-SEVEN SUCCESSIVE STAGES 
IN THE HISTORY OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH SYMBOLIZED 

BY "THE SEVEN CHURCHES WHICH ARE IN ASIA" 
-THE NAMES OF THE CHURCHES CHARACTERISTIC-THE 
GREAT FALLING AWAY-THE TRUE CHURCH CALLED 
"OVERCOMERS"-THE LORD'S RETURN DURING THE LAODICEAN 
PERIOD OF CHURCH HISTORY. 

"Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee the Crown of Life."— Verse 10. 

WHILE the messages given to the seven 

churches specified in the Revelation were 

doubtless applicable to them, they properly 

have a still wider application to the entire 

Gospel Church, the number seven representing 

completeness. The Book of Revelation 

is a book of symbols, which our Lord "sent 

and signified [told it in signs and symbols] 

by His angel unto His servant John." 

(Revelation 1:1.) Bible students know that 

the book abounds in symbols, or signs; and we are satisfied 

that these are the rule, and that the literal is the exception, 

being used only when unavoidable. 

To be in harmony, then, with the rest of the book, 
"the seven churches which are in Asia" must be symbolic; 
and as the book is chiefly history written beforehand, 
they must symbolize seven successive stages in the history 
of the Christian Church, covering the period between the 
First Advent and the Second Coming of Christ. The fulfilment, 
we think, proves the correctness of this position. 

In the first chapter we have a description of "One like 



unto a son of man," as seen in vision by the Apostle John. 
Some one or more of the features of this description 
would seem to be peculiarly appropriate to each of the 
successive stages of the Church; and in each case He 
who sends the message is thus described. The last part 
of each message is a promise to the "overcomers," and is 
also adapted to the different periods of Church history. 

To give a bird's-eye view of the arrangement, we would 
notice their chronological position. Ephesus covers the 
period during the lives of the Apostles; Smyrna, the time 
of the Pagan persecution, reaching to about 325 A.D., 
when Constantine became Emperor of Rome and declared 
in favor of Christianity. Pergamos embraces the transition 
period during which the Papacy had its rise; 
Thyatira, the space during which the true Church was in 
the wilderness, and the Apostate Church sat as a queen 
and lived deliciously with the kings of the earth. Sardis 
includes a short interval just before the Reformation; 
Philadelphia, the period from the Reformation until recent 
times; and Laodicea, the nominal Church of today. 

MESSAGE TO THE CHURCH OF EPHESUS 

The word Ephesus means first, desirable. During this 
period our Lord "holdeth the seven stars in His right 
hand," etc. (Chapter 1:20.) The messengers of the 
Churches— St. Paul, St. Peter, St. John, etc.— were so 
powerfully led and kept in the grasp of our Lord Jesus 
during this epoch that we accept their teachings as His, 
believing that their words were really His words. This 
stage of the Church is commended for its faithful, patient 
labor and for its discernment of Truth and true teachers. 
-Acts 20:28-30; 1 Cor. 11:19. 

It was characteristic of this period that "they forsook 
all and followed Him." They took joyfully the spoiling of 
their goods. They sold what they had and gave to those 
in want. Though often deprived of the bread of this 
present life, they not only had the Living Bread, but had 
the promise of "the tree of life which is in the midst of 
the Paradise of God." It will be remembered that all the 
trees in Eden were trees of life, but that the one in the 
midst of the Garden was then a forbidden tree, the disobedient 
eating of which brought death upon Adam and 
all his race. That tree in the midst of Paradise was 
called "the tree of the knowledge of good and evil"; and 
our Lord's promise in today's Study is that the overcomers 
of the Gospel Age shall have full liberty to paitake 
of that tree under most blessed and satisfactory conditions, 
when the knowledge will be of benefit to them 
under Divine approval, and will not then bring a curse. 

TO THE CHURCH OF SMYRNA 

Smyrna means bitter. Myrrh and Marah are kindred 
words. This stage of the Christian Church was the period 
of most bitter persecution, under the Roman Emperors 



from Nero to Diocletian. In His message to the Church 
of this epoch our Lord styles Himself "the First and the 
Last, which was dead and is alive." In no other sense or 
way could He be the First and the Last than as the only 
direct creation of the Father, through whom all else was 
created. Any other view would be in conflict with the 
Scriptures.— Revelation 3:14; Colossians 1:15; 1 Corinthians 8:6; 
John 1:1-3, Diaglott. 

"The Devil shall cast some of you into prison that ye 
may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days." 
Thus the Lord informed His faithful servants of this 
period that theirs would be a time of great persecution. 
Pagan Rome, here symbolized as the Devil, has been the 
most devilish of all earthly governments, when viewed in 
the light of its bloody persecutions. The ten symbolic days 
refer to the last and most severe persecution under the 
Roman Emperors— that of the reign of Diocletian, A.D. 
303-3 13. Those who have read the history of this period 
can understand the depths of the words, "that ye may be 
tried." Some of the most sublime pictures of Christian 
endurance that the world has ever seen were enacted during 
the Smyrna period of the Church. The call was for 
faithfulness unto death; the promise was that the overcomers 
should "not be hurt of the Second Death," but 
should receive the Crown of Life— immortality. 

TO THE CHURCH OF PERGAMOS 

Pergamos means an earthly elevation. The Speaker is 
"He who hath the sharp Sword with two edges" [Greek, 
two-mouthed]— the Word of God. During this period, 
while the nominal Church was growing popular, the true 
Christians were tested and proved by the introduction and 
development of Pagan and Papal ideas. The Pagan 

R5993 : page 346 

priests, unwilling to lose their positions of honor and influence 

amongst the people, sought to bend their ideas to 

fit the new religion. Thus while nominally professing 

Christianity, they brought many of their former ideas 

with them into the Christian Church. These were eventually 

grafted upon the true stock— "the faith once delivered 

to the saints."— Jude 3. 

Thus gradually the Church was led into error, evil 
practises, and away from God. This is what is meant in 
Verse 14 by the allusion to Balaam and Balak. It will be 
remembered that Balaam, who had been a prophet of God, 
instructed King Balak how to tempt Israel to sin, and thus 
brought about what he could not accomplish by his own 
powers. (Numbers 23; 24; 31:16.) So these Pagan 
priests taught the Church to indulge in spiritual fornication, 
and thus brought upon her the withering blight of 
the wrath of God. 

The "doctrine of the Nicolaitans" seems to be the 
theory of lordship or headship in the Church. The strife 



as to who should be greatest existed amongst many of the 
patriarchs— fathers— of the prominent churches. At their 
councils there was a bitter fight for supremacy. The 

R5993 : page 347 

tendency was toward an earthly head, and of course many 
coveted the honor. The patriarchs of Jerusalem, Antioch, 
Constantinople and Rome were the most prominent. The 
first two dropped out of the conflict, but the strife continued 
for several hundred years between Constantinople 
and Rome. It was settled only by a division of the 
Church: the Eastern, or Greek Church, accepting the 
Patriarch of Constantinople for its head; and the Western, 
or Papal Church, acknowledging the Bishop— Pope 
or Father— of Rome. 

Many of the true followers of the Master in the 
churches denounced this attempt to disobey the direct command 
of Jesus, "Call no man father." (Matthew 23:9.) 

Of course, they received the promised persecution. (2 Timothy 1:12.) 
This class in Pergamos is commended by 
our Lord under the symbol of "Anti-pas, My faithful 
martyr." In the Greek, anti means against, and Papas 
signifies father. In this stage of the development of the 
Church those who sought to be popular received the emoluments 
of the Church; but the promise to the overcomers 
is that of pleasure and honor that shall be eternal. 

THE CHURCH OF THYATIRA 

Thyatira seems to mean "the sweet perfume of sacrifice." 
It was the period of Papal persecution. The virgin 
Church was enduring the hardships of the wilderness; 
while the apostate Church sat on the throne of her royal 
paramour. The message is sent by Him "who hath eyes 
like a flame of fire," to watch over His faithful ones as 
they wandered through the dark valleys or hid in the 
darker caves of earth; and "feet of hard brass," to walk 
by their side as they scaled the rugged mountains or 
wandered footsore and weary, seeking a place to plant 
the seeds of Truth. 

The message contains an allusion to a faithful old 
Prophet who fled for his life into the wilderness from 
the wrath of the idolatrous wife of a king. The picture is 
from the history of the Prophet Elijah. (1 Kings 18; 19.) 
Jezebel was the protector of the priests of Baal. Her 
husband was king, and she wielded his power for her 
own ends. The drouth of three and one-half years was 
evidently a type of the "time, times and a half"— 1260 
years— of the spiritual famine, "not of bread nor of 
water, but of hearing the words of the Lord."— Amos 8:11. 

THE LORD'S SECOND COMING 

Sardis is said to mean that which remains, as if it signified 
a useless remnant, something out of which life or 



virtue had gone. The nominal Church during this period 
had the appearance of being what it was not, having a 
form of godliness without its power. Sardis was the remains 
of the true Church, which had been driven into the 
wilderness; but when the persecution began to subside, 
her zeal also abated. Persecution has always developed 
the vigor of the Church. 

Many today have the Sardis characteristics. To such 
there is a fatal warning in Revelation 3:3. Seven times 
our Lord's Second Coming is described as being thief-like, 
stealthy. Only to those who are watching is the approach 
of a thief known. Those who are asleep will be awakened 
only after he has taken full possession, after his work of 
destruction has progressed. Although they may then 
arouse themselves, it is too late. They have been overtaken. 
Thus our Lord will be present, but invisible and 
unknown— except to the watchers— for some years after 
His arrival; and His presence will be recognized by the 
sleepers only as the noise of spoiling the Strong Man's 
House gradually increases. Then slowly will they realize 
what it is and what the outcome will be. 

The reason why many professing Christians cannot 
recognize our Lord's Parousia— presence— is that they are 
looking for a fleshly Christ, visible to the fleshly eye, and 
making an imposing demonstration which they cannot mistake. 
Failing to realize the fact that spiritual bodies cannot 
be seen by human eyes without a miracle, they cannot 
understand how He can be present while "all things continue 
as they were since the beginning of creation." (2 Peter 3:3,4.) 
Thus they are unable to understand "the 
signs of the times," revealing His return. 

THE CHURCH IN PHILADELPHIA 

Philadelphia means brotherly love, as is well known. 
This stage of the Church's history evidently began at the 
Reformation; and there are many still living who possess 
the characteristics described. 

There is considerable similarity between the work begun 
on Pentecost and that of Luther and his friends. The 
Reformation was, in a sense, the beginning of a new era, 
a dawning of light where all had been darkness, the 
separation of the true from the false, and a new start in 
the way of Truth. No doubt all the powers of Satan 
were exerted to close the door then opened; but "He that 
is true" had said, "which no man can shut." Compared 
with the mighty hosts of their enemies, the little band of 
Reformers had but "a little strength"; but they knew that 
they had the Truth, and they fully trusted the Giver. 
Thus the Master could say, "Thou hast kept My Word, 
and hast not denied My name." 

During the Philadelphian period, especially during the 
first and the last phases of it, the faithful have either been 
obliged to come out of the nominal temple or have been 
cast out for their straight testimony. The reward promised 
them is that they will be, not simply an unimportant part. 



but a vital one— a pillar in the true and eternal Temple— a 
part which cannot be removed while the structure exists. 
During their trial state their names were cast out as evil. 
They were branded as infidels and heretics. They were 
not recognized as children of God, as citizens of the 
Heavenly Country, as Christians. All this is to be reversed. 
"The Lord knoweth them that are His," and in 
due time will fully and eternally acknowledge them. 

THE NOMINAL CHURCH OF TODAY 

Laodicea is interpreted to mean a tried, or judged 
people. The description shows us that they were tried 
and found wanting. If we understand Christ's meaning 
in this message, it is sent particularly to those who profess 
His name, but deny the Truth which He Himself here 
presents. Let those who read this special message do so 
with special care. 

"The Beginning of the creation of God." "What think 
ye of Christ? Whose Son is He?" (Matthew 22:42.) 
This question has had many answers. More Bible and 
less hymn-book theology would have made the subject 
clearer to all. The doctrine of the trinity is totally opposed 
to Scripture, and has not even one reasonable text 
to support it when the well-known interpolation of 1 John 5:7 
is discarded and when John 1 : 1 is properly understood. 
We suggest that any reader who does not see this 
subject clearly should read carefully and prayerfully 
the 17th chapter of St. John's Gospel. 

The Message to the Laodicean stage of the Church 
pictures the nominal Church of today as our Lord sees 
her. In one sense she is not cold. She has much zeal, but 
not according to knowledge. She has organized her 
armies, developed her machinery and multiplied her 
stores; but yet the enemy does not fall before her. She 
claims that her principal object is to convert sinners, to 
bring forth spiritual children. The Prophet puts these 
words into the mouth of nominal Christians when they 

R5993 : page 348 

awake to a knowledge of the situation: "We have been 
with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were 
brought forth wind; we have not wrought any deliverance 
in the earth; neither have the inhabitants of the earth 
fallen." (Isaiah 26: 16-18.) This is said after they have 
realized the presence of the Lord. 

We should not look for light where little remains but 
the fading reflections of a former glory. The sickly hue 
which now appears is only the smoke illuminated by the 
piercing rays from the Hand which, high upon the wall, is 
writing, "MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN." (Daniel 5:25-28.) 
Unknown to the Laodicean Church, our Lord has 
returned. He has stood at the door and knocked. Had 
they been awake, they would have heard. Our Lord 
clearly foretold that He would come as a thief; but He 



did not tell at what hour. 

While the nominal church is still seemingly in power, 
while the old glory still hangs about her, while it is still 
respectable and honorable to be a church member, the 
Little Flock of Truth-seekers are despised and rejected. 
They are covered with reproach because they dare to point 
out the faults of a worldly church. They are looked down 
upon by her who sits as a proud queen, lifted up in order 
that she may have the greater fall.— Revelation 18:7,21. 



R5994 : page 348 

SOME ITEMS OF INTEREST 
THE WAR OBSESSION 

"Does it not strike you that a most dangerous worldwide 
psychological condition is being created by the war 
in Europe' 1 War is too rapidly becoming a fixed and normal 
condition; men and women are becoming too easily 
adapted to that condition. 

"The people of the warring powers, not alone the 
soldiers, but the stay-at-homes, are accepting death on the 
firing line as inevitable and as good a way as any to die. 
The prayers for peace have been superseded by a grim 
determination on both sides to fight to a finish; to continue 
the war as the PERMANENT business of the nation. 
In the meantime crops are being raised almost normal, 
business is being conducted as usual, and even social functions 
are being resumed. 

"The attitude of Europe is being reflected over here. 
While still persistently declaring our principles of peace. 
war in our heart of hearts does not appear near so horrible 
to us as it did three, two, or one year ago. Are we 
not being insidiously inoculated with the war germ? 

"We may be forced into war, no matter how we 
struggle against it, but as a decent. Christian people let 
us not accept it as other than a horrible catastrophe. 
Without this country to lead in persistent efforts for 
peace a complaisant mental attitude toward war may soon 
become chronic all over the world; it is almost so in 
Europe now." —Cleveland Press. 

"WITH THE SKIN OF MY TEETH" 

-JOB 19:20.- 

The following is a partial synopsis of the description of 
the teeth-membrane or skin, in "Tomes' Dental Anatomy," 
1904, Fourth edition, London. It shows that Job and the 
learned of his day were far from being monkey-men. Until 
lately Job's words were considered a joke by dentists as 
well as others. The Bible is a wonderful book. 



"Nasmyth's Membrane" 

"Under the names of Nasmyth's Membrane, Enamel, 
Cuticle, or persistent dental capsule, a structure is described 
about which much difference of opinion has been, 
and indeed still is, expressed. Over the enamel of the 
crown of a human or other mammalian tooth, the crown 
of which is not coated with a thick layer of cementum, 
there is an exceedingly thin membrane, the existence of 
which can only be demonstrated by the use of acids, which 
cause it to become detached from the surface of the 
enamel. When thus isolated it is found to form a continuous 
transparent sheet, upon which, by staining with 
Nitrate of Silver, a reticulated pattern may be brought out 
as though it were made of Epithelial cells. It is exceedingly 
thin, Kolliker attributing it to a thickness of only one 
twenty-thousandth of an inch; but, nevertheless, it is very 
indestructible, resisting the action of strong Nitric or 
Hydrochloric Acid and only swelling slightly when boiled 
in Caustic Potash." 



page 348 

HOLIDAY REMEMBRANCERS 

WE ARE publishing early this year, as usual, a 
list of our stock suitable for Holiday Gifts. 
This will enable the friends to send their 
orders in good time to avoid the later congestion 
of the mail and express service. 

Remember that our Gifts should always in 
some measure represent us as ambassadors of 
Christ: 

"Studies in the Scriptures." India paper 
edition, fine sealskin binding, gold edges, light, 
small, beautiful, per set, $9.80 in cloth carton. 

"Studies in the Scriptures." Morocco, over 
boards, gold edges, but on paper the same as the ordinary 
cloth edition, suitable for book-shelf, $6 (1L 5s) for six 
volumes, postpaid. 

"Studies," Volume I., with Pyramid Chapter added. This 
special edition is very suitable for presentation to uninterested 
friends. Many have had their interest awakened by the reading 
of the Pyramid Chapter. A picture of the Great Pyramid 
is stamped in gilt on the front cover. We recommend this 
Volume for gift purposes. Postpaid 50c. (2s Id). 

Daily Heavenly Manna. Cloth-bound edition, prepaid, 
60c. Prices on "Studies" and Manna to Colporteurs and to 
I.B.S.A. Classes in lots of 50 or more, charges collect, will 
be one-half of the above mentioned prepaid rates. 

"Poems of Dawn." Nearly three hundred very choice 
poems topically divided, the very thing each should have near 
him for a leisure moment. The value of these as spiritual 
stimulants is inestimable. They can be appreciated by all 



Christians, though of course especially by those possessing a 
knowledge of Present Truth. Postpaid in karatol, red edges, 
50c; leather-bound, gold edges, 75c. 

"In the Garden of the Lord." This little booklet is a 
choice poem from the pen of Sister Seibert. It contains sixteen 
colored illustrations, twenty-four pages. Postpaid 6c. 
(3rd) each; per dozen 65c. (2s 8d). 

Choice Motto Cards for home embellishment and spiritual 
refreshment: 

Packet Ma— Twelve mottoes, small and medium, postpaid 
50c. 

Number Mb— Fourteen medium and small cards, $1. 

Number Mc— Thirteen large, medium and small cards, $1. 

Number Md— Four large and medium cards, $1. 

Where $5 worth of these are sent to one address the saving 
in packing and expressage would be 60c, making the price 
$4.50. Order by number only. 

Postcards. Assorted mottoes and designs, 15c. (7 l/2d) 
per doz; two dozen, 25c. (Is l/2d); 100 for $1. 

Scripture Memorizing Curds. We have two different sets 
of these— No. 1 and No. 2. Colors of the cards indicate the 
topic. For instance, purple represents royalty and the Kingdom, 
garnet represents the redeeming blood, etc. On one 
side of the cards are texts appropriate to the color. On the 
reverse side of the card is the citation of where it is found. 
These can be used personally or with a company of friends. 
The design is to commit the text to memory and its citation. 
Many have found these very useful. Fifty cards to the pack, 
25c. (Is Id) per pack, postpaid. 

Write your letters and correct P. O. address very plainly; 
also give name of nearest express office and company. 

Write your orders on a separate sheet of paper from your 
letter. If answering a letter marked File A, File R, or otherwise, 
refer to it in the opening paragraph of your letter. 

By observing these simple requests, delay will be avoided. 

page 349 

"I.B.S.A." BIBLES, BIBLE STUDY HELPS, ETC. 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" SERIES 
[SEE OPPOSITE PAGE] 

We commend also, as aids, the following publications (not all our own), 
which we supply at specially low prices because of the assistance they 
lend to the study of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the 
order in which they seem to us to be desirable aids. 

OUR SPECIAL "I.B.S.A." BIBLE 

Hereafter to distinguish our own special edition from other Bibles, 
we will refer to it as the "I.B.S.A." Bible. This Bible is becoming 
more and more indispensable to all readers as they learn how to use it. 
The translation, of course, is not at all different from that of other Bibles 
of the Common Version. We specially recommend 



it for its smallness of size, lightness of 
weight, and good-sized print, and above all for 
the helps to Bible students and teachers bound 
with it; printed on India paper; excellent 
press work. Its special feature, distinguishing 
this Bible from all others, is 

BIBLE TEACHERS' MANUAL. 
Part I. 

Biblical Comments from Genesis to Revelation 
with references to the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and others of our publications 
showing the page where the text is more fully 
discussed and elaborated. We can scarcely 
imagine anything more helpful than these for 
Bible study. It is so easy to turn to the 
reference and ascertain if the matter has been 
treated and where and how. It represents 
four hundred and eighty-one pages of matter. 

Part II. 
INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS. 

This is a topical arrangement of Bible subjects 
specially convenient for those who have 
opportunity for teaching others the Divine 
Plan of the Ages. Its various Topics are arranged 
under distinct headings and the various 
texts bearing upon the subjects are collated. 
With this help a novice has at his 
command, well-furnished, "the Sword of the 
Spirit." It is in condensed form, very convenient, 
consists of eighteen pages solid matter. 

Part III. 
BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX. 

The Berean Topical Index, alphabetically 
arranged, presents a large variety of subjects 
showing references to the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and others of our publications 
treating the same. This feature covers 
twenty-eight pages. 

PART IV. 
DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED. 
SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED. 

In this, specially difficult texts are brought 
to the attention and references given showing 
where they are treated in our publications. 
Following this is a full list of various interpolations 
and spurious passages of the Scriptures 
not in the original MSS., as proved by 
the oldest Greek MSS.— fifteen pages. 



These four features, representing five hundred 
and forty-two pages, are not to be found 
in any other Bibles on earth and, in our 
opinion, they are of almost priceless value. 
One of our interested readers if he could not 
procure another would not sell his copy for 
a hundred dollars— many of them surely 
would not take thousands for it. 

All of our "I.B.S.A." Bibles contain the 
above, and some of them, the numbers of which end with a nine, contain 
additionally Bagster's Bible Study Helps, including an alphabetical index 
of proper names and Bagster's Bible Concordance and Maps— a total of 
one hundred and eighty-six pages. 

We not only supply these Bibles at cost price, but, because of the 
large quantities ordered at a time, we are enabled to secure a cost price 
which is really phenomenal. The very low prices must not lead you to 
think that these are manufactured in any slipshod manner. They are 
first class in every particular. The prices are, many of them, less than 
one-half of what you pay for such books almost anywhere else. 

So great is the demand for these "I.B.S.A." Bibles that hereafter 
we purpose carrying no others in stock except pocket Bibles and large 
type Bibles for the aged. We will still, however, be pleased to serve 
anyone who desires other Bibles. We can procure for these wholesale 
rates, usually twenty-five per cent, off, plus postage. 

DESCRIPTION AND PRICES-"I.B.S.A." BIBLES 

No. 1918, $1.85, postage prepaid, is a beautiful book. It is small and 
light. Size 4 3/4 x 6 3/4 inches. It has minion type, red under gold edges, 
divinity circuit. French Seal. Looks like the genuine sealskin, but it is 
in reality good sheepskin. 

No. 1919, price $1.95, postage prepaid; the same book, the same 
Bible; the same every way, except the addition of Bagster Helps, Concordance, 
etc., making this size a trifle larger. 

No. 1928, price $2.85, postage prepaid. This is the same book exactly 
as No. 1918, except that it has genuine morocco binding; leather-lined. 

LITTLE LARGER, IONIC TYPE, SELF-PRONOUNCING 

No. 1939, price $2.25, postage prepaid. This is the same book as 
1919, the same binding and contents, but it has a coarser print and is a 
little larger book. Size, 5 1/2x7 1/2 inches. 

No. 1959, price $3.85, postage prepaid. This is the same book as 
1939, except that it has splendid morocco binding, is calf-lined and silk-sewed. 
Bibles similar in quality and finish are listed in many catalogues 
at $8. 

The sale of these books is not restricted to WATCH TOWER readers. 
They are valuable aids in Bible study and open to the public. 

BIBLE STUDY HELPS (BOUND SEPARATE). 

These are the same as in the latest "I.B.S.A." Bibles, described 
above. Full leather, divinity circuit, $1.15; Karatol, red edge, 60c, 
postpaid. Also in German (leather), $1.15; (cloth), 60c. 

Remit with order. We can secure such prices only by paying spot 
cash and must sell on the same terms. Insurance, 10c additional. 



Anyone ordering patent index on any of these Bibles should so state 
and should add twenty-five cents to the price. 

Should any desire other Bibles we will be pleased 
to supply publishers' catalogue, giving full description 
and prices. We are usually able to secure a 
discount of 25 per cent, on the publishers' list prices. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This Greek New Testament, with interlinear, word-for-word rendering, 
and a free-reading emphasized translation alongside, based upon the 
famous Vatican Manuscript, No. 1209, is a very valuable work. Originally 
published under the author's copyright by Fowler & Wells Co., New 
York City, it was sold by them at $4 in cloth and $5 in half-leather binding. 
For several years a friend, an earnest Bible student, desirous of 
assisting the readers of our Society's publications, has supplied them 
through us at a greatly reduced price; now he has purchased the copyright 
and plates from the Fowler & Wells Co., and presented the same 
to our Society as a gift that the poor of the Lord's flock may have this 
help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICE.-Hereafter we will have the Diaglott in leather binding 
only, divinity circuit, Bible paper, and have reduced the price to 
$2.00 (8s. 5d.), postpaid. We offer THE WATCH TOWER for a year as a 
premium, with each order for the Diaglott, if it is a new subscription. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading Hebrews, by 
one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a valuable aid in 
critical study of the Old Testament. Our special price, in leather binding, 

including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 1240 
pages. A valuable work for all critical students. We are not permitted 
by the publishers to cut their price, but we may and do give in addition, 
postage free, any two volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, cloth binding, 
with each Concordance. Postpaid, cloth binding, $6. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's work. It 
is a large volume of 1,020 pages. Cloth binding, $1.30, including postage. 

*DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 
FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH 

The demand for this publication increases year by year. 

Our present edition of the "Manna" contains the same texts and comments 
as all former editions. Every alternate leaf is blank-ruled for use 
as an autograph and birthday record. Its value increases as additional 
autographs of friends are secured. It is printed on fine bond paper. 

The following wholesale rates postpaid are granted to all WATCH 
TOWER subscribers: 
Purple cloth, gold embossed, gilt edges; English and Polish $0.60 



Dark blue cloth, silver embossed, German 60 

Leatherette, blue edges, Swedish and Norwegian 60 

Leatherette, genuine gold edges, Swedish and Norwegian 1.10 

Genuine Morocco, gold edges, English, Polish and Norwegian 2.00 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast table, 
that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed with the natural food. 

^SCENARIO OF CREATION DRAMA 

The ninety-six short, pithy lectures of the Creation Drama can be 
supplied in print as follows: 
IN ENGLISH AND FINNISH: 

De Luxe, gold edges, embossed, 400 illustrations $1.00 postpaid 

Cloth, burnished edges, embossed, 400 illustrations 65 " 

Paper in three booklets, complete; per set 25 " 

A Newspaper edition in 4 Parts 05 " 

IN GERMAN, SPANISH, ITALIAN, GREEK, POLISH, ARMENIAN: 

Cloth bound, complete 65 " 

Paper " " 25 " 

Newspaper edition, 3 Parts, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

IN SWEDISH: Newspaper edition only, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (cloth) $ .35 

Hymns of Dawn, without music (flexible) 10 

Poems of Dawn (Karatol) 50 

Poems of Dawn (Leather) 75 

Bible Talks in Simple Language (half leather) 1.25 

Bible Talks in Simple Language (half leather) 1.25 

Memorizing Text-Cards ( 100 in pkg.— assortments, Nos. 1 and 2). 

per pkg 30 

Scriptural Post Cards (assorted), doz. 15c; per 100 1.00 

CHARTS (Blue Prints, soft cloth): 

Plan of the Ages, 5 ft. $1.85; 8 ft 2.50 

Chronology of the Bible, 7 1/2 ft 2.00 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 7 1/2 ft 2.00 

BINDERS for THE WATCH TOWER: 

Spring Back (holds 1 yr.) 60 

CROSS & CROWN PINS (Gold, with red enamel): 

5/8"-No. 1 Ladies' Style, No. 2 Gents', each 1.15 

l/2"-No. 3 Gents' Style, No. 4 Ladies', each 1.00 

5/8" celluloid, per doz., .25; each 03 

Missionary Envelopes, per 100 .30; per 1000 3.00 

Vow Bookmarks (paper) per 100 .25; (silk) each 05 

*Booklets (on Hell, Spiritism, Evolution, Tabernacle Shadows, Our 

Lord's Return 10 

♦Question Booklets on each Vol. of SCRIPTURE STUDIES and on 

THE TABERNACLE, each .07; per doz 84 

Report on Foreign Missions, each 05 

THE WATCH TOWER, (semi-monthly) per year 1.00 

The Divine Plan of the Ages (Za), WATCH TOWER form, ea 10 

What Say the Scriptures about Hell (Hz), WATCH TOWER form, ea 05 

Judge Rutherford's Defense of Pastor Russell, each 10c, per 100 8.00 

THE BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY, per year 12 

Tracts in all languages FREE 



*Colporteurs and Class Secretaries may deduct one-half from above 
prices on MANNAS, BOOKLETS and SCENARIOS if shipment consists of 50 
or more volumes, charges collect. 



R5994 : page 350 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
WHOM THE LORD LOVES HE CHASTENS 

MY DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

As is expressed by so many dear friends writing you, we 
hesitate to intrude upon your consecrated time. We regret 
that too often during the past fourteen years we have needlessly 
done so. We now pray that God shall overrule all our 
mistakes for the good of His cause and our own spiritual 
advancement. 

We are now perplexed over some matters concerning 
what we should do in the Harvest work, and after praying 
over the matter, feel directed of the Lord to lay it before you, 
and abide by what you think best. We will try to be brief. 

(1) Reading and accepting Present Truth in 1902, I was 
very zealous for about one year to hand out tracts and tell 
the "good tidings." Finding that the people generally did not 
care to hear it and having a growing family to support, I 
lost my zeal, became interested in worldly affairs, with the 
result that after a season of measurable prosperity in which 
I failed, painfully, to contribute to God's cause as I should, 
I found myself a bankrupt and in debt in 1912. I accepted 
the chastisement as of the Lord, returned to my "first love," 
and was not rejected (what wonderful mercy!), putting my 
trust in Him for temporal welfare as well as spiritual. He 
has guided and guarded our interests to the extent that we 
have been able to provide things needful in an honorable way 
(farming). Our family of seven children are growing— our 
oldest, a girl of fifteen years, thoroughly consecrated, and 
two boys younger than she, thirteen and eleven years respectively, 
are manifesting a deep interest in God's Word. We 
are thus enabled to have the Bethel exercises each morning, 
with lessons from the SCRIPTURE STUDIES and TABERNACLE 
SHADOWS alternately every evening before retiring. We are 
at present somewhat isolated, except for one dear brother 
near us whom the Lord brought into the light through our 
humble ministry. We have no class connections except our 
own home. Our questions follow: 

(1) Opportunities are presenting themselves for giving 
public talks in small towns around us, which, when we have 
accepted them, seem to have stirred up an interest to the 
extent that the congregation increases and some are giving 
evidences of full acceptance of the Truth. There are brethren 
in large Classes who could and would as Elders do this work 



at a considerably greater expense than myself, owing to distance, 
etc. Since I have no Class direction should I call upon 
those brethren, or do this work myself— especially when going 
to a small place where we have no assurance of a good turnout? 

(2) If I continue to do this service should I report to 

the Bible House each meeting held, number in attendance, 
number manifesting interest, etc.? 

(3) We note that you advise that only such as are able 

to answer the late list of questions be considered as eligible 
to Eldership. We have sent in our answers to these questions, 
but have not heard as to what grade we made. We 
are sure since sending them in that we were not quite clear 
on one or two, at least. We kept a copy of the questions and 
are making a study of them, and find them very helpful. We 
also believe this is a timely test directed of God to provide 
thorough shepherds for His flock, and shall be glad to abide 
by the outcome of our examination. 

(4) Considering the fact that we have lessons each day 
in the week at home, would it be proper for my family to 
sacrifice my leadership to other work on Sundays? 

Praying every day for you, dear Brother, that you may 
receive strength, courage and wisdom from above to continue 
in the way until He shall say, "It is enough," and soliciting an 
interest in your prayers, 

I am sincerely your brother in hope, . 

OUR REPLY:— We rejoice with you that the Lord did not 
permit you to drift away from Him, but gave you experiences 
which directed you, and brought you important lessons. 

We quite approve your course of going forth every Sunday, 
or whenever convenient opportunity may afford, to 
neighboring villages and towns, to spread the knowledge of 
God's Word and of the Divine "Plan of the Ages." We are 
glad that you are thus engaged and that the Lord is granting 
you to see some fruit from your labors. We would encourage 
you to go on in the good work, believing that you will not be 
sacrificing the interests of your home so long as you continue 
the worship of the Lord and the study of His Word therein. 
A further suggestion we would make is that you introduce 
the reading matter to all who manifest any interest. It is our 
experience that, no matter who does the preaching, nor how 
much of it is done, very few will be brought to a satisfactory 
condition of knowledge or of character unless they read for 
themselves-STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, WATCH TOWER, etc. 

Since you are not identified with any Ecclesia, it would not 
be necessary for you to appeal to any. Authority to preach 
God's Word goes to whoever receives the Holy Spirit, in proportion 
as he may have talents for service. 

The V. D. M. questions have been sent out freely and 
many of them have been returned, but we have not yet had 
time to make an examination of them. Shortly we hope to 
appoint a Committee to examine all the papers and to pass 
upon them, and we will then be glad to notify each one in 
respect to the accuracy of his answers, as viewed by the 
Committee. 

May the Lord's blessing continue with you richly! 



TO PREPARE THE WAY 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Loving greetings to my beloved Pastor and Brother in the 
Lord, through whom the dear children of the Kingdom 
are constantly fed and nourished with meat in due season 
from the dear Lord's own table! 

Kindly pardon this intrusion upon your great magnanimity, 
and accept my sincere thanks for all you have been to, and 
done for, me and mine, by your unceasing labor of love. As 
the debt is so great, and I so very poor at reciprocity, I pray 
God, our Father, through His Son, our Redeemer and Lord, to 
cancel it, making such rewards perpetually as it richly merits. 
(Phil. 4: 19.) His grace is so wonderful and matchless! 

Had served many years as a church worker, but eventually 
sickening at its form of godliness, etc., slipped back into the 
field (world). About this time I married, and my wife has 
blessed me with great faithfulness and five children— one asleep. 

About this same time a dear friend of ours bought THE 
DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES of a Colporteur (Sister Graham) 
and handed it to my wife for me to read it and give my 
opinion as to its merit, etc. 

At this time my business began to move me to and fro 
with my little home and increasing family, and the book was 
laid away. After ten years or so of roaming, sometimes 

doing well, but never satisfied, I met a dear Brother S . 

A little conversation made me feel he had something I wanted, 
and somehow I let him know it. He kindly invited me to 
discuss the matter and after a very few exchanges he quoted, 
"Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground," etc. It was 
with this text I received some light, and surely more light 
has been the watchword ever since! 

I should tell you here that we had been well warned to 

beware of our friend S 's religion, etc., and we had never 

heard of you, or MILLENNIAL DAWN; in fact, it was only 
when reading Volume III., after going through Volumes I. 
and II., that I got to know Pastor Russell and his authorship 
of the books, etc., the main reason for this, I think, being the 
fact that the chart and preface of Vol. I. were missing. 

Leaving Brother S 's that evening, some tracts were 

given me. When I got home and told my wife where I had 
been and spent the evening, both hands went up in horror, and 
the words, "You've done it now; I was always afraid you 
would! I have no more desire; ah, I have been warned! 
You'll be an infidel proper now!" etc., etc. 

But she was already grieved about my seeming lack of 
spiritual desire and non-churchianity, and very anxious for 
the children. Two days or so after this I sat down to take 
some of the "food," and a paragraph in the tract "Do You 
Know?" got me; it referred to the trouble, "world-wide, 
socialistic and anarchistic." I felt very strange and not 
anxious to take it in. The statement, "The downfall of all 
the kingdoms of the world" grieved me, but I had not yet 
noticed the statement, "To prepare the way for Messiah's 



Kingdom"— the Heavenly Kingdom. 

I did not like to see the disasters predicted, but when the 
above caught my eye I exclaimed. Thank God, whoever has 
penned this! Exuberant with this joy, my wife must see 
it. And as I read, you should have seen her face, "And will 
result in the downfall of all the kingdoms of the earth." She 
was troubled and said, "That's awful!" Yes, I said, but thank 
the Lord this author has something better for their place; 
listen: "To prepare the way for Messiah's Kingdom." 

She did not, however, embrace the Truth with me, but 
seemed to fight at every step, until she was brought to see 
plainly it is the Truth and that it is no use to fight the Truth. 
She was now hopeful, missing my society, and very, very 
lonely. One day, sitting at her knitting (I was making a few 
notes), she said, "If you can't speak, write something; it will 
be all right." Whereupon I wrote, "What do you think of 
consecration?" and passed it on. She replied, "A great deal." 
I was delighted. She symbolized shortly after, and our 

page 35 1 

life has since been fraught with abundant joy and satisfaction 
in the dear Lord, to whom be all the praise for evermore! 

Being tied by family duties, etc., we have not been able to 
render very much service in the Harvest work, but we do 
pray for the dear Lord's blessing continually on you and all 
"the dear colaborers at the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Bethel, and 
everywhere." 

We ask your loving prayers for us that we may be found 
faithful and joined with you and all His own to our living. 
loving Head in His Kingdom, in the sweet bye and bye. 

"Toil on, and in thy toil rejoice; 
For toil comes rest; for exile. Home; 
Soon thou shalt see Him face to face, 
And hear Him say, "Enough, well done!" 
Your brother in the Lord, T. R. HICKMAN. 



ONE USED HIS BRAINS-THE OTHER DID NOT 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

Greetings in the name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ! 
I have been wanting to give you my testimony for some time; 
how I got the Truth, and what it has done for me. I had 
often heard the saying, "As a man soweth, so shall he also 
reap," and I was sowing bad thoughts in my heart, and reaping 
bad habits. 

My first start in the Christian life was in the fall of 1914, 
when I joined the "Knights of Malta." I got out of each 
Degree just enough of the Bible to make me want to know 
the rest; so I would go home and get my Bible and read 
the connections. It got so interesting to me that I started at 
Genesis and read everything to the end of Revelation. In 
that way I was getting rid of some of my bad thoughts, for 



some good thoughts. 

I was a great fellow for condemning the Roman Catholic 
religion. I was working with a Catholic friend at that time, 
and I asked him one day why he did not use his own brains 
instead of believing everything the priests told him. He 

R5995 : page 350 

asked what church I went to, and I told him that I was a 

Presbyterian, and he inquired why I was one. I told him, 

"Because my mother and father were." He asked, "Why 

don't you use your own brains?" I replied, "That is right; 

I am going to use them." He was telling all about St. Peter 

as being the first Pope, etc. So I bought a "Theological 

Dictionary" which gives the history and belief of all denominations. 

I asked our Heavenly Father to show me which was 

the right one. The first that I read was the history and belief 

of the Presbyterian Church. It did not take me long to 

find out that I did not believe what they taught. The more 

I read of the different beliefs the more disgusted I got. I 

saw your sermons in the Pittsburgh papers, but I did not 

read them very often, until one day I saw your sermon on, 

"Peter and the Kingdom Keys," and read it very carefully. 

I found that you proved from the Scriptures that St. Peter 

was not the first Pope. It gave me more zeal to read and 

study your sermons. The one, I believe, that got me into 

the Truth, was your sermon on "Christ Buried in the Flesh 

and Raised in the Spirit." I told my wife (who is also with 

me in the Truth), that I was going to send for a set of 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. But our Heavenly Father, seeing 

that my heart was ready for the Truth, did not give me a 

chance to send for them. He sent one of His messengers 

to my home with them. It was April 15th, 1915, and I have 

been making a close study of them ever since, and I thank 

my Heavenly Father for calling me "out of darkness into 

His marvelous light." I rejoice in trials and tribulations, 

because my love for our Heavenly Father casteth out fear. 

My wife and I had the great pleasure of hearing you talk 
at the Carnegie Hall, Pittsburgh, May 9th, 1915. The first 
time we attended a meeting in the Auditorium, Pittsburgh, 
was July 4th, 1915. Brother Kendall gave a talk on the Life 
of Christ, from Isaiah, 53d chapter. We made up our minds 
that from that time on we would follow you as you follow 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 

October 10, 1915, 1 sent nineteen letters which I received 
from the Brooklyn Tabernacle, to the Elders, Deacons and 
the Minister of the Presbyterian Church, notifying them 
why I was withdrawing and asked each one of them to come 
to my home and we would talk it over. None have come yet. 
Shortly after, I passed the minister on the street, but he did 
not recognize me. It was told me that he said he did not 
want to have anything to do with Pastor Russell or anybody 
that believed in his teachings. 

My wife and I consecrated ourselves to God during the 
October, 1915, Convention in Pittsburgh, and we symbolized 
our consecration by water baptism January 2d, 1916. We have 



been striving ever since to be overcomers by making the 
good fight, and guarding "the faith" to the best of our ability. 
We ask that you remember us in your prayers, that we may 
be faithful unto the end, when it will be said, "Well done, 
good and faithful servant, enter into the joys of thy Lord." 

We pray that our Heavenly Father will give you strength 
and wisdom so that you will be faithful unto death, and also 
all others who have made a Covenant with Him by sacrifice. 

With much Christian love, 

BROTHER AND SISTER HEADRICK.-England. 



A MINISTERIAL ATTEMPT TO "ANSWER" THE TRUTH 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Since your visit among us I have wondered if you would 
like to hear the results of our meeting. The effect on the 
entire city has been wonderful. Many thoughtful men heard 
you and have not minced matters in their open approbation 
of your sermon. The local papers did not report it and they 
came in for some criticism for failing to do so. 

On Sunday evening following your meeting two ministers 
attempted to "answer" you. They resorted to slander and 
falsehood, blindly wresting your points. Many who heard 
them after having heard you, have been drawing comparisons 
that are detrimental to these ministers' hold on their people. 

The pastors of one denomination have met to discuss the 
situation and to decide what to say to their congregations 
about you and your teachings. They admitted that the question 
everywhere is getting beyond their ability to answer. 

We are continuing our volunteering and canvassing, finding 
a kind of interest that will not much longer be put off 
without the Truth. 

The opposition is getting strong, but the Lord knows all 
about that! I thank Him always for this opportunity to 
serve Him. How kind He was to let me have this Light and 
His Robe of Righteousness to hide my blemishes as they become 
more perceptible! 

I thank Him for your visit here. It has been a greater 
blessing than we knew. May our Father bless you and 
send you back! 

In Jesus' Name, BUEBO ELLER. 



BRITISH CONDITIONS GROW SERIOUS 

A Brother in Great Britain writes:— 

"Women are now taking the places previously occupied 
by men, in nearly every trade. They are driving and collecting 
fares on the electric cars, motor cars, etc.; they are to 
be found at the railway depots emptying the wagons, behind 
the counters, in the banks, working the machines on the farms, 
and doing every other conceivable job which men have been 
in the habit of doing in the past. 



"Our nation is being weakened very considerably by the 
big battles that are now raging at the front. Thousands from 
lliis district wiped out daily. Il is a common occurrence to 
meet a mother who has lost all her sons— very often three 
or four— and in many cases the father also. 

"If ever there was a time to preach the Truth it is now. 
The nation is being broken down, and who can give comfort 
and joy to these dear hearts, now torn and sad, but 
ourselves? and we are doing, by the Lord's grace, all we can. 

"As a Church here, we are adding to our numbers daily; 
many very fine and noble characters are amongst those now 
coming along; and while the Lord continues to bless us, we 
remember you all. Often we find it easier to walk with the 
Lord when troubles abound on every side, while it is difficult 
to maintain our full devotion to the Lord when everything 
goes smoothly." 



CAREFULLY STUDIED VOW -THEN ACCEPTED IT 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

Soon after reading your views in the November 1 issue 
of THE WATCH TOWER I sat down to inform you, out of my 
own experience, what reasons a consecrated believer could 
have for not taking the Vow. After stating my reasons I 
decided to change the letter by leaving out one of them, so I 
re-wrote the letter, but decided to wait awhile before sending 
it in its final form. The result is, that after having 
carefully studied the Vow and my own heart, I have made 
the Vow my own, and thank God for it. 

I wonder if there are not others who would be led to 
take the Vow, if they should very carefully scrutinize their 
reasons for not taking it? Please record me as a keeper of 
the Vow and accept my deepest gratitude for having brought 
me to a closer study of my heart. 

May God's blessing continue with you in the work! 

Yours in His name, M. E. S.-N. C. 



page 353 
