Chapter Twenty-four
No Help From This World
Isaiah 31:1-9
1, 2. (a) Why are Jerusalem’s inhabitants terrified? (b) In view of Jerusalem’s predicament, what questions are fitting?
JERUSALEM’S inhabitants are terrified​—and with good reason! Assyria, the mightiest empire of the day, has attacked “all the fortified cities of Judah and proceeded to seize them.” Now, Assyria’s military machine is threatening the capital city of Judah. (2 Kings 18:13, 17) What will King Hezekiah and the rest of Jerusalem’s inhabitants do?
2 Since the other cities of his land have already fallen, Hezekiah knows that Jerusalem is no match for Assyria’s powerful military force. Moreover, the Assyrians have an unparalleled reputation for cruelty and violence. That nation’s army is so fear-inspiring that opponents sometimes flee without even a fight! In view of Jerusalem’s dire circumstances, where can her inhabitants turn for help? Is there any escape from the Assyrian army? And how did God’s people get into such a situation? To answer these questions, we have to look back and see how Jehovah dealt with his covenant nation in earlier years.
Apostasy in Israel
3, 4. (a) When and how was the nation of Israel divided into two kingdoms? (b) What bad start did Jeroboam give the northern ten-tribe kingdom?
3 From the time that Israel left Egypt until the death of David’s son Solomon​—a period of just over 500 years—​the 12 tribes of Israel were united as one nation. After the death of Solomon, Jeroboam led the ten northern tribes in rebellion against the house of David, and from then on the nation was divided into two kingdoms. This was in the year 997 B.C.E.
4 Jeroboam was the first king of the northern kingdom of Israel, and he led his subjects on the path of apostasy by replacing the Aaronic priesthood and the lawful worship of Jehovah with an illegitimate priesthood and a system of calf worship. (1 Kings 12:25-33) This was abhorrent to Jehovah. (Jeremiah 32:30, 35) For this and other reasons, he allowed Assyria to subjugate Israel. (2 Kings 15:29) King Hoshea tried to break the Assyrian yoke by conspiring with Egypt, but the scheme failed.​—2 Kings 17:4.
Israel Turns to a False Refuge
 5. To whom does Israel turn for help?
5 Jehovah wants to bring the Israelites back to their senses.a So he sends the prophet Isaiah with the following warning: “Woe to those going down to Egypt for assistance, those who rely on mere horses, and who put their trust in war chariots, because they are numerous, and in steeds, because they are very mighty, but who have not looked to the Holy One of Israel and have not searched for Jehovah himself.” (Isaiah 31:1) How tragic! Israel places greater trust in horses and in war chariots than in the living God, Jehovah. To Israel’s fleshly way of thinking, Egypt’s horses are numerous and mighty. Surely Egypt will be a valuable ally against the Assyrian army! However, the Israelites will soon find that their fleshly alliance with Egypt is futile.
 6. Why does Israel’s turning to Egypt betray a blatant lack of faith in Jehovah?
6 Through the Law covenant, the inhabitants of both Israel and Judah are in a dedicated relationship with Jehovah. (Exodus 24:3-8; 1 Chronicles 16:15-17) By turning to Egypt for help, Israel reveals a lack of faith in Jehovah and a disregard for the laws that are part of that holy covenant. Why? Because included in the terms of the covenant is Jehovah’s promise to protect his people if they render exclusive devotion to him. (Leviticus 26:3-8) True to that promise, Jehovah has repeatedly proved to be a “fortress in the time of distress.” (Psalm 37:39; 2 Chronicles 14:2, 9-12; 17:3-5, 10) Moreover, through Moses, the mediator of the Law covenant, Jehovah told future kings of Israel not to increase horses for themselves. (Deuteronomy 17:16) Obedience to this regulation would show that these kings look to “the Holy One of Israel” for protection. Sadly, the rulers of Israel do not have that kind of faith.
 7. What can Christians today learn from Israel’s lack of faith?
7 There is a lesson in this for Christians today. Israel looked to visible support from Egypt rather than to the far more powerful support that Jehovah provides. Likewise today, Christians may be tempted to place their confidence in fleshly sources of security​—bank accounts, social position, connections in the world—​rather than in Jehovah. Granted, Christian family heads take seriously their responsibility to provide materially for their families. (1 Timothy 5:8) But they do not put their faith in material things. And they guard against “every sort of covetousness.” (Luke 12:13-21) The only “secure height in times of distress” is Jehovah God.​—Psalm 9:9; 54:7.
8, 9. (a) Although Israel’s plans may seem strategically sound, what will be the outcome, and why? (b) What is the difference between human promises and Jehovah’s promises?
8 Isaiah, in effect, mocks the Israelite leaders who crafted the treaty with Egypt, saying: “He is also wise and will bring in what is calamitous, and he has not called back his own words; and he will certainly rise up against the house of evildoers and against the assistance of those practicing what is hurtful.” (Isaiah 31:2) Israel’s leaders may think that they are wise. But is not the Creator of the universe supremely wise? By all appearances Israel’s scheme to seek help from Egypt is strategically sound. Nevertheless, forming such a political alliance constitutes spiritual adultery in Jehovah’s sight. (Ezekiel 23:1-10) As a result, Isaiah says that Jehovah will “bring in what is calamitous.”
9 Human promises are notoriously unreliable, and human protection is uncertain. Jehovah, on the other hand, does not need to ‘call back his own words.’ He will without fail do what he promises. His word does not return to him without results.​—Isaiah 55:10, 11; 14:24.
10. What will happen to both Egypt and Israel?
10 Will the Egyptians prove to be a reliable protection for Israel? No. Isaiah tells Israel: “The Egyptians, though, are earthling men, and not God; and their horses are flesh, and not spirit. And Jehovah himself will stretch out his hand, and he that is offering help will have to stumble, and he that is being helped will have to fall, and at the same time they will all of them come to an end.” (Isaiah 31:3) Both the helper (Egypt) and the helped (Israel) will stumble, fall, and come to their end when Jehovah stretches out his hand to execute his judgment by means of Assyria.
Samaria’s Fall
11. What record of sin has Israel amassed, and what is the end result?
11 In his mercy Jehovah repeatedly sends prophets to encourage Israel to repent and return to pure worship. (2 Kings 17:13) Despite this, Israel adds to its sin of calf worship by engaging in divination, immoral Baal worship, and the use of sacred poles and high places. The Israelites even make “their sons and their daughters pass through the fire,” sacrificing the fruit of their own flesh to demon gods. (2 Kings 17:14-17; Psalm 106:36-39; Amos 2:8) To bring an end to Israel’s wickedness, Jehovah decrees: “Samaria and her king will certainly be silenced, like a snapped-off twig on the surface of waters.” (Hosea 10:1, 7) In 742 B.C.E., Assyrian forces attack Samaria, the capital city of Israel. After a three-year siege, Samaria falls, and in 740 B.C.E., the ten-tribe kingdom ceases to exist.
12. What work has Jehovah commissioned today, and what happens to those who disregard the warning?
12 In our day Jehovah has commissioned a worldwide preaching work to warn “mankind that they should all everywhere repent.” (Acts 17:30; Matthew 24:14) Those who reject God’s means of salvation will become like “a snapped-off twig,” destroyed like the apostate nation of Israel. On the other hand, those hoping in Jehovah “will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.” (Psalm 37:29) How wise, then, to avoid the mistakes of the ancient kingdom of Israel! Let us put our whole confidence in Jehovah for salvation.
Jehovah’s Saving Power
13, 14. What comforting words does Jehovah have for Zion?
13 Situated a few miles from Israel’s southern border is Jerusalem, the capital city of Judah. The inhabitants of Jerusalem are only too aware of what has happened to Samaria. Now they find themselves threatened by the same terrifying enemy that brought about the end of their northern neighbor. Will they learn from what befell Samaria?
14 Isaiah’s next words are comforting to Jerusalem’s residents. He assures them that Jehovah still loves his covenant people, saying: “This is what Jehovah has said to me: ‘Just as the lion growls, even the maned young lion, over its prey, when there is called out against it a full number of shepherds, and in spite of their voice he will not be terrified and in spite of their commotion he will not stoop; in the same way Jehovah of armies will come down to wage war over Mount Zion and over her hill.’” (Isaiah 31:4) Like a young lion standing over its prey, Jehovah will jealously protect his holy city, Zion. No boasting, no threatening words, nor any other commotion by Assyrian troops will turn Jehovah from his purpose.
15. How does Jehovah deal tenderly and compassionately with the inhabitants of Jerusalem?
15 Notice, now, the tender and compassionate way that Jehovah will deal with the inhabitants of Jerusalem: “Like birds flying, Jehovah of armies will in the same way defend Jerusalem. Defending her, he will also certainly deliver her. Sparing her, he must also cause her to escape.” (Isaiah 31:5) A mother bird is ever vigilant to defend her young. With outstretched wings she hovers above her brood, and with watchful eyes she searches for any sign of danger. If a predator comes near, she quickly swoops down to defend her chicks. In a similar way, Jehovah will tenderly care for the inhabitants of Jerusalem because of the invading Assyrians.
“Return, You People”
16. (a) What loving appeal does Jehovah make to his people? (b) When does the revolt of the people of Judah become especially evident? Explain.
16 Jehovah now reminds his people that they have sinned and encourages them to abandon their erring ways: “Return, you people, to the One against whom the sons of Israel have gone deep in their revolt.” (Isaiah 31:6) The ten-tribe kingdom of Israel has not been alone in her rebellion. The people of Judah, also “sons of Israel,” have gone “deep in their revolt.” This will be especially evident when, shortly after Isaiah concludes his prophetic message, Hezekiah’s son Manasseh becomes king. According to the Bible record, “Manasseh kept seducing Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to do worse than the nations that Jehovah had annihilated.” (2 Chronicles 33:9) Imagine that! Jehovah annihilates pagan nations because they are disgusting in their filth, yet the inhabitants of Judah, in a covenant relationship with Jehovah, are even worse than the people of those nations.
17. In what way are conditions today comparable to those in Judah under Manasseh?
17 At the dawn of the 21st century, conditions are similar in many respects to those in Judah in the days of Manasseh. The world is increasingly polarized by religious, racial, and ethnic hatreds. Horrific acts of murder, torture, rape, and so-called ethnic cleansing have victimized millions. Without a doubt, people and nations​—especially the nations of Christendom—​have gone “deep in their revolt.” We can be certain, however, that Jehovah will not allow wickedness to continue indefinitely. Why? Because of what took place in Isaiah’s day.
Jerusalem Delivered
18. What warning does Rabshakeh give to Hezekiah?
18 Assyrian kings gave credit to their gods for victory on the battlefield. The book Ancient Near Eastern Texts contains writings of Ashurbanipal, an Assyrian monarch who claimed that he was guided “by Ashur, Bel, Nebo, the great gods, [his] lords, who (always) march at [his] side, [when he] defeated the battle (-experienced) soldiers . . . in a great open battle.” In Isaiah’s day, Rabshakeh, who represents King Sennacherib of Assyria, shows a similar belief in the involvement of gods in human warfare when he addresses King Hezekiah. He warns the Jewish king against relying on Jehovah for salvation and points out that the gods of other nations have been ineffective in protecting their people against the mighty Assyrian war machine.​—2 Kings 18:33-35.
19. How does Hezekiah react to Rabshakeh’s taunts?
19 How does King Hezekiah react? The Bible account says: “As soon as King Hezekiah heard, he immediately ripped his garments apart and covered himself with sackcloth and came into the house of Jehovah.” (2 Kings 19:1) Hezekiah recognizes that there is only One who can help him in this frightening situation. He humbles himself and looks to Jehovah for direction.
20. How will Jehovah act in behalf of the inhabitants of Judah, and what should they learn from this?
20 Jehovah gives the sought-for direction. Through the prophet Isaiah, he says: “In that day they will reject each one his worthless gods of silver and his valueless gods of gold, that your hands have made for yourselves as a sin.” (Isaiah 31:7) When Jehovah fights for his people, Sennacherib’s gods will be exposed for what they are​—worthless. This is a lesson that the inhabitants of Judah should take to heart. Despite the faithfulness of King Hezekiah, the land of Judah, like Israel, has been filled with idols. (Isaiah 2:5-8) For the inhabitants of Judah, rebuilding their relationship with Jehovah will require repenting of their sins and rejecting “each one his worthless gods.”​—See Exodus 34:14.
21. How does Isaiah prophetically describe Jehovah’s executional acts against the Assyrian?
21 Isaiah now prophetically describes Jehovah’s executional acts against Judah’s fearsome enemy: “The Assyrian must fall by the sword, not that of a man; and a sword, not that of earthling man, will devour him. And he must flee because of the sword, and his own young men will come to be for forced labor itself.” (Isaiah 31:8) When the showdown comes, Jerusalem’s inhabitants do not even have to draw their swords from their sheaths. The cream of Assyria’s troops are devoured, not by the swords of men, but by the sword of Jehovah. As for Assyrian King Sennacherib, “he must flee because of the sword.” After the death of 185,000 of his warriors at the hand of Jehovah’s angel, he returns home. Later, while bowing to his god Nisroch, he is assassinated by his own sons.​—2 Kings 19:35-37.
22. What can Christians today learn from the events involving Hezekiah and the Assyrian army?
22 No one, including Hezekiah, could foresee how Jehovah would deliver Jerusalem from the Assyrian army. Nevertheless, Hezekiah’s way of dealing with the crisis provides an excellent example for those who face trials today. (2 Corinthians 4:16-18) In view of the terrifying reputation of the Assyrians threatening Jerusalem, Hezekiah understandably was afraid. (2 Kings 19:3) Still, he had faith in Jehovah, and he sought His guidance, not man’s. What a blessing for Jerusalem that he did! God-fearing Christians today may also experience intense emotion when under stress. In many situations, fear is understandable. Yet, if we ‘throw all our anxiety upon Jehovah,’ he will care for us. (1 Peter 5:7) He will help us overcome our fear and will strengthen us to cope with the situation that is causing stress.
23. In what way is Sennacherib, not Hezekiah, left with fearful emotions?
23 In the end, it is Sennacherib, not Hezekiah, who is left with fearful emotions. To whom can he turn? Isaiah foretells: “‘His own crag will pass away out of sheer fright, and because of the signal his princes must be terrified,’ is the utterance of Jehovah, whose light is in Zion and whose furnace is in Jerusalem.” (Isaiah 31:9) Sennacherib’s gods​—his “crag,” the refuge in which he has trusted—​fail him. They “pass away out of sheer fright,” as it were. Moreover, even Sennacherib’s princes are of little help. They too are struck with terror.
24. What clear message can be learned from what happened to the Assyrian?
24 This part of Isaiah’s prophecy provides a clear message for any would-be opposer of God. There is no weapon, no power, no device that can frustrate Jehovah’s purposes. (Isaiah 41:11, 12) At the same time, those who claim to serve God yet turn away from him to seek security in fleshly things will meet with disappointment. Any who “have not looked to the Holy One of Israel” will see Jehovah “bring in what is calamitous.” (Isaiah 31:1, 2) Truly, the only real and lasting refuge is Jehovah God.​—Psalm 37:5.
[Footnote]
Likely, the first three verses of Isaiah chapter 31 vss 1-3 are directed mainly to Israel. The final six verses Isa 31:4-9 seem to apply to Judah.
[Picture on page 319]
Those who put their trust in material things will be disappointed
[Picture on page 322]
Like a lion guarding its prey, Jehovah will protect his holy city
[Pictures on page 324]
The world is polarized by religious, racial, and ethnic hatreds
[Picture on page 326]
Hezekiah went to the house of Jehovah for help

