Letters​—Not Outdated
CHRISTIANS are well aware that letters played an important role in the development and spread of their faith. Many of the books of the Bible originally were letters written to the various congregations. (Col. 4:16) But the time for using letters to spread the Christian message is not past.
On a freezing winter morning, with the temperature below zero, one of Jehovah’s witnesses in Ohio decided to make a return call on a woman who had accepted a Bible and Bible literature from her. Lacking transportation by which to go personally to this woman, the Witness decided to write. She wrote out a Bible sermon, and enclosed a copy of The Watchtower with the letter.
About three days later she received a response from the woman. In part, her letter of appreciation read: “I have read your letter (a very good sermon) several times and also looked up the Bible references. Additionally, I have tried to read some every day and have given up nearly all my worldly magazines so that I will have more time to read my Bible and Bible books. I want to send this letter so that you will get it this week and thank you for thinking of me and sending the magazine.”
Sometimes, as we can see, letter writing can be a source of direct personal satisfaction. At other times the results are just as beneficial, even though the original correspondent may not be aware of it.
One of Jehovah’s witnesses in New York was sharing in the regular house-to-house ministry. At one door she met a man who identified himself as a devout Catholic, quite familiar with Jehovah’s witnesses, and definitely not interested in becoming one. Learning that the householder was quite upset over the recent loss of his wife, the Witness briefly spoke to him about the resurrection hope.
In view of the fact that he had expressed himself so plainly about Jehovah’s witnesses, one might wonder what kind of reception this minister could expect on the return visit. She was much surprised.
The minister soon found that, since she had made the original call, he had received a letter from a Witness who obtained his name and address from the obituary column in the newspaper. Though the man was a stranger to her, she had written a kind letter explaining the Bible’s glorious hope of a resurrection. The man concluded that surely he ought to look into an organization that would take the time to go from door to door and to write letters of comfort to people.
As far as a means to spread the good news of God’s established kingdom is concerned, the letter is definitely not outdated.

