From Our Readers
Mental Illness
Since 16 years of age (I am now 48), I have tried numerous doctors, not one of whom was able to do anything for me beyond the prescription of antidepressant drugs. My condition got steadily worse, and I experienced figments of the imagination, similar to those of Irene in “Hope for the Mentally Ill.” (September 8, 1986) I also made the mistake of basing my own self-esteem on what others thought of me. Only with the help of this article, and others on depression, was I really able to evaluate the ailment properly. (October 22, 1987, and November 8, 1987) I now feel much better. Simply to know that others suffer in the same way is an encouragement to carry on the struggle.
A. P., Austria
My Parents’ Divorce
I am a 16-year-old who doesn’t miss an article in the “Young People Ask . . ” series. After reading the article entitled “Will My Parents’ Divorce Ruin My Life?” (December 22, 1987), I felt relieved at receiving answers and pertinent counsel. I had often posed to myself the same question after my parents’ divorce. The series for young people is really helpful.
S. E. O., Italy
God’s Permission of Evil
“How Some Explain God’s Permission of Evil” (October 8, 1987) tells readers that Christian Scientists believe evil is unreal. This leaves the impression that they simply disregard evil. Right words. Wrong impression. What Christian Science actually teaches is that evil does not come from God​—the Giver of ultimate reality. Evil does not have God-given authority, permanence, or power. Christian Scientists feel that this evil is personified in Scripture as Satan or the Devil, but that it can be best combatted by understanding its very essence as a lying (John 8:44) or a deceiving of the world (Revelation 12:9) into accepting it as authentic. It is on the basis of God’s giving of infinite goodness that we feel the power of Christ exposes and vanquishes evil as illegitimate.
N. A. T., The First Church of Christ, Scientist, United States
Our article stated that Mary Baker Eddy tried to resolve the problem of evil by denying that evil exists in the first place, and we quoted “Science and Health With Key to the Scriptures” as follows: “God . . . never made man capable of sin . . . Hence, evil is but an illusion, and it has no real basis.” We would not want to convey a wrong impression, but we understand reader N. A. T. as expressing essentially the same thoughts but with different words.​—ED.
Happiness of Giving
Many thanks for your articles “The Happiness of Giving​—Do You Experience It?” (November 22, 1987) Since I enjoy giving gifts myself, I know how happy it makes you feel when the person you have given something to expresses his joy and gratefulness. Now I have learned to show greater appreciation, even for small things, realizing that they come from the heart.
T. W., Federal Republic of Germany

