Accidents​—“Why Me?”
THE world seems to be a very hazardous place. In one frightening split second, an accident can happen to almost anyone. Accidents at home, on the road, in meeting halls, and at work have become a scourge of the 20th century. Yet nine out of ten accidents could be prevented or avoided. How? By our becoming more safety-minded. Remember, accidents don’t just happen. They are generally caused by people.
Accidents are unplanned events that hurt. People cause them by means of an unsafe act or an unsafe practice, or an unrealized hazard may cause hurt. To prevent or avoid accidents, good judgment is needed.
How can good judgment be acquired? First, have a proper attitude that is free from anger and emotional upset. Has someone or something upset you within the last day or so? Then beware​—you may be accident prone! Psychological studies show that stressful situations can cause nervous tension that triggers risk-taking behavior that same day or even the next day. A second way to acquire sound judgment is to increase your knowledge of your limitations as well as of your “world” (home, workplace, machines, and so forth).
All too often one will shrug off a mishap by merely saying: “It was only an accident!” But accidents can maim or kill. The car driven recklessly kills just as surely as the bullet from a smoking gun. The poison taken by mistake is just as deadly as that taken deliberately. The fire sparked by a cigarette tossed thoughtlessly burns just as fiercely as that started by an arsonist. ‘I just didn’t think,’ is a hollow-sounding excuse that offers no solace whatsoever to someone who has lost a loved one in an accident.
In many countries, a fatal accident caused by a person who disregards safety laws can result in criminal-manslaughter charges. When the ancient Israelites were under the Law of Jehovah God, safety became part of their daily life. Houses with flat roofs had to have parapets, or low walls, so that no one would fall off and be injured. (Deuteronomy 22:8) The owner of a bull had to provide safeguards so that his animal could not gore people. (Exodus 21:29) And it appears that Israel’s road system had to be well maintained and clear of obstacles.​—Isaiah 62:10.
Therefore, safety is accident prevention. Safety is obeying all safety rules. Safety is a personal matter.

