From Our Readers
Help for Burns
I just had to write concerning your articles on burns. (March 22, 1980; April 22, 1980) Some months ago, when I was heating some cooking oil, water formed by condensation fell into the pan. The boiling oil splashed up onto my face, also landing on my wrist and shoulder. With the suggestions from your articles in mind, I immediately got under a cold shower. Although the pain had almost subsided, my skin was still peeling, so I went to the nearest hospital. The nurses disinfected the burned areas and applied cold compresses through the night and the following day. Since I had second-degree burns, I feared my face would never be the same. But just one week later, the results were so fine that even the hospital staff did not recognize me. Now a month later, only a slight trace of red on my forehead and on my eyelids remains. Our family has already learned much from Awake!, but my experience has prompted us to pay even more attention, for ‘time and unforeseen occurrence befall us all.’
G. J., France
Occultism
I wish to express my thanks for your article “Your Worst Enemy​—Who Is He?” (June 8, 1984) I bought a lot of books about occultism because I was fascinated by it. I never thought a Christian ought to avoid such things. Your article helped me to understand this point, so I decided to destroy all my books on occultism just as the Ephesians did. Without your article, I would never have found the courage to defend myself from the Devil.
E. M., Italy
Arousing Interest in the Bible
I was deeply moved with the presentation of your issue of July 22, 1984. Previously, I would have nothing to do with your publications. It was not because my religion, I am a Methodist, is different from yours, but I just found reading the Bible or any related material to be boring. Now, though, your magazines have greatly developed my appetite for reading the Bible and related literature. Enclosed is my contribution for more literature that will intensify my Bible reading habit.
F. O., Nigeria
Money Talks
I want to thank you for the article “When Money Talks.” (March 22, 1985) In these days of economic crisis, I got valuable tips on how to save and how to spend money wisely. I have learned a lesson from the saying: “If you make money your chief goal in life, it can be calamitous.” This article has been of great benefit to me.
R. G., Philippines
Conquering Prejudice
I wish to thank you for your article “Prejudice Can Be Conquered!” (November 8, 1984) Already after the first article, I was enthused. I was able to use the material of that issue as a basis for discussing the subject at school. The thoughts expressed in the article have been of great assistance in making a success of that schoolwork.
P. P., Austria

