Paying Attention Saved Their Lives
JESUS CHRIST gave advance warning of the end of the Jewish system of things that was centered at the temple in Jerusalem. He did not give a date when it would occur. But he described events that would lead up to that destruction. He urged his disciples to keep on the watch and to get out of the danger zone.
Jesus foretold: “When you see Jerusalem surrounded by encamped armies, then know that the desolating of her has drawn near.” He also said: “When you catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation . . . standing in a holy place, . . . then let those in Judea begin fleeing to the mountains.” Jesus urged his disciples not to go back to save material possessions. Flight was urgent if their lives were to be saved.​—Luke 21:20, 21; Matthew 24:15, 16.
In order to put down prolonged revolt, Cestius Gallus led Roman forces against Jerusalem in 66 C.E. He even entered the city and laid siege to the temple. Turmoil engulfed the city. Those who kept on the watch could see that disaster was imminent. But was flight possible? Unexpectedly, Cestius Gallus withdrew his troops. Jewish insurgents pursued them. Now was the time to flee from Jerusalem and all Judea!
The next year, Roman troops returned under Vespasian and his son Titus. The whole country was engulfed in war. Early in 70 C.E., the Romans built around Jerusalem a fortification of pointed stakes. All escape was blocked off. (Luke 19:43, 44) Factions within the city slaughtered one another. The remainder of the people were either killed by the Romans or taken into captivity. The city and its temple were completely destroyed. According to first-century Jewish historian Josephus, more than a million Jews suffered and died. That temple has never been rebuilt.
If the Christians had still been in Jerusalem in 70 C.E., they would have been killed or enslaved along with everyone else there. However, ancient historians report that the Christians had heeded divine warning and fled from both Jerusalem and all Judea to the mountains east of the Jordan River. Some settled in Pella, in the province of Perea. They had abandoned Judea and had not returned. Paying heed to Jesus’ warning had saved their lives.
Do You Take Seriously Warnings From Reputable Sources?
After hearing about numerous warnings that have not materialized, many people treat all warnings lightly. However, heeding warnings may save your life.
In China in 1975, warnings were given that an earthquake would strike. Officials took action. The people responded. Many thousands of lives were saved.
In April 1991 in the Philippines, villagers on the slopes of Mount Pinatubo reported that steam and ash were spouting from the mountain. After monitoring the situation for two months, the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology warned of imminent danger. Promptly, tens of thousands of people were evacuated from the area. Early on June 15, with a mighty explosion, more than two cubic miles [8 cubic km] of pulverized material was hurled toward the heavens and then settled over the countryside. Paying attention saved thousands of lives.
The Bible warns of the end of the present system of things. We now live in the last days. As the end nears, are you keeping on the watch? Are you taking action so as to stay out of the danger zone? With a sense of urgency, are you warning others to do the same?
[Picture on page 20]
Paying attention to the warning saved the lives of many when Mount Pinatubo spewed out volcanic ash
[Picture on page 21]
The lives of Christians who heeded Jesus’ warning were spared when Jerusalem was destroyed in 70 C.E.

