Where Is Your Life Heading?
• Many people are so wrapped up in the affairs of daily life that they give little thought to where they are heading.
• The Bible alerts us to wonderful events ahead. It also warns of a coming global upheaval in human institutions. For us to benefit and to avoid calamity, positive action is urgent.
• There are some people who know what the Bible says and try to apply it but who let the anxieties of life push them off course.
• Are you happy with the direction that your life is taking? When you plan activities, do you consider how these could affect your long-term goals in life?
[Box/Pictures on page 9]
What Is Most Important to You?
How would you rate the following? Number them.
Many of them have a proper place in life, but when you have to choose, what comes first? second? and so forth.
․․․ Entertainment/recreation
․․․ My job or my career
․․․ My health
․․․ Personal happiness
․․․ My mate
․․․ My parents
․․․ My children
․․․ A nice home, fine clothes
․․․ Being the best at whatever I do
․․․ Worship of God
[Box on page 10, 11]
Are Your Choices Leading You to Where You Really Want to Go?
CONSIDER THESE QUESTIONS
ENTERTAINMENT/RECREATION: Does my choice of recreation refresh me? Does it involve thrills that could endanger my health or even cripple me for life? Is it a form of “fun” that involves excitement for perhaps a few hours but that can bring long-term heartache? Even if the entertainment that I choose is wholesome, am I spending so much time at it that it crowds out more important things?
MY JOB OR MY CAREER: Does it serve as a means of support, or am I really a slave to it? Does it make demands that are ruining my health? Would I prefer to work overtime on my job or to spend time with my mate or my children? If my employer demands work that disturbs my conscience or that frequently crowds out spiritual interests, will I do that work in order to keep my job?
MY HEALTH: Do I take it for granted, or am I consistent about safeguarding it? Does it dominate my conversation? Does the way I treat it show concern for my family?
PERSONAL HAPPINESS: Is this my first consideration? Do I put it ahead of the happiness of my mate or my family? Is the way in which I seek it consistent with being a worshiper of the true God?
MY MATE: Do I view my mate as my companion simply when this happens to suit me? Do I treat my mate with honor, as one who is entitled to personal dignity? Does belief in God influence the way I view my mate?
MY PARENTS: If still a minor, am I obedient to my parents​—answering respectfully, doing assigned chores, coming home at whatever time they set, avoiding associations and activities that they warn against? If an adult, do I listen to my parents with respect, giving them suitable help when this is needed? Is the way I deal with them governed by my convenience or by the counsel of God’s Word?
MY CHILDREN: Do I feel a responsibility to teach my children proper moral values, or do I expect the schools to do that? Do I spend time with my children, or do I expect toys, TV, or a computer to keep them occupied? Do I discipline my children consistently when they ignore God’s reminders, or do I do it mainly when I am irritated?
A NICE HOME, FINE CLOTHES: What dictates the attention I give to my appearance and my possessions​—the impression I hope to make on the neighbors? the welfare of my family? the fact that I am a worshiper of God?
BEING THE BEST AT WHATEVER I DO: Do I feel that it is important to do things well? Do I strive to be the best? Am I disturbed if someone else does something better?
WORSHIP OF GOD: Is having the approval of God more important to me than the approval of my mate, my children, my parents, or my employer? In order to maintain a comfortable life-style, would I be willing to push service to God into second place?
CONSIDER CAREFULLY THE BIBLE’S COUNSEL
What place does God occupy in your life?
Ecclesiastes 12:13: “Fear the true God and keep his commandments. For this is the whole obligation of man.”
ASK YOURSELF: Does my life show that I view things that way? Does obedience to God’s commandments determine how I care for responsibilities at home, at work, or at school? Or do other interests or the pressures of life determine whether I set aside time for God?
What sort of relationship with God do you have?
Proverbs 3:5, 6: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.”
Matthew 4:10: “It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.”
ASK YOURSELF: Is that the way I feel about God? Do my everyday activities, as well as the way that I deal with crises, demonstrate such trust and devotion?
How important to you are reading and studying the Bible?
John 17:3: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”
ASK YOURSELF: Does the place that I give to reading God’s Word and thinking deeply on it show that I really believe that?
How important to you is attendance at meetings of the Christian congregation?
Hebrews 10:24, 25: “Let us consider one another to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together, . . . and all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.”
Psalm 122:1: “I rejoiced when they were saying to me: ‘To the house of Jehovah let us go.’”
ASK YOURSELF: Does my pattern of life show appreciation for this direction found in God’s Word? During the past month, did I skip any Christian meetings because I let something else crowd them out?
Do you have a zealous share in talking to others about God and his purpose?
Matthew 24:14: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness . . . , and then the end will come.”
Matthew 28:19, 20: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, . . . teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.”
Psalm 96:2: “Sing to Jehovah, bless his name. From day to day tell the good news of salvation by him.”
ASK YOURSELF: Does this activity really have the place in my life that it deserves? Does my share in it reflect conviction on my part as to the seriousness of the times in which we live?

