Help Others Attend Meetings
1 “Any friends in the vicinity . . . who desire to attend the meetings are cordially invited to do so.” Ever since this announcement appeared in the November 1880 issue of Zion’s Watch Tower, Jehovah’s Witnesses have eagerly invited people to gather together for Bible instruction. (Rev. 22:17) This is an essential part of true worship.
2 It Is Vital to Attend: Blessings result when we associate with the congregation. We become better acquainted with our marvelous God, Jehovah. In the congregation, we meet together to be “taught by Jehovah.” (Isa. 54:13) His organization outlines a continuous program of Bible instruction that draws us closer to him and gives practical help in applying “all the counsel of God.” (Acts 20:27; Luke 12:42) Meetings provide personal training in the art of teaching God’s Word. Reminders from the Scriptures help us to enjoy successful relationships with others and with Jehovah himself. Associating with those who love God strengthens our faith.​—Rom. 1:11, 12.
3 Give a Direct Invitation: From the first study, invite every Bible student to the meetings. Give him a handbill. Stir his interest by sharing a point that encouraged you from the last meeting and by considering something that will be discussed at the next meeting. Describe what the Kingdom Hall is like, and make sure he knows how to find it.
4 If a student does not attend right away, continue inviting him. Take a few minutes each week to show him how our organization functions. Use the brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Who Are They? What Do They Believe? and the video Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name to familiarize him with us and our meetings. Bring other publishers along to acquaint the student with them. In prayer, thank Jehovah for the organization and mention the student’s need to associate with it.
5 Do not hesitate to help newly interested ones to congregate with us. As their appreciation for Jehovah grows, they will be moved to apply what they learn and to become part of God’s unified organization.​—1 Cor. 14:25.

