Let Us All Honor Jehovah and His Son
How All Who Attend the Memorial on April 8 Can Benefit More Fully
1 Who today are given special honor? Those whose performances are highly regarded by the world. In most cases, however, their deeds are soon forgotten. But what about deeds that truly benefit all mankind? The greatest of these will receive our closest attention as we observe the Lord’s Evening Meal after sundown on April 8, 2001.
2 Who is worthy of the highest honor? The Bible answers: “You are worthy, Jehovah, . . . to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things.” (Rev. 4:11) As the Creator, Jehovah is the Sovereign Ruler of the universe. His worthiness to be honored will never cease!​—1 Tim. 1:17.
3 Jesus Christ, God’s Son, performed worthy deeds that will bring endless blessings to mankind. He perfectly imitated his Father. (John 5:19) His flawless obedience and faithful service made him “worthy to receive the power and the riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing.” (Rev. 5:12) His Father honored him by enthroning him as King. (Ps. 2:6-8) As for us, we will have the opportunity to honor both the Father and the Son as we observe the Lord’s Evening Meal on April 8, 2001.
4 Sad to say, relatively few in human history have rendered Jehovah and his Son the honor that is due. At times, even God’s ancient people, the Israelites, rendered only token service to Jehovah. This was blatantly disrespectful. (Mal. 1:6) Proper respect demands faithful obedience based on love and on appreciation for all that Jehovah and his Son have done for us. Giving such honor and respect means that we show godly fear and reverence, acknowledging Jehovah and Jesus in all our ways. The Christian congregation endeavors to teach and assist others to do the same.
5 A Special Occasion to Show Honor: The observance of the Memorial is the most significant gathering of Jehovah’s people each year. Everyone who has a desire to serve and honor Jehovah should be present. (Luke 22:19) We anticipate that in addition to the 6 million active Witnesses, interested ones will swell the attendance to more than 14 million. What a fine opportunity to honor our heavenly Father! While the observance focuses on Jesus, the honor and respect shown for what he accomplished glorifies the Father, who sent him.​—John 5:23.
6 What can we do to support this special occasion? We can help newly interested ones to benefit fully. Urge them to attend, and where needed, offer kindly assistance to help them get there. Explain the purpose of the discourse. Introduce them to others. What they see and hear could move them to seek to unite with us in honoring Jehovah.
7 Do not underestimate the impact of the program. A university student had this reaction: “I have attended Communion many times in my church, but this is quite different. I see that this is just like what the Bible says, and I think you have the truth.” He began to attend meetings regularly and was soon baptized.
8 Help New Ones Make Progress: Take note of the new ones who attend the Memorial, and visit them soon after to review the refreshing things they learned and observed. Make them aware of the other meetings, where they can add to their Bible knowledge. A review of chapter 17 of the Knowledge book, “Find Security Among God’s People,” will show them the wide range of spiritual provisions offered by the congregation, which are readily available to them. Arrange for them to view the video Our Whole Association of Brothers so that they can see the unity, joy, and zeal of Jehovah’s people with their own eyes!
9 It is important that interested ones learn how they can personally show honor and respect for Jehovah. Explain that heartfelt prayer pleases Jehovah and is a constant source of spiritual refreshment. (1 John 5:14) Using lessons 8 through 12 in the Require brochure, describe the kind of conduct that honors Jehovah. By discussing what is stated in the brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Who Are They? What Do They Believe?, pages 30-1, encourage new ones to think about the possibility of honoring Jehovah by personally sharing in the preaching work.
10 Appreciation for Jesus’ sacrifice and for our privilege to serve as his disciples honors the Father and brings blessings to others. Jesus promised: “If anyone would minister to me, the Father will honor him.”​—John 12:26.

