Love Motivates Us to Preach
1 As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we are best known for being zealous preachers of the Kingdom message. (Matt. 24:14) More than six million are active worldwide; new ones are added when they join with us in preaching. Numbers are tabulated on the basis of participation in this work.
2 What motivates us to volunteer for such a challenging assignment? We are not forced, enticed by material gain, or offered special honors. Initially, many of us were intimidated because we felt unqualified, and the public response was often negative. (Matt. 24:9) Most observers are at a loss to understand what motivates us. There must be a compelling reason for us to persevere.
3 The Power of Love: Jesus identified the greatest of all commands when he stated that we ‘must love Jehovah with our whole heart, soul, mind, and strength.’ (Mark 12:30) Our love for Jehovah is rooted in deep feelings of appreciation for who and what he is​—the Sovereign Ruler, the Creator of all things, who is ‘worthy to receive glory, honor, and power.’ (Rev. 4:11) His marvelous qualities are beyond compare.​—Ex. 34:6, 7.
4 Knowing and loving Jehovah moves us to let our light shine before men. (Matt. 5:16) Our light shines when we publicly praise him, speak about his wonderful works, and spread the message about his Kingdom. Just like the angel in midheaven, we have “everlasting good news to declare as glad tidings . . . to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.” (Rev. 14:6) Our love is the force behind the worldwide preaching work.
5 The world views our preaching as “foolishness” that should be ignored. (1 Cor. 1:18) Widespread efforts have been made to suppress our work. Our loyal love has strengthened us to declare, as did the apostles: “We cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard. . . . We must obey God as ruler rather than men.” (Acts 4:20; 5:29) The preaching work continues to expand in all parts of the earth in spite of opposition.
6 Our love for Jehovah is like a burning fire that compels us to declare abroad his excellencies. (Jer. 20:9; 1 Pet. 2:9) We will continue to “make known among the peoples his dealings . . . for he has done surpassingly”!​—Isa. 12:4, 5.

