Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting March 12
Song 112
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “April​—Time to ‘Work Hard and Exert Ourselves.’” (Paragraphs 1-13) To be handled by the presiding overseer. An enthusiastic discussion of what we desire to accomplish in April. Encourage everyone in the congregation to do his part to reach the goal of 100-percent participation in the ministry that month.
Song 147 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 19
Song 166
 8 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
17 min: Make Good Use of the 2001 Yearbook. Talk and audience discussion. Review “2000 Grand Totals,” on page 31. Discuss “A Letter From the Governing Body,” on pages 3-5. Have some in the audience relate a report or experience from the new Yearbook that has been especially encouraging and faith strengthening to them. Encourage families to read together the entire Yearbook, just as the worldwide Bethel family does during the year. Highlight the questions on page 255, which can be used to review what is learned. Ask for suggestions on how to use the Yearbook to help Bible students better appreciate Jehovah’s organization and the privilege of being part of it.
20 min: “April​—Time to ‘Work Hard and Exert Ourselves.’” (Paragraphs 14-30) To be handled by the service overseer. A talk with selected question-and-answer portions. Everyone should make a practical schedule for sharing as much as possible in the ministry during April. Outline entire schedule of meetings for field service planned for the month. Encourage all who can to auxiliary pioneer and to obtain an application after the meeting.
Song 188 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 26
Song 204
10 min: Local announcements. Remind brothers that daylight saving time begins this weekend. This may help auxiliary pioneers to reach their goal. Explain that it is not too late to submit an application to auxiliary pioneer in April. Encourage all to follow the Memorial Bible reading scheduled for April 3-8, as outlined in Examining the Scriptures Daily​—2001. Announce when the Watchtower Study will be held for the week of the Memorial. Do not forget the special public talk this Sunday, April 1, entitled “Who Can Be Saved?” Urge everyone to share in the ministry that same day, getting April off to a good start.
20 min: “Let Us All Honor Jehovah and His Son.” A Scripturally motivating talk by an elder. Encourage everyone to share as fully as possible in the special activity planned for April and to put forth extra effort to invite people to the Memorial.
15 min: Preparing Our Magazine Presentations. We will offer The Watchtower and Awake! during April. Review page 8, paragraphs 3 and 10, in the October 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry. Highlight (1) an article, (2) an appropriate talking point, (3) a question to stimulate interest, and (4) a timely scripture that could be used effectively in presenting each of the current magazines. Endeavor to use the Require brochure or the Knowledge book to start Bible studies with interested people. Conclude with a well-prepared demonstration of how this might be done on the initial call.
Song 207 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 2
Song 220
 9 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for March. Review “Memorial Reminders.”
18 min: “Love Motivates Us to Preach.”a Highlight the scriptures in the article. Include thoughts presented in Insight, Volume 2, page 673, paragraph 1. Invite a publisher who has been active for many years to relate how love for God motivates him to persist in the preaching work. Urge all publishers to share in the witnessing work during April and every month thereafter.
18 min: “Help Others Attend Meetings.”b The June 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, paragraphs 14-16, offers additional suggestions for directing Bible students to the organization. Show how both the Require brochure (lesson 5, paragraph 7) and the Knowledge book (chapter 5, paragraph 22) can be used early on to encourage meeting attendance. To illustrate this, have a well-prepared demonstration of a capable publisher warmly encouraging a student to think seriously about coming to meetings.
Song 47 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

