Announcements
● Literature offer for August: One of the following 32-page magazine-size brochures: Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, or The Government That Will Bring Paradise for a contribution of 30¢. As an alternate offer, two of the following publications may be offered for $1.00: Babylon, ‘Finished Mystery,’ God’s Kingdom . . . Has Approached, ‘Know Jehovah,’ Life Everlasting, and Paradise . . . Theocracy. See Announcements in July Our Kingdom Ministry for information on how credit will be issued for any of these publications used in the campaign. September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? The contribution will be $3.00 for the large size and $1.50 for the small size. October: One-year subscription for Awake! or The Watchtower, or both, for a contribution of $5.00 each. November: New World Translation with the “Kingdom Come” book for a contribution of $5.00.
● During the week of August 29–September 3, 1988, the Society will be taking an inventory of all literature on hand in Brooklyn. Because of this inventory, no congregation literature orders will be processed for shipment or for pickup during that week.
● Each congregation will receive three Literature Inventory forms and should take an actual count of campaign literature. Please fill out the forms completely and send the original to us no later than September 6, 1988. Keep a carbon copy for your files. We are sending the third copy for use as a work sheet.
● Congregations should begin ordering the 1989 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses with their September literature order. (See the 1988 Cost List, paragraphs 7-10.) The calendars will be available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish, and Swedish. Calendars are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at $1.00 each, which is the rate for publishers, pioneers, and the public. Do not send the remittance with the orders. (See the Cost List, paragraphs 23-25.) Until the calendars are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices.
● New Publications Available:
Making Your Family Life Happy​—Vietnamese
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Twi
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Burmese, Luchazi, Tumbuka
From Kurukshetra to Armageddon​—And Your Survival—​Gujarati, Punjabi
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide—​Romanian
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Cinamwanga, Hiri Motu, Silozi
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Luchazi, Nepali, Tamil, Tumbuka
“This Good News of the Kingdom”​—Tuvaluan
Watch Tower Publications Index 1986​—Dutch
Tract No. 14​—Hungarian
Tract No. 15​—Hungarian
Tract No. 16​—Hungarian, Swedish
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Isaiah (set of four; congregation and public: $6.00; pioneers: $5.00)​—French, German
The First to the Thessalonians through To Philemon (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)​—Portuguese
The First of Peter through The Letter of Jude (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)​—Portuguese
Jehovah Delivers Those Calling Upon His Name (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)​—Portuguese

