Benefiting From Obedience to Divine Instruction
1 The more we observe the folly of disobedient mankind, the more we can appreciate how beneficial it is to be obedient to divine instruction. The world’s do-your-own-thing philosophy has caused many of its adherents needless suffering. However, Jesus Christ set the pattern for Christians. The Bible shows that he was always obedient to his Father, and for this faithful course he was greatly rewarded.​—John 8:29; Heb. 5:8; Phil. 2:7-11.
2 “Benefiting From Obedience to Divine Instruction” is the theme of the special assembly day program that will begin in September. Practical suggestions and timely counsel will be presented to assist us in various aspects of Christian living. For example: How can parents help their children to take a firm hold on the truth and make it their own? How can each family member increase his joy in serving Jehovah? What can each member of the congregation do that will benefit him individually and the organization as a whole? These are some of the things that will be discussed on the new special assembly day program.
3 Attention will be given to the importance of following divine instruction when facing tests of Christian obedience related to employers and when dealing with the superior authorities. Surrounded as we are by a lawless society, Christians must be careful to maintain the Scriptural viewpoint toward such authorities and avoid improper attitudes prevalent in the world today.
4 Some adjustment is being made in the program schedule. During the 1989 service year, the Watchtower summary will be featured on the program whether it is held on Saturday or Sunday. This means that congregations having their special assembly day on Saturday will not schedule a Watchtower Study or public meeting the following day. The elders will be able to organize extensive group witnessing instead.
5 Appreciative comments have been heard concerning how beneficial the first special assembly day proved to be. Many were encouraged and strengthened by the wholesome spiritual instruction on personal Bible study and the information regarding the progress of the organization.
6 No doubt the special assembly day program for the 1989 service year will also be of great benefit to us as we strive to imitate our Exemplar, Jesus Christ. Do not miss any part of it. May we all continue to benefit from obedience to divine instruction.​—Heb. 10:23-25.

