Family Bible Study​—A Priority for Christians
1 Very often where there are serious problems with believing family members, especially with teenagers, family Bible study has not received the needed attention. It is sad to say, but many families, including those of some elders and ministerial servants, are having problems with their school-age children being overtaken by worldly influences.
2 Recently a circuit overseer wrote about brothers who were having problems with their children. He observed that the root of the problem is almost always the lack of attention to Bible instruction in the home. A recent survey by a circuit overseer indicated that in some congregations up to 50 percent do not have a regular family Bible study.
A PRIORITY
3 Jehovah admonished parents in Israel: “And these words that I am commanding you today must prove to be on your heart; and you must inculcate them in your son and speak of them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up.” (Deut. 6:6, 7) Yes, parents in Israel were instructed to give this matter serious consideration.
4 Time must be set aside regularly for family study if families are to follow the guidelines given in God’s Word. Family heads need to persevere diligently in conducting the family Bible study regularly, and other family members should likewise help to make this aspect of family worship successful for the benefit of the entire household. All need to appreciate that if they do not give proper attention to the spiritual needs of the household now, very likely they will have to deal with serious and even painful problems in the future.
HOW TO ADAPT A STUDY PROGRAM
5 How should a study be conducted? What should be studied? When should it be held, and for how long? How can you be sure of reaching the child’s heart? For answers to these questions, please consider The Watchtower of November 1, 1986, page 24.
6 Essential ingredients for a successful family study are joy and enthusiasm manifested by the parents. (Compare Psalm 40:8.) Also, parents need to commend the children for their efforts and encourage them to apply Jehovah’s principles.
7 A sister learned the truth when eight of her children were still living at home. Even though she had an unbelieving and uncooperative husband, she made sure that the spirituality of her children was given proper attention. She set a good example in field service and in her participation at meetings. After field service, she would look at the faces of her children to see if they reflected joy. If not, immediately she made sure to give encouragement. If they isolated themselves in their room, she would lovingly talk with them to draw them out and encourage them with God’s Word. As a result, all her children are in the truth. Three have been regular pioneers, and two of these also served at Bethel. Her efforts were richly rewarded because she always gave priority to their spirituality.​—Compare 3 John 4.
8 Many blessings can be enjoyed now and in the future if parents give constant attention to the spiritual needs of their children. As the children see the value of God’s law and are convinced that it is really good and beneficial, they will not hold back from letting others know what they believe by word and action. (Ps. 119:165) Therefore, parents, joyfully give your family study the important position it is due.

