Fully Accomplish Your Ministry
1 Jesus told his disciples: “Go therefore and make disciples . . . , teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) Genuine disciples of Jesus today respond enthusiastically to this lifesaving work. Concerning many it could be said, as in the case of the apostle Paul, that they are “being poured out like a drink offering.” (Phil. 2:17) Their faith-strengthening example encourages all of us to accomplish our ministry fully.​—2 Tim. 4:5; Heb. 13:7.
2 However, zealous efforts to witness to everyone in the territory are hampered at times by the great number who are not at home when we call. Additionally, some congregations have territory assignments that are quite large. This makes it difficult for them to cover the territory frequently, follow up the interest fully, or return to find those who were not at home. What can you do to accomplish your ministry more fully? Have you tried concentrating your efforts in those sections of your territory that have proved to be more productive? Try to work these thoroughly several times in the year, while being sure to cover all the assigned territory at least once a year.
PROPER USE OF HOUSE-TO-HOUSE RECORDS
3 It is essential that we keep a good house-to-house record and make use of it afterward. How can we fully accomplish our ministry if we do not call back where no one was at home? Can we really say that we are covering our territory thoroughly if we fail to make return visits on interested persons we have already located and endeavor to start Bible studies with them? The answers to these questions emphasize the need to make proper use of the house-to-house record. It is best to keep two records, one for interest found and the other for addresses where no one was at home.
4 Some publishers have found it practical to call again at not-at-homes before leaving the territory. Returning an hour or two after the initial call may result in finding someone home and placing literature or even starting a Bible study. In the case of congregations with limited territory, returning to find these people after the first hour or two extends the amount of available territory and assures better coverage of it.
5 Publishers who are unable to call again soon can give the record of not-at-homes to their study conductor for distribution to other publishers. This can be arranged conveniently where congregations have midweek, weekend, and evening witnessing groups. Of course, some publishers may want to keep their house-to-house records and make some calls when going to and from school, work, or shopping or while in the course of caring for other necessary matters. One congregation that encouraged the brothers to do this obtained good results, finding much interest in a section of their territory that had previously been unproductive.
6 Our ministry has many facets. There are a number of things for us to do. But a primary objective of our work is to “preach the word.” (2 Tim. 4:2) That “word” will result in good for those who listen to it. (Zeph. 2:2, 3) People in our assigned territory still need to be given the opportunity to ‘call on the name of Jehovah.’ (Rom. 10:11-13) Let us exert ourselves vigorously and seek every opportunity to accomplish our ministry fully.

