Presenting the Good News​—With Brochures
1 What a joy it is to speak the truth to people and share the Kingdom good news with them! (Acts 15:3) But our time for doing this is limited. Wisely, Jehovah through his organization provides excellent Bible study aids that we can leave with interested persons to assist them in making further progress. We want to introduce these aids effectively.
2 During August we will be using a new Topic for Conversation, “The Key to Happiness,” and we will be offering one of these brochures: Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, The Government That Will Bring Paradise, or The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever. Before we go into the field, we should consider how to introduce these Bible aids effectively and in harmony with our Topic for Conversation on happiness.
SOME SUGGESTIONS
3 Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!: This brochure has excellent appeal to young people as well as to those with limited reading ability. The pictures and scriptures are numbered for easy reference. How might you introduce it? To conclude your discussion on happiness, you could say: “Wouldn’t you like to enjoy true happiness on earth someday? [Allow for response.] Note this beautiful illustration of happy people here in this Bible study aid. [Turn to picture 49, and read comments over picture.] This brochure will aid you in learning how the Bible can help you live among such happy people and enjoy life forever on earth. It is yours for a contribution of 30¢.”
4 After a brief introduction, a young or new publisher might offer the brochure by saying: “We are offering people this brochure that shows how God will bring happiness to people all over the earth. Notice the cover that shows happy people really enjoying life. I am sure you will want to read more about this and examine the pictures and scripture references in this brochure. It is yours for a contribution of 30¢.”
5 The Government That Will Bring Paradise: This brochure focuses attention on God’s Kingdom​—the theme of Jesus’ message and ours. Here are two ways you could link this brochure to your conversation on happiness:
6 “Those who truly appreciate and observe God’s Word can look forward to a happy life under God’s government. This is the government that will bring about Paradise conditions all over the earth. It is well described in this brochure that you may have for just 30¢. Notice what is said about this government on page 3.” Then read paragraph.
7 Or, “Those who observe God’s Word not only are happy now but also look forward to greater happiness. This Bible study aid shows on page 29 why those who observe God’s Word will be happy. [Show householder pertinent points on page 29.] I am sure you will enjoy reading more about this. You may have this instructive brochure for 30¢.”
8 The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever: Certainly seekers of happiness must get acquainted with the God of happiness, Jehovah. So you might introduce the brochure this way: “In order to know and observe God’s Word, one must really become better acquainted with God himself. That is one reason we are offering people this informative Bible study aid. [Show brochure.] Not only does it explain what God’s name is but it also shows here on page 31 the value of knowing God’s name. [Read paragraph 1.] This copy is yours for a contribution of 30¢.”
9 You may find other effective ways to introduce the brochures in field service this month. Prepare well, and may Jehovah grant you joy in presenting the good news with the brochures.

