Announcements
FEAR OF THE SOVEREIGN JEHOVAH
“Let all the earth fear Jehovah.”—Ps. 33:8, AS.
Not a nation on earth today is free from fear. In fact, the world is now in the state so accurately described by Jesus, who predicted for this time that men would be “faint out of fear and expectation of the things coming upon the inhabited earth”. (Luke 21:26, NW) But there is another fear which is healthful, upbuilding, reassuring and conducive to right living and long life. That is the fear of Jehovah, which is pure. It impels one to serve Jehovah out of love for his goodness, and Jehovah guards the eternal interests of those who fear him. (Ps. 34:7, AS) Millions of people need to be taught that fear of Jehovah is the way of life, and that, in brief, is the purpose of the Watchtower magazine. During January, 1953, Watchtower readers may join in presenting this journal to the people on a year’s subscription for $1. Three booklets will be given as a premium. Help people to fear Jehovah as Sovereign by directing their attention to his Word. Each issue of The Watchtower does that faithfully.
1953 YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
Ready for distribution now are the 1953 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses and the new calendar. The passing of each year sees an increasing tempo in the preaching of the good news world-wide and the extending of the ministry to more territory. The Yearbook devotes a great deal of space to interesting and colorful reports of the activity of Jehovah’s witnesses, country by country. Also presented for consideration each day of the year are an appropriate Bible text and explanatory comment. The calendar strikingly depicts various ways in which Jehovah’s people worship him, in keeping with the yeartext. Monthly Bible themes are set forth on the calendar pad. The Yearbook is available on a contribution of 50c, and the calendars are 25c each, or five or more calendars to one address at the rate of 20c each. Send for your Yearbook and calendar now.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 11: Sharing in the Prosperity of God’s Nation.
Week of January 18: Theocratic Slaves.

