Serving the Interests of God’s Perfect Government
WHAT an example the apostle Paul left for us of one serving the interests of God’s perfect government, his heavenly kingdom!—Acts 28:31.
Note some of the ways in which Paul set us a good example: Upon his conversion he lost no time but “immediately in the synagogues he began to preach.” Having learned of God’s perfect government, did we at once begin telling others about it or are we still hesitating?—Acts 9:20.
Paul not only published but also made return visits upon those whom he had interested in God’s kingdom, as we read: “Now after some days Paul said to Barnabas: ‘Above all things, let us return and visit the brothers in every one of the cities in which we published the word of Jehovah to see how they are.’” Do we, “above all things,” make return visits upon all to whom we first preached about God’s perfect government?—Acts 15:36.
Although Paul had to contend with a twofold government, the Jewish polity of Palestine and the Roman world empire, he at no time compromised but continued to fight to defend and legally establish the good news, even appealing to Caesar. Do we show the same uncompromising spirit when we come in conflict with modern Caesars?—Acts 25:11; Phil. 1:7.
Note also Paul’s example of endurance. He was able to recommend himself as God’s minister by preaching with the greatest freeness of speech and continuing therein in spite of prisons, stripes, beatings, stoning, shipwrecks, hunger, nakedness, cold and all manner of dangers, in cities, in the wilderness and at sea. Do we continue serving God’s kingdom in spite of all trials?—2 Cor. 6:4; 11:21-32.
Because of all this Paul could say, as he did to the Corinthians: “You yourselves are our letter, inscribed on our hearts and known and being read by all mankind.” Do we have like letters of recommendation? Can we point to the fruits of our labors as proof that we are ministers of God’s government?—2 Cor. 3:2.
Among the many ways we can imitate Paul during the month of April is by offering to all we can the two magazines that tell about God’s perfect government, The Watchtower and Awake!

