Blessings That Come From Working With Others
1 Do you feel there are benefits to be enjoyed in working with others in the ministry? Jesus did. Although the harvest was great and the workers were few, he sent 70 disciples into the field “by twos.” What a rewarding time all of them had preaching in “every city and place to which he himself was going to come”!​—Luke 10:1, 17; Matt. 9:37.
2 It is stimulating to work with others. Some of us are shy and find it difficult to approach strangers. Having someone else at our side may give us confidence to speak the Word of God with boldness. When we have someone with us, it may be easier for us to carry out the work in the way that we have been trained. (Prov. 27:17) The wise man said: “Two are better than one.”​—Eccl. 4:9.
3 It is good to work with a variety of publishers and pioneers. The apostle Paul’s service companions included Barnabas, Silas, Timothy, and John Mark, and they enjoyed many blessings while preaching together. The same can be true today. Have you worked with someone who has been in the truth for a long time? After observing his skill in giving a witness, likely you have picked up some good ideas that have helped you improve. Have you accompanied publishers who are relatively new? Then you may have been able to share some of what you have learned and thus may have helped them to be more effective and to find greater joy in their ministry.
4 Are you presently conducting a Bible study? If so, why not invite one of the elders or the circuit overseer to accompany you? It is beneficial for our Bible students to get acquainted with the overseers. If you are hesitant about conducting the study in the presence of an elder, perhaps he would be willing to conduct it and let you observe. Afterward, feel free to ask him for suggestions on how you can help the student progress more rapidly.
5 Be an encouraging companion when you work with others. Be positive in your comments about the territory. Never gossip about others or complain about congregation arrangements. Keep your mind focused on the ministry and on blessings from Jehovah. If you do, both you and your companions will return home spiritually refreshed.
6 Your circumstances may make it difficult for you to work regularly with other brothers and sisters. However, if possible, why not arrange to have some time for working with another publisher? Both of you will be blessed!​—Rom. 1:11, 12.

