God’s Word Has Power
1 The Bible has greatly influenced the lives of millions. What it says is more motivating than anything man could produce. (Heb. 4:12) Look at what it has done for us. Truly, its worth is beyond compare.
2 Jehovah’s Witnesses are the foremost students and advocates of the Bible. We should view Bible reading as a vital part of our regular theocratic schedule, giving it priority over television viewing and all other recreational pursuits.
3 Make It a Regular Habit: Jehovah’s people have come to appreciate the powerful influence that regular Bible reading can exert. For many years a large sign on one of our factory buildings in Brooklyn has been urging passersby to “Read God’s Word the Holy Bible Daily.” New members of the Bethel family are required to read the entire Bible during their first year of Bethel service.
4 Despite your busy schedule, are you keeping up with the suggested weekly Bible reading outlined in the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule? If you have experienced difficulty in doing this, why not work to improve during November? The Bible reading for the entire month is Psalms 95-109, which requires reading about three or four pages a week. Some choose to do a little reading each day, perhaps early in the morning or before retiring at night. However you do it, the important thing is that you reap the wholesome benefits to be gained by regularly reading God’s Word.
5 Offer the Bible During November: Many people still have respect for the Bible and are willing to listen when we read from it. During November we will be offering the New World Translation and the book The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? This presents a splendid opportunity to show honesthearted ones the value of God’s Word. Be enthusiastic in doing that.
6 Prepare some thoughtful comments on the outstanding features of the New World Translation that will stimulate the people’s interest in obtaining it. Highlight its practical value. You could feature one of the topics in the section “Bible Topics for Discussion” and tie that in with the book The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? Or you might demonstrate the value of the 92-page index of Bible words by showing how it enables a reader to locate familiar texts. Some publishers may want to highlight either the “Appendix” or the “Table of the Books of the Bible” by showing its value in Bible study.
7 Be sure to point out that the New World Translation is in modern English, which makes it easy to understand. Some interesting comparisons with the King James Version are 1 Corinthians 10:25 and 1Co 16:22. The New World Translation uses the divine name, Jehovah, 7,210 times.
8 Yes, the Bible is God’s Word. If we read it, believe it, and apply its counsel in our lives, we will reap great benefits. It was written to give us instruction and hope. (Rom. 15:4) It is vital that we consult it every day and that we be ready to use it to teach others.

