Question Box
▪ What caution is needed when we work dangerous territory?
1 Increasingly, we hear reports of violence, muggings, and social disorders, especially in urban areas. Although we feel concerned, we know that even in areas of unrest, there are sincere people who will respond to the Kingdom message. So at the appropriate time, we must muster up boldness to press forward, confident of Jehovah’s watchcare.​—Prov. 29:25; 1 Thess. 2:2.
2 When we go into a potentially dangerous area, Jehovah expects us to be cautious and to use good judgment. Be alert. “Shrewd is the one that has seen the calamity and proceeds to conceal himself, but the inexperienced have passed along and must suffer the penalty.” (Prov. 22:3) Experienced publishers appreciate the wisdom of working together in pairs or even in groups of several publishers, if necessary. Ecclesiastes 4:9, 12 states: “Two are better than one . . . If somebody could overpower one alone, two together could make a stand against him.” Criminals often look for those who are alone and thus easier to victimize.
3 Be extra careful about going into apartment buildings with dark hallways and deserted stairwells. Be cautious about accepting an invitation into a house or an apartment. Do not argue with those who may appear to be threatening or challenging. Be quick to identify yourself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Some publishers always carry a Bible or a Watchtower or an Awake! magazine in their hand for the purpose of identification.
4 Keep an eye on individuals loitering in the area. Be cautious about entering an elevator with others who do not appear to be residents of the building. Do not wear expensive jewelry. If you have to be out after dark, avoid walking down dark streets where there is little traffic. If you are a mugging victim, do not resist if it is only your money or possessions they want; your life is worth more than any material thing you possess.​—Mark 8:36.
5 Brothers taking the lead need to be alert, keeping track of publishers in the territory. Usually it is best to keep the group concentrated in the same area so others are always nearby. If any kind of violence or disturbance develops in the neighborhood, the group should leave the territory immediately.
6 If we are alert and cautious, we can continue to reach those in high-crime areas who “are sighing and groaning over all the detestable things that are being done.”​—Ezek. 9:4.

