Service Meetings for November
Week Starting November 7
Song 4
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Mention one or two talking points in each of the latest magazines that can be used in offering them.
18 min: “God’s Word Has Power.” Questions and answers. Include comments on the importance of regular Bible reading based on the foreword of Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1994.
17 min: “The Bible​—Source of Comfort and Hope in a Troubled World.” Discuss with audience. Arrange for two demonstrations showing how to use the suggested presentations.
Song 24 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 14
Song 25
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and any donation acknowledgments. Review arrangements for expanded field service activity during the worldly holiday period next week.
17 min: “What Kind of Spirit Do You Show?” A talk. Include comments from June 15, 1977, issue of The Watchtower, page 369, paragraphs 4 and 5.
18 min: “Ways to Improve Our Kingdom Preaching.” Questions and answers. Invite audience to relate experiences showing how the suggestions offered in Our Kingdom Ministry have been used with good results.
Song 37 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 21
Song 40
12 min: Local announcements. Question Box. A talk. Make local application of material.
15 min: Local needs. Or a talk by an elder based on “Appreciate Your Sacred Service” in the September 1, 1994, issue of The Watchtower, page 29.
18 min: “Help Them to Hear ‘Even Another Time.’” Discuss with audience. Have two well-prepared demonstrations showing how the Bible may be used when starting a study.
Song 52 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 28
Song 58
10 min: Local announcements. Demonstrate ways of presenting current magazines.
17 min: “Blessings That Come From Working With Others.” Questions and answers. Encourage all to support meetings for field service arranged by the congregation rather than always making private arrangements to go out on their own. Working with the group results in extra blessings, more effective service, and mutual encouragement.
18 min: Offering the Greatest Man Book During December. There is a great need for this book. Hundreds of millions of people profess to be Jesus’ followers and claim to believe what he taught. People need to know what set him apart from all other men​—their salvation depends on it. The Greatest Man book, chapter 133, states: “Our hearts are moved when we consider his sublime courage and manliness, his unparalleled wisdom, his superb ability as a teacher, his fearless leadership, and his tender compassion and empathy.” The Bible clearly identifies him as (1) a Witness (John 18:37), (2) a Savior (Acts 4:12), and (3) a King (Rev. 11:15). Have a capable publisher demonstrate a presentation using some of these points. Encourage all to share in distributing this book during December.
Song 61 and concluding prayer.

