Ways to Improve Our Kingdom Preaching
1 Our preaching work is more urgent now than ever before. Whether people live or die will depend on their reaction to the good news. (1 Pet. 4:5, 6, 17; Rev. 14:6, 7) For this reason we should always look for ways to improve our Kingdom preaching. What are some ways to make improvement?
2 Prepare Well: Using the current issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, select a presentation that you feel would appeal to most people in your territory. It is important to adapt your remarks to local circumstances. Or you may prefer to prepare a presentation of your own, using ideas and Scripture texts that you have personally found to be effective. You will need an interest-arousing introduction. (See Reasoning book, pages 9-15.) Perhaps you plan to ask a thought-provoking question or to request the householder’s comment on some news item of local interest. When you have your presentation in mind, practice it with a family member or another publisher who can offer suggestions for your improvement.
3 Converse With People: Our purpose is to convey an important message. This can be done by engaging our listener in a meaningful conversation. If the householder raises an objection or offers an opinion, listen carefully to what he has to say. His comments will help you to give a Scriptural answer for the hope within you. (1 Pet. 3:15) If his view does not agree with the Bible, you might tactfully say: “Many people feel as you do. Yet, here is another way of looking at the subject.” Then read an appropriate text, and get his comment.
4 Have a Flexible Schedule: Being well prepared will be of little value if you are unable to talk to people. Today it is common to find only a few householders at home when we call. If that is the way it is in your territory, try to adjust your schedule so that you can work from house to house when more people are at home. You might find that the best time to call is on the weekends; others may be more accessible during the week but in the early evening hours. In some areas publishers find it advantageous to witness on worldly holidays because they find more people at home. People are generally in a relaxed mood and may be more willing to converse at such times. It would be good to adapt your introduction to the occasion and then to tie your remarks in with a Scriptural theme.
5 Analyze the Effectiveness of Your Presentation: After leaving each door, ask yourself: ‘Did I reach the heart of the householder? Did I draw him out and pay attention to what he had to say? Did I answer tactfully? In view of the circumstances, did I use the best approach?’ It may be helpful to work with an experienced publisher or a pioneer from time to time and to listen carefully to his presentations with a view to improving your own effectiveness in the ministry.
6 If you are skillful in your work, you will be able to share Kingdom truths that “will save both yourself and those who listen to you.”​—1 Tim. 4:16; Prov. 22:29.

