What Kind of Spirit Do You Show?
1 Paul concluded his letter to the congregation in Philippi with this exhortation: “The undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ be with the spirit you show.” (Phil. 4:23) He commended them for their genuine interest in preaching the good news as well as their warm, loving concern for the well-being of one another.​—Phil. 1:3-5; 4:15, 16.
2 It should be our desire to reflect the same spirit in our congregation. When all show zeal, kindness, and hospitality, this creates a spirit that becomes evident to observers. A positive and loving spirit brings unity and spiritual progress. (1 Cor. 1:10) A negative spirit produces discouragement and halfheartedness.​—Rev. 3:15, 16.
3 Elders Take the Lead: The elders have a responsibility to keep a fine, positive spirit among themselves and within their congregation. Why? Because the congregation can be influenced by their attitude and conduct. We appreciate having elders who are zealous in field service, who greet us with a warm smile and a kind word, and who are positive and upbuilding in their counsel, whether given privately or from the platform.​—Heb. 13:7.
4 Of course, all of us should do our share to make the congregation friendly, hospitable, zealous, and spiritually-minded. Individually, we can show warmth and love in our association with others. (1 Cor. 16:14) There should be no distinctions of age, race, education, or financial status among us. (Compare Ephesians 2:21.) Because of our hope, we can reflect a spirit of joy, generous hospitality, and zeal in the ministry.​—Rom. 12:13; Col. 3:22, 23.
5 All who associate with us, including new ones, should be made to feel welcome and to sense the love and devotion of the brotherhood. By our ministry and by manifesting fine Christian qualities, we give evidence that the congregation is “a pillar and support of the truth.” (1 Tim. 3:15) We also experience spiritual security by means of “the peace of God” that guards our hearts and mental powers. (Phil. 4:6, 7) May all of us diligently strive to show the kind of spirit that will assure us of enjoying Jehovah’s undeserved kindness by the Lord Jesus Christ.​—2 Tim. 4:22.

