What Can You Do About the High Price of Eating?
“HOW can I feed my family at these prices?” That is a question millions of housewives are asking. There are two basic principles that will help in many cases: (1) Be sure your money is paying for food, not advertising or “convenience.” (2) Buy for nutrition, rather than for desire or appearance.
Now, with these principles in mind, consider what happens when you go shopping.
When you look at the enticing frozen-food display, what do you see? Among other things, there are pre-seasoned and premixed fancy vegetables and TV dinners. Over at the cereal shelves you see the presugared, prefruited crunchy cereal for which children often plead. There are also “kits” with sauce for making rice and noodle dishes. You will find whipped butter, precooked rice and handy “individual servings” of soup, cereal or pudding. All these things involve “extras.” When you buy them, it is not only food that you are buying. As an Associated Press analysis says, “Every time the . . . consumer asks someone else to do what he could very well do for himself, it costs.” So, are these foods for you? Not if you need to economize.
If you want to save on your food bills, buy most foods in their simplest form. If you have a tight schedule, certain convenience foods could be valuable. But be sure they are worth the time they save.
In the beverage section are a variety of refreshing drinks. When you purchase them, what do you get? Is it not largely just plain water? It is amazing how much you can pay for a bottle of water when sugar and a little flavor and coloring have been added! If that is what you want, why not buy a powdered mix or syrup and add the water and sweetening yourself?
When shopping, you have to decide which brand to buy. If you make it a habit to reach for the one you hear advertised all the time, some of your money is going to help to pay the advertising cost. Did you know that in the case of dry cereals, for example, an average of one fifth of the price goes to pay for advertising? If you want to economize, why not try unadvertised local or “store” brands, where they are available. You will probably pay less. Did you know that often these brands are prepared by the same manufacturers?
Do you find that, when shopping, you often reach for the small package because the price is less? Really, you are probably paying more per measure than for the larger size. Volume usually means economy; so, generally it is in your interest to buy the largest size you have space for, especially of staple items that will keep. First, though, it is good to check the weight marked on the package to be sure there really is a saving. Packaging can be deceptive. One manufacturer’s container may look bigger, but contain less, than another’s.
Money Value Has Little to Do with Food Value
Have you ever said, “You get what you pay for”? On the other hand, did you know that some low-priced foods are more nutritious than high-priced ones?
Authorities generally agree that foods from four basic groups are needed for good health: (1) Meat, including poultry and fish, as well as eggs, dried peas and beans; (2) fruits and vegetables; (3) milk and milk products; (4) breads and cereals. You can save by using the most economical foods from each group.
Are you inclined to think that a top-grade steak is better for your family than a cheaper cut? Interestingly, cuts and grading of meats, grading of canned goods, eggs, butter, fruits and vegetables have almost nothing to do with food value! So it is wise to use the most economical of these items that will serve your purpose. When you plan to serve meat, why not try the lower grades and inexpensive cuts, like chuck and stew pieces? A good cookbook can tell you how to serve them in an appealing way. Remember, the food value is just the same as in the expensive cuts.
Another point to consider: Do you feel that your menus must always center around meat? The long-living people of Hunza in the Himalayas rarely eat meat and a number have lived well over a hundred years! So, necessary protein in their diet must come from other sources. What do they eat? Dried legumes (peas, beans and lentils), also milk and milk products like cheese. And, do you realize that these foods do not shrink from cooking, as meat does?
You will find that protein from lima beans may cost as little as one tenth of that from meat. Protein from cheese may be one fifth as expensive, and that from milk and eggs is one third of what you would pay if buying meat. But when you prepare a pot of lentils or beans instead of meat, remember that proteins from vegetable sources (except soybeans) are usually “incomplete,” not having all the necessary amino acids. Your body uses the protein best in the presence of all these acids, so include a glass of milk or some cheese when you serve beans.
Many like the convenience of just pouring dry cereal into a bowl, but did you know that you usually pay two to four times as much as if you cooked and served oatmeal? Furthermore, plain cooked cereals usually have more protein and vitamins. It pays to cook your breakfast cereal.
In most stores potato chips, pretzels, onion rings and other “snack foods” sell well. If that is what you purchase, what are you really getting? Is it truly nourishment for your family? The fact is, you are paying a high price for very little food value. You would be kinder to them if you provided cheese or fruits and vegetables in season for them to use as snacks.
Is milk a big item on your budget? If you were to use nonfat dry milk powder, you might cut your milk cost nearly in half, without loosing nutrition. Do you say, “The family does not like the taste”? Have you tried mixing it half-and-half with fresh milk and letting it stand overnight, or mixing it 50 percent stronger than directed? Some find that this solves the problem.
Other Ways You Can Save
When you go to the store, do you have a shopping list with you? It can be a money saver if you stick to it. You will more likely buy what you need instead of being motivated simply by impulse. When you prepare your list, keep in mind the advertised “specials.” If you take full advantage of them, you may save as much as 20 percent on your food bills, on the average, though you may have to go to two or three markets to get the best buys.
There are reduced prices on the day-old bread and pastry rack in many stores. These items are often quite good if you heat them before serving.
Strawberries may look very good, even in wintertime, but they will be much easier on your budget when they are in season, as is true of all fruits and vegetables. Also, why not try buying produce at the end of the week or when its appearance begins to deteriorate? It may be priced for quick sale then.
It could be that you find the price of fresh vegetables is still out of reach. In that case you may want to try growing your own. A small garden about ten feet by fifteen feet could be seeded with a variety of vegetables for $3 or so and may save you annually over $100 in produce. Even in city apartments, a sunny windowsill or roof can afford space for a few plants. If you are a beginner, be sure to get some “how to” information from someone who knows or from your local library or government information offices.
There is another suggestion you may want to consider: Time magazine of December 18, 1972, observed: “The simple fact is that Americans eat too much.” Studies have indicated that keeping children slender, rather than chubby, has health benefits. So, catering to desires for high-calorie, low-nutrition foods is probably no favor to your family.
Consider it a rewarding challenge to provide wholesome and tasty, yet economical meals for your family. You will be happier and healthier if you do.

