From Our Readers
Court Battles  As an attorney involved in child custody battles and blood litigation, I cannot express how much encouragement I derived from the article “Jehovah’s Witnesses ‘Delivered Up to Local Courts.’” (September 22, 1992) This past week some doctors, ignoring specific instructions to the contrary, administered blood to a Witness. Such callous disregard for fundamental religious and personal rights is repellent. Your article encouraged me all the more so to keep up the fight!
P. P., United States
Women​—Deserving of Respect  Thank you for the series “Women—​Deserving of Respect.” (July 8, 1992) It helped me to understand that taking women for granted is not a problem limited to one community, but one that occurs in many countries. I am also grateful for the suggestions on avoiding sexual harassment.
S. A., Nigeria
I appreciated the frankness of these articles. Your suggestions will make a lot of people, men and women, reconsider their attitudes. Thank you for showing how Jehovah views women.
J. P. L., Canada
I really feel that women were restored to their rightful position and were viewed as they ought to be. May Christian men also appreciate these articles so that, if need be, they may readjust their viewpoint regarding women. We will sincerely respect them all the more for doing so.
E. S., France
The articles give us permission to feel better about ourselves and show that men have a responsibility to act peaceably and respectfully toward us. I think these were very courageous articles, and they are much appreciated.
A. H., United States
It gave me a lump in my throat and tears in my eyes to know that I belong to an organization that takes such a firm stand on the treatment of women. They were the first articles I have seen that left no loopholes for abusive men to use as an excuse.
E. M., United States
I know this information regarding men’s view of women is not going to change the world, but it is very comforting to read words of truth, comfort, compassion, and understanding, realizing that Jehovah really does care for us.
H. Q., United States
The articles affected me deeply​—not that I have neglected my wife, but I am certain I could do more to help her. I esteem her very highly and feel that the articles will help all Christian husbands to recognize even more the value of our wives. They merit respect, dignity, love, and understanding from their husbands.
S. S., Brazil
Death  Your issue on “When a Loved One Dies” (July 22, 1992) touched my heart. The very day we received it, my 16-year-old brother-in-law died of cancer. The articles were truly an encouragement in a time of distress. Our friends and family stepped in to assist us by providing food, comfort, and help in making funeral arrangements. Jehovah really provides consolation through timely articles like these.
C. C., United States

