You Can Make Flying Safer
By Awake! correspondent in Finland
NOWADAYS, flying is a fast and common way of traveling. It is also considered to be one of the safest.
This safety is the result of determined and combined efforts by authorities and airline companies to eliminate potential risks. Safety depends on various factors. Airlines contribute by keeping their planes in good condition through checking and servicing at regular intervals. Furthermore, detailed loading plans and instructions are carefully designed for each flight. Luggage, freight, and mail are placed in the cargo space according to those instructions, and accurate weight-and-balance calculations concerning the flight are made. Did you ever think about all these preparations carried out behind the scenes?
But is this all there is as far as safety on a flight is concerned? By no means! There are additional features to which you as an airline passenger can directly contribute. In what way? Did you know that you may be a safety risk without being aware of it? Or that you can promote general safety on flights by knowing and observing some basic rules of aviation?
The Airlines and Your Safety
ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization), operating under the supervision of the United Nations, has made an effort to improve flight safety, working with the commercial airlines. IATA (International Air Transport Association) and ATA (Air Transport Association of America) have been in very close association with ICAO as far as safety matters are concerned. They have published instructions and requirements and prepared training material and information for the benefit of their members and the general public.
The development of various new materials and chemical compounds, as well as electronic devices used by passengers, has resulted in an increase in the number of risk factors. This has in turn increased the volume of safety measures and the need to inform the passengers.
What Kinds of Dangerous Situations Can Occur?
Fatal consequences could have resulted from the following situations:
(1) A suitcase of a member of a skiing team ignited on the luggage conveyor belt before it was loaded onto the plane. When examined, it was found to include a solvent for removing ski wax. The solvent had leaked out of its container. There was also a gas lighter in the suitcase, and a spark caused by the shaking of the suitcase set its contents on fire. Fortunately, all of this took place on the ground and not in the cargo space at 35,000 feet, [11,000 m] where it might have resulted in an extremely serious accident.
(2) In a similar way, ordinary matches ignited in a passenger’s suitcase by friction.
(3) At one airport, the personnel found a leaking container of bottled gas. The bottle was quickly developing into a delayed-action bomb!
(4) Acid leaking from the battery of a motorized wheelchair caused corrosion and significant damage to a plane’s structure. The plane was grounded for several days for cleaning and repair work, which resulted in financial loss to the airline.
What Must Not Be Taken on Board
The international associations mentioned above publish a handbook that is called the Dangerous Goods Regulations, which is available to airline companies and forwarding agents. Many of its stipulations form a part of the national aviation legislation in various countries. These stipulations include a listing of thousands of dangerous goods together with detailed directions for packing and transporting such items.
There are some substances and goods that you are not allowed to transport by plane at all. Furthermore, there are items that cannot be transported in luggage but may be approved as airfreight under certain preconditions. Then there are items​—though classified as dangerous—​that the rules of an individual airline may allow you to take with you in small amounts, for example in your hand luggage. Whenever you are uncertain, it is wise to consult your airline before the trip.
Where Can You Get the Necessary Information?
Most airlines print in their timetables the restrictions concerning hazardous items. Your ticket also has a listing of items and goods that are restricted. Furthermore, at their conference held in 1989, airlines around the world decided to direct the attention of the public to the risk factors that they may unintentionally create. At the beginning of 1990, the airlines launched a campaign directed at travelers. Posters were placed at airports and travel agencies to inform the public that hazardous items would be listed on a slip they would receive with their tickets.
What Is Included in Hazardous Goods and Items?
There are plenty of seemingly harmless goods and items that under certain circumstances may react to form a danger on board an aircraft. In flight, variations in temperature and air pressure, for example, may cause leakage to occur. Certain materials may seem safe, but as they come in contact with some other normally harmless items, they may generate a chemical reaction. This may cause a fire or spread toxic fumes. Therefore, it is essential that you know what you are packing in your suitcase.
As mentioned earlier, the forbidden items include ordinary matches and cigarette lighters. You are permitted to carry them only in your hand luggage.
The transport of all kinds of flammable liquids is forbidden. Paints, varnishes, and adhesives may also prove dangerous, let alone such solvents as thinner and acetone.
All kinds of flammable gases, such as lighter or camping gas refills, are forbidden on board an aircraft.
Explosives, fireworks, and signal flares are also forbidden because of their hazardous nature.
You have probably become accustomed to using many kinds of chemicals and industrial products in your home. Did you know that when taking a plane, you may not be allowed to take certain ones with you? The forbidden items include many aerosols, pesticides, bleaches, and cleaners. They may cause corrosion or oxidation or damage the plane or other goods around them.
Magnetic items may disturb the function of the aircraft instruments, and radioactive items may cause damage through radiation.
You Might Affect the Navigation System!
In the last few years, you may have been able to enjoy the use of all kinds of new inventions in the field of electronics. Radios, small video cameras, CD players, and cellular telephones, as well as remote-control toys, have attained wide popularity. Usually, you are allowed to pack these goods in your luggage provided you have removed the batteries. Since the rules differ from airline to airline, you should consult your travel agent before packing. It is, however, a universal rule that you may not use this type of equipment during the flight since it can disturb the navigation system of the aircraft.
Each passenger is allowed to carry a limited amount of medication, cosmetics, and alcoholic beverages for personal use, and aerosols such as hair spray and antiperspirants may usually be included in the luggage.
Are You Promoting Safety Aboard?
Do you observe all these regulations? Are you aware of your responsibility? Before packing for your next flight, sit down and carefully read the transport conditions, especially the rules concerning hazardous items. We have dealt with the general stipulations in this regard, but there may be variations among different airlines.
If you are uncertain about an item, do not hesitate to consult your airline just to make sure. Thus, you may avoid unintentional breaking of the rules. Thereby, you also avoid subjecting yourself, your fellow passengers, and airline property to dangerous situations. Yes, you can make flying safer.
[Picture on page 25]
Can you identify which of these items do not belong in your luggage?

