Theocracy’s Increase
THE Bible shows that the Theocracy is Jehovah’s kingdom, and fulfilled prophecy shows that it was established in the heavens in 1914. (Matthew 24; Rev. 11:15-18) On earth the Theocracy is represented by an ever-increasing number of loyal subjects, even as foretold by the prophet: “Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein.”—Zech. 2:4.a
How this city has grown! Within a single generation its inhabitants have increased a hundredfold. And with this increase of men there is also an increase of cattle. In times past cattle were a good indication of one’s wealth, and so today the cattle would well represent the possessions that Jehovah’s servants on earth have dedicated to his service.
So that there may be room for increase, the theocratic city of Jerusalem is unwalled. Being without walls, however, does not mean that the city is without protection, for Jehovah assures us: ‘I will be a wall of fire round about her.’ What greater protection could we have? If God is for us, who can be against us? If we are loyal subjects of this theocratic city we will have Jehovah’s protection, even as he protected his people in times past, because “Jehovah knows those who belong to him”.—2 Tim. 2:19, NW.
How can we demonstrate that we are loyal subjects of the theocratic city? By doing all we can to convince others to pull away from Babylon and flee to our unwalled city. Some may shrink back and consider such a step to be taking a chance. However, when one studies and knows the Word and believes that Word, it is not a matter of taking a chance. It is a matter of being absolutely sure of what the outcome will be. By fleeing to this city and accepting God’s Son, Christ Jesus, as their Savior and Redeemer, they will be able to get everlasting life.
The question often comes up, Just how long must we keep on doing this work? The Lord Jesus himself answers this question: “And this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for the purpose of a witness to all the nations, and then the accomplished end will come.” So, as long as this witness must be given the end will not come.—Matt. 24:14, NW.
It cannot be denied that the great “multitude of men and cattle” are being gathered to this ‘unwalled city’. It cannot be denied that we see Theocracy’s increase. It cannot be denied that Jehovah God is protecting his people as though we were in the shadow of his hand. But, as servants of Jehovah, we should ask ourselves these questions: Can we do better? Can we do more? Is our work efficient? Are we finding all the “other sheep” and aiding them properly?
Jesus said: “The person faithful in what is least is faithful also in much, and the person unrighteous in what is least is unrighteous also in much.” (Luke 16:10, NW) Having taken up the faithful service of the Most High God we must be faithful in all our work, be it large or small. The little details are just as essential to our faithfulness as the looking after the greater and more prominent interests. We have greater work ahead of us. As we increase in numbers let us also make sure that individually we increase in zeal and efficiency. Then our joy will also increase, for “Jehovah knows those who belong to him”.
[Footnotes]
For a further discussion of this subject please see The Watchtower, January 1, 1951.

