Does God Take Sides in Sports?
A VICTORIOUS runner kneels and gestures in a prayerful way, giving thanks for her accomplishment. Yet, we must assume that some of the other runners in the contest also prayed to God for victory​—and lost.
Two boxers kneel in opposite corners of a boxing ring before the first round of their bout. Both make the sign of the cross, a form of silent prayer to God for success. Then one knocks the other out. At other bouts, only one fighter may petition God for victory, yet he is as often the loser as not.
In team sports, groups of players may pray before, during, or even after a game. For example, during the last seconds of an American Super Bowl football game, a kicker lined up for the crucial field goal that would win the game for his team or lose it if he missed. The kicker later said: “I was praying about it.” But some of the opposing team were also praying about it​—for the opposite outcome.
Although both sides may pray, one side must lose. Even a winning team whose players prayed for victory can lose the next game. Indeed, eventually, by the end of the season, all other teams must lose, for there can be only one overall champion in a league. Yet, most of those losing teams had players who prayed for victory.
In an article entitled “Save Your Prayers, Please,” a sports columnist wrote: “Just because you rant and rave about how tight you are with God, doesn’t necessarily mean it’s true. . . . In World War II, German soldiers had a phrase inscribed on their belt buckle: Gott mit uns. The translation: ‘God is with us.’” Another sportswriter observed: “God does not take sides in football games. Temporal matters like these are decided by men and women, not the Almighty.”
The apostle Peter said: “God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” Engaging in violent sports is not ‘working righteousness.’ (Acts 10:34, 35; Romans 14:19) If God did hear the prayers of those asking for victory and a contestant was injured or even killed, would God be to blame?
God’s Word states: “No matter what it is that we ask according to his will, he hears us.” (1 John 5:14) For prayers to be answered, one must know God’s will and purposes, and one’s actions must be in harmony with such.​—Compare Matthew 6:9, 10.
No, God’s will and purposes are not connected with sports events. Thus, when prayers for victory are offered at them, is God listening? Most assuredly not.
[Picture Credit Line on page 31]
UPI/​Bettmann

