From Our Readers
Loneliness  I want to thank you so very much for the series “Loneliness​—What You Can Do About It.” (September 22, 1993) It came on a day when I was feeling very alone. Even though it made me cry, I feel much better having read it. I can think of several other friends of mine who will find encouragement in reading it.
B. H., United States
Even though I have desired to see such an article for some time, it came quite unexpectedly. I would like to express my heartfelt thanks for the advice it contained. Loneliness really is difficult to understand if you have not experienced it.
C. G., Italy
I am 38 years old and have experienced much loneliness, having been an only child and later going through career changes and divorce. The material was enlightening and educational. You failed to mention, however, that loneliness can lead to sexual immorality, drug abuse, and bad associations.
J. B., United States
In this particular article, we chose to focus on ways of overcoming loneliness rather than dwelling on its dangers. However, we do appreciate this observation.​—ED.
Moths and Butterflies  As a person who has an interest in biology, I would like to add one point to the article “Moth or Butterfly​—How Can You Tell?” (May 8, 1993) The clearest way to distinguish at a glance between a moth and a butterfly is to observe their sitting postures. The moth sits with its wings open flat; the butterfly, with its wings folded together vertically.
Y. Y., United States
Thanks for this additional information. “The World Book Encyclopedia” says this is true of ‘most butterflies and moths.’​—ED.
Young People Ask . . .  Thank you for the article “Am I Developing Normally?” (September 22, 1993) My sister is a year younger than I, and she’s very tall. Now I know I will not necessarily stay short.
C. L., United States
Thank you for the article “What About Hanging Out?” (June 22, 1993) I have never been the kind of teenager that hangs out with other youths. For this reason I felt that something was wrong with me. But the article helped me to appreciate that hanging out can get you in a lot of trouble. Cooking, drawing, writing letters, and preaching are much better ways for me to use my time.
K. R., United States
I am only 11 years old, but I thoroughly enjoyed the article “How Can I Avoid Getting AIDS?” (September 8, 1993) My mother and I talked about it together. Thank you for explaining in detail how to be safe from the AIDS virus. I thought you could get it any old way!
L. K., United States
Holocaust Museum  Recently my work supervisor planned a visit to the Holocaust Memorial Museum. I gave her the May 8, 1993, article “A Holocaust Museum and Jehovah’s Witnesses” to enhance her visit. The museum circulates 500 personal experiences on handout cards. Her card had the experience of one of Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Emma Arnold. My family met the Arnolds in 1951 and had snapshots of them in a photo album. My supervisor was astounded that she got the experience not only of a Witness but of one whom my family knew! I shared with her and with others at work our photos and the experience of Sister Arnold’s son-​in-​law, Max Liebster, which appeared in The Watchtower of October 1, 1978.
J. K., United States

