Help Others to Benefit From the Ransom
Memorial of Christ’s Death to Be Observed on April 12
 1. What is one way that God’s people express their appreciation for the ransom?
1 “Thanks be to God for his indescribable free gift.” (2 Cor. 9:15) Those words well express how we feel about the goodness and loving-kindness that God extends to his people through his Son, Jesus Christ. Such appreciation will be especially evident as we gather together on April 12 to observe the Memorial of Christ’s death.
 2. Who along with Jehovah’s servants attend the Memorial observance, and what do they need to do in order to benefit from the ransom?
2 Along with Jehovah’s servants, some ten million others attend the Memorial observance each year. In so doing, they demonstrate a measure of appreciation for Christ’s sacrifice. However, to benefit from the ransom, they need to exercise faith in it. (John 3:16, 36) How can we help them to develop such faith? During this Memorial season, we can encourage them to have a personal Bible study and to attend the weekly congregation meetings. Consider the following suggestions.
 3. How might we start a Bible study when extending an invitation to the Memorial?
3 Bible Studies: When you invite interested ones to the Memorial, why not try to start a Bible study with them in the Bible Teach book? Offer to explain the Memorial observance to the person by opening to pages 206-8 and considering the topic “The Lord’s Evening Meal​—An Observance That Honors God.” You may be able to consider that information in one or two visits, perhaps as a Bible study at the doorstep. When you have completed that material, the person may be willing to discuss chapter 5, “The Ransom​—God’s Greatest Gift.” Once a regular Bible study has been established, go back and consider the opening four chapters of the book.
 4. With whom can we start a Bible study during this Memorial season?
4 With whom can we start a Bible study using this approach? Perhaps some of your workmates, schoolmates, or neighbors would agree to such discussions. Brothers might approach the unbelieving husbands of sisters in the congregation. And do not overlook your own non-Witness relatives. In addition, we will want to make a special effort to extend a Memorial invitation to those who were once actively associated with the congregation. (Luke 15:3-7) May we seek to help all such ones to benefit from the ransom.
 5. How can we encourage Bible students and other interested ones to attend the weekly congregation meetings?
5 Congregation Meetings: The Memorial is the first meeting that many Bible students and other interested ones attend. How, though, can we encourage them to benefit from our other congregation meetings? The April 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8, offered the following suggestions: “Mention the title of the next public talk. Show them the material that will be considered at the Watchtower Study and at the Congregation Book Study. Describe the Theocratic Ministry School and the Service Meeting. When you have an assignment in the school, perhaps you could rehearse it with them. Share outstanding points that were presented at the meetings. Use photographs in our publications to help them visualize what takes place. From the very first study, invite them to attend.”
 6. In what two ways can we help honesthearted ones to benefit from the ransom?
6 When honesthearted ones have a regular Bible study and attend congregation meetings regularly, they often make rapid spiritual progress. May we, therefore, encourage others to take advantage of these spiritual provisions and to benefit from God’s greatest gift​—the ransom.

