Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting March 13
Song 41
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the March 15 Watchtower and the March Awake! At the conclusion of each presentation, have the publisher invite the householder to the Memorial, using the back cover of the magazine that is being featured.
15 min: “Help Others to Benefit From the Ransom.”a The part that follows this one will further consider how we can use pages 206-8 of the Bible Teach book when inviting people to the Memorial.
20 min: The Lord’s Evening Meal​—An Observance That Honors God. Question-and-answer discussion based on pages 206-8 of the Bible Teach book. In an introduction of less than one minute, show how the subject can be introduced to the householder by reading the opening paragraph. Then invite the audience to comment on the following questions without having the paragraphs read: (par. 2) When did Jesus institute the Memorial of his death? (par. 3) How often should the Lord’s Evening Meal be observed? (par. 4) How does the Bible describe the Memorial observance? (par. 5) How do we know that Jesus did not turn the bread into his literal flesh and the wine into his blood? (par. 6) What does the unleavened bread symbolize? (par. 7) What does the red wine represent? (par. 8) Who only should partake of the bread and the wine? (par. 9) When is the Memorial held each year, and why should we attend? Highlight key scriptures as time permits. Encourage all to consider this information with Bible students and others whom they invite to the Memorial by reading the paragraphs, discussing the main points, and using simple questions, such as those provided in this part.
Song 134 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 20
Song 18
10 min: Local announcements. Review main points from the box “Memorial Reminders.”
23 min: Christ’s Role in God’s Arrangement. A talk based on Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, pages 10-13. When discussing the first two paragraphs under the subheading “What Christ’s Role Is,” use three or four minutes to suggest and demonstrate ways to use the Memorial invitation. Review suggestions in the February 2006 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 3, paragraph 3.
12 min: Fortified by Examining the Scriptures Daily. Talk and demonstration based on the foreword of Examining the Scriptures Daily​—2006. Arrange a demonstration of a family considering today’s text and comments.
Song 103 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 27
Song 44
15 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for March. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the April 1 Watchtower and the April Awake! Also show how to use the printed invitation to invite interested ones to the Memorial.
10 min: Is God Still in Control? Talk and demonstration based on the back cover of the April 1, 2006, Watchtower. Take advantage of every opportunity to invite people to the special public talk. Be sure to invite every Bible student as well as members of his family who may not be sitting in on the Bible study. All known interested persons and others whom we meet in field service should be given this special invitation. Demonstrate how to use the April 1 Watchtower when extending an invitation to one who has become inactive or has stopped attending meetings.
20 min: Local experiences. Invite audience to relate experiences enjoyed in offering the Bible Teach book during March. Highlight Bible studies that were started. One or two outstanding experiences may be reenacted.
Song 170 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 3
Song 199
15 min: Local announcements. Briefly review the article “Enjoy Our Study of What Does the Bible Really Teach?” which appears on page 6 of the February 2006 Our Kingdom Ministry. Draw attention to the study schedule for the Bible Teach book. Also show how to use the printed invitation to invite interested ones to the Memorial.
10 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Teach Meek Ones to Walk in God’s Way.”b Include comments based on the July 1, 2004, Watchtower, page 16, paragraph 9.
Song 93 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

