Teach Meek Ones to Walk in God’s Way
 1. What is involved in making disciples?
1 First-century disciples of Christ were spoken of as belonging to “The Way.” (Acts 9:2) True Christianity involves a person’s entire way of life. (Prov. 3:5, 6) When conducting Bible studies, therefore, we need to do more than impart accurate knowledge of Bible doctrine. We must also help Bible students to walk in Jehovah’s way.​—Ps. 25:8, 9.
 2. What can motivate a Bible student to observe God’s commands?
2 Love for Jehovah and for Jesus: What a challenge it is for imperfect people to bring their thinking, attitudes, speech, and conduct into harmony with God’s will! (Rom. 7:21-23; Eph. 4:22-24) However, love for God and his Son motivates meek ones to undertake this challenge. (John 14:15; 1 John 5:3) How can we help our Bible students to cultivate this love?
 3. How can we help students to cultivate love for Jehovah and for Jesus?
3 Help your student to get to know the kind of person Jehovah is. One brother explained, “People cannot love a person they don’t know, so from the very beginning of the study, I teach them God’s name from the Bible, and I look for opportunities to emphasize Jehovah’s qualities.” Highlighting Jesus’ example is an excellent way to do this. (John 1:14; 14:9) In addition, make use of the review box at the conclusion of each chapter of the Bible Teach book to help the student reflect on the marvelous qualities of God and his Son.
 4. (a) Why do many students find preaching to be a challenge? (b) How can we help our students to take their first steps in the Christian ministry?
4 Teach by Example: As teachers and guides, we show others by our actions what it means to walk in God’s way. (1 Cor. 11:1) For example, most Bible students are not accustomed to approaching strangers in order to share their beliefs. Therefore, it may require patience and skill to help them to develop the love, faith, and courage needed to participate in the work of preaching and making disciples. (2 Cor. 4:13; 1 Thess. 2:2) Our desire to guide our students will move us to be at their side when they take their first steps in the Christian ministry.
 5. How does a good example help students to observe what is involved in following God’s commands?
5 Your example can instruct students in other important aspects of Christian living. When you visit the sick or warmly greet others at congregation meetings, they see love in action. (John 15:12) When you share in cleaning the Kingdom Hall or do helpful things for others, you are teaching them how to serve. (John 13:12-15) When they observe that you maintain a simple lifestyle, they see what it means to ‘keep on seeking first the kingdom.’​—Matt. 6:33.
 6. What results from helping meek ones to serve Jehovah?
6 The work of teaching others from God’s Word and of making disciples involves much effort. But what a joy it is to see meek ones “go on walking in the truth”!​—3 John 4.

