Bless Jehovah “All Day Long”
1 Psalm 145:2 contains a promise that King David made to Jehovah: “All day long I will bless you, and I will praise your name to time indefinite, even forever.” We too have reason to bless and praise our heavenly Father! But how can we imitate David’s example in exalting Jehovah’s sovereignty “all day long”?
2 Fill Our Hearts With Appreciation for Jehovah: Regular study of God’s Word deepens our gratitude for what Jehovah has done, is doing, and will yet do for us. As we grow in appreciation for his marvelous acts, we will find ourselves bubbling over about his goodness. (Ps. 145:7) We will eagerly praise Jehovah on every appropriate occasion.
3 Praise Jehovah in Daily Conversation: When conversing with neighbors, schoolmates, workmates, and others we contact daily, we may find opportunities to share our hope with them. A neighbor may express concern about crime in the community; a schoolmate may be anxious about drug abuse or immorality; a workmate may state an opinion about some political issue. We can point to the principles and promises in God’s Word that show the proper course to take now and the eventual remedy for these problems. Such words spoken at the “right time” can be a blessing!—Prov. 15:23.
4 Speak About Jehovah Full-Time: The person with deep appreciation for Jehovah wants to share the good news with as many others as possible. (Ps. 40:8-10) In this regard we should ask ourselves, ‘Am I doing all that my circumstances will allow?’ Many have found that with some reasonable adjustments, they have been able to become regular pioneers. If present circumstances do not allow for that, can we enroll as auxiliary pioneers? Since the upcoming Memorial season is a time for expanded activity, the months of March and April would be a fine time to increase our service by auxiliary pioneering.
5 Help New Ones to Join Us in Blessing Jehovah: The celebration of the Memorial of Jesus’ death always reminds us of reasons to be thankful to Jehovah and to praise His name. This is an especially good time to encourage our Bible students to join us in speaking publicly about Jehovah’s kingship. Urge them to reflect prayerfully on what is stated in paragraphs 7-9 on pages 173-5 in the book Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life. If they qualify, they have no reason to hold back just because they lack experience. Capable publishers are available to show them how the Kingdom-preaching work is done. If new ones can muster up boldness to speak the good news, they can be confident that Jehovah will help them.—Acts 4:31; 1 Thess. 2:2.
6 We bring eternal benefits to ourselves as well as to others when we seek to bless Jehovah all day long.

