Part 3—Benefit From the Theocratic Ministry School for 1996
1 The apostle Paul wanted his brothers to pray in his behalf so that he might acquire the ability to speak the good news with boldness. (Eph. 6:18-20) We desire to cultivate that same ability. To that end, we appreciate the help provided by the Theocratic Ministry School, in which qualified meeting attenders are encouraged to enroll.
2 As students, we receive personalized counsel to help us improve our speaking and teaching abilities. (Prov. 9:9) We can also benefit from listening to the counsel other students receive, applying what we learn to ourselves. When preparing an assignment, we should study the source material carefully to make sure that our explanation of it is accurate. The main points and the scriptures that we use should fit in with the development of the overall theme. If the assignment involves another person, it should be rehearsed well in advance of being presented in the school. As we make progress, an effort should be made to speak extemporaneously, using notes instead of a manuscript.
3 All who have assignments in the school should arrive early, give the school overseer their Speech Counsel slip, and sit near the front of the hall. Sisters should let the school overseer know in advance what their setting is and whether they will stand or sit for their part. Cooperating in these ways contributes to a smooth program and helps those caring for the platform to get everything ready beforehand.
4 Preparing Assignment No. 2: One purpose of the Bible reading is to help the student improve his ability to read. How can this best be achieved? Reading the material aloud over and over again is the best way to master it. To learn the meaning and proper pronunciation of any unfamiliar words, the student should look them up in a dictionary. This may also require becoming acquainted with the meaning of the pronunciation symbols used in the dictionary.
5 The New World Translation renders aid in pronouncing proper names and uncommon words that are found in the Bible. It does this by breaking them down into syllables and providing accent marks. (See “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial,” pages 325-6, paragraphs 27-8.) As a rule, the syllable preceding the accent mark receives the major stress. If the accented syllable ends in a vowel, the vowel is long in its pronunciation. If a syllable ends in a consonant, the vowel in that syllable is short. (Compare Saʹlu with Salʹlu.) To prepare for their Bible reading assignments, some brothers listen to the Society’s audiocassettes.
6 Parents can assist their young children to prepare the reading assignment. This may include listening when the child is rehearsing and then giving him helpful suggestions for improvement. The allotted time allows for a brief introduction and an appropriate conclusion that makes application of key points. Thus the student develops his ability to speak extemporaneously.
7 The psalmist prayerfully requested: “O Jehovah, may you open these lips of mine, that my own mouth may tell forth your praise.” (Ps. 51:15) May our participation in the Theocratic Ministry School help us to satisfy this same desire.

