Preparation—Key to Success
1 Advance preparation for the ministry will help to overcome any hesitancy one might feel about sharing in the field service. As you approach the doors, you will know what you want to say to the householders. You will not have to be apprehensive about the challenges that might be encountered. Upon returning home from the service, you will feel encouraged, knowing that you put forth a good effort in the ministry. Yes, thorough preparation is the key to sharpening our preaching and teaching skills.
2 Paul emphasized preparedness by urging us to have our “feet shod with the equipment of the good news of peace.” (Eph. 6:15) This includes preparing our mind and heart as well as acquiring a positive outlook and a willing attitude. When we are prepared to share the truth with others, our labor will be rewarded with Kingdom fruitage, making us happy.—Acts 20:35.
3 How to Prepare for the Preaching Work: We should select a presentation that we feel comfortable with, perhaps from among those suggested in the Reasoning book or those found on the last page of Our Kingdom Ministry. Give careful thought to the scripture you plan to use, determining what words or phrase you are going to emphasize to make your main point stand out. There is no need to memorize the presentation; rather, it is best to get the idea in mind, put it in your own words, and express it in a manner that you think will appeal to your listener.
4 Look over the publication you plan to offer, and pick out some interesting talking points. Select something you feel will be of interest to people in your territory. Give thought to how you might adjust your presentation for different householders—a man, a woman, an older person, or a youth.
5 Have you tried holding practice sessions? Get together with family members or other publishers to discuss what presentations might be effective, and then rehearse them aloud so that all will have them well in mind. Try to simulate actual situations and objections that could be encountered in the territory. Such practice will improve your fluency in speaking, increase your effectiveness in preaching, and build your confidence.
6 In addition to preparing and practicing your presentation, you should also ask yourself, ‘Is the clothing that I plan to wear suitable for the ministry? Do I have what I need in my book bag, including the literature that I plan to use? Is it in good condition? Do I have my Reasoning book, tracts, house-to-house records, and a pencil?’ Thoughtful planning in advance will contribute to a more productive day in service.
7 Once we have done the best that we can to prepare ourselves, we should pray for Jehovah’s spirit to help us to be successful. (1 John 5:14, 15) Giving careful attention to preparation will result in our finding greater joy in our work, as we ‘fully accomplish our ministry.’—2 Tim. 4:5.

