Service Meetings for March
Week Starting March 4
Song 1
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Bless Jehovah ‘All Day Long.’” Questions and answers. Read paragraphs 2-5 as time permits. Give positive encouragement for the auxiliary and regular pioneer work.
20 min: “Knowledge of the True God Leads to Life.” Review suggested presentations. Have one or two demonstrations. Offer some examples of how we can tactfully make the householders aware of their opportunity to contribute toward the worldwide work.
Song 78 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 11
Song 164
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
20 min: “Benefit From the Theocratic Ministry School for 1996—Part 3.” Talk by school overseer. Encourage all who can to enroll and faithfully fulfill their assignments. Clearly explain the rules for pronouncing Bible names, as found in the “All Scripture” book, pages 325-6, paragraphs 27-8. Also explain that the “ch” combination in names is pronounced hard, like “k.” (Except in Rachel, where “ch” is soft.) Illustrate the rules by playing a portion of Luke 3:23-38 from the Society’s audiocassette, having the audience follow along in their Bible.
15 min: Do Things Together as a Family. Father talks to his family informally about the need for togetherness, based on the September 1, 1993, Watchtower, pages 16-19. Concentrate on the family study and the evangelizing work. Point out how modern families are falling apart because they spend little time together and have practically nothing in common. Studying God’s Word and sharing in the ministry together is a blessing to the Christian family. Stress need for the father to organize these things well and for the mother to cooperate. Children should take an interest in spiritual activities, working closely with parents. Family will be united and will be fortified to cope with increasing pressures toward worldliness.
Song 211 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 18
Song 6
10 min: Local announcements. Those conducting studies should encourage new ones who are progressing well in their Bible study to reach out to become unbaptized publishers. Parents can also help their children to become publishers. Review recommended procedure outlined in Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, pages 97-100.
15 min: Review Highlights of the 1996 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Family group discuss some of the interesting features about our worldwide activity covered on pages 3-5 and 33. They agree that together each day they will try to read a few pages of the Yearbook after they consider the designated Bible text in Examining the Scriptures Daily.
20 min: “Help Others to Acquire the Knowledge That Leads to Life.” Review presentations suggested for use on return visits. Include one or two demonstrations. Stress goal of starting studies.
Song 130 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 25
Song 5
15 min: Local announcements. Review “Memorial Reminders.” Explain why it is important to attend. (See the February 15, 1985, Watchtower, pages 18-20.) Review plans to assist elderly, infirm, and new ones to be present. Discuss arrangements for expanded field service activity during this coming week. Also, review the article, “Where Hospitality Is Shown to Strangers,” on page 32 of the September 22, 1995, issue of Awake!
15 min: Question Box. Talk by an elder. Discuss reasons that prompt us to be generous, as outlined in the January 15, 1992, Watchtower, pages 16-17.
15 min: “Preparation—Key to Success.” Questions and answers. Mention that we will be offering The Watchtower and Awake! during April and May. Make preparations now by ordering extra copies, obtaining subscription blanks, and making plans to support congregation arrangements for Magazine Day activity.
Song 7 and concluding prayer.

