Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting March 10
Song 5
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 8, demonstrate how to present the March 15 Watchtower and the March 22 Awake! In each presentation, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured.
15 min: Benefiting From the 2003 Yearbook. Talk and audience discussion. Discuss highlights of “A Letter From the Governing Body,” on pages 3-5. Arrange in advance for a few to relate reports and experiences that they found especially encouraging and faith strengthening. Mention highlights from the worldwide report. Encourage families to read the entire book progressively during the year. Suggest ways we can use the book to direct new ones to Jehovah’s organization and encourage them to attend meetings.
20 min: “Be Zealous for What Is Good!”a (Paragraphs 1-12) After discussing paragraph 6, briefly demonstrate publisher inviting a relative, neighbor, schoolmate, or workmate to the Memorial, using the printed invitation. If not already done, the printed Memorial invitations should be made available following the meeting.
Song 19 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 17
Song 34
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Be Wise in Choosing Your Associates. Talk by an elder based on the February 22, 1997, Awake!, page 13, and the material under the heading “Bad Associations” on page 189 of the Reasoning book. Show how the principles apply to both youths and adults. Highlight the benefits of choosing as friends those who love Jehovah and who demonstrate that they are striving to adhere to his standards.
20 min: “Be Zealous for What Is Good!”b (Paragraphs 13-26) To be handled by presiding overseer. When considering paragraph 14, have a brief demonstration of an elder making an encouraging visit on an infirm brother, during which he kindly explains how the brother can share in the congregation’s increased activity during the Memorial season.
Song 53 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 24
Song 72
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8, demonstrate how to present the April 1 Watchtower and the April 8 Awake!
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Jehovah’s Witnesses​—A Force for Good in the Community. Talk and audience discussion. At times we have opportunity to point out how our ministry and example benefit the community. Invite audience to comment on the following points: (1) We teach people to live by Bible standards of morality. (2) We teach honesty and respect for authority. (3) We teach harmony between races, nationalities, and social groups. (4) We help others to improve their family life by encouraging them to apply Bible principles. (5) We have taught thousands how to read and write. (6) We extend ourselves to help others in times of disaster. (7) We have been instrumental in securing religious freedoms that are enjoyed by all.​—See Proclaimers book, page 699.
Song 121 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 31
Song 130
10 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in March field service reports. Mention literature offer for April, especially noting that a special effort should be made to start Bible studies in the Worship God book with those who have already studied the Knowledge book and Require brochure. Discuss main points in “Memorial Reminders.”
15 min: Local experiences. Invite congregation to relate experiences enjoyed during the increased activity that took place in March. Commend them for their efforts, and encourage all to share as fully as their circumstances permit during April.
20 min: “Jehovah Is Very Much to Be Praised.”c Emphasize the importance of the Memorial. Show how all can be helpful in assisting others to be present. Explain what can be done to contact inactive ones to revive their interest. Invite audience to relate any encouraging experiences from last year’s observance.
Song 173 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 7
Song 191
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: How to Reason From the Scriptures. Audience discussion. How can we develop the ability to reason effectively with people in the ministry? (1) Acquire a sound knowledge of the Scriptures through regular personal study and meeting attendance. (2) Meditate on what you learn, exploring truths from various standpoints. (3) Seek not only explanations of scriptures but also Scriptural reasons for them. (4) Consider how you would explain scriptures to various types of people. (5) Give thought to how you might illustrate certain points.
20 min: “How the Truth Sets Us Free.”d Include comments on the box on page 6 of the October 1, 1998, Watchtower. Invite audience to comment on how the truths from God’s Word have brought them freedom.
Song 217 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

