Can You Share?
1 Can young people associated with Jehovah’s organization share in the Christian ministry? Yes, they can and they are invited to. How can they? In many ways.
2 All of us, young and old, can share the truth with others in the field ministry and we should do so regularly. Do you? If you are in school, do you also talk about the truth on appropriate occasions to your classmates? Have you ever witnessed to your teacher? After school, when others are gone, may be a good time. Your teacher needs to hear the truth, too, and you may be the only one of Jehovah’s people with whom he or she has regular contact.
3 The preaching and teaching of the good news of the Kingdom of God is the major work that Jesus gave his followers to do. It is especially important now just prior to the great tribulation. If people are going to survive the end of this system of things, they need to hear the Kingdom message and respond favorably to it. Can you have a fuller share in this part of the ministry?​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
4 The Scriptures make particular mention of two young men, John Mark and Timothy, who did well in another feature of the Christian ministry. Of course, they preached the good news. But they were also attendants and ministers to the apostle Paul and others. Likely, they ran errands and delivered messages; they may have obtained supplies and rendered other helpful services. They served faithfully, and later in their lives they enjoyed additional privileges of service.​—Acts 13:5; 19:22; 2 Tim. 4:11.
5 There is much you can do to help the servants in the congregation too. Would you like to make yourself available to help with things needing attention at the Kingdom Hall? If so, mention your willingness to one of the servants. It may be that he will ask you to help look after the appearance of the Kingdom Hall​—arrange the chairs, pick up things before meetings or keep the platform well arranged. Perhaps you can help to clean the Hall after the meetings. Maybe the lighting and ventilation need attention or you may be asked to see that the windows are closed after the meetings. There may be repair work or painting to do, grass to cut, etc. Your helping with such things would make you a very useful minister, and this is a part of the Christian ministry too.
6 The Greek verb di·a·ko·neʹo, translated “to minister,” literally means ‘to serve’ and it has to do with personal service. Is there someone in your congregation who needs help personally to get to the Kingdom Hall? Could you help? Is there someone elderly or not well in your congregation who needs a visit? Have you ever visited someone like this? You might ask one of the servants if there is someone in your congregation who needs assistance in some way and whom he feels you can help. Some who are not well may appreciate your reading to them or telling them some of the things you heard at the last meeting at the Kingdom Hall. It may be that they will need you to run an errand for them, pick up something at the store, sweep the floor, shovel the snow or take out the garbage. Would you be willing to help with something like this? If you are, you will probably be encouraged to know that not only will your brothers appreciate your kindness in ministering to them in this way but also Jehovah observes when you show love for his name by aiding those whom he loves, and Jehovah will remember you with favor and pay you back. Hebrews 6:10 says: “God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name, in that you have ministered to the holy ones and continue ministering.”​—Ps. 11:4, 5, 7; Gal. 6:10.
7 Are there things like these that you can do at home? No doubt there are. Your serving well under the direction of your parents is also observed by Jehovah. Yes, Colossians 3:20 says: “You children, be obedient to your parents in everything, for this is well-pleasing in the Lord.” And verse 23 says: “Whatever you are doing, work at it whole-souled as to Jehovah.” You can be sure that your serving whole-souled in the Christian ministry like that will be looked on with favor by Jehovah.
8 Have you considered that what you do and say can be an influence for good among other young people? It may be that your suggestion that you and other young folks share in some congregation activity that has been planned, instead of doing something else, will have a very wholesome effect on others. Or in conversation, it would be a fine thing for you to bring up the spiritual view of things. Yes, your endeavoring to be a fine example in conduct and in wholesome speech can be a fine service to others.​—1 Tim. 4:12; Titus 2:7, 8.
9 Jesus stated: “The person faithful in what is least is faithful also in much.” (Luke 16:10) And that’s true. As you continue to set a good example and as you show yourself dependable and reliable in handling small assignments of service you receive at home and elsewhere, you can be sure that this will be observed and it will give evidence of your ability to handle larger assignments in the Christian ministry in time to come. So show industriousness in these matters. Remember that Jehovah will not forget your work and the love you show to him and his people, but he will bless you richly for your faithful share in the Christian ministry.​—Heb. 6:10-12.
[Blurb on page 8]
Will you share the truth with someone today?

