God Makes It Grow
1 We have seen God’s organization grow in a marvelous way in recent years. Some of you are newly associated with Jehovah’s people, but many of you, too, have seen others begin to associate with the organization since you have. We are glad that as individuals we can now have a share in planting and watering the seeds of truth so others can learn of Jehovah’s way. But we all have observed and have come to appreciate that we need Jehovah’s blessing on our efforts and that it is “God who makes it grow.”​—1 Cor. 3:6, 7.
2 There are many ways to spread the truth. The early Christians did this mainly by word of mouth and by reading to people from the scrolls. They did not have magazines and other publications to distribute as we do. We, of course, have found the printed publications very helpful in spreading the Word of life. But to a large extent our work is still most effectively accomplished by going to the people personally, discussing the Scriptures with them, reading to them from the Bible and encouraging them to read from their own copies of the Bible.
3 During February we will have the additional pleasure of offering a subscription for The Watchtower for $1.50 or subscriptions for The Watchtower and Awake! for $3.00, offering three booklets with each subscription as a premium. Will people take the subscriptions? Yes, of course they will. Many new ones are regularly subscribing. Many honest-hearted ones want the truth from the Scriptures and are learning that The Watchtower can help them. How can you help them?
4 You know how valuable The Watchtower is to you and how much you look forward to the Scriptural direction it brings in each issue. When you get the next issue of The Watchtower, look through it and find an article of real value to you. It is likely that it will be very much appreciated by someone else too. And you will probably show the greatest conviction in talking about the article that meant the most to you. If you can help the other person to see the need for The Watchtower, he may subscribe.
5 If people subscribe, they will have each issue coming into their home and they will have many opportunities to read something spiritually beneficial to them. Even if they are busy, when each issue arrives, they will be reminded again of their need to learn more from God’s Word. It may be also that a friend or relative visiting the home will be attracted by a particular article, read it and get the benefit.
6 What if a person does not subscribe? By all means, offer him the two current issues. If he reads an article you feature, it may be that he will be helped spiritually, and that is what we want, isn’t it?
7 When interest is observed, make a note of it and bring the new issues when they come out. It may be that he will be motivated to read something in each issue because of your personal call and because of your drawing attention to an interesting article each time you visit. Yes, your regular visits can accomplish much good too.
8 During February we will have many opportunities to offer subscriptions and single copies of the magazines, which can help others to get acquainted with the Kingdom message. There are many ways we can plant and water the seeds of truth. And, with you, we look to Jehovah to make it grow.
[Blurb on page 1]
Allow God to finish your training.

