VOL. XXXVII. DECEMBER 15 No. 24 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6045 



CONTENTS 

1915-AnnualReport-1916 .... 387 

The Colporteur Work 387 

Pilgrim Service 388 

Free Literature 388 

The Pastoral Work 388 

Harvest Work Continues 390 

Organization of the Work . . . 390 

"Ecce Homo!" (Poem) 391 

The Holy City 392 

The New Jerusalem 392 

The Glorified Temple .... 393 
Blessings to be Shed Upon Mankind . 394 
"Unto Us a Son is Given" .... 394 
The True Light of the World. . . 395 
The Antitypical Gideon's Band . . 395 

Interesting Items 396 

1917 Year Text Motto .... 396 
Your Good Hopes for 1917 . . . . 397 

Ministries of the Truth 399 

Index to The Watch Tower for 1916 . .400 

page 386 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS STREET, 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



This journal is published under the supervision of an 

Editorial Committee, at least three of whom have read 

and approved each and every article appearing in these 

columns. The names of the Editorial Committee are: W.E. 

VAN AMBURGH, J.F. RUTHERFORD, H.C. ROCKWELL, F.H. 

ROBISON, R.H. HIRSH. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, POLISH AND DANO-NORWEGIAN 
EDITIONS. SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



BROTHER RUSSELL'S CHRISTMASTIDE GREETINGS 

Shortly before his death Brother Russell gave instructions for the 
publication of a beautiful little card conveying his Christian greetings 
and best wishes to the New Creation, together with references to five 
recent WATCH TOWER articles which he considered particularly timely 
and helpful, also announcing the Year Text for 1917, over his signature. 
On the other side of this card is a rotogravure reproduction of the 
famous painting, "Christ Stilling the Storm on the Sea," as selected 
by our Pastor. According to his request, these cards are now being 
enclosed in all regular mail sent out from this office in acknowledgment 
of orders, etc. By this means practically all of our interested 
readers will receive one. Any who fail to receive a copy, may have 
one upon request. 

Anticipating a continued demand for this picture, he ordered an 
edition in regular post-card form, with space for message, which may 
be had at 10c per doz., postpaid. We have also a quantity of the 
same picture in post-card size, printed on heavy coated paper, with 
"Our Morning Resolve" on the reverse side. These may be had for 
6c per doz., postpaid. 



R6024 : page 386 

CONVENTION AT PITTSBURGH 



THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY is arranging for a 
Convention at Pittsburgh, Pa., to be held Saturday and Sunday, January 
6th and 7th, 1917. Several of the brethren from the Brooklyn 
Tabernacle will be present and address the Convention. The Saturday 
sessions will be held in CARNEGIE HALL in Allegheny, and those on 
Sunday at the Lyceum Theatre, in Pittsburgh. 

Any one desiring to make reservations for accommodation will 
please address Dr. W.E. Spill, 2509 Perrysville Ave., N.S., Pittsburgh, 
Pa. 

EXAMINATION OF ANSWERS TO V.D.M. QUESTIONS 

The Examining Board expects to complete its work before the end 
of the present month; but if for any reason its work should be delayed 
a little, we would advise that the election of any to represent 
your Class as either Elders or Deacons could be done on the same 

condition as that of the New York Congregation— subject to a successful 
examination of the answers to the questions. 



MEMOIRS OF PASTOR RUSSELL 

The Society is contemplating the publication, in book form, of 
Memoirs of Brother Russell, together with a number of his sermons. 
Further announcement will be made in due time. 

[CONTINUED ON PAGE 396.] 



My Morning Resolve 
My Earliest Thought I Desire Shall Be: 

"What shall I render unto the Lord for all His 
benefits toward me? I will take the Cup of Salvation 
and call upon the name of the Lord [for grace 
to help]. I will pay my Vows unto the Most 
High."-Psa. 116:12-14. 

Remembering the Divine call, "Gather My saints 
together unto Me, those that have made a Covenant 
with Me by sacrifice" (Psa. 50:5), I resolve 
that by the Lord's assisting grace I will today, as 
a saint of God, fulfil my Vows, continuing the work 
of sacrificing the flesh and its interests, that I may 



attain unto the Heavenly inheritance in joint-heirship 
with my Redeemer. 

I will strive to be simple and sincere toward all. 

I will seek not to please and honor self, but 
the Lord. 

I will be careful to honor the Lord with my 
lips, that my words may be unctuous and blessed 
to all. 

I will seek to be faithful to the Lord, the Truth, 
the brethren and all with whom I have to do, 
not only in great matters, but also in the little 
things of life. 

Trusting myself to Divine care and the Providential 
overruling of all my interests for my highest 
welfare, I will seek not only to be pure in heart, 
but to repel all anxiety, all discontent, all discouragement. 

I will neither murmur nor repine at what the 
Lord's providence may permit, because 
"Faith can firmly trust Him, 
Come what may." 



R6021 : page 387 

1 9 1 5-ANNU AL REPORT- 1916 

[Together with a Resume of the work of the 
various Branches of the service of the Society.] 

WE feel sure that the dear friends everywhere 
are eagerly awaiting the Report for 1916. 
Our fiscal year ends October 3 1 st. It may 
appear to some quite significant that it was 
on this very date that Brother Russell 
passed away, thus closing his earthly ministry 
with the end of the Society's business 
year. What more appropriate time could 
there be for us to turn aside for a little 
season and survey the Field! 

In the heat and excitement of battle one cannot take 
much time to look about or to inquire what others may 
be doing or who may possibly be falling. Each soldier 
is on the alert to carry out the commands given by the 
great Captain of our Salvation; but the Lord loves all 
the true soldiers, and occasionally calls them aside for 
a little breathing spell and refreshment, thus preparing 
them for the next and more vigorous campaign. The 
Lord's people will greatly rejoice over the progress made 
during the year— Nov. 1, 1915, to Nov. 1, 1916. 

Our Covenant with the Lord calls for a walk by faith. 
We are therefore not to expect to see the full results 
of our labors while on this side the veil, but our Lord is 
so loving and considerate that He frequently draws the 
curtain aside a little, that we may have a glimpse of the 
results following some of our labors of love. How such 



views rejoice our hearts! 

The year 1916 has been a very eventful one in many 
ways. We need not mention here those events particularly 
connected with the falling of the "kingdoms of this 
world." They are written by the world's historians. Our 
interests are centered in the establishment of "the Kingdom 
of God," for which the Church has so long been 
praying. At the beginning of the year we were in a more 
or less expectant attitude, not knowing what new experiences 
the Lord might have in store. We were certain 
that He would supply us with the waters of Truth and 
lead us to certain victories, if we but followed closely. 
There was much polishing and buckling on of the Armor 
of God, and preparing for whatever might be ahead. No 
one thought of faltering— the prize appeared brighter, 
and the goal nearer. Those inclined to criticize us had 
prophesied that, as 1914 had passed, and as their interpretation 
of our understanding of the Scriptures had 
failed to come to pass, the work would soon come to 
naught. How little do they realize the power of the Spirit 
of God in the hearts of the consecrated! And how far 
short of the reality is their knowledge of our glorious 
hopes and prospects! Considering the conditions— the 
comparatively small army of thoroughly consecrated and 
the great tension under which the whole world is straining 
—the results seem but little short of miraculous. But 
very few have become discouraged or have returned 
to their former pursuits. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK 

Every well-equipped army is composed of several 
branches. The main branch is always the Infantry. It is 
the heavy fighting body, and the main reliance of every 
commander. So we might think of the Colporteurs. 
They are the soldiers who do the hard fighting at the 
front. Though each year since war-conditions prevail 
notices a change in the numbers, yet these noble soldiers 
of the Cross "close up ranks" and move on steadily and 
unfalteringly. We doubt not that the Lord will greatly 
reward this noble band. They have stormed many a redoubt 
of the enemy, and have been mighty in the Lord's 
hand to the pulling down of strongholds of evil and 
prejudice and planting the good Seed of the Kingdom. 

Owing to the fact that financial conditions were 
greatly strained in many localities, and that labor difficulties 
and local disturbances existed in others, the number 
of those who were able to devote most of their time 
to the work has been considerably less than in 1915. 
However, those who have remained have done better 
work on the average. For 1915, the average sale per Colporteur 
was a trifle over 406 STUDIES and 23 SCENARIOS. 
For 1916, the average sale per Colporteur was a little 
over 430 STUDIES, and 166 SCENARIOS. An average of 
372 Colporteurs were in the field for the year. 

The general advance in prices on all commodities 



hit this branch of the work very hard in some respects. 
During a number of months we were greatly hindered 
by not being able to secure sufficient cloth STUDIES to fill 
the Colporteurs' orders. Then the DE LUXE SCENARIOS 
ran short, and also the supply of Karatol volumes. The 
printers were unable to obtain delivery of the materials 
necessary to their manufacture. The paper shortage has 
greatly hindered the printers. Many of the Colporteurs 
made a specialty of the SCENARIO in territory which had 
already been canvassed a number of times for the STUDIES. 

Total output of STUDIES for year 265,495 

Total output of SCENARIOS 70,000 

Total output of Booklets 1 10,000 

Total 445,495 

Moreover, these faithful workers were careful to encourage 

the reading of the STUDIES, where they found them 

already in the homes. A number were thus awakened to 

the import of present conditions, and some to active co-operation. 

R6021 : page 388 

Who can say what the yield may be when 

the Master of the Harvest shall show forth all the increase? 

May the Lord richly bless the dear Colporteurs! 

THE PILGRIM SERVICE 

We might liken the Pilgrim force in some respects 
to the Cavalry division of the army. It is much smaller 
than the Colporteur list, and covers more territory, and 
the force must be moved more quickly. Its work for the 
past year compares very favorably with any other year of 
the entire Harvest campaign. Note the following figures: 

Number of Pilgrims 69 

Miles traveled 552,498 

Towns visited 6,575 

Public meetings held 1,507 

Semi-public meetings held 3,124 

Parlor meetings held 9,221 

Total attendance 809,393 

FREE LITERATURE 

We might term this the Grenadier Department of the 
army. It seeks out the hiding places of the enemy, and 
endeavors to leave little "bombs" in every available place. 
The output for 1916 has not quite equaled that of 1915. 
We cautioned the friends to be much more careful that 
each "bomb" be properly placed, so that no waste be 
made. The amount of free literature thus distributed is 
almost beyond our comprehension. The total output for 
the year was 22,158,000 BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLIES. To 
print these took over 598,000 pounds of paper, or 16 carloads. 
Who can estimate the number of strongholds of 
error which these "bombs" may have overthrown? But 



that is only an incidental feature of the work. The principal 
thing was the reflex action upon our own hearts. 
How we have rejoiced as we sought to carry the Message 
of Good Tidings to others and to free them from the 
shackles of error, even as we ourselves have been freed! 

The friends will be glad to know that we have some 
very excellent Volunteer matter for 1917, prepared by 
Brother Russell. On page 396 of this WATCH TOWER 
will be found an item especially upon this subject. 
We desire to make a word of explanation here: It is not 
so much a question of how many shots are fired as of how 
many are hits. Note the cost of this year's output in the 
financial report. The paper for next year will cost us 
more than twice as much as formerly. In other words, 
we were fortunately able to purchase paper last year at 
3-3/4c per pound. Next year it will cost us over 8c. 
This means that a dollar will not go so far now as fifty 
cents have gone heretofore. Therefore, it behooves us to 
be very careful to make every shot count and not to waste 
any. Better fire only five shots and make three hits than 
to fire twenty shots for the same number of hits. Noise 
or number does not count. The shots only are effective. 
Therefore judge cautiously as to your needs, and be sure 
to use all that you order. We shall be pleased to have 
your orders as quickly as possible. The matter will be 
ready Jan. 1 . "The World on Fire" is the leading article. 

THE NEWSPAPER WORK 

This had become greatly curtailed, owing to our dropping 
from the list many papers of small circulation, and 
further, to our policy of retrenchment necessitated by 

R6022 : page 388 

conditions produced by the war. Now that Brother 
Russell has passed beyond, the sermon feature will be 
discontinued entirely. The blessing of the Lord has 
rested upon this work far beyond our highest expectations. 
We remember when we thought if we could secure 
fifty newspapers to publish the sermons it would be a 
wonderful witness. About twenty years ago Brother 
Russell saw the great advantage of reaching the people 
by means of the public press. At that time the large 
sum of nearly half a million dollars seemed within his 
reach. He planned to use this for having the Truth 
spread broadcast through the magazines. Just as he expected 
to receive the money, the death of one man 
blocked the way. It was a great disappointment for 
awhile, but lie knew that the Lord was still at the head 
of the Harvest work. Later, with an astonishingly small 
sum, the Lord opened another way, and at one time about 
2,000 papers were publishing the sermons simultaneously 
and altogether over 4,000 papers published weekly reports. 
We asked for showers, and the Lord gave us 
rainfalls almost amounting to floods. What an evidence 



of His might and power to open doors whenever it may 
please Him and best serve His cause! 

Now that part of the work is past. Has He anything 
else to take its place? We think so. We believe that 
even a greater work is just at our doors, and that it will 
prove to be a richer blessing to the Church itself. The 
way is opening for thousands to enter into the work 
"while it is yet day," and they are hastening before the 
"night cometh when no man can work." The Colporteur 
work, the Pilgrim work, the Volunteer work, the PHOTO-DRAMA, 
and the "lightnings" of the Lord now observed 
on every hand have prepared the soil of the 
hearts of men. Each loyal soldier not already enlisted in 
some branch will be asking for the privilege to be a 
participant in the great battle of victory for the overthrow 
of Babylon. Already Babylon is gathering her 
hosts. We can hear the rumbling of the companies and 
the divisions as they are being assembled; and we think 
that it will not be long before she will have her army in 
full battle array. Hence we, like David of old, wish to 
have our slings loaded with pebbles from the Brook of 
Truth and to hurl them while Babylon is preparing for 
the battle. Let each remember that before one can enlist 
under the lead of our glorious and victorious Captain, 
it is well to take the oath of full allegiance to Him— to 
make a whole-hearted consecration and take up the cross 
and follow Him, else we cannot expect to share the glories 
of the Kingdom, soon to be established. We refer to 

THE PASTORAL WORK 

This seems to us to be another great forward movement 
against the embattlements of the Adversary. The 
campaign is opening up so rapidly that it is difficult to 
keep up with the rush. We can almost hear the noise 
of the gathering of the companies all over the country. 
Letters are pouring in from all sides asking for information, 
and many are already in the thick of the battle. 
We have been hindered by not being able to secure the 
needed "ammunition" to equip all the companies. The 
"munition factories"— our printers— have been greatly 
delayed in filling our orders; but we have promise now 
of speedy delivery, and soon we hope to see the battle 
being waged along the entire front. 

We wish we could tell you many of the interesting 
and encouraging incidents taking place in this service. 
We give one: In one of the larger cities the sisters had 
loaned a book to a gentleman. He read it, became very 
much interested, and said that he would be glad to pay 
for as many books as the Class could loan. When informed 
that they could use 700, he promptly gave his 
check for the needed amount. A letter now going out 
to the Pastoral workers gives other interesting and helpful 
information to these dear colaborers. 

THE DRAMA 



The PHOTO-DRAMA and the EUREKA DRAMA are still 
a valuable means of reaching many. The country districts 
are glad to have the opportunity of seeing the beautiful 

R6022 : page 389 

slide-pictures, even though they may not see the 

"movies." As a result we are receiving many inquiries 
from rural districts, which show a considerable interest. 
We are able to furnish the PHOTO-DRAMA to Classes in 
the following foreign languages: Armenian, Dano-Norwegian, 
French, German, Greek, Italian, Spanish, Polish 
and Swedish. 

There are twenty-one DRAMAS in active service, exhibiting 
mostly on Sundays; very few working during 
the week. These twenty-one are being operated mostly 
by the Classes of the larger cities, even where the DRAMA 
has been previously exhibited with success. We are receiving 
some glowing reports. One of these, from 
Toronto, Canada, informs us that in a hall seating 1,000, 
frequently hundreds are turned away at a single exhibition. 
Those attending are showing marked interest and 
are leaving many cards of inquiry. The PHOTO-DRAMA 
has also been shown upon several of the large American 
battleships, and many have manifested marked interest. 
It was also shown to the soldiers down upon the Mexican 
border, and good reports are coming from there. We 
have two more DRAMAS ready for use. If any of the 
large Classes are so situated that they could handle the 
PHOTO-DRAMA for a season, the Society will be pleased 
to hear from them; and if they do not have local operators 
arrangements could probably be made to supply 
them on short notice. Our latest information is that the 
DRAMA has witnessed to about twelve millions. Many 
classes have in this way been doubled, and prejudice 
against the Truth has been dispelled as perhaps could 
not otherwise have been accomplished. 

THE WATCH TOWER 

We are not printing so many extra copies for samples 
and for supplying back numbers as formerly, but we are 
printing about 47,000 each issue, except in the case of 
the Memorial Number, for which we are expecting a wide 
circulation. Orders for large numbers of these continue 
to come from Classes and friends. We do not know 
of a better issue to allay prejudice against Present Truth. 
It is very cheap at 5c. for 32 pages. THE WATCH TOWER 
is also published in the German, Polish, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian 
and French languages, but the Memorial Number 
in only English, German and Polish. 

We have long considered THE WATCH TOWER list the 
best criterion in regard to the general interests of the 
Harvest work, but there is still good reason to believe 
that the list does not include more than half the names 



it should. We are dependent upon the brethren to make 
known to others the merits of this publication and to urge 
all to send in their subscriptions. We remind them again 
of our willingness to cancel the debt of any receiving 
THE WATCH TOWER on credit who will advise us of their 
inability to pay. 

It must be gratifying to all to observe in THE WATCH 
TOWER columns the letters of sympathy and expressions 
of continued loyalty to the Society and to the Harvest 
work. These letters cover every section of the country, 
and incoming mails from foreign lands show the same 
spirit of sympathy and confidence— that He who began 
the good work is both able and willing to complete it. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

The foreign branch of the service has been to some 
extent hindered, especially in Germany and France. The 
work in England has gone on without much change, and 
we have good reports from the dear brethren there. We 
hope to publish some very interesting letters soon. 

As this is the report for the last year our dear Brother 
Russell was connected with the work, we feel sure that 
all have an added interest in it. 

Our mail for the past year has been very encouraging: 

Letters received 134,849 

Letters and cards sent out 152,944 

You will observe that last year's report closed with a 
loan to balance the account. Therefore the report for 
the year just closed commenced with no balance on hand: 

RECEIPTS 

Good Hopes and Tract Fund 
donations $149,726.21 

EXPENDITURES 

Pilgrim service 30,967.71 

Free literature. Lecture 

Bureau, etc 60,596.74 

For the Blind 845.00 

For the various Conventions 1,985.36 

Pastoral work 269.60 

For the Foreign Fields... 32,850.23 

Paid on loan 20,000.00 

Leaving a balance on hand to 

commence the year 2,211.57 

$149,726.21 

As we see the vast possibilities opening up before us 
for the incoming year, we trust that each will carefully 
consider what share he or she may have in the work. 
As has been customary for a number of years, in order 
that the Society might outline its work with as much 
definiteness as possible— lay plans and make contracts— 



we give the friends an opportunity of advising us as 
soon as possible how much they estimate they will be able 
to give to the work for the coming year. Please remember 
that this is in no sense a solicitation. We know that 
all are glad to give to the best of their ability; that many 
have local expenses for Class and other needs; and yet 
that all desire to assist the general work as much as 
possible— as the Lord hath prospered them. 

We are glad to show a safe balance on hand and to 
report that the receipts during the past month are encouraging. 

R6023 : page 389 

We are governing ourselves accordingly- 
making preparations for the wisest and most judicious 
use of our stewardship. We doubt not the Lord's continued 
interest in the Cause which we all love so much, 
and His intention to carry to completion that which we 
believe He began. Continue to pray for us, as we always 
do for you. 

Finally, as expressed in the motto text of Brother Russell's 
selection for 1917: "The Lord bless thee, and keep 
thee; the Lord make His face shine upon thee, and be 
gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up His countenance upon 
thee, and give thee peace."— Numbers 6:24-26. 

REPORT FROM 1886-1891 

We feel sure that all will be greatly interested in a 
quotation from the first published report— extending from 
1886 to 1891 -published in THE WATCH TOWER in the 
latter year. We append the part as follows: 

"PREACHING THE GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM" 

"The handful of Harvest laborers and the money at our 
disposal seem insignificant in contrast with the hundreds of 
missionaries and the millions of dollars spent by Catholic 
and Protestant societies in their support and in publishing 
abroad the doctrinal errors handed down from the Dark 
Ages, which tend to pervert and subvert the teachings of the 
Scriptures. But such is the zeal which the 'present truth' 
inspires, that 'a little one is able to chase a thousand, and 
two to put ten thousand to flight.' (Deut. 32:30.) Although 
few and untitled, and generally without great worldly learning 
—in these respects resembling those sent out by our Lord 
with the Kingdom Message at the First Advent— the faithful 
band of Harvest workers is busily engaged (some giving all 
their time and others able to give only a portion of it) in 
seeking out the 'wheat' class— the sickle of Truth which they 
bear separating 'the wheat' from the 'tares.' 

"Few know these Colporteurs as the Lord's real representatives, 
or recognize that dignity which the Lord sees in 

R6023 : page 390 



their humility and self-sacrifice. Missionaries? No, say the 
world and the nominal Church, ours are the missionaries, 
who go to foreign lands. Yes, says the Lord, these are My 
missionaries, charged with a grand mission— to 'gather My 
saints together unto Me; those that have made a Covenant 
with Me by sacrifice.' They shall be Mine, saith the Lord, 
in the day when I come to make up My jewels.' 

"Ministers? No, say the world and the nominal Church, 
only ours who wear clerical garments and preach from our 
pulpits are God's ministers. Yes, says the Lord, My servants 
(ministers) they are because they serve Me, dispensing Present 
Truth to My household. I have sent forth the Message 
which they bear. He that despiseth them despiseth Me, and 
he that receiveth the sealing in the forehead which I send by 
them will know the doctrine, that it is of Me. 'My sheep 
know My voice.' 

"During the past six years, annual reports of the work 
have not been made, for the reason that the reports would 
not have shown so well as we would have liked, and might 
have been discouraging rather than encouraging, some years. 
But the past year has been so favorable, and the responses 
already received to the suggestion in a recent TOWER have 
been so encouraging, that we have concluded to report each 
year hereafter, good or bad. We accordingly report now 
the TOWER MISSIONARY WORK in spreading the Gospel of the 
Kingdom for the six years past: 

"WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY 

"SECRETARY'S REPORT 

"FROM JANUARY 1, 1886, TO DECEMBER 1, 1891 

"EXPENDITURES: 

"Paid balance, debt, owing January 1, 1886. $516.17 
"Expended in publishing and circulating 
Tracts and sample copies of WATCH 
TOWER and in sending TOWER to the 

Lord's poor 8,625.03 

$9,141.20 

"From Old Theology Tract subscriptions... $1,1 13.63 

"From Tract Fund Donations 8,027.57 

$9,141.20 

"It will thus be seen that we started Dec. 1st, 1891, with 
an evenly balanced ledger. But since figures are not apt to 
come out so exactly, it may be proper to remark that we had 
expended considerably more than our receipts, which would 
have shown a debt owing; but five friends of the Cause subscribed 
the balance so as to permit us to start the new fiscal 
year, beginning Dec. 1st, free from debt. 

"Tracts published and distributed 841,095" 



R6023 : page 390 

HARVEST WORK CONTINUES 

"Gather My saints together unto Me; those that have 
made a Covenant with Me by sacrifice."— Psalm 50:5. 

IT WAS the Lord who said that the gathering-time 

would be in the end of the Age; that 

He would then be present as Master of the 

Harvest; that His colaborers in the Harvest 

field would be His truly consecrated followers, 

acting as His messengers. He furthermore 

stated that during the Harvest time 

He would make one "faithful and wise servant. ..ruler 

over His household to give 

them meat in due season."— Matthew 24:45. 

Since "that Servant" has been gathered into the Garner 
of the Lord, should we expect the work of the 
Harvest to cease immediately? Surely not! We should 
expect it to continue until every member of the Kingdom 
class is fully gathered unto the Lord! The Harvest work 
consists of two distinct parts: (1) The promulgation of 
the Kingdom Message, which serves as a trumpet to call 
the people of God out from Babylon and to draw them 
closer to the Lord; and (2) the ripening and perfecting 
of the saints in character-likeness to the Master, and their 
entrance finally into the Heavenly Home. 

"That Servant" means a special messenger to the 
Church as this time. "Meat in due season" means the 
Message of the Kingdom to the Church, given at the 
time the Lord intended it should be given. The fact that 
the messenger has been gathered into the Kingdom should 
in no wise affect the Message, which remains with the 
Church as food and to be handed out to other hungry 
ones, until every one of the Lord's little ones has been 
gathered into the Kingdom. 

Who, then, will proclaim the Message? We answer. 
Every truly consecrated child of God who appreciates his 
or her privilege. All who are begotten and anointed 
of the Holy Spirit are commissioned to do this work. 
(Isaiah 61:1-3.) The Message of the Kingdom has been 
put in such form that everyone who possesses the Master's 
Spirit may use it for his own blessing and for the 
blessing of others. Our full consecration to the Lord 
means that all of our money, our time, strength, influence, 
everything, is devoted to His Cause. Whatever natural 
qualifications we thus have for serving the Lord provide 
an opportunity for us to serve in whatever place we are 
best situated for service. 

The Volunteers will continue to hand out the precious 
"meat in due season" which the Lord has furnished 
through His chosen Servant, that thereby some of His 
people yet in Babylon may be awakened. 

The Colporteurs will continue to bear to the hungering 
ones the precious Food contained in the Six Volumes 



of SCRIPTURE STUDIES. Evidently such food is all-sufficient 
for anyone to make his calling and election sure. 

The Pilgrim brethren will continue to make their 
usual visits to the Classes to aid, to teach and comfort 
them, and to serve the public as opportunity affords. 

Pastoral Workers will find much to do in searching 
out those who have heard the Truth at some public 
meeting and who may be needing further assistance in 
the way of getting out of Babylon before her downfall. 

The Elders of the various Classes who have the Spirit 
of the Lord will earnestly cooperate with the members 
of their respective Classes and in helping them to better 
understand the Berean lessons. Serving in humility and 
love and walking circumspectly, they will contribute 
much to the development in others of the character-likeness 
of the Master. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION will continue to perform 
the portion of the work the Lord intends it to do. 

Every truly consecrated child of God will, by his or 
her ability and opportunity, daily preach the Message. 
The world cannot intelligently read and understand the 
Bible, but can read and understand the daily life of 
Christians with whom they come in contact. "Actions 
speak louder than words." As the Lord continues to 
provide the money, so shall the Society continue to use 
it for the promulgation of the Gospel, looking for and expecting 
Divine wisdom and guidance in the proper use of it. 

ORGANIZATION OF THE WORK 

It is recognized that everything must be done decently 
and in order; that there must be a regular organization 
to properly carry on any work. How, then, may the 
Harvest work be thus conducted since Brother Russell 
is no longer in our midst? Many of the friends throughout 
the country are asking this and other questions, and 
we take pleasure in answering: 

R6024 : page 390 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
was organized in the year 1884 as a means of putting 
forth the Message of the Kingdom in an orderly and 
systematic manner. The Corporation is controlled and 
managed by its Board of Directors and officers. The 
Board of Directors is composed of seven members. The 
Charter of the Corporation provides that the Board of 
Directors shall be self-perpetuating; that is to say, when 
a vacancy occurs by death or resignation the surviving 
members are empowered to fill such vacancy. Brother 
Russell was a member of the Board of Directors. Two 

R6024: page 391 

days after his death the Board met and elected Brother 
A.N. Pierson as a member of the Board to fill the 



vacancy caused by Brother Russell's change. The seven 
members of the Board as now constituted are A.I. 
Ritchie, W.E. Van Amburgh, H.C. Rockwell, J.D. 
Wright, I.F. Hoskins, A.N. Pierson and J.F. Rutherford. 

The Board of Directors thereupon provided for an 
Executive Committee of three, and elected as that Committee 
Brothers A.I. Ritchie, W.E. Van Amburgh and 
J.F. Rutherford. This Executive Committee lias general 
supervision of all the work of the Society, both in 
America and abroad, subject to the control of the Board 
of Directors of the Society. 

The Charter of THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT 
SOCIETY provides that the officers shall be elected annually 
by those who have contributed to the funds of the Society, 
and that those officers must be elected from among the 
Board of Directors. Brother Russell was the President 
of THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY from 
its organization until his death. The next annual election, 
as provided by the Charter, will be held Saturday, January 
6th, 1917, at Pittsburgh, at which time officers will 
be elected; viz., a President, Vice President, and Secretary 
and Treasurer. 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY is 
the most wonderful and unusual Corporation on earth. 
It is the strongest corporation, not financially, but strong 
because it has been, and still is, used of the Lord for 
the carrying on of His work. It is unusual in this: that 
all who are in any wise connected with it gladly render 
their services without salary; those giving all of their 
time taking only the bare necessities of life. It will continue 
in the same manner as in the past to spread the 
Gospel, so long as the Lord indicates this as His will. 

THE WATCH TOWER 

This publication is the medium through which the 
Kingdom Message is brought regularly to the members 
of the "Household." "That Servant" used this medium 
to give out the "meat in due season." By his last Will 
and Testament he provided for the continuance of THE 
WATCH TOWER by a duly constituted Editorial Committee. 
The names of the members of this Editorial Committee 
appear upon the title page of each issue of THE WATCH 
TOWER. It is the province of this Committee to put in 
proper form and publish, twice each month, that which 
goes to the Church. THE WATCH TOWER is not the organ 
of the Editorial Committee. It is the official organ of 
the Church. It is the only publication in the world declaring 
the presence of the King and announcing the nearness 
of His Kingdom. Therefore, dear brethren, THE WATCH 
TOWER is your journal. It is the journal of every one 
in harmony with Present Truth, and its publication is 
for the benefit of all such. It will continue to publish 
only that which is in harmony with what "that Servant" 
has heretofore given to the "Household of Faith." 

Shall we, then, continue to recognize in our Class-studies 



the Berean Bible lessons prepared by Brother 
Russell? Shall we continue to speak in our Class-studies 
of Brother Russell as the Lord's Servant who brought 
"meat in due season to the household of faith." Yes, 
indeed! Why not? If the Lord was pleased to use him 
for many years to give the "meat in due season" to the 
Church, then it is still "meat in due season," and the 
Berean lessons are essential for the development of those 
who shall be made partakers of the Kingdom. Should 
we now disregard the food contained in the STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES and other publications of THE WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, it would mean that 
we were repudiating or disregarding that which the Lord 
has graciously provided for our benefit. We must make 
the distinction between Brother Russell as a creature and 
his official capacity as "that servant" of the Master to 
give out the "meat in due season." To disregard the 
Message would mean to disregard the Lord. 

Let us be courageous and faithful, dear brethren. Let 
us remember that in unity there is strength. The Lord 
will continue His work until it is finished. He will gather 
all of His true children into the Garner in due time. 
Shall we be of those thus gathered? That will depend 
upon whether or not we hold fast to that which we have; 
whether or not we remain loyal to the Lord and to His 
Message of the Kingdom. 

The Lord's "faithful and wise servant" finished his 
work and left with us his message. His last words to 
the Church, as set forth in his Will and Testament, show 
how essential it is for every one who would enter the 
Kingdom to continue loyal, and faithfully develop the 
fruits and graces of the Spirit. He said, "I entreat you 
all that you continue to progress and to grow in grace, 
in knowledge, and above all in Love, the great fruit of 
the Spirit, in its various diversified forms. I exhort to 
meekness, not only with the world, but with one another; 
to patience with one another and with all men, to gentleness 
with all, to brotherly-kindness, to godliness, to 
purity. I remind you that all these things are necessary 
for us— necessary that we may attain the promised Kingdom; 
and that the Apostle has assured us that if we do 
these things we shall never fail, but that 'so an entrance 
shall be ministered unto us abundantly into the everlasting 
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.'" 



R5995: page 391 

ECCE HOMO! 

[In loving remembrance of Pastor Russell and his Ministry.] 

"Loved and hated! Revered and reviled! 
Spurned and courted! Flattered, defiled! 
With never a falter and never a frown 



He kept to his moorings, and laid his life down 

In the place where God put him. What more can be said 

For soldier or hero? For living or dead? 

He wept with the anguished; he smiled with the glad: 

He lifted the fallen; he heartened the sad; 

He pitied the sinner, inspired the saint; 

He strengthened the feeble, recovered the faint. 

God gave him a Message— he gave it to men: 

He patiently told it again and again. 

"When men's eyes were blinded and ears could not hear. 

And men's souls were stunted by folly or fear. 

When minds were beclouded by dullness or doubt 

He maneuvered the Message and turned it about 

Till 'the wayfaring man, tho a fool,' could behold 

And hear the glad Gospel he patiently told. 

And yet will like rabble as stood by the Cross, 

Not knowing their folly, not sensing their loss. 

Flouting and scouting and wagging their head, 

Stand by in contempt while we weep o'er our dead. 

Dishonoring the prophet of this, their own time. 

And crowning him saint when the World sees their crime. 

"Behold now the Man?— Or wait world-old way 
To pay him the tribute we owe him today? 
Stand reverently now, with uncovered head. 
And look on 'that Servant' and honor the dead! 
A Man has gone from us, leaving none in his place, 
Yet his Message of Truth men can never efface. 
He'd the mind of a master, the heart of a child. 
The courage of Caesar, a soul undefiled. 
He'd the love of a father, a shepherd's kind care. 
The faults of a human and sympathy rare. 
He lifted a standard and held it up high. 
He lived— ready to live and ready to die!" 



R6024 : page 392 

THE HOLY CITY 

-DECEMBER 17.-REVELATION 21:1-4,22-27.- 

THE NEW JERUSALEM-THE NEW SPIRITUAL GOVERNMENT 
OF THE MILLENNIAL AGE-THE NEW HEAVENS AND EARTH 
SYMBOLIC EXPRESSIONS INDICATIVE OF NEW CONDITIONS 
TO PREVAIL UNDER MESSIAH'S RULE-THE NEW SPIRITUAL 

GOVERNMENT TO BE INVISIBLE-IN ANOTHER FIGURE 
CALLED THE TEMPLE OF GOD-THE EARTHLY REPRESENTATIVES 
OF THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM-THOSE WHO 
WILL CONSTITUTE THE HEAVENLY PHASE. 

"Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men. 
and He shall dwell with them, and they shall be 
His peoples."— Verse 3. R.V. 



PARADISE, the Garden of God, was applicable 
as a name to Eden, where our first parents 
resided while they were still in harmony 
with God— before their disobedience. The 
same name is Scripturally applied to the new 
earth when Restitution blessings shall, during 
the Millennium, have brought it to perfection 
as the abode of those who under Divine 
favor shall then prove worthy of life everlasting. 

It was to this Paradise that the Apostle Paul was in 
vision "caught away" when given a glimpse of various 
features of the Divine Plan, not then due to be understood 
by the Church in general— "things not lawful to be 
uttered." (2 Corinthians 12:4.) The Apostle St. John was 
similarly caught away in vision, and shown some of the 
wonders of the Paradise epoch. But these were only in 
symbols, which he was permitted to report, and which 
have been comparatively misapprehended, until now, in 
the Lord's due time, the Holy Spirit is guiding His people 
into the Truth of this subject, as well as upon others; for 
"the time is at hand," and the information is "meat in due 
season" for the Household of Faith. 

Elsewhere this Paradise of the future is referred to 
by the Apostles as "the third heaven," and as "a new 
heavens and a new earth." (2 Corinthians 12:2; 2 Peter 3:13.) 
They are not referring to new planets, nor to 
heavens ranged one above another, as many have supposed, 
but to the third of three great periods of time, 
beginning with man's creation and extending into the 
illimitable future. The first of these periods, termed the 
first heavens and earth— the old order of things— passed 
away with the Deluge of Noah's day. The second period, 
"the heavens and the earth which are now," the present 
order of things, are reserved of God to pass away with 
a great symbolic fire of trouble— revolution, etc.— which 
will utterly destroy the present spiritual powers and the 
present social arrangements.— 2 Peter 3:6,7; Galatians 1:4; 
Zephaniah 3:8,9. 

The third great period is to be a "world without end," 
under Divine administration. This will be the third 
heavens and the third earth, or the new heavens and the 
new earth, which will differ from the present condition 
of things in that they will be righteous! whereas the 
present arrangement is imperfect, unrighteous. The "new 
heavens" will consist of the new spiritual ruling powers 
of the future— Christ the Head, and the Church His 
Body. The present heavens consist of the nominal religious 
systems which, while claiming Christ for their 
Head, nevertheless bow in a very large degree to Antichrist, 
"the god of this world," "the prince of this world," 
"who now worketh in the children of disobedience," and 
who is captivating and blinding the whole world, with 
the exception of the few whose eyes of understanding 
have been opened, who are under special blessing and 
leading, who are taught of God— the Little Flock, "heirs 



of the Kingdom."— Ephesians 2:2; 2 Cor. 4:4. 
"THE PARADISE OF GOD" 

It is to this new heavens and new earth condition, this 
Paradise of God, that today's Study introduces us. As 
the "new heavens" do not mean a new place for God's 
Throne, so the "new earth" does not mean another planet. 
The "new heavens" are a new condition, the spiritual 
power and control of Christ and His glorified Church; 
so the "new earth" means a new social order on this 
planet— "the new heavens and earth"— constituting the 
world to come— "wherein dwelleth righteousness." (2 Peter 3: 10-13.) 
The declaration of our lesson is that the former 
heavens and the former earth— which are now— will then 
have passed away and will be no more. All present institutions 
are to perish utterly in the great Time of 
Trouble with which this Age is very shortly to end. 

"And there shall be no more sea." As we have already 
seen, the sea is a symbol for the masses of people 
in a restless and unstable, anarchistic condition— just as 
the land represents the social order, and as the mountains 
represent the kingdoms of the present time. As there 
is no reference to the physical earth and the physical 
heavens being destroyed, so there is no reference to the 
physical sea being obliterated. The symbol signifies that 
under the new arrangement, under the control of the 
new Heaven— spiritual powers— the reconstructed social 
order will be so satisfactory, so complete, so thorough, 
that there will be no more sea class— no more restless 
people, no more dissatisfied masses, no more anarchists. 
Everything will be reduced to law and order; and under 
the new regime law and order will secure justice to every 
creature, obliterating the differences of wealth and power 
as they now exist.— Isaiah 2: 12-22. 

THE NEW JERUSALEM 

In the symbolism of Scripture a city represents a government; 
as, for instance, symbolic Babylon is denominated 
"that great city [government] which ruleth over 
the kings of the earth." (Revelation 17:18.) The New 
Jerusalem symbolizes the new spiritual Government of 
the Millennial Age. It is not earth-born; it is not reared 
by men; but, as pictured in today's Study, it descends from 
God out of Heaven. That is, it is spiritual in every sense 
of the word— of God and not of men. It is for this 
Kingdom, this Government, that our Lord taught His 
disciples to pray, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done 
on earth, as it is done in Heaven." 

The declaration that the City is adorned as a bride 
for her husband implies its beauty, grandeur and perfection, 
as a bride's adornment on such an occasion is particular 
and elaborate lo the last degree. Additionally, the 
statement reminds us that in the government of the future 
the world's judges are to be the saints selected throughout 



the Gospel Age and qualified through faithfulness 
in trial and tribulation. (1 Cor. 6:2.) In the Scriptures 
these are frequently called "the Bride, the Lamb's Wife" 
and Joint-heir in the Kingdom. 

We are not to think of this Holy City as being composed 
of literal stones, coming down through the air. On 
the contrary, we are to remember that the saints of the 
Gospel Age are "living stones," as the Apostles explain. 
(1 Peter 2:4-7; Ephesians 2:19-22.) This glorious City 
will not be visible to the natural eye. Neither Christ nor 
the saints in glory can be seen of men. Only those who 
are changed from human to spiritual nature will see 
these matters in full. But the whole world will quickly 
be made aware of the fact that a new Government has 
been instituted— a government of righteousness and all 
power— and that thereafter whosoever doeth righteousness 
shall be blessed, but that whosoever doeth evil shall 
be punished proportionately. 

R6024 : page 393 

The entire Gospel Age has been devoted to the preparation 
of this New Jerusalem. As a whole, it comprises 
all of the saints, from our Lord Jesus Christ down 
to the last member of the Church. Not until all of the 
members of the Body of Christ have been chosen, found 
faithful, fitted and prepared for their places will this City 
of God descend to earth in power and come into possession 
or control of the earth. The coming of the New 
Jerusalem to the earth is the symbolic representation of 
the establishment of God's Kingdom in the earth; for a 
city is a well-known symbol representing government, 
control. Thus Washington City represents the United 
States government; Petrograd, the Russian government; 
Paris, the French government; Rome, the Italian; Berlin, 
the German; London, the British; etc. 

THE GLORIFIED TEMPLE 

The third verse of today's Study associates this City 
with the other figure of a symbolic Temple which the 
Lord is now preparing, and of which the saints will constitute 
the "living stones" and "pillars." It is declared 
that the Tabernacle of God [His Dwelling] shall be with 
men in this City [Government or Kingdom]. It will be 
His Temple; and the world of mankind will approach 
God in it, to receive the Divine blessings, just as Israel 
approached the typical Tabernacle and the Temple in their 
typical religious services. Thus God, represented in His 
Church— The Christ, Head and Body— will dwell with 
the world of mankind during the Millennial Age, and they 
shall be His people; that is to say, all mankind will be 
treated from the standpoint of reconciliation. The Propitiation-price 
for the sins of the whole world having 

been paid, and the due time having come for the manifestation 
of Divine favor, all peoples shall be treated as 



the Lord's people. None of them shall be treated as 
aliens, strangers, foreigners from God and His promises. 

While the Millennial Kingdom will be the Kingdom 
of God's dear Son, it will also be the Kingdom of God; 
for God's dear Son and His Joint-heir, the Church, will 
be in absolute accord with the Father; and all that shall 
be done under their control will fully and completely represent 
the Divine will respecting men. Nevertheless, it 
will be a Kingdom separate from the remainder of the 
Universe, as the Apostle Paul indicates. (1 Cor. 15:24,25,28.) 
"He must reign until He hath put all enemies 
under His feet.... And when all things shall be subdued 
unto Him, then shall the Son also be subject to Him 
that did put all things under Him. ...Then cometh the 
end, when He shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, 
even the Father"— at the close of the Millennial Reign. 

THE WORK OF THE KINGDOM 

Since God is the Author of all the blessings of Redemption 
and Restitution, and since every good and every perfect 
gift cometh down from Him, the record appropriately 
declares that "God shall wipe away all tears from their 
eyes"— the eyes of mankind. Though Christ and the 
Church will do it, nevertheless the Heavenly Father will 
be recognized as the First Cause, the Fountain of Blessings. 
The wiping away of tears implies a gradual work, 
such as we see shall be the process of that glorious time. 
At the beginning of the Messianic Reign mankind will 
not be exempt from weakness, trial and difficulty; but 
as they conform to the laws of the Kingdom all cause 
for distress will gradually pass away; and the Restitution 
blessings will gradually lift them out of death into perfect 
life.-Acts 3:19-23. 

In verse 4 the work of the whole Millennial Age is 
summed up in a few words. What a glorious sunburst 
of blessing is in these words! What a grand fulfilment 
of St. Peter's declaration respecting the Times of Restitution! 
This declaration, however, applies to the very end 
of the Millennial Age rather than to any previous part 
of that Age; for other accounts show us unmistakably 
that there will be imperfections, chastisements and stripes 
throughout that Age, while mankind are being lifted up 
As our Lord expressed it, the raising up of mankind 
throughout the Millennium will be a "resurrection by judgment" 
—chastisements, disciplines.— John 5:28,29. R.V. 

Even at the close of that Age, as we are shown in 
another pen-picture of that time, there will be a severe 
trial and testing to demonstrate to what extent the enforced 
obedience of the Messianic Reign shall have rightly 
affected the hearts of those who experience its blessings, 
so that they shall love righteousness and hate iniquity. 
(Revelation 20:7,8.) In that final test any who shall manifest 
that his heart contains anything aside from loyalty 
to God and to the principles of righteousness shall have 
his part in the Second Death. 



Verse 5 comprehends the entire Millennial Age. Our 
Lord Jesus Christ, then in the Throne of earth's dominion, 
declares, "Behold, I make all things new." This expression 
does not relate merely to rocks, trees, etc., but 
to the great work which our Lord undertook; namely, the 
regeneration of humanity— of as many of Adam's race 
as will, under favorable conditions of knowledge, develop 
characters in full accordance with the Divine will. The 
end of the Millennial Age will see the work completed. 
All of the wicked— all who will not hear the voice of that 
Prophet, Teacher, King— will be cut off from amongst 
the people in the Second Death. But all the willing and 
obedient will be made new, brought to the complete perfection 
contemplated in the original Divine Plan. 

THE HEAVENLY CITY RESPLENDENT 

Here our Study turns to a consideration of the City, 
the glorified Church, the Kingdom class, those who during 
the Millennial Age will be "Kings and priests unto God, 
and reign upon the earth" for "a thousand years." (Revelation 1:6; 
5:10; 20:4,6.) This City class, the glorified 
Church, it is declared will have need of neither sun nor 
moon. Nothing in this statement indicates that the world 
will not both need and have sunlight and moonlight during 
the Millennial Age and subsequently.— Psalm 72:5. 

While it will be true that the Church, as spirit beings, 
will not need the literal sunlight and moonlight, nevertheless 
this is not the thought of Verse 23. Both sun 
and moon here are symbolical, as in Revelation 12:1. 
The sun signifies the light of this Gospel Age. The moon 
signifies the typically reflected light of the Gospel in the 
Law and the Prophets of the Jewish Dispensation. The 
glorified Church will have no need of the light which in 
the present time she so much enjoys through the Word 
and the Spirit. Instead, she will have a much more excellent 
glory. To this St. Paul refers when he says, 
"Now [with all the light, privileges and opportunities 
which we enjoy, as respects the representations of God 
through the Law and the Prophets and through the instructions 
and leadings of the Spirit in the present Age] 
we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; now 
we know in part; then we shall know even as we are 
known."— 1 Corinthians 13:12. 

The Church, the Temple of God, will be so filled with 
all the fulness of God, when made like her glorious Lord 
(1 John 3:2), that nothing could add to her blessings 
of knowledge and Divine favor. She will be so filled with 
the glory of God that from her, as from her Lord and 
Head, shall proceed the light of the glory of God, which 
shall heal and bless the world during the Millennial Age. 
This is the Sun of Righteousness to which our Lord referred 
in Matthew 13:43: "Then shall the righteous 

R6024 : page 394 



shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father"— 

our Lord Jesus, the Head of the Church, of course being 

included. The Prophet mentions the same Sun of Righteousness, 

saying, "The Sun of Righteousness shall arise 

with healing in His beams." (Malachi 4:2.) Nevertheless 

we are not to lose sight of the fact that Christ is the 

Head of the Church, even as the Father is the Head of 

Christ Jesus. (1 Cor. 1 1:3.) Hence the Lord God Almighty 

and the Lamb will always be an inner Temple in 

this great Temple which God has provided for the world's 

blessing during Restitution Times.— Verse 22. 

THE BLESSINGS SHED FORTH UPON MANKIND 

When this Sun of Righteousness shall shine forth, its 
blessings of healing, refreshment and life— mental, moral 
and physical— shall fall upon all mankind; and the nations 
shall walk in the light therefrom. Old MSS. do not 
contain the words "of them that are saved" (Verse 24). 
Indeed, it is because the nations are NOT SAVED that they 
need this special light during the Millennial Age, in order 
to their enlightenment, their salvation, their Restitution. 
Nor do the words "and honor" occur in old MSS. "And 
the kings of the earth do bring their glory into it." 

The expressions, "nations" and "kings," are not to be 
understood as signifying that during the Millennial Age 
the world of mankind will be divided into nationalities 
and kingdoms as at present. The word "nations" here 
signifies peoples, and is intended to show that all peoples, 
not merely the Israelites, will be thus favored under 
God's Kingdom. The word "kings" represents those 
princes, or chief ones, who during the Millennial Age will 
be the representatives of the Heavenly, spiritual, invisible 
Kingdom of Christ. 

These princes, as we have already seen, will be Abraham, 
Isaac, Jacob and all the faithful Prophets of the 
previous Ages, who loved God before the Call to the 
Kingdom and to the Bride class went forth. Therefore 
they cannot be of the Bride class; but because of their 
faithfulness they will be the princes whom the Lord will 
establish in all the earth. First, however. He will make 
them perfect human beings and will qualify them for their 
office, as a reward for their faithfulness to God in the 
dark times in which they lived— their manifestation of 
love for righteousness and their trust in the Omnipotent 
One.-Psalm 45:16; Hebrews 1 1:39,40; Luke 13:28. 

The bringing of their glory into the City, the Kingdom, 
signifies their acknowledgment of this Heavenly Kingdom, 
their rendering of tributes of praise, thanksgiving, 
worship and obedience to it as God's Agency. This 
rendering of glory to the Kingdom will continue throughout 
the entire Millennial Age; for the princes throughout 
the earth will make known to the peoples that not in 
their own name or authority do they rule and execute 
judgment and establish righteousness, but in the name of 
the glorified Christ, Head and Body, whose representatives 



they are. The result will be that all peoples will 
ascribe honor, praise, majesty and glory to the Lord's 
Anointed, through whom Redemption and Restitution is 
being accomplished.— Verse 26. 

Then, in consideration of the fact that this book of 
symbols, while relating to the future, is addressed to 
God's consecrated Church of the present time— The Elect 
—and in view of the fact that this message would be 
more or less understood by those who would seek to make 
their calling and election sure to a part in the glorious 
New Jerusalem, Verse 27 is added, declaring that "in 
nowise shall there enter into it anything that defileth, 
neither whatsoever worketh abomination nor maketh a lie; 
but they which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life." 

The Lamb's Book of Life we must understand to include 
only those who attain to the position of joint-heirship 
with Christ, those whose names are written in Heaven 
during this Gospel Age and who are faithful to their 
Covenant. (Psalm 50:5.) What an incentive we have 
here to faithfulness! What a warning against the slightest 
sympathy with anything unclean, untrue, or in anywise 
contrary to the Divine standard of holiness! If we 
appreciate the glorious Divine provision for the Church 
and for the world, these promises will have their influence 
upon us; and under that influence we shall strive to keep 
our garments unspotted from the world, to be without 
spot or wrinkle or any such thing, that thus we may abide 
in our Lord's love, and in the due time be "meet for the 
inheritance of the saints. "-Col. 1:12-14; Heb. 4:14-16. 



R6024 : page 394 

"UNTO US A SON IS GIVEN" 

-DECEMBER 24.-ISAIAH 9:2-7.- 

A PICTURE OF MESSIAH AND HIS MILLENNIAL KINGDOM-DARKNESS 
STILL MEASURABLY COVERS THE WORLD-THE LIGHT 
OF THE WORLD SHINING FROM CHRIST AND HIS FOLLOWERS 
-THE RISING OF THE SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS TO SCATTER 
THE DARKNESS-THE WORLD TO BE CLEANSED FROM 
ALL OPPOSITION TO THE DIVINE GOVERNMENT-MESSIAH 
TO BE THE AGENCY THROUGH WHICH EARTH'S CLEANSING 
AND LIGHTING WILL BE ACCOMPLISHED. 

"For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the 
Government shall be upon His shoulder; and His name shall 
be called Wonderful, Counselor, Mighty God, 
Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace."— Verse 6. 

WE AGREE with Leeser's translation of the 
Old Testament that the first verse of the 
chapter from which today's Study is taken 
should properly be the last verse of the preceding 



chapter— that the second verse of our 
lesson begins a new topic. With it, therefore 
the Study for today properly begins. 

Verse 2. After the Hebrew idiom this 
statement pertaining to the future reads as 
if it related to something in the past— just 
as in Verse 6 we read, "Unto us a Child is born," whereas 
Jesus was not born at that time nor until several centuries 
later. The promised great Light is not yet shining upon 
the people. Mankind still dwell in the land of the Shadow 
of Death. The shadows of the demoralized, sinful, dying 
condition of Adam's race affect all of life's interests for 
the whole world of mankind. As the Apostle explains 
subsequently, "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth 
in pain together until now."— Romans 8:22. 

We are still in the time when "darkness covers the 
earth [civilized society], and gross darkness the people 
[the heathen]." True, there is a measure of light in the 
world. True, also, that light emanated from our dear 
Redeemer, His words and His works; and it still shines 
forth from all who are truly His, all whose hearts are 
illuminated by His promises and His Spirit. But this is 
not the light which is to scatter all of earth's darkness 
and to cause all mankind to appreciate the glory of God. 
It is merely "the light that is in you"— in believers. It is 
a light of faith, a light of hope, a light of love ignited in 
the hearts of the Little Flock, who shine as lighted candles 
in the world and who are admonished to shine brightly. 

Our Lord's light shone into a little corner of the world 
called Palestine: and from His lamp many followers have 

R6024 : page 395 

lighted their lamps. To these the Master's instruction is, 
"Let your light so shine before men that they may see 
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
Heaven"; "Put not your light under a bushel, but upon a 
lampstand, that it may give light unto all in the House." 
But He adds, "Every one that doeth evil hateth the light, 
neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds be reproved."— 
Matthew 5:15,16; John 3:20; 2 Cor. 4:4. 

THE TRUE LIGHT OF THE WORLD 

That the True Light is not now shining, that the Sun 
of Righteousness has not yet arisen with healing in His 
beams, is fully evidenced by the gross darkness of heathendom 
and by the lesser darkness of Christendom. In proportion 
as Jesus' true followers have kept their lights 
trimmed and burning, in that proportion a measure of 
light has spread throughout the world. But all this is 
merely the shining of light in the midst of darkness and 
at the present time and under present conditions a light 
wholly inadequate to dispel the night and to bring in the 
glorious Day for which the whole creation groans and 
waits. That glorious Day cannot come until the Lord 



shall first have found the members of His Body, who together 
with Himself shall constitute the Sun of Righteousness. 
-Malachi 4:2; Matthew 13:43. 

The glorious prospect is that very soon the Church 
of Christ will be completed, that soon the Sun of Righteousness 
will shine. Soon its rays will light the uttermost 
parts of the earth. Then ultimately every child 
of Adam, sharer in his curse, shall be a sharer in Messiah's 
great work of blessing by being brought under the 
influence of that great Light which will constitute the 
Millennial Age a Day of glory and of knowledge of the 
Lord— the Golden Age of prophecy. 

The prophecy of Verse 2 of our Study goes beyond 
the living of that time and assures us that the Light will 
shine to those who are in the shadow of death— those 
who are in Hades, in darkness. Upon every member of 
Adam's race the light must shine; for Christ hath tasted 
death for all. As all of Adam's children were condemned 
before their birth, so Christ died for all, and the majority 
before their birth. As surely as they shared in the curse 
that came upon Father Adam, so surely will they receive 
a blessing from the redemptive work of our Lord Jesus 
Christ.-Romans 5:17,18. 

MULTIPLICATION BY RESURRECTION 

Verse 3. "Thou hast multiplied the nation, thou hast 
increased their joy; they joy before Thee according to 
the joy in harvest, as men rejoice when they divide the 
spoil." This, the Revised Version rendering, is evidently 
the correct one. This pictures the world of mankind during 
the Millennial Age, brought forth from the bondage 
of death, released from the Adamic curse, rejoicing as 
those who are dividing a spoil— sharing in something 
which is not theirs, something which has fallen to them. 
It will be just so. The blessings of the Millennium will 
be distributed as Divine bounty; the curse will be rolled 
away; the Sun of Righteousness will shine for all with 
healing in His beams, bringing Restitution to all; and none 
will forfeit the blessings except those who wilfully refuse 
them and who do despite to God's favor. 

The same is true now to those who receive Divine 
mercy. It is a gift; they can do nothing for it; they 
are merely assured that they are forgiven. The difference 
is that now only a very few have the eye to see, 
the ear to hear and the heart to appreciate God's mercy 
as it is told us in the Good Tidings which can be understood 
only by the hearing of faith. By and by, after 
the selection of the elect class, the Church, sight and 
knowledge will largely take the place of faith. The world 
will then realize the grace of God in Christ Jesus, forgiving 
their sins and providing them with life everlasting 
if they will accept it; and they will rejoice to divide 
the great spoil, the great gift of God.— Romans 6:23. 

Verse 4 delineates the cause for this rejoicing. It will 
be because the great oppressor, Satan, will no longer have 



control. His yoke of sin, sorrow, pain and death, his rod 
and his staff of affliction and slavery, will be broken forever, 
as the Lord explains. (Revelation 20: 1-3.) The 
victory over the Adversary is not to be a slow and gradual 
one, not to be accomplished by missions or any human 
power; but the Lord Himself will interpose His Power, 
"as in the day of Midian." 

THE ANTITYPICAL GIDEON'S BAND 

The day of Midian was the day when Gideon and his 
little band of Israelites met the hosts of Midian. (Judges 7: 15-22.) 
Suddenly, at the breaking of the pitchers and 
the blowing of the rams' horns, the Lord overwhelmed the 
powerful enemies of His people and granted them a miraculous 
deliverance. Gideon evidently prefigured our 
Lord Jesus; and his little band prefigured the Little Flock 
of Christ— the saints, the Very Elect. It was after the 
testing, the sifting, of Gideon's little band that the Lord 
granted the great deliverance. Thus will it be at the end of 
this Age. As soon as the antitypical Gideon's Band, the 
Royal Priesthood under the captaincy of their Lord Jesus 
Christ, shall have given their Message and shall have let 
their feeble lights shine out, the Lord will grant the great 
victory for truth and righteousness through a Time of 
Trouble which will eventuate in the binding of Satan and 
the release of all the oppressed. 

We read of the grand consummation, the end of sin 
and trouble, in Verse 5, which Leeser translates thus: 
"For all the weapons of the fighters in the battle's tumult 
and the garments rolled in blood shall be burned, become 
fuel for the fire." The interpretation of this figurative 
statement is that all of the weapons of Satan, all the accessories 
of sin and death, everything that pertained to 
this great conflict between righteousness and unrighteousness 
which has prevailed in the world for centuries, shall 
be utterly destroyed. The picture shows us the world 
cleansed from every evidence of opposition to the Divine 
Government and the Law of Righteousness, and accords 
well with the statement in Revelation 5: 13. 

HOW WILL IT BE BROUGHT ABOUT? 

Verse 6 gives us the explanation of the process by 
which the foregoing prophecy of blessing and release 
from the oppressor shall be accomplished. The Lord 
would draw the attention of all having the hearing ear 
to the fact that no such blessing and enlightenment could 
be possible until first Messiah should come. He would 
also show that Messiah would be born after the manner 
of mankind, but would nevertheless be the Son of the 
Living God. 

How beautiful, how simple, is the entire statement 
from the standpoint of faith! Yet how possible it is for 
the wisdom of this world to stumble over even such simple 
statements as these, and to claim, as Higher Critics do. 



that this prophecy was wholly to the Israelites of Isaiah's 
day, and that the promised one was King Hezekiah! 
Blessed are our eyes if they see, and our ears if they hear, 
the true meaning of this prophecy and thus permit us to 
recognize in it the Messiah, the Sent of God, Immanuel— 
"God with us"— to be the great Deliverer and to accomplish 
for us all the wonderful things which God hath 
promised by all the holy Prophets since the world began, 
confirming His Promise made to Abraham: "In thy Seed 

R6024 : page 396 

shall all the families of the earth be blessed."— Acts 3:19-2 1 ; 
Genesis 12:3; Galatians 3:8,16,29. 

Continuing, the prophecy pictures the Child grown to 
manhood, and the government placed upon His shoulders 
—the responsibility falling upon Him as a royal mantle 
from the Heavenly Emperor, Jehovah. The prophecy 
steps over the earthly trials and sufferings of our Redeemer, 
the Head, and of the Church, His Body, throughout 
this Gospel Age. It ignores the names Beelzebub, 
Prince of devils, Man of Sorrows, etc.; and it points us 
to the complete and glorified Messiah at His Second Advent, 
as viewed from the standpoint of Jehovah and from 
the standpoint from which ultimately the whole world 
shall recognize Him, when every knee shall bow and 
every tongue confess to Him, to the glory of the Father. 

"HALLOWED BE THY NAME" 

A name stands for or represents the character, disposition, 
qualities or powers of an individual. Thus all 
these names, these titles, given to our Lord in Verse 6, 
represent His majesty, dignity, power and glory. Our 
Lord is already recognized by His true followers, who 
know Him as the most wonderful Counselor. No other 
counsel, no other teaching is like His. The world in 
general has yet to learn this fact respecting Him; but 
before the close of the Millennium it will be generally 
known. If after mankind shall have confessed Him as 
the wonderful, wise Counselor, Guide, Teacher, any of 
them shall then wilfully and deliberately ignore and reject 
His teachings, and shall sin wilfully and intentionally, 
such must die the Second Death. 

Our Lord Jesus is recognized now by His true followers 
as the Mighty Lord, the Mighty God, but not as 
the Father. (1 Cor. 8:6.) He is the Father's Representative, 
Voice, Mouthpiece, the well-beloved Son whom 
the Father has clothed with glory, honor and immortality, 
and given all power in Heaven and in earth necessary 
to the accomplishment of the great work entrusted to 
Him, His fitness for which He demonstrated by His love 
and His loyalty even unto the death of the Cross. 

Our Lord Jesus will be the Everlasting Father of the 
human race in the sense that Adam, their father, failed 
to give them life, and that our Lord redeemed Adam and 



all his posterity, thus becoming the Author of everlasting 

life to all who will obey Him. This will include all of 

the human family that will attain to everlasting life, except 

the Church class of this Gospel Age, who are chosen 

from out the world and begotten of the Heavenly Father 

to a new, spiritual nature. (1 Peter 1:3.) These spirit-begotten 

ones are separate and distinct from the world, 

and are Scripturally designated the New Creation. They 

are spoken of as the brethren of Christ in one figure, and 

as His Bride and Joint-heirs in another, but never as 

His children. To the world, however. He will be the 

Everlasting Father, or Life-giver through whom they may 

have everlasting life— life to all eternity— if they will 

become obedient to Jehovah's arrangements. 

Another of our Lord's titles shall be that of the Prince 
of Peace. While His Kingdom will be introduced by the 
great Time of Trouble such as never before was, the 
trouble will not be of His producing. It will be the 
legitimate result of the wrong course of sin and selfishness 
fostered by the great oppressor, Satan. The Prince 
of Peace will subdue all enemies, all sin, all unrighteousness, 
all insubordination to the Divine will. He will 
neither fail nor be discouraged. Nothing shall hinder the 
accomplishment of this great mission entrusted to Him 
by the Father. His love of peace shall not hinder Him 
from dashing the nations to pieces as a potter's vessel, in 
order that righteousness shall be established upon a firm 
and sure foundation.— Psalm 2:9; Revelation 2:26,27. 

"UPON THE THRONE OF DAVID" 

Verse 7. The word David signifies beloved; and the 
kingdom entrusted to King David was God's Kingdom in 
a typical form, which was never to pass away. (1 Chronicles 29:23; 
2 Samuel 7:16.) It was maintained by the 
Lord down to the time of Zedekiah, when we are told 
that the crown and the scepter of authority and power 
were removed to be overturned until He should come 
whose RIGHT it is.-Ezekiel 21:27. 

Our Lord in the flesh, as a descendant of King David, 
was the legitimate Heir to that Kingdom of David which 
was to have no end. But instead of establishing His 
Kingdom at His First Advent, He declared, "My Kingdom 
is not of this world"— not of this Age, not of this 
Dispensation— and began the selection of the Little Flock 
who in the world to come— the Millennial Age— will be 
His joint-heirs and associates in the Millennial Kingdom. 
This work of selecting the Church— the kings, rulers, 
priests— has since been in progress; and we have the assurance 
of God's Word that it will reach a final and 
glorious consummation worthy of our God. 

When Christ and the glorified Church shall reign over 
the earth, their Rule will be the continuation or exaltation 
of the Kingdom of God which was begun in King 
David and Natural Israel. This greater David, this 
greater Beloved of the Father, full of grace and truth. 



will establish righteousness in the earth with judgment— 

with punishments for wrong-doing and rewards for right-doing. 

"The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this." 



page 396 

INTERESTING ITEMS 
[CONTINUED FROM SECOND PAGE.] 

1917 VOLUNTEER LITERATURE 

The Society will have this ready for shipment about January 1. 
It was prepared by Brother Russell, and is specially appropriate for 
the times in which we are living. The leading article is: "The World 
on Fire." When ordering please mention B.S.M., Vol. 9, No. 1. 

Classes are requested to place their orders as soon as possible that 
the Society may be able to estimate the quantity to be printed. In 
ordering do not figure on more than one copy for each English-speaking 
home. Where there are no Ecclesias, individual orders will be received. 
Volunteer numbers are supplied free of charge, transportation 
charges collect. 



HYMNS OF DAWN-KARATOL EDITION 

We now have the MILLENNIAL DAWN HYMNAL (with music) bound 
in black karatol, round corners, red edges, embossed in oriental gold 
leaf: price 50c; postpaid. We also have a good supply of the regular 
cloth-bound Hymnals, on which the price has not been advanced; 35c 
postpaid. Small flexible edition, without music, 10c each. 



1917-YEAR TEXT MOTTO-1917 

As our Year Text Brother Russell chose these words, "The Lord bless 
thee, and keep thee; the Lord make His face shine upon thee, and be 
gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up His countenance upon thee, and 
give thee peace." (Numbers 6:24-26.) Price, postpaid, 60c per dozen; 
10c each. 

ADVERTISING PUBLIC MEETINGS 

Owing to the very high price of paper the BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY will not hereafter be used to advertise public meetings for 
Pilgrims and others. We would suggest the use of cards and newspaper 
columns instead. We will be glad to furnish cuts of the 
speakers as usual. 



WATCH TOWER RENEWALS 



The friends are now so accustomed to looking at their WATCH 
TOWER wrapper for acknowledgment of receipt of renewal of subscription 
that we will not longer send post-card acknowledgment as 
heretofore. When a dollar is sent for renewal of your subscription 
the date on the outside of your wrapper will be advanced one year. 



"POEMS OF DAWN" 

Many of the friends are not aware that since the first edition of 
"Poems of Dawn," a second has been issued containing two indexes- 
alphabetical and topical— and twenty-one additional poems— Karatol, 
50c; Leather, 75c, postpaid. 



LEESER BIBLE 

The publishers advise us that there will be no more of these at 
prices on our former list. We are able, however, to secure a larger 
Leeser Bible, 7x10, at $2.25, cloth, postpaid. 

page 397 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" FOR 1917 

[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan has proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of Truth but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

— TO THE — 

"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the STUDIES and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested in 
the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and breadths, 
the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed for us 
in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of His people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 



for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 

naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 

righteousness, the unjustified, who stand, at best, in 

the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 

that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 

so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 

and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 

to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 

during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 

to the several parts of the Lord's work carried on by 

our Tract Society. Of course, I cannot in advance judge 

or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 

me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand the 

sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 

upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 

than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 

well, the Lord will know my heart and you, also, will know 

of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some idea 
of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this, my 
highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating SCRIPTURE STUDIES in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY 
in various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as Lecturers to preach the Divine Plan of Salvation, and 
in general to be expended as the officers of the Society may 
deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for WATCH TOWER sent to the Lord's poor or others, as the 
Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 

BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., BROOKLYN, N.Y. 
or, London Tabernacle, Lancaster Gate W., England; or, 
Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 



page 398 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 
ON "GOOD HOPES" ACCOUNT. 

The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
THE WATCH TOWER to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves, or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give us 
such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from their 
donations. Give full name and address, and write very 
plainly, please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions: 



WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS 

Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take 
this opportunity to remark that we shall be glad to hear 
promptly from such as desire the visits of THE WATCH TOWER 
continued. The Lord's Poor friends have been requested to 
send their applications in May. When names are dropped and 
afterward renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. When 
desiring to know date of expiration look on your TOWER 
wrapper. Date is given in lower left-hand corner. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE 

We are convinced that THE WATCH TOWER lists do not 
contain the names of many of those deeply interested in its 
teachings. The total is small enough surely, and we are not 
content that the name of any should be missing. We believe 
that all such will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow 
way" by its semi-monthly appearance on their table, 
reminding them afresh of spiritual matters which the world, 
the flesh and the Devil continually tend to crowd out of mind 
and heart. 

We have at times required that all desiring THE WATCH 
TOWER on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make 
personal application; now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in Present 
Truth, and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their 
subscriptions either on credit or free, as their circumstances 
may necessitate. Any getting it on credit may at any future 
time request that the debt be canceled, and we will cheerfully 
comply. We desire that as nearly as possible THE WATCH 
TOWER lists shall represent all deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and 
to come. (Eph. 4: 12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
cooperation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
coworkers with us in this ministry. 

*CREATION DRAMA SCENARIO 



This is a condensed statement of the Divine Plan of the 
Ages— profusely illustrated— much information in little space. 
The ninety-six short, pithy lectures of the CREATION DRAMA 
can be supplied in print as follows: 

De Luxe, gold edges, embossed, 400 
illustrations $1.00 postpaid 

Cloth, burnished edges, embossed, 400 
illustrations 65 

Paper in three booklets, complete, per set.. .25 " 

A Newspaper edition in 4 Parts 05 " 

IN GERMAN, SPANISH, ITALIAN, GREEK, POLISH, 
ARMENIAN: 

Cloth bound, complete 65 " 

Paper " " 25 " 

Newspaper edition, 3 Parts, 2c ea.; per set. .05 " 
IN SWEDISH: Cloth bound 65 " 

Newspaper edition, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

CHOICE MOTTO CARDS- 19 16-191 7 

We have, as usual, very choice sorts. These cards are 
made in Europe, hence subject to heavy expenses for freight 
and duty, especially since the war began. Nevertheless, we 
can supply them in the United States and Canada at less than 
retail European prices, because we supply them at about cost 
price— that is to say, about one-half the usual American prices. 
Besides this, we prepay postage or express charges. Our 
object is to encourage the embellishment of the homes of the 
Lord's people with faith-stimulating and courage-inspiring 
texts tastefully prepared. To facilitate the handling of these 
motto cards we assort them in packets, carefully packed, at 
the following prepaid rates: 

Packet Ma— Twelve mottoes, small and medium, 50c. 

Number Mb— Fourteen medium and small cards, $1. 

Number Mc— Thirteen large, medium and small cards, $1. 

Number Md— Four large and medium cards, $1. 

Where $5 worth of these are sent to one address the saving 
in packing and expressage would be 50c, making the price 
$4.50. Order by number only. 

*DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

Those who use this book as we recommend are surely 
being blessed. Thousands testify to the help thus received. 
Its daily text should be read and commented on freely by all. 
Then the MANNA comment should be read. This book contains 
the same texts and comments as all former editions. 
Every alternate leaf is blank-ruled for use as an autograph 
and birthday record. Its value increases as additional autographs 
of friends are secured. It is printed on bond paper. 

The following wholesale rates postpaid are granted to all 
WATCH TOWER subscribers: 
Purple cloth, gold embossed, gilt edges; English and 

Polish $0.60 

Dark blue cloth, silver embossed, German 60 



Leatherette, blue edges, Swedish and Norwegian 60 

Leatherette, genuine gold edges, Swedish and 

Norwegian 1.10 

Genuine Morocco, gold edges, English, Polish and 

Norwegian 2.00 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast 
table, that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed 
with the natural food. 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (Karatol) $ .50 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (cloth) 35 

Hymns of Dawn, without music (flexible) 10 

Poems of Dawn (Karatol) 50 

Poems of Dawn (Leather) 75 

Bible Talks in Simple Language (half leather) 1.25 

Memorizing Text-Cards (100 in pkg.— assortments. No. 

1 and 2), per pkg 30 

Scriptural Post Cards (assorted), doz. 15c; per 100. 1.00 
CHARTS (Blue Prints, soft cloth): 

Plan of the Ages, 5 ft. $1.85; 8 ft 2.50 

Chronology of the Bible, 7-1/2 ft 2.00 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 7-1/2 ft 2.00 

BINDERS for THE WATCH TOWER: 

Spring Back (holds 1 yr.) 60 

CROSS & CROWN PINS (Gold, with red enamel): 

5/8"-No. 1 Ladies' Style, No. 2 Gents', each 1.15 

l/2"-No. 3 Gents' Style, No. 4 Ladies', each 1 .00 

5/8" celluloid, per doz., 25: each 03 

Missionary Envelopes, per 100 .30: per 1000 3.00 

Vow Bookmarks (paper) per 100 .25; (silk) each 05 

*Booklets (on Hell, Spiritism, Evolution, Tabernacle 

Shadows, Our Lord's Return) 10 

♦Question Booklets on each Vol. of SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

and on THE TABERNACLE, each .07; per doz 84 

Report on Foreign Missions, each 05 

THE WATCH TOWER (semi-monthly), per year 1.00 

The Divine Plan of the Ages (Za), WATCH TOWER 

form, ea 10 

What Say the Scriptures about Hell (Hz.), WATCH 

TOWER form, ea 05 

Judge Rutherford's Defense of Pastor Russell, each 10c, 

per 100 8.00 

THE BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY, per year 12 

Tracts in all languages FREE 



*Colporteurs and Class Secretaries may deduct one-half from above 
prices on MANNAS, BOOKLETS and SCENARIOS if shipment consists of 50 
or more volumes, charges collect. 


