Announcements
● Literature offer for August and September: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, on a contribution of $2.50. If this book is unavailable, then My Book of Bible Stories or any other book may be used. October and November: Subscription for either The Watchtower or Awake! for $3.50 each for a one-year subscription; six-month subscription, $2.00.
● During the week of August 29–September 3, 1983, the Society will be taking an inventory of all literature on hand in Brooklyn. Due to taking this inventory, no congregation literature orders will be processed for shipment or for pickup during that week.
● Each congregation will receive three Literature Inventory forms, and an actual count should be taken of all campaign literature in stock and of all controlled-stock items listed on the inventory form. Please fill out the forms completely and send the original to the Society no later than September 6. Keep a carbon copy for your files. The third form is to be used as a work sheet.
● The secretary and service overseer should complete the Congregation Analysis Report form (S-10) and send this to the Society as soon as the congregation’s August report has been compiled. Double-check all information for accuracy, carefully following the instructions on the form. Keep a duplicate in the congregation file.
● Starting in September, circuit overseers will give the public talk “Why Christians Must Be Different.” They will also begin meeting with Watchtower Study and Congregation Book Study conductors when visiting congregations. The public talk to be given by district overseers in connection with the new series of circuit assemblies beginning in September will be “What Future Is There for You?”
● The Society has now produced the Greek Scriptures of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures in grade-two English Braille. The publication is divided into four volumes, each bound in a black durable hard cover and arranged as follows: Volume 1, MATTHEW and MARK; Volume 2, LUKE and JOHN; Volume 3, ACTS through GALATIANS; Volume 4, EPHESIANS through REVELATION. The cost will be $40.00 for the set, or $10.00 per volume.
To obtain the Braille Greek Scriptures, please send in a separate order, giving the name and address of the blind person that is to receive it, and enclose the remittance. Mark your order: ATTENTION: BRAILLE DESK.
This portion of the Bible in Braille will not be available on a loan basis, but for purchase only.
● New Publications Available:
1905 Crampon Bible (congregation, public and pioneers: $10.00)—French
The Bible (congregation, public and pioneers: $6.50)—Cambodian
The Two Babylons (congregation, public and pioneers: $5.20)—French
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth—Portuguese
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!—Arabic, Bislama, Cebuano, Herero, Hungarian, Iloko, Kwanyama, Luganda, Marshallese, Moore, Ndonga, Romanian, Sinhalese, Zulu
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
The First of Peter through The Letter of Jude (single cassette)—French
A Revelation to John (single cassette)—French
Album with complete Greek Scriptures (18 cassettes; congregation and public: $30.00; pioneers: $20.00)—French

