Helping Inactive Ones to Grow Strong in the Faith
1 In January 1982 a special effort was started to find and help inactive ones. What have been the results? Can we do more to aid the weak or inactive? How can we encourage our brothers?
2 We rejoice to inform you that many formerly inactive ones are again serving shoulder to shoulder with us. They were like the psalmist who wrote: “I have wandered like a lost sheep. O look for your servant, for I have not forgotten your own commandments.” (Ps. 119:176) One sister, recognizing her loss of a close relationship with Jehovah, prayed to him for direction and the next day an elder called, offering her a Bible study. She commented: “How can I not continue to serve Him?” A very unhappy family that had become inactive due in part to the pursuit of material things was called on by two elders who offered a Bible study. They said: “This is what we were waiting for.” Now the whole family joyfully share in service as they reduce their secular work.
3 Indeed, the loving labors of the elders and all who have cooperated with them have been blessed by Jehovah, the Great Shepherd. (1 Pet. 2:25) A traveling overseer in Texas reports that in one area the brothers had the joy of seeing 75 reactivated, making it necessary to form a new congregation. Many circuits report 25 to over 100 reactivated. Hundreds more have begun to attend meetings again and are growing in faith through specially arranged Bible studies.
4 Many are the expressions of gratitude from formerly “lost sheep.” When the elders called on one family, their marriage was on the verge of breaking up. The children were confused, wondering whether they were still Jehovah’s Witnesses. But the family accepted a Bible study and resumed their association with the congregation. The brother comments: “Now Jehovah has blessed our efforts by making us stronger spiritually. Our marriage is sturdy, and we study together as a family; we attend all meetings and now are going in service. We are so grateful for Jehovah’s patience and the help from the brothers.” Another reactivated sister happily said: “Last month I turned in my first service report in ten years. And by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness I’ll never let another month go by without some preaching.” A couple told a visiting elder: “The last two months, during which we had been studying and attending meetings, have been the happiest in our 12 years of married life.”
5 How can we keep on aiding the inactive? Continue making reasonable efforts to find and assist those who have strayed. Speak positively and understandingly. Pray with them. Give them reason to feel hopeful and that they are of great value in God’s eyes.
6 If you are studying with an inactive person, bear in mind that spiritual recovery often is a slow, step-by-step process. Patience and long-suffering are required. When asked what helped her return, a sister commented that the one who studied with her “just would not let go.” Help them see the value of “keeping a set way” by establishing good habits of study and service. (Ps. 50:23) All in the congregation can assist by drawing these into loving association. One reactivated one said that what helped her was “the overwhelming kindness and love the friends showed me when I returned to the meetings. We truly are one large family.”
7 As we seek to help the inactive, let us never forget those presently associated with us who may need help. (Acts 20:35) We can prevent many from drifting into inactivity by being interested in the spirituality of our brothers. Is there someone in your book study group that is slowing down in his service or missing meetings? Does he need some encouragement? Could you invite him to share in your family or personal study? Could you work with him in the ministry? Rather than ‘draw away’ from Jehovah through a lack of faith, let us keep exhorting one another each day.—Heb. 3:12.

