Magazine Day Presentations
1 Emphasis has been placed on sharing regularly in magazine activity, including street work, especially on the second and fourth Saturdays of the month if you cannot go out every Saturday. A brief presentation is usually best, perhaps from half a minute to a minute in length.
2 When offering the August 1 Watchtower, we could say: “No doubt you will agree that the world is full of problems today. In fact, some individuals who felt there were just too many problems to face chose to commit suicide. The current Watchtower has some interesting information on this subject and helps us to appreciate that there is ‘hope for despairing ones.’ [Point to article on page 6.] We are offering the Watchtower and Awake! magazines for a contribution of 30 cents. I am sure you will enjoy reading them.”
3 After introducing ourselves, if we are highlighting the August 8 Awake! we might say: “Many authorities warn us that the earth is getting overcrowded. Pollution, famine and unemployment are just a few of the effects. These lead to social unrest and violence. What is the solution? Is there a government capable of handling this problem on a worldwide scale? This issue of Awake! gives you the satisfying answers, and it, along with The Watchtower, is yours for a contribution of 30 cents.”
4 The August 15 Watchtower may be offered by stating: “Most people agree that the world is in very serious trouble, and some wonder whether it can be saved. This issue of The Watchtower raises the question, ‘Who can save the world?’ and goes on to give the satisfying answer from the Bible. Together with Awake! it is yours for 30 cents.”
5 If featuring the August 22 Awake! we could say: “Will we ever have universal peace? This is a question many of us are asking these days. Millions of people are protesting the buildup of nuclear bombs. Could it be that shortly the nations will be saying that they have achieved peace and security? The articles starting on page 3 in this issue of Awake! will help you to learn the answer. The Watchtower and Awake! are offered for a contribution of just 30 cents.”
6 Publishers who have good success placing magazines in street witnessing are usually those who take the initiative to approach people with the offer. Rather than just standing and waiting for others to approach you as you display The Watchtower and Awake!, prepare a brief statement directing attention to a particular article and, after a friendly greeting, present the magazines. Although we would not want to obstruct the flow of traffic or rudely interrupt the conversations of others, someone waiting for a bus or unoccupied at the time may appreciate being informed on an important subject in one of the current magazines.
7 In some areas it may be advisable to have another publisher close by when engaging in street witnessing. However, if you are conversing with each other you defeat the purpose of street witnessing. So be alert to observe any interest shown in the publications you display. Have a friendly smile and cheerful greeting. Be positive in your approach. By taking the initiative in using brief, well-prepared presentations, you too may have good success in placing magazines on the streets.
8 Short presentations can be prepared for each issue. Highlight articles that are likely to have a broad appeal. If we regularly use pointed presentations in offering the magazines from house to house, in business territory and on the streets, no doubt we will be able to accomplish much more. We want to do all we can to increase the distribution of these two fine publications.

