Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JULY 31
Song 89
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—Featuring the Live Forever Book.” Use paragraph 1 for introduction. Demonstration of paragraphs 2 and 3 not to exceed five minutes. Then discuss with audience new Topic for Conversation and other points that may be featured in offering the book. Discuss paragraph 4 with audience and then demonstrate how brochure might be offered when householder cannot afford book. Discuss paragraph 5 with audience. Encourage all to share in field service on first Sunday of the month.
15 min: Arrange according to local needs. (Or discuss “Why So Many Suicides?” “Hope for Despairing Ones” and “They Want to Help” in the August 1, 1983, Watchtower. Show practical use of material in the field ministry.)
10 min: “Magazine Day Presentations.” Question-and-answer discussion of paragraphs 1 and 6-8. Demonstrate offering two magazines, highlighting August 1 Watchtower using presentation in paragraph 2. Encourage brothers to bring Our Ministry book next week.
Song 118 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 7
Song 10
 8 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
15 min: “Witness Publicly and From House to House.” Questions and answers. Emphasize information applicable to local circumstances.
12 min: “Recognizing Christ’s Role in God’s Arrangement.” Talk by elder covering material in chapter 3 of Our Ministry book, making local application.
10 min: Service overseer considers congregation’s July report. Encourage all to share in magazine work this weekend. Have brief discussion between two publishers showing how information under “Feature Articles” on page 2 of each Awake! issue can be used to develop an effective magazine presentation. Have two brief demonstrations of 30-to-60-second magazine presentations for use this weekend. (Include one in paragraph 3 of article “Magazine Day Presentations.”)
Song 68 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 14
Song 44
 5 min: Local announcements.
20 min: “Helping Inactive Ones to Grow Strong in the Faith.” Question-and-answer discussion. If possible, interview one who has been aided, highlighting what helped him to return to active association.
10 min: “Circuit Assemblies—Timely Reminders.” Talk. Encourage all to make definite plans to attend next circuit assembly.
10 min: Experiences in placing Live Forever book. One or two should be prearranged but allow for others from audience. Also demonstrate presentation in paragraph 4 of article “Magazine Day Presentations.” Have publishers bring Our Ministry book to Service Meeting next week.
Song 29 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 21
Song 58
10 min: Announcements and local announcements. Have publishers relate experiences enjoyed starting studies in Live Forever book. Emphasize that special effort should be made to follow up placements so as to establish home Bible studies.
20 min: “How the Congregation Is Organized and Governed.” Talk by elder on material in chapter 4 of Our Ministry book from page 21 to subheading on page 25. Consider remainder of chapter by questions and answers.
15 min: “Theocratic News” and “New Peak in Memorial Attendance.” Encouraging increases evident. Memorial report shows good potential for continued growth in United States. Relate to local congregation. What is being done or can yet be done to help new ones who attended Memorial this year? Encourage all to share in magazine activity this Saturday. Have youth demonstrate presentation in paragraph 5 of “Magazine Day Presentations.”
Song 60 and concluding prayer.

