Presenting the Good News—Featuring the Live Forever Book
1 January and February were the first months that we featured the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth in our field ministry. We enjoyed using this publication and in fact we had a new peak of publishers reporting service during January. Again in August and September we will be offering this fine book as we share the good news with others. To aid us, we have a new Topic for Conversation: “Can You Live Forever in Paradise?”
2 After introducing yourself, you might say: “I am sure you will agree that it does not seem possible to enjoy real happiness on earth even for a short time in view of all the problems we face, such as sickness, aging, hunger, crime and insecurity. [Allow householder to comment.] But there are good reasons for believing that it really is possible to live forever in happiness on earth. One reason is because God promises it. Notice what it says here in Psalm 37:29. [Read verse.] But what about the causes for unhappiness that we mentioned? In Revelation 21:4 God promises to do away with them. [Read that verse.] I know you would like to learn more, and to help you to do so, we are offering this publication.” Then proceed to show the Live Forever book.
3 You are already familiar with this book. You have used it in the field and perhaps are studying it with someone. No doubt, then, you have some fine points in mind to share with householders when you offer it. You may want to read some of paragraph 9 on page 10 and then show the contrast between the pictures of the troubles in the world on pages 8 and 9, and the Paradise scenes on pages 11-13. If time permits, you could show some of the interesting chapter titles that you think would appeal to that particular householder.
4 During the previous campaign, many publishers found householders who said they wanted the Live Forever book but did not have the $2.50 at the time. Some of these accepted the book when a return call was made. But sometimes when we call back the interest has cooled off, and they do not take the book. So that they are left with something to read at the first call when they do show interest, one circuit overseer found it helpful to offer the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! for 25 cents when the householder could not afford the book. We could try doing that, or offering the current magazines, so that the person would have some publication to read to stimulate further his interest. And, of course, we could arrange to return with the book when the householder expects to be able to obtain it.
5 Living in happiness on earth forever is certainly a marvelous prospect, one that is open to a great crowd without number. (Rev. 7:9) We want to do all we can to help others to share with us in having that wonderful hope. As we feature the Live Forever book in our field ministry, we want to keep this in mind and endeavor to start Bible studies with all who show interest in this promise Jehovah makes for those who love him.

