Witness Publicly and From House to House
1 The apostle Paul was irritated at seeing the grip false religion had on the people of Athens. “Consequently he began to reason in the synagogue with the Jews and the other people who worshiped God and every day in the marketplace with those who happened to be on hand.” (Acts 17:16, 17) In Ephesus, Paul took every advantage of his opportunities to witness by teaching publicly and from house to house.—Acts 20:20, 21.
2 Faithful servants of Jehovah in the first century were alert to preach the good news whenever and wherever they could. Although tired out, Jesus struck up a conversation with a Samaritan woman when he was resting at a fountain. The result was that “many of the Samaritans out of that city put faith in him.” (John 4:5-42) Paul and his companions preached beside a river, with the result that Lydia and her household got baptized. (Acts 16:14, 15) We can enjoy rich blessings just as they did, when we engage in public witnessing.
3 When going from house to house, do we stop to talk to persons who may be relaxing or working outside? If some are just arriving home or leaving, try to start up a conversation with them. Otherwise it may be weeks or even months before they can be contacted, especially if they are seldom home—as is often true today. We want, if possible, to reach all those who reside in the territory. Try to give a brief and tactful witness, perhaps placing The Watchtower and Awake! and making arrangements to call back.
4 Do you have territory that is inaccessible because of doormen admitting only tenants and invited guests? Would it be possible to reach the persons living there by doing street work where the majority of the residents enter and leave the area? In this way one congregation was able to generate so much interest that a Congregation Book Study was started in a territory where it was impossible to go from house to house. Those who did street work there were alert to approach people and tactfully obtain the names and addresses of those who showed interest so that return visits could be made.
5 All of us can look for opportunities to witness informally wherever we may be. When traveling by subway, bus, train, plane, car or on foot, we can often share the good news with others. Many times we find that those we speak with do not really know much about Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Kingdom message. If we place magazines or leave tracts, these can provide something for the interested person to consider further.
6 During August and September we will be offering the Live Forever book. Are there ways it can be presented publicly as well as from house to house? Yes. Some have featured the book in street work quite successfully by approaching passersby and giving a brief witness. Some have been helped to come into the truth because a brother or a sister witnessed to them at work during rest periods or their lunch break. A brother decided to present the Live Forever book to those on his magazine route. He wrote, ‘One man I have been calling on would just take the magazines and close the door. One day I offered the Live Forever book. He took it and the next time I called he said he had read the first 35 pages. Many others just see the book and want it.’ Why not give thought to offering the Live Forever book to neighbors, relatives or others who are not yet serving Jehovah.
7 As recorded at Proverbs 1:20, wisdom is said to keep “giving forth its voice” in the public squares, thus making it available to all who seek it. Never before in man’s history has there been a greater need for God’s wisdom as contained in his Word to be publicly proclaimed. (Matt. 24:14) As we near the end of this present system, those held in darkness by it need to hear Jehovah’s Word while there is yet time. It is a marvelous privilege for us to be ‘engaged in the holy work of the good news of God,’ witnessing publicly and from house to house.—Rom. 15:16.

