From Our Readers
Fighting Illness  I would like to express my appreciation for Hans Augustin’s experience in the article “My Fight to Live.” (April 22, 1992) I suffer from poor health, but never have I had problems as great as his. I’m reminded of the tale of a man who thought he was bad off because he had no shoes​—until he saw a man who had no feet! At any rate, the story of Hans Augustin’s ordeal was very faith strengthening to me, and my prayers are with him.
A. M. M., United States
I have suffered headaches, numbness in my right hand and foot, weakening eyesight, and continuous giddiness. I had a CT scan, but it revealed nothing amiss. I became depressed because I could no longer do much in God’s service. I also felt despair when I thought about my future. However, Hans Augustin encouraged readers to focus on spiritual values, and I want to imitate his positive viewpoint. I am scheduled for further tests, but however the tests turn out, I have been helped to look ahead and fight the sickness.
K. T., Japan
World Commerce  A note of appreciation for the series “The Rise and Fall of World Commerce.” (January 8–March 22, 1992) I expected them to be hard to read, but I found them to be so well-​written, I had no problem grasping them. I thoroughly enjoyed the series.
D. H., United States
Eating Disorders  I’d like to thank you so very much for printing the article “Helping Those With Eating Disorders.” (February 22, 1992) It helped me finally to admit that I suffer from an eating disorder. For the first time, I understand that my problem has nothing to do with food but with other issues, such as my family life. My disorder has complicated so many aspects of my life, including my career in the ministry. Since reading the article, I have started to do much research, and I realize that I have a long, tough road of recovery ahead of me. But to know that Jehovah is patient and loving is of great help to me.
J. S., United States
I am 15 years old and have suffered from an eating disorder for a few years now. Ever since my mom read the article, she has become so much more understanding and supportive in the right way. I really feel in control of my life now, and I have to say how much I appreciate your articles. They are always just what I need.
M. G., United States
Virginity  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Stay a Virgin?” (April 22, 1992) I cried when I read the words of a 14-​year-​old girl who lost her virginity through fornication. The fact is, I did too. Crying all the tears in the world would never be enough to show how deeply sorry I am as a Christian for failing to keep my virginity. When my father found out, it was the first time I ever saw him cry. Somehow, even though God kindly forgives, from time to time the memories come flooding back, and tears start falling again. How wonderful it is to keep one’s virginity rather than to reap the bad results from being someone’s plaything.
I. M., Japan
A girl in school propositioned me several times to have sex with her, but I refused her every time. As a result, she accused me of being a homosexual. Your article has strengthened my conviction that my virginity is a good thing. Because of it, I stand a better chance of succeeding in marriage than someone who is sexually permissive.
D. L., United States

