Use an Approach That Works
 1. What can we learn from the varied approach of early Christians?
1 Early Christians preached the good news to people of diverse cultures and religions. (Col. 1:23) Although the message was the same—God’s Kingdom—the approach varied according to the audience. For example, when Peter spoke to Jews who had a deep respect for the Scriptures, he began by quoting the prophet Joel. (Acts 2:14-17) On the other hand, notice the way Paul reasoned with Greeks as recorded at Acts 17:22-31. Today, people in some territories respect the Scriptures, and we can freely refer to the Bible as we go from house to house. However, we may need to be more discreet when speaking to those who have no interest in the Bible or in religion or who belong to a non-Christian religion.
 2. How can we use the literature offer to help those who appreciate the Bible as well as those who do not?
2 Use the Literature Offer Effectively: Literature offers for this service year will change every two months and will highlight magazines, tracts, and brochures. Even if people in our territory are generally not interested in the Bible, we will still be able to present something that addresses their interests. We might not read a scripture on the initial visit or directly refer to the Bible, but when interest is shown we can return with the objective of helping the householder to build faith in the Creator and his inspired Word. On the other hand, if we are preaching where people appreciate the Bible, we can use literature and an approach that reflect this. In fact, we may offer the Bible Teach book or the Listen to God or Listen to God and Live Forever brochures at any time, regardless of what is being featured for the month. The main thing is to use an approach that works.
 3. In what way are the hearts of people in our territory like soil?
3 Prepare the Soil: A person’s heart is much like soil. (Luke 8:15) Some soil needs more preparation before seeds of Bible truth can take root and grow. First-century evangelizers successfully planted in all types of soil, and this brought them satisfaction and joy. (Acts 13:48, 52) We can experience similar success by giving attention to our approach.

