Young People Ask—What Will I Do With My Life? (Part 2)
On the main menu of the video Young People Ask—What Will I Do With My Life? select Interviews, then select Sections. After viewing each of the three sections, use the questions in paragraph 2 as a review. Then from the main menu select Supplementary Material and after viewing each of the five supplementary interviews, use the questions in paragraph 3 as a review.
Sections—Dedication to Vain Pursuits or to God: (1) What goals are youths pressured to pursue? (2) How can 1 John 2:17 help youths decide how much secular education to pursue? (3) Why should we not let fear hold us back from getting baptized? (4) What are some things that will help us to reach the point of baptism? Learning to Enjoy Your Ministry: (5) Why do some not enjoy the ministry? (6) What are some things that can help us? (7) What do some fear even more than talking to a stranger, and why? (8) How can we overcome our fears and develop the courage to speak? (9) Why is it also important to develop a measure of skill in the ministry? An Open Door to Service: (10) How does pioneering offer many opportunities to advance spiritually? (Phil. 3:16) (11) Why do some hesitate to go through this door of service? (12) What Scriptural principles can help us overcome economic concerns? (13) What have some done to support themselves financially while pioneering? (14) What can be done if circumstances do not allow one to enter full-time service?
Supplementary material—The Value of Personal Study: (15) Why is a good routine of personal study important? Alternative Witnessing (now called public witnessing): (16) How will engaging in different forms of the ministry add to our joy? Bethel Service: (17) What are some of the joys of Bethel service? Ministerial Training School: (18) How have those who attended this school (now called the Bible School for Single Brothers) benefited? Gilead Missionary Training: (19) How did Peter and Fiona prepare for a missionary career, and how did they benefit from Gilead?

