From Our Readers
Gambling  I just finished reading the series “Gambling—Is It Harmless Fun?” (July 22, 2002) I thank Jehovah for using you to provide this timely information. I could hardly believe my eyes when I saw the behaviors listed for those who have a gambling problem. It was as if you were describing my mate! Sadly, this sinful practice led to other grave sins. Gambling is a plague. I truly hope all will remember that it is not harmless fun.
M. G., United States
Butterflies  I am ten years old, and I was so happy to read the article “Harvesting the Crop With Wings.” (July 22, 2002) We had a butterfly project at our school last year. Each child received a caterpillar to look after. We had to give the caterpillar its food every day and keep its container clean. I even saw four of the caterpillars molting. When they pupated, we returned them to the biology station. Then we visited the emerged butterflies the following spring. Please keep writing such nice articles.
B. P., Germany
I grew up in a house near a meadow, and it was common to see many butterflies in our courtyard. I always admired their beauty. Now that I am an adult, these fragile creatures help me perceive Jehovah’s qualities. (Romans 1:20) You can imagine my joy when I saw the pictures of multicolored butterflies in Awake! Thank you for your excellent work.
D. G., Slovakia
Postpartum Depression  I have found that the information in the article “I Won My Battle With Postpartum Depression” (July 22, 2002) pertains well to any type of depression. I fight depression constantly. It is so encouraging to know that I am not alone and that depression, like all other sicknesses, will end under God’s Kingdom.
C. H., United States
Ten months ago, after giving birth to a baby girl, I began to suffer from postpartum psychosis. I wanted nothing to do with my baby. Medical treatment and the loving support of my family and congregation have been of real help. I hope that this article will help other women and their families to understand this illness. I plan to give a copy to my doctor.
S. Z., South Africa
After the birth of my second child, I fell into a deep depression. It took intervention from friends and family to get me to seek medical help. I am thankful that Jehovah’s organization provides spiritual food at the proper time through publications like Awake!
C. O., United States
Hair  I would like to express my heartfelt thanks for the article “Do You Worry About Your Hair?” (August 8, 2002) I am 36 years old, and for some time I have been worrying about slight hair loss and the thinning of my hair. The article helped me to understand that losing some hair every day is natural. Now I feel much more at peace. Do not stop publishing articles like this one!
V. G., Slovakia
I received this article right on time. I was under extreme stress because my hair was falling out. The article calmed me down, especially the statement that “others are not usually as concerned about your hair as you are.” It also helped me when I learned that even if one does not have a hair problem, some 70 to 100 hairs fall out every day!
E. L., United States

