From Our Readers
Sweet Mesquite
Had it not been for “The Mesquite . . . ” (July 22, 1988), I would surely not have noticed it at the local shop and would certainly have missed out on this wonderful delicacy. I am bound to agree that mesquite honey is especially mild but at the same time very tasty. How grateful I am to our Creator for this remarkable plant and for the variety that he bestows upon us! Many thanks.
S. B., Federal Republic of Germany
AIDS
As a physician, I can certainly agree with the statements in your magazine on AIDS (October 8, 1988). I am the founder of the Blood-Free Surgical and Medical Center. Since we provide a service that has virtually no risk of AIDS, these articles are very helpful to me, my staff, and my patients. Please send me one hundred magazines, as I would like to see that all my colleagues receive a copy.
F. G., Medical Director of O.R., United States
Just a card of thanks​—for the very scientific AIDS articles in an Awake! I found on the street, muddy and dirty. I have not gotten so much on AIDS and its scope from anyone before. I recently had two blood transfusions and hope I haven’t AIDS “sleeping” somewhere in tissues or cells.
G. T., United States
The article was interesting to say the least (and that despite having heard/​read so much on the subject already). One comment though. The inference is made that if we accept “the Creator’s standards for human behavior,” we should be exempt from the AIDS virus. However, on a news program, it was stated that where population density and number of persons carrying the AIDS virus is sufficient, mosquito-transmitted AIDS is “probable.” Hence, for a few individuals to expect to remain free from a disease rampant in human society around them may NOT be reasonable. Ultimately, the only way to be absolutely safe from AIDS will be for EVERYONE to accept and live by “the Creator’s standards.”
D. B. S., United States
We agree with D.B.S. We did not intend to imply that the Creator’s standards would totally exempt one from AIDS now. We do say that such behavior is the best way of avoiding it.​—ED.
Courage to Face Handicaps
My father has been fighting Parkinson’s disease for 20 years. “Living With Parkinson’s Disease” (January 8, 1988) provided great encouragement. His ability to walk is deteriorating. He does things like rushing forward, head first, into glass window-walls. A few months ago, he developed a negative attitude toward living, but the report in Awake! gave him the courage he lacked.
T. N., Japan
When I read “The Body​—Wonderfully Made . . . ” (June 8, 1988), I just had to thank you. I am handicapped in my right hand and leg due to cerebral infantile paralysis, and I have allowed myself to dwell on this and to use it as my reason for getting depressed. Of course, I do feel inconvenienced to some extent at times, but from now on, instead of letting myself get depressed, I want to change my way of thinking and express gratitude to the One who created me.
T. T., Japan

