AIDS and Celebrities
THOSE who read the obituaries are often amazed at the number of celebrities who die from AIDS. Newsweek of January 18, 1993, confirmed that many such people are dying, saying: “In every branch of culture​—dance, theater, literature, music, design, fashion, art, television, movies—​the devastation from AIDS continues.”
Newsweek also noted: “Paris is more like New York or Los Angeles: one study showed that more than 60 percent of the deaths of Parisian men between 25 and 44 in the professions of journalism, arts and entertainment were caused by AIDS.”
People magazine of January 23, 1993, in its article “Fear on the Ice” told of the devastation that AIDS has wreaked on professional ice skating. It said: “Their sport ravaged by more than 40 deaths, North America’s top figure skaters agonize over the loss of their friends and the grim toll of AIDS.”
John Curry, a British Olympic gold medalist, was identified in the magazine as “the most celebrated skater with AIDS.” He was quoted as saying: “My whole circle of friends died from AIDS.” Why have so many skaters contracted AIDS?
Their life-style is the reason. People revealed this when it said: “As skaters, coaches and officials privately mourn the deaths of their friends, they remain confused and fearful about dealing publicly with AIDS and with the issue of homosexuality in skating.”
Indeed, promiscuous sex​—both homosexual and heterosexual—​is the major cause of AIDS. In December 1991, two doctors in Canada revealed that a woman who had died from AIDS named up to 70 National Hockey League players with whom she had had sexual contact. “The episode has caused deep uneasiness on some N.H.L. squads,” reported The New York Times of December 5, 1991. “This was reflected in the somber groups of players and coaches who gathered to discuss the issue at practices today.”
What should be done? “The message we should be sending out to kids is not safe sex, it should be save sex,” said one Montreal Canadiens hockey player. “Don’t have sex until after you’re married.” That is not new advice, for the Bible urges: “Flee from fornication.”​—1 Corinthians 6:18.
[Picture Credit Line on page 31]
Focus On Sports

