From Our Readers
Surrogate Motherhood  In your article “Surrogate Motherhood​—Is It for Christians?” (March 8, 1993), you quote Leviticus 18:20 as saying: “You must not give your emission as semen to the wife of your associate.” However, the King James Version simply says: “Thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour’s wife.” The New English Bible and New American Standard Bible read similarly. You are changing the Scriptures. What did the original Word of God say?
S. S., United States
Most translations paraphrase this verse. The “New World Translation” renders it literally, as do both “The NIV Interlinear Hebrew-English Old Testament” and “The Interlinear Hebrew/​Greek English Bible.” The latter renders this verse: “And you shall not give your seed of copulation to the wife of your neighbor.”​—ED.
Tears  The article “Why All the Tears?” (September 22, 1992) deeply moved me. For some time I’d been wanting to know why we cry and what the role of tears is. Thanks to this well-written article, I finally understand. It made me feel an immense gratitude to Jehovah for the way he so marvelously created us.
F. G., Portugal
Home Schooling  I want to thank you so much for the article “Home Schooling​—Is It for You?” (April 8, 1993) I am presently schooling two of my four children at home. Many times others have told me that I am protecting my children too much. Your neutral stand on this matter is therefore greatly appreciated.
B. W., United States
Life Story  The experience of Marlene Pavlow, “Drawing Close to God Helped Me Cope” (March 22, 1993), was probably the most encouraging article I have read. I loved the honest and forthright way she described her life. Having had similar problems, I felt a bond with Marlene. Thank you for having such wonderful articles for just plain people like us. It makes me feel that there is hope if there are others who have the same joys and agonies as we.
R. H., United States
I have never read an article that touched me so much. Word for word, it describes my own life. It was just what I needed!
K. B., New Zealand
Entertaining  I’m writing to commend you for the article “Would You Like to Entertain Your Friends?” (April 22, 1993) As an amateur musician, I benefited greatly from it. My friends often invite me to liven up social gatherings by playing and singing. Your suggestions about developing a repertoire and involving the audience in the presentation were simply excellent!
P. S. S. M., Brazil
Pets  In the article “Does Your Child Want a Pet?” (January 22, 1993), you stated: “Domestic cats infect some 3,300 expectant mothers a year with toxoplasmosis, resulting in a 15-percent fetal death rate.” According to one reliable source, the transmission rate of this disease is quite small. Are you not exaggerating the dangers of owning a cat?
K. T., Japan
The statement you cite was quoted from “U.S.News & World Report.” While only a relatively small number of pregnant women are infected by cats, the “Wellness Letter” published by the University of California at Berkeley still cautioned pregnant women against “close contact with a cat.” Fortunately, the disease is rarely transmitted simply by touching a cat. Says the “Wellness Letter”: “The disease is most commonly transmitted when you come in contact with cat feces, as when disposing of cat litter.”​—ED.

