Designed to Learn Forever
“In every head is a formidable powerhouse, a compact, efficient organ whose capacity seems to expand further towards infinity the more we learn of it.”—TONY BUZAN AND TERENCE DIXON, SCIENCE WRITERS.
HOW much can the human brain learn? That question continues to fascinate and baffle researchers. In The Brain Book, Peter Russell writes: “The more that is learned about the human brain, the more its capacities and potentials are found to go far beyond earlier speculations.”
In regard to memory, for instance, our brain has an enormous capacity. “Memory is not like a container that gradually fills up,” says Russell, “it is more like a tree growing hooks onto which the memories are hung. Everything you remember is another set of hooks on which more new memories can be attached. So the capacity of memory keeps on growing. The more you know, the more you can know.” This brings us back to our earlier question, Why does the human brain have such vast, untapped reserves?
The theory of evolution offers no reasonable answer. Relying heavily on the notion of survival of the fittest, evolution leaves thinking people baffled as to what drove the human brain to develop its enormous capacity. By way of illustration, why build a huge truck if all you will ever carry is a mere shovelful of sand?
The Bible, however, offers a refreshingly simple yet logical explanation. First, it tells us that our original parents—Adam and Eve—were formed in God’s image, able to reflect God’s wonderful qualities. Second, it explains that they were designed to live—and therefore to learn—forever. (Genesis 1:27; 2:16, 17) The human brain reflects that divine purpose, albeit imperfectly at present because of the introduction of sin into the human family.—Romans 5:12.
But God’s original purpose for the earth to be filled with perfect, God-fearing humans living in Paradise will be realized. Indeed, Jehovah gave his only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ, as a ransom sacrifice in our behalf in order that we may gain everlasting life.—Matthew 20:28; John 3:16.
The Very Best Mental Food
Jehovah also gave us his inspired Word, the Holy Bible. (2 Timothy 3:16; 2 Peter 1:21) Because this precious volume is a product of holy spirit, it is no exaggeration to say that it contains the very best mental and spiritual food for humankind. (Psalm 19:7-10) Indeed, Jesus himself said: “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.”—Matthew 4:4.
So whether you are young or old, why not set aside a little time each day to read God’s precious ‘utterances’? Those who do so and who apply what they learn will benefit both now and in the future. Yes, they can enjoy the prospect of living and learning forever, just as God originally purposed. What a wonderful hope that is!—Ecclesiastes 3:11; John 17:3.
[Picture on page 11]
Reflecting God’s purpose, the human brain was designed to learn forever
[Pictures on page 12]
The Bible contains the very best food for your mind

