Recommending the New Instead of the Old
“WINE . . . makes the heart of mortal man rejoice.” Very true. But for us to experience the greatest and most enduring rejoicing we need spiritual wine, the sparkling and stimulating truths of God’s Word, even as it is true that “not by bread alone does man live but by every expression of Jehovah’s mouth.”—Ps. 104:15; Deut. 8:3.
It was after Jesus had answered the complaint of the Pharisees about his disciples’ not fasting that he gave an illustration in which he likened the comforting and refreshing message of the Kingdom to new wine. And in particular he made the point that “new wine must be put into new wineskins.” He well knew that the truths he was bringing were far too powerful to be contained in the old-wineskin-like organizations of his opposers, ruled by creatures and designed to exalt them instead of Jehovah. Far from appreciating the new wine Jesus served, the Pharisees preferred the old, saying, “The old is nice.”—Luke 5:33-39.
Today, in the time of Christ’s second presence, the same situation prevails. Again God’s servants have an energizing new wine, as it were, to serve to men of good will. “How can it be new,” you ask, “when it is taken from the Bible, all of which is more than eighteen centuries old?” Because it all becomes new by reason of fulfillment of Bible prophecy. And what a vast number of prophecies this generation is seeing being fulfilled! Besides, do we not also read that “the path of the righteous ones is like the bright light that is getting lighter and lighter until the day is firmly established”? Consider the striking demonstration we had of this at our recent Divine Will International Assembly, both in the lectures given and in the publications released.—Prov. 4:18.
Let Christendom’s religious leaders continue to serve to their flocks the insipid, sleep-inducing old wine of higher criticism, musty creeds, ancient traditions of men, fossilized Greek philosophy and the hoary wisdom of this old world. Let those who prefer it say, “The old is nice.” But let those of us who have tasted the sparkling new wine supply ourselves richly with it. How? By diligently availing ourselves of all the instruments that bring us this new wine, the publications of the Society and the congregational meetings. Once having a clear understanding and keen appreciation of this new wine, let us enthusiastically recommend it to all whom we meet as opportunity affords.
In bringing this new message, this new wine, to men of good will shall we try to do so through the sectarian channels of Christendom? Shall we practice interfaith and “brotherhood” and recommend their old organizational wineskins through which to serve this new wine so as to be considered tolerant and broad-minded? How foolish that would be! Those decrepit and dried-out old religious systems could not begin to contain such a powerful, stimulating message! Those old wineskins would burst and the wine would be wasted!
Jehovah in his wise and loving providence has provided us with new wineskins, a new channel or instrument especially adapted for our day, namely, the New World society of Jehovah’s witnesses. To all willing to taste of our refreshing new wine let us also by able speech, by continued zealous activity and by right conduct recommend the new world instead of the old world and the New World society instead of Christendom. Yes, help them to appreciate that “new wine must be put into new wineskins.”—Luke 5:38.

