Do You Remember?
Have you found the recent issues of The Watchtower of practical value to you? Then why not test your memory with the following questions:
□ What two questions have helped many Christians facing employment decisions to reach a personal decision?
The first key question is: Is the secular work itself condemned in the Bible? The second question is: Would doing this work make one an accomplice in a condemned practice?​—4/15, page 28.
□ In what way was ‘the human creation subjected to futility’? (Romans 8:20)
We were “subjected to futility” because of the actions of our original parents, Adam and Eve. It was “not by [our] own will” or as a result of personal individual choice that this happened. We inherited it. Mercifully, although our original parents could now pass on only imperfection, sin, and death, Jehovah allowed them to produce children. Death spread to all men, so in that sense God “subjected [the creation] to futility.”​—5/1, page 5.
□ Why is it logical to say that there will be a future “standing in a holy place” by “the disgusting thing”? (Matthew 24:15)
In the ancient pattern, ‘the disgusting thing standing in a holy place’ was linked to the Roman attack under General Gallus in 66 C.E. The modern-day parallel to that attack​—the outbreak of the “great tribulation”—​is still ahead. (Matthew 24:21) So “the disgusting thing that causes desolation” is yet to stand in a holy place.​—5/1, pages 16, 17.
□ How might a working father and mother find time for their children?
The mother who feels exhausted after a day’s work could ask her children to prepare a meal with her. The father with a full list of things to do on weekends could do some of those chores with his children.​—5/15, page 6.
□ What must those who ‘walk in Jehovah’s way’ do? (Jeremiah 7:23)
Walking in Jehovah’s way demands loyalty​—a determination to serve him alone. It demands trust​—complete faith that Jehovah’s promises are reliable and will come true. Walking in Jehovah’s way demands obedience​—following his laws without deviation and keeping his high standards. (Psalm 11:7)​—5/15, page 14.
□ What are four important responsibilities that “gifts in men” can fulfill? (Ephesians 4:8)
They can tenderly readjust us, lovingly build us up, contribute to our unity with the congregation, and courageously protect us. (Ephesians 4:12-14)​—6/1, page 14.
□ What can we learn from Paul’s association with some one hundred individuals mentioned in Acts and in his letters?
We should always work with God’s organization, with our local congregation, and with our fellow believers. We need their help, support, and comfort in good times and in troublesome times.​—6/1, page 31.
□ What three lines of reasoning might be used in helping others to think about the Creator?
The precision seen in the vast universe, the origin of life on earth, and the undeniable uniqueness of the human brain, with its varied capacities.​—6/15, page 18.
□ Why is an understanding of the meaning of the Creator’s personal name so important?
God’s name signifies “He Causes to Become” and emphasizes that he both purposes and acts. By our knowing and using his name, we can better appreciate that he fulfills promises and actively brings his purpose to realization.​—6/15, page 21.
□ How can children be involved in a family Bible study?
Where possible, arrange for each child to have his own Bible and study publication. A youngster could be asked to explain pictures that appear in the study material, and a child could be assigned in advance to read a scripture. An older one might be assigned to point out opportunities for practical application of the study material.​—7/1, page 15.
□ What are some goals that a family might include in preparation for congregation meetings?
(1) Each one in the family be ready to comment at the meetings; (2) each one work on giving comments in his own words; (3) include scriptures in comments; and (4) analyze the material with a view to personal application.​—7/1, page 20.
□ What is a key to a good marriage?
To unlock and experience the precious joys of a good marriage, one essential is good communication. This involves a sharing of sentiments and ideas. And wholesome communication entails things that are upbuilding, refreshing, virtuous, praiseworthy, and consoling. (Ephesians 4:29-32; Philippians 4:8)​—7/15, page 21.
□ What is ‘Jehovah’s way’? (Psalm 25:8, 9, 12)
That way is the way of love. It is based on doing what is right according to God’s standards. The Bible calls this application of principled love “a surpassing way.” (1 Corinthians 12:31)​—8/1, page 12.

