Will There Ever Be Peace and Quiet?
WHEN asked what they looked for in a foreign vacation, nearly 3 out of every 4 British tourists replied, “Peace and quiet.” But with noise pollution a worldwide problem, many believe that real peace and quiet is simply a pipe dream.
In spite of vigorous attempts to reduce noise pollution, you may wonder if it is realistic to believe that there will ever be total success. What about others who do not share your concern?
Obstacles to Overcome
It is not easy to speak with people who are antagonistic, much less win them over to your viewpoint. When noisy groups of teenagers gathered outside the building where Ron lived, he took the initiative to befriend them. He learned their names. He even helped repair one of their bicycles. Since then, he has had no more trouble from them.
Take the case of Marjorie, a single parent with a teenage daughter, who lives in an apartment sandwiched between noisy neighbors. The tenants upstairs have no carpet on their floor. Consequently, Marjorie finds that noise from the children roller-skating across the floor, bouncing a ball, or even jumping off the bed disturbs her. Additionally, their mother wears high-heeled shoes at home. Marjorie made a kindly approach to ask her neighbor to be more quiet, but the language barrier between them brought frustration. The local municipal council has offered to send an interpreter to help resolve the problem, so Marjorie waits for improvement.
Beneath her is a man who plays loud music between seven and eight o’clock every morning, the bass beat thumping constantly. Her tactful approach to the man brought the reply that he needed his music to ‘put him in a good mood for his work.’ How does Marjorie cope?
“I’m working on self-control and patience,” she says. “I have rearranged my program, and I sit down to read in spite of the noise. I find that I quickly become absorbed in my book. Then I don’t notice the noise as much.”
Heather, on the other hand, lives in an apartment overlooking a nightclub, which, after a rowdy night, closes about six in the morning. Although she eventually complained to the local authorities, little has been done to stop the disturbance.
An End to Noise?
“Many people find total silence extremely disturbing and eerie,” observes Dr. Ross Coles of Britain’s Medical Research Council’s Institute of Hearing Research. The beautiful songs of birds, the gentle breaking of waves on a sandy shore, the excited cries of children—these and other sounds delight us. Though we may presently long for some relief from noise, we are happy to be with wholesome companions who converse with us. God has promised peace and quiet for his faithful servants.
In the Bible the psalmist declares: “The meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.” (Psalm 37:11) God’s heavenly Kingdom government will soon intervene in human affairs. (Daniel 2:44) Then, under the rulership of Christ Jesus, there will be an “abundance of peace until the moon is no more.”—Psalm 72:7; Isaiah 9:6, 7.
You can rest assured that divine intervention will achieve the peace and quiet that all of us desire, just as God’s prophet Isaiah foretold: “The work of the true righteousness must become peace; and the service of the true righteousness, quietness and security to time indefinite. And my people must dwell . . . in undisturbed resting-places.”—Isaiah 32:17, 18.
Even now, you can discover spiritual peace and quiet at the gatherings of Jehovah’s Witnesses in your locality. Though on occasion tens of thousands meet together for worship in large conventions—and these get-togethers are truly ‘noisy with men, women, and children’—the sound is not disturbing but pleasant. (Micah 2:12) Experience it for yourself by meeting with the Witnesses locally or by writing to one of the addresses on page 5 of this magazine to contact them. Enjoy real peace and quiet in their company now and perhaps forever.

