Announcements
AWAKENING THE SLEEPERS
Does it not seem strange that, despite the extensive media of publication and information in the world today, millions of people are asleep to the vital issues that confront mankind? Awake! magazine, basing its course upon the Holy Scriptures and endeavoring to present the truth no matter where it strikes, stands in position to awaken you to the real meaning of things that are happening in the world today. Awake! gathers the facts and, without fear of commercial boycott or religious threats, gives you a true picture of the whys and wherefores of current and past happenings. (Eph. 5:14, NW) During the month of October, Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the world will go from house to house offering Awake! on a subscription of $1 a year (24 issues), with three small booklets free. Why not join in this good work and help your friends and neighbors keep awake by receiving Awake! regularly. Write us if you wish to help in this subscription campaign.
“MAKE SURE OF ALL THINGS”
Here is a Bible handbook of 416 pages that provides ready proof of what the Scriptures teach on seventy different major topics. “Ancestor Worship,” “Faith,” “Marriage,” “Races of Mankind,” “Return of Christ,” “Sign of Last Days,” and “Spiritism”—these are but a few of the many subjects considered. First, the subject is defined and its origin shown. Then, under subheadings dealing with various aspects of that subject, Scripture texts are quoted (without comment) that show what the Bible teaches regarding the subject. Eleven different versions of the Bible are quoted from. “Make Sure of All Things” also contains an alphabetical listing of 287 “Subjects for Study” in addition to the seventy principal themes. This listing serves as a cross reference, directing the reader to pages throughout the book that also deal with these many additional subjects. The book measures 6 5⁄8ʺ x 4 1⁄2ʺ x 1⁄2ʺ and has a brown cloth binding. Remit only 75 cents per copy.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 8: The Attack by Gog of Magog, ¶1-21.
Week of November 15: The Attack by Gog of Magog, ¶22-42.

