New World Society Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses
THE events occurring at Yankee Stadium, New York city, July 19 to 26, gave eloquent testimony that Jehovah has indeed a name-people in the earth. For eight days, Christian men, women and children associated in love, peace and unity as members of the New World society, entirely oblivious to the fact that they were of different races, tongues and nationalities. (John 13:34, 35) To make for ready introduction to one another, each wore a convention badge giving his name and his home congregation or his country, if from a foreign land. The preaching work of Jehovah’s witnesses is performed in 143 lands, by 510,228 witnesses. The assembly was truly international, some 22,000 from 95 lands outside of the United States came—by sea, air and land.
A not insignificant segment of the New World Society Assembly was located at Trailer City, near New Market, New Jersey, forty miles from the stadium. On its 200 acres 1,500 trailers parked and 6,000 tents sprang up practically overnight along theocratically named streets. Connected by direct wire with Yankee Stadium, its 80 buildings and meeting tents provided amply for both the spiritual and the physical needs of its 45,000 inhabitants.
The assembly was well organized. Its twenty-three departments, Attendant, First Aid, etc., staffed by upward of 20,000 volunteers serving freely and cheerfully, were marvels of efficiency that amazed outsiders. Nothing was overlooked: translation of lectures for deaf-mutes; tape recordings for the benefit of those who could not come; sessions in twenty foreign languages for those who could not understand English; and provision for visiting the Brooklyn Bethel and factory, WBBR, Staten Island, and the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead after the assembly.
The convention program itself was masterfully conceived. Each day had its “territorial” theme, Asia Day, Africa Day, etc., in the interesting and meaty branch servants’ and missionary reports. Themes of new truths were heard almost daily in the major hour lectures given by the president and vice-president. And finally there was the continual flow of new publications, 75 in all, from the first day to the last, in English and in many foreign languages. Truly Jehovah’s spirit and power was upon his people and to him went all the praise. But on to the first day’s program.
FIRST DAY FEATURES GRADUATION
Sunday morning, July 19, at Yankee Stadium was bright and sunny. Promptly at 9:30 a.m. the voice of F. S. Hoffmann, branch servant of Switzerland and assistant chairman, rang out sharp and clear over the convention’s own excellent sound system as he opened the New World Society Assembly with the call for a song, followed by brief discussion of the day’s text, and prayer.
It being Earth’s Four Quarters Day, eight interesting 4-minute reports were next heard from literally the four corners of the earth. Then followed G. Fredianelli with “Missionary Service as a Life’s Work,” a heart-to-heart talk to pioneer ministers to consider the missionary field by one who has been in it for many years. Modern Macedonia not only calls but actually shouts, “Come over and help us!” Instead of indifference, the missionary’s chief problem is to find enough time to take care of all the interest found. “You need the foreign fields to obtain the superlative happiness!”
At 10:30 the chairman of the assembly, Percy Chapman, branch servant of Canada, gave the address of welcome. ‘Jehovah is a happy God; his people are a happy people; let nothing mar that happiness. We are all here for the same purpose, to worship Jehovah God. Get the most out of the assembly by attending all of its sessions.’ He closed by making the convention’s first release: the beautiful leather-bound edition of the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
The afternoon saw the graduation of the twenty-first class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead, presided over by its president, N. H. Knorr. Parting counsel to the 127 students, seated to the right and the left of the platform garden, was first given by the school’s five instructors: U. V. Glass, D. H. Burt, E. A. Dunlap, M. G. Friend and A. D. Schroeder, the school’s registrar. J. F. Markus, servant of Kingdom Farm, where the Gilead school is situated, also gave parting words of admonition. Further fine counsel was given the students by the school’s vice-president, F. W. Franz: “Do missionary work, thoroughly accomplish your ministry.” (2 Tim. 4:5, NW) Learn to understand the people as well as the language; take a personal interest in them; be as physicians visiting the spiritually sick. Be interested also in your fellow missionaries; you need one another. Keep reading Paul’s admonition on love at 1 Corinthians 13.
Climaxing the graduation program, Brother Knorr spoke for more than an hour on “Gathering Men of All Nations into One Flock,” in which he highlighted the role of shepherd of Jehovah God and his Son, the Shepherd-King Christ Jesus, and contrasted the pastoral activity of Jehovah’s witnesses with that of the selfish clergy. His forceful refutation of the charges made against the missionary activity of Jehovah’s witnesses was especially enthusiastically applauded.
During his remarks Brother Knorr digressed to give a striking demonstration of what Gilead has accomplished by asking all those of previous classes in attendance, as well as those comprising the next class, and who had been seated out in front, to rise, class by class. At the conclusion he handed out diplomas, together with a gift, the class picture and notice of foreign assignment to the students as they came, one by one, to the platform. The students, who had come from 28 different lands, were being sent to 44 different countries.
The afternoon’s thrilling proceedings had been witnessed by 77,634 at the Yankee Stadium; the 48,753 listening at the overflow tents and at Trailer City bringing the first day’s peak attendance to 126,387. During the afternoon Brother Knorr also expressed appreciation for the contributions that enabled the Society to bring so many to the assembly from distant lands, released the August 1 Watchtower containing the text of his talk and which introduced a new feature “Check Your Memory,” and announced an improvement in the method of studying The Watchtower congregationally.
The evening’s two-hour program, presented by the graduating class, consisted of a series of demonstrations in which certain visitors to Gilead were shown about the classrooms and library and told about the subjects studied and methods used. Results of their training were also interestingly and effectively illustrated. By way of diversion, beautiful as well as amusing musical numbers, chiefly folk songs, were rendered throughout the program.
The closing remarks, made a few minutes early because of showers, stressed the seriousness of attending Gilead to those contemplating it. It is a wonderful education, never to be forgotten nor regretted; it will even be taken with them into the post-Armageddon world, but—count the cost. And then, a closing prayer.
NORTH AMERICA DAY
The forenoon of Monday, July 20, gave conventioners opportunity to tell New Yorkers more about the New World society, they already having some knowledge of it from the friendly and well-illustrated reports appearing in their morning papers. And while eight foreign-language sessions were in progress in various sections of the stadium, pioneer ministers interested in foreign missionary service met for more information and to fill out preliminary applications. In a heart-to-heart talk with these Brother Knorr observed that missionary service is not just training at Gilead and an airplane trip to a foreign country, but also carries with it heavy responsibilities. However, the blessings are great.
Monday being North America Day, where in 12 lands 193,568 ministers are busy, the program featured the progress of the work in North America, of particular interest being the ten-minute branch servants’ reports. For example, in Costa Rica in seven years their numbers had increased twelvefold, from 155 to 1,825; and in Panama the numbers had increased fifteenfold in eight years!
The climax of the day was reached at 3:30 p.m., when the president of the Society, N. H. Knorr, delivered the keynote speech, “Living Now as a New World Society.” The New World society is here to stay and is growing; the nations of the world will not be able to stamp it out. It is God’s creation by his Word and spirit and will continue in spite of what may happen to the legal Society. Christians must abandon old-world habits; we cannot expect to take them into the new world.
At the close of his discourse, which repeatedly raised his audience to a high pitch of enthusiasm, Brother Knorr released a most practical ministerial aid, the 416-page pocket-sized Bible handbook, “Make Sure of All Things”, which quotes more than 4,500 Bible texts under 70 main themes and has a valuable index listing 287 religious subjects. Then he presented a resolution clearly outlining the position of Jehovah’s witnesses as a New World society in regard to Jehovah’s Word, to the Kingdom and its establishment in 1914, and their separateness from the nations of the world. The resolution, after being seconded by the assembly’s chairman, was adopted by the 125,040 present at Yankee Stadium, overflow tents and Trailer City, with thunderous applause.
The evening’s program featured a series of demonstrations that illustrated the many ways in which the Bible handbook, “Make Sure of All Things”, could be effectively used. Concluding the evening’s program, R. E. Morgan of the Brooklyn office spoke on “Getting the Full Value Out of Your Ministry School.”
ISLANDS OF THE ATLANTIC DAY
In addition to another series of foreign-language meetings, Tuesday forenoon, July 21, the third day of the assembly, saw a special meeting for branch, circuit and public-relations servants. At this meeting Brother Knorr stressed the value and purpose of maintaining good relations with the press; to project, not personalities, but the truth of God’s kingdom. Avoid antagonizing; get constructive ideas across; have information accurate. M. G. Henschel, a member of the Society’s board of directors, emphasized writing stories as news and not quibbling with the press over the amount of space or its location. U. V. Glass counseled on making the most of radio and TV possibilities. C. Quackenbush, of the Society’s editorial staff, gave pointers on writing style: stories must move fast, have current interest. Methods of contacting editorial agents were discussed by M. Cole. L. A. Swingle, also a member of the Society’s board of directors, gave helpful advice on the value and use of photographs in telling one’s story.
Tuesday noon the first issue of the Convention Report appeared and at 1:30 the program for the day began with reports on the progress of the work among the “Islands of the Atlantic,” the theme of the day, where 17,346 ministers are preaching in 29 islands.
The day’s feature was special instruction for branch servants. First speaker was Brother Knorr. Branch servants must be keenly interested in their country and its people and must be able to expand with the work. They must not be too busy to engage in the field service. “Quality, not quantity, is important! Might as well leave the sheep in the world as to bring them to an unclean organization!” At the close of his remarks Brother Knorr released a 32-page preaching aid, “Preach the Word”, containing a testimony regarding Jehovah and the Kingdom in 30 different languages.
Then M. G. Henschel gave counsel on treatment of Gilead graduates. Branch servants should warmly welcome missionaries, acquaint them with local customs and take them into the field at once. Next A. D. Schroeder spoke on “Keeping Up with the Truth.” Branch servants must fully familiarize themselves with the contents of The Watchtower. He recommended going over the main article three times. H. C. Covington, the Society’s legal counsel, stressed caution and perseverance in “Know Your Rights as a Citizen.” Spy out the land as did Joshua; avoid getting expelled; you cannot help them if you are not there. The world has a proverb, ‘Don’t butt your head against a stone wall.’ “But God’s Word says he has made our heads as flint. If we run up against a brick wall, flint is harder yet. So we will crash through if we butt against it long enough!” Counsel to “Recognize the Theocratic Organization” by F. W. Franz concluded the series. The “faithful and discreet slave” organization is appointed by Jehovah God. Above all others, branch servants under it should obey organization instructions. A count showed that 125,592 had heard all this valuable instruction.
In the evening, after more reports from the Islands of the Atlantic, E. C. Chitty, secretary of the International Bible Students Association, London, spoke on “The Fruitage of the Spirit,” basing his remarks on Galatians 5:22. Concluding the day’s program, answers were given to service and Scripture questions by two speakers, both members of the Society’s board of directors. First T. J. Sullivan dealt with questions relating to the Society’s policy on various aspects of disfellowshiping, and then H. H. Riemer answered a number of Scripture questions.
SOUTH AMERICA DAY
Wednesday, July 22, was a full day at Yankee Stadium. At 9:00 a.m. C. A. Steele began his discourse on baptism. He discussed the appropriateness of immersion, the need to dedicate oneself to Jehovah to gain salvation, and that it is indeed a dedication to a person, Jehovah, and not just to a work. ‘Remember the date, July 22.’ All together, 4,640 presented themselves for immersion, which took place at the Riverside Cascade Pool.
While candidates for immersion were leaving, those remaining centered their attention on the next feature, a discussion of “Will You Be an Irregular Praiser in the New World?” by L. E. Reusch, district servant. Having dedicated themselves to Jehovah, his witnesses must give him first place in their lives. Drawing an analogy from Malachi, chapter 1, he asked irregular praisers if they would think of treating their worldly employers the way they treat Jehovah God.
Then followed special instructions to the Society’s traveling representatives, known as district and circuit servants. Speaking on “Principal Work of All Servants” Brother Knorr thrilled his audience as, step by step, he outlined a great house-to-house training campaign, having as its goal the qualifying of every last one of Jehovah’s witnesses to give effective short sermons as occasion required at any doorstep. Varying aspects of the duties of the district and circuit servants, particularly in their relations with the branch offices, were then discussed by members of the Brooklyn and Canadian branch offices.
The reports heard in the afternoon, from 1:30 to 3:30, made it clear that this was South America Day, the continent where at the present time 12,828 ministers are letting their light shine in 12 lands, lands where gross darkness prevails in spite of four centuries of domination by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. By 3:30 a vast audience of 132,811 was on hand to hear Brother Knorr’s powerful discourse on “Walk in the Name of Jehovah Our God for Ever.” After showing the importance of the name of Jehovah, the inconsistency of modern translators who exclude it from their versions and the insult they give Jehovah by so doing, he thanked God that provision had been made for a translation that does restore His name to its rightful place, and with this produced Volume I of the New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures, consisting of the Octateuch, the first eight books, from Genesis to Ruth inclusive. This news was received with prolonged and deafening applause.
In the evening, M. G. Henschel gave a stirring discourse on “The Day of Salvation.” Drawing a parallel between Daniel in the lions’ den and Jehovah’s witnesses today, he pointed out that leading an upright life is part of our giving testimony. Hated solely because of the message they bear, Jehovah’s witnesses do not break faith but keep on preaching and even baptizing right in prisons and concentration camps. The conventioners next heard another “fighting speech,” by H. C. Covington, on “They Oppose Freedom of Worship.” Tracing the Society’s legal battles through the years, both in the United States and in other lands, he highlighted the importance of prayer in these legal battles and admonished his audience of 125,000 to be cautious as serpents, as innocent as doves and as fearless as lions.
ASIA DAY
An unusually heavy rainstorm greeted the conventioners on Thursday, July 23, the fifth day of the assembly. But rain or no rain, the morning’s foreign-language sessions were held, circuit servants met to have their questions answered, and there was a special meeting for those interested in serving at the Brooklyn Bethel. The latter learned that requirements for Bethel service include, first of all, full dedication to Jehovah God; other requirements being that the applicant have good health, be without encumbrances and within the ages of 18 to 35. Serving at Bethel is not just one grand convention but means much hard work; but with it also comes much joy, as it is a great privilege to serve one’s brothers world-wide, and Bethel has many privileges peculiar to it. (Since members of the Bethel family at times find it necessary to leave, openings continue to occur and anyone interested should write the president’s office regarding such service.)
The entire afternoon’s program on Thursday was given over to the missionary work in Asia, earth’s largest and most populous continent, where in 20 lands but 2,620 ministers of the New World society are bringing comfort to men of good will. Particularly interesting was the two-hour feature, presided over by W. L. Thornton, of Brooklyn, in which missionaries, branch servants and native ministers answered the question: “How do you witness to Oriental people and cultivate interest in the Bible?” presented, incidentally, in native costume. Before the demonstration was fully over, the rain ceased for the day, to permit a beautiful ensemble in costume.
Among the points well made were that Oriental prejudice against the Bible as a Western book was ill-advised, as most of it was written in Eastern lands; that the Kingdom message should be judged on its merits and not on the basis of who brings it; that science does not conflict with the Bible but rather corroborates it. For the conclusion of the program Brother Knorr came to the platform and released the 64-page booklet Basis for Belief in a New World, a Bible aid especially prepared for use by missionaries in Oriental lands, containing all the arguments presented in the course of the afternoon’s demonstration and many more. Since prejudice against the Bible is not limited to the Orient, ministers throughout the world will find it a valuable aid, and those at the assembly enthusiastically registered their keen appreciation of it.
“What Did You Learn from The Watchtower Last Year?” was a question that A. D. Schroeder answered in the course of the evening’s program, which he did by reviewing a number of the leading articles that appeared in 1952. He particularly noted the emphasis these placed on Jehovah’s witnesses’ now being a New World society and the imperative need for it to keep clean if it would survive Armageddon.
F. W. Franz, the final speaker, in his discourse on “New World Society Attacked from the Far North” gave a detailed consideration of chapters 38 and 39 of Ezekiel, the text of which talk appears in this issue of The Watchtower. In spite of the bad weather some 87,000 had heard the afternoon’s assembly program and 112,700 the evening’s.
AFRICA DAY
The forenoon’s program provided for the final series of special meetings for foreign-speaking brothers and the circuit servants, and the last opportunity for regular field service. During the course of the afternoon many thrilling reports were heard from the “Dark Continent,” where 78,305 Kingdom publishers in 34 lands are teaching men of good will to drop polygamy and other tribal customs, to read and write and to worship Jehovah in holy array. A surprise feature was introduced by Brother Knorr: beautiful unaccompanied singing by our native African brothers in Northern Rhodesia, by means of a tape recording. Harmony and intonation seemed perfect although sung from memory and without benefit of instrumental accompaniment.
At 2:00 p.m. A. H. Macmillan, for many years traveling representative of the Society, discussed “Requirements Necessary for Ministry.” Not theological seminary training, but full dedication to Jehovah, knowledge of his Word and purposes, and a desire to teach others the truth, were required. Later in the program a symposium of three speakers gave suggestions on ‘How to Approach People at the Doors.’ The basic requirements are knowledge of God’s Word and love in one’s heart. A neat appearance is also essential. Opening remarks are very important; conversation should be pleasant and friendly.
“The Purpose of Our Witnessing,” noted L. A. Swingle, the final speaker of the afternoon, is to separate the “sheep” from the “goats,” but, above all, to vindicate Jehovah’s name. At the conclusion of his talk he released, to the great joy of his listeners, four new tracts: Do You Believe in Evolution or the Bible? “Which Is the Right Religion? The Sign of Christ’s Presence and Man’s Only Hope for Peace.
Programed in between African singing, missionary and branch servant reports was the evening’s first discourse, “The Living Word,” by Grant Suiter, secretary and treasurer of the Watch Tower Society. (Heb. 4:12, NW) ‘It divides between “soul and spirit” in that it distinguishes between actions and motives. It is powerful—provided we get the sense of it. Its most important feature is its revelation of the true God, Jehovah.’ Concluding the evening’s program was C. D. Quackenbush’s heartwarming talk on “Rearing Children in the New World Society.” Instruction must begin early in life and must be backed up by consistent example. “If you don’t want little Pharisees, then don’t be big ones!” Addressing his remarks to the children he showed from examples in nature that parents discipline for the child’s own welfare, because they love them. The close of the assembly’s sixth day found 124,150 conventioners returning to their places of rest happy and light of heart.
EUROPE DAY
The outstanding program feature for the forenoon of July 25, the seventh day of the assembly, was a five-part symposium, “Advancing the Interests of the New World Society by Being a Pioneer.” Pioneering, that is, spending 100 hours monthly in the ministry, is practical, the first speaker emphasized, as thousands have proved. Many more could be pioneers if they but had the faith and appreciation.
Next, “Meeting Your Financial Problems” was discussed. Pioneers do not evade financial responsibilities, they just are not enslaved by them. They meet their obligations by keeping expenses low, by finding part-time jobs and willingly adapting themselves to whatever work may be available, regardless of how humble it may be.
“Pioneering Is a Serious Business,” stressed the succeeding speaker. But “perhaps it is still more serious not to take it up if able to do so.” It means budgeting one’s time, making advance preparations, having something definite to say at the doors and varying one’s presentation so as not to get in a rut.
In “Covering Your Assignment in City and Rural,” pioneers were admonished to make time count and to arrange their activity so as to be able to spend fifty hours monthly in the basic house-to-house work. And finally, Scriptural and living examples were produced to show that pioneering is practical for septuagenarians and teenagers alike.
Reports from Europe, begun in the morning’s program, were continued in the afternoon. There in 23 lands, 174,257 happy servants of Jehovah are seeking to make others also happy, many thousands endeavoring to do this even behind the Iron Curtain. Then followed another meaty five-part symposium: “The Value of the Congregational Book Study.” Strategic location is important because of its being a service center; its conductor must set a good example in field service and be kind and patient. It serves as a training ground for new ones, to start out in the field and speak up at meetings. It is of special value in times of bans when only small groups can come together.
The climax for Europe Day came at 3:30 with the lecture, “Flight to Safety with the New World Society,” delivered by N. H. Knorr, the Society’s president. In this powerful talk Brother Knorr drew a parallel between Jerusalem A.D. 66, when Rome’s armies surrounding Jerusalem suddenly withdrew, permitting Christians in Jerusalem and in Judea to heed Jesus’ words and flee to safety, and Christendom, which is now surrounded by the armies of the anti-God forces within the “disgusting thing that causes desolation,” making it imperative that all flee before Armageddon makes it too late. The eager and intent audience of 134,333 hung on every word and was thrilled when at the conclusion Brother Knorr released the 384-page beautifully-blue-bound study aid, “New Heavens and a New Earth”.
More than half of the evening’s program was taken up by more European reports, after which the third symposium of the day, “Your Ministerial Manners,” brought excellent counsel to all the conventioners. District servant J. W. Stuefloten admonished: Proper manners are not inherited but must be cultivated by application of God’s Word and by much training and discipline. O. L. Pillars, a circuit servant, gave some plain talk on proper conduct between the sexes. It is proper for them to associate with each other but evil appearances must be avoided.
Colorful counsel that hit home time and again, judging by the response, was given by U. V. Glass on woman’s place in the organization. In the New World society woman must recognize her limitations. She has no authority to criticize congregational servants nor should she resent counsel given her by them. By serving faithfully within her sphere she will win the respect of all. District servant C. W. Barber discussed the validity of the ordination of Jehovah’s witnesses and pointed out that proper ministerial manners include being loving, humble and teachable. N. Kovalak, also a district servant, took for his theme ‘putting up a hard fight for the faith.’ It is necessary to put up such a hard fight because of imperfection within us, because of evil humans about us and because of the demons. Putting up a hard fight means regular study, faithful attendance at meetings and going in the service.
ISLANDS OF THE PACIFIC DAY
On Sunday morning, July 26, the final day, interesting reports were heard from the Islands of the Pacific, in 13 of which 31,304 of Jehovah’s ministers are making disciples of all nations.
Brother Franz followed, thrilling his audience as he revealed, in the course of his remarks on “Filling the House with Glory,” that the “desire of all nations” of Haggai 2:7 that was to come in was not, as we once thought, God’s kingdom or even Christ Jesus, but the men of good will now associating themselves with the remnant of Christ’s body and that right now these are fulfilling the prophecy relative to ‘beating swords into plowshares.’—Isa. 2:2-4.
John O. Groh, convention servant, then gave “Some High Lights on the Assembly.” He reviewed the vast preconvention activity, gave interesting statistics regarding Trailer City and the various convention departments, and noted the fine publicity the press had given. In conclusion he thanked the 15,000 to 20,000 volunteer workers for their excellent co-operation and expressed appreciation to the New York city police, health and sanitation departments, the unions and the management of Yankee Stadium for their cooperation.
Between the morning and afternoon’s English sessions a Spanish public lecture was given by R. M. Gonzalez, vice-president of the Watch Tower Society of Cuba, in one part of the stadium. An audience of 4,075 heard the discourse “It Is Time to Consider God’s Way,” and afterward received the Spanish edition of God’s Way Is Love.
At 3:15 a musical program was presented featuring excellent arrangements of Kingdom songs beautifully performed by the 77-piece convention orchestra under the able direction of the assembly’s musical director, V. R. Duncombe of Canada, and vocal selections. At 4:00 o’clock the chairman of the assembly, Percy Chapman, introduced the speaker of the afternoon, N. H. Knorr, to speak on the subject, “After Armageddon—God’s New World.”
With due deliberation and sustained power the speaker logically and Scripturally developed his theme, being applauded from the first two sentences. Armageddon was not to be a mere political or international conflict but Jehovah’s war of universal proportions. (Rev. 16:14, 16) The march to Armageddon is on. The question today is not, Which bloc will yield? but, Will the nations yield to the King of kings? After Armageddon God’s new world will take over, bringing with it health, everlasting life and even the resurrection of the dead. In conclusion he urged, “Prepare now for that eternity of all new things, to live in it and be forever happy. Get ready now to live AFTER ARMAGEDDON in GOD’S NEW WORLD!”
Two free copies of the booklet containing the lecture were offered to all in attendance. The official count showed that 91,562 had jammed into Yankee Stadium, 25,240 heard the lecture in the overflow tents around the stadium and 49,027 listened at Trailer City, making a total of 165,829. WBBR broadcast it to many more thousands.
The sun gradually lowered behind the stands to the west. The closing moments of the assembly were stealing on apace. Just a short intermission, and then the convention lifted its voice in songs of thanksgiving to Jehovah, after which came the “Closing Remarks by the President.” For the next hour he gave earnest admonition to praise Jehovah, basing his remarks on Psalm 145, during which he announced that the 1954 yeartext will be Psalm 145:2, “Every day will I bless you, and I will praise your name forever and ever.”—CB.
Then speaking informally Brother Knorr told about plans for Brothers Franz, Henschel and himself to visit the brothers in Central and South America. He commended the assembly on its good behavior, and announced that during 1954 district assemblies will be held and in 1955 a series of conventions, spreading across the country from the west coast of the United States to England and the continent’s mainland. Then, with a song and a prayer of thanks to Jehovah, the greatest assembly of Christians ever to be held ended.
IN CONCLUSION
Truly, here are a people separate and distinct, a New World society based on the principles set forth in the Bible. Its principles work, for those at Yankee Stadium could look about them each day and see scores of thousands, all dedicated to Jehovah and living by those principles. Truly the world saw a powerful demonstration of the spirit of Jehovah at work!
[Picture on page 585]
The platform at Yankee Stadium
[Picture on page 589]
Aerial view of part of Trailer City
[Picture on page 592]
Above: View from bleachers of an afternoon session
[Picture on page 593]
Below: Yankee Stadium during public talk, July 26

