Instruction by Attention to God’s Works
TODAY man has a better understanding of the wonderful works of God’s material universe than ever before. By reason of his attention to them man has been instructed in many of the basic laws and principles governing both the inconceivably immense bodies in stellar space and the infinitesimally small ones residing in the tiny atom. Man has also greatly increased his understanding of the marvels residing in his own body. Truly he has reason to exclaim: “How many your works are, O Jehovah! All of them in wisdom you have made. The earth is full of your productions.”—Ps. 104:24.
All this attention to God’s works should have caused modern man to grow in appreciation of his Creator, but not so. Like Napoleon’s astronomer, Laplace, more often than not modern man sneers that God is not at all necessary to his hypothesis. Rarely indeed does he manifest the understanding of Elihu when he said to Job: “Do give ear to this, O Job; stand still and show yourself attentive to the wonderful works of God.”—Job 37:14.a
Those who are wise will let their instruction regarding God’s wonderful works increase their appreciation of him. They see in God’s wonderful works evidence, not only of his existence, but also of his basic qualities, his attributes of wisdom, power, righteousness or justice and love. And they find that implicit in this knowledge is the obligation to worship the grand Creator.—Rom. 1:20.
Not that God’s wonderful works are to be viewed only in the so-called Book of Nature. Not by any means! God’s wonderful works include, among other things, his inspired Word, his organization, visible and invisible, and the great work of preaching the Kingdom.
What abundant and wise instruction we can receive by giving attention to God’s wonderful Word! Are we so concerned to learn to know and to do God’s will that we daily give attention to this Source of instruction? Do we approach such instruction with a teachable mental attitude and a pure motive? Above everything else, it is by attention to this work of God, his Word, that we are instructed.—2 Tim. 2:15.
And then there is God’s wonderful organization, visible and invisible. True, only with our eyes of faith can we see its invisible part. (Dan. 7:9, 10, 13, 14) But we can see God’s visible organization with our natural sight, though not without the aid of God’s holy spirit. It consists of the remaining ones of the Christian congregation that had its beginning at Pentecost. Designated by Jesus “the faithful and discreet slave,” it is the nucleus of the New World society of the Christian witnesses of Jehovah.—Matt. 24:45-47.
Do we give the attention to this wonderful work of God that it really deserves? If we would understand God’s Word and serve him acceptably we must. That includes attention to its publications, such as its official journal, The Watchtower, the Bible-study aid “Let Your Name Be Sanctified,” and the monthly pamphlet Kingdom Ministry. It also means faithfully attending the various congregational meetings and assemblies and giving attention to what is being presented from the platform at these gatherings.—Heb. 2:1; 10:23-25.
What is the purpose of our being instructed in this way? Is it solely that we might gain salvation? No, that is not the sole reason, in fact, it is not even the primary reason. Above all, we want to be instructed so that we may have a part in another one of God’s wonderful works, the one he is having done at the present time, namely, preaching the good news of his kingdom. By faithfully sharing in that grand work we shall also be contributing our part toward the greatest of all of God’s works, the vindication of his name.
Yes, nothing is more important than the clearing of God’s name of reproach. If we fully appreciate that fact, we shall not be unduly concerned about what men think of us but shall remember that “trembling at men is what lays a snare, but he that is trusting in Jehovah will be protected.”—Prov. 29:25.
So let all Christians, especially during the month of February, be instructed by earnestly, humbly and regularly giving attention to God’s wonderful works, at the same time having a part in the work he is having done at the present time, preaching the good news of his kingdom. Doing so, they will have their joy made full and share in his greatest work of all, the eventual and complete vindication of Jehovah God’s name and universal sovereignty, to their own eternal salvation.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, August 15, 1961.

