From Our Readers
Comic Books
Thank you very much for the articles on “Comic Books​—Should Your Child Read Them?” (June 22, 1983) I was affected by comics, but when I read the articles it really surprised me. Now I know the violence that is presented in them. So now I don’t read them! I thank you so much for publishing these articles. I needed them. I am an 11-year-old boy.
T. A., Massachusetts
Is the Tourist to Blame?
I have enjoyed reading your articles and discovering that there is quite a lot of good sense, not fanaticism, in what you have to say. However, I take issue with your article “Who Is to Blame​—Russia or the Tourist?” (June 22, 1983) The author was saying that if you don’t obey the regulations and get into trouble, it’s your own fault. I would agree that this is true in places where regulations and customs are reasonable and based on respect for the individual. However, I personally felt that your article was being too easy on the Russians. Does a crowded sidewalk contain many national secrets? I certainly would not blame myself if because of living in a free society I forgot the rules and accidentally filmed a sensitive scene. I would be reminding myself how different our two systems are. If I couldn’t get into a museum, I would again be thinking how little respect that system has for an individual and how open our museums are, such as the National Gallery of Art. I would also be thinking that if I were a guest in the United States and couldn’t speak a word of English, I would still get the help that I needed from people. So I disagree with your article. I think you had the blame placed where it belonged in the first place.
J. W., New York
We did not intend to justify or defend such a restrictive system. Rather, our purpose in publishing the article was to emphasize, on the basis of the experiences of the author, that if you really want to enjoy being a tourist anywhere in the world it is advisable to become acquainted with local customs and regulations and conform to them. This is especially true where governments tend to be somewhat more restrictive.​—ED.
Population Explosion
I disagree with your articles on “Population Explosion.” (August 8, 1983) If space and resources were used properly, there would be enough for everyone. The Japanese have about half the population of the United States and get along on a land area the size of California. The reason is they cooperate with one another, they don’t work against one another.
R. H., New York
That is the point of the articles, so we are in agreement. The present state of the population explosion causes problems because of mismanagement of earth’s space and resources. Only the one world government, God’s Kingdom, is able to manage affairs properly. Under its rulership our planet Earth will be fully populated and adequately provide for the needs of everyone.​—ED.

