Argentina Receives the “Good News of Peace”
“RELIGIOUS questions are irrelevant now. We need to give more attention to real problems like social welfare.” Such a response is common when the subject of religion comes up with many Argentineans. A lawyer voiced the more extreme view of some: “I am a Communist. When we get into power we are going to do away with religion!”
These views reflect the explosive issues that are deeply affecting people’s attitudes toward what really matters in life. The tendency of many is toward religious apathy or atheism. On the other hand, interest grows in movements that promise to better material and social conditions. Even some Catholic priests have swung far from religious duties into social activism.
However, there is also a calming influence at work. Many former Communists, urban guerrillas, hippies and others have made marvelous changes in their troubled lives after hearing the “good news” about God’s solution to human problems. Upon learning how his Kingdom government will permanently resolve social injustices, many sincere persons have rechanneled their energies from giving support to violence and destruction into supporting constructive, lifesaving activity on behalf of the “good news of peace.”
A young woman from the northwest province of Jujuy felt that she could not remain indifferent to poverty, misery and inequality, so she joined a political group. Protest marches and demonstrations became a regular part of her life. An armed extremist group trained her in various forms of violence.
But then something changed all of this​—a free Bible study offered by Jehovah’s witnesses. “I soon understood what Jesus meant when he said, ‘My kingdom is no part of this world,’” she relates, “so I severed my political connections. Five months later I was engaged in peaceable activity, telling others about how God’s kingdom can and will bring justice to the earth.”​—John 18:36.
Marta Tortoni of Bahía Blanca wanted to promote justice through a career in law. But when she learned about a more practical way to serve the ends of justice, she gave up her law studies. When she was criticized by her concerned father for doing so, her loving response was: “Papa, you wanted me to become a good lawyer to defend justice. As one of Jehovah’s witnesses, I have come to know true justice and I am helping as many persons as I can to learn about it.” About 30,000 Argentineans have taken up this same peaceful activity.
LIVES ARE CHANGED
Rather than try to improve the world, some persons may become so discouraged that they consider giving up on life altogether. Señora Etelvina Nanni was on the verge of committing suicide when a Witness called with the good news concerning God’s kingdom. As she learned about the righteous conditions soon to bless mankind, her despondency gave way to joy. Now she contemplates, instead of death, the richness of the life ahead, and is busy telling others about her newfound hope.
Bible principles changed the life of a former professional football (soccer) player from Germany. After studying the Bible for just a short time, Cristian Rudsky decided to take a trip back to Germany. Why such a costly trip? Because sometime previously he had left without fulfilling his paid contract to a football club there. Imagine their amazement when Rudsky returned money to cover the year he had failed to play! Back in Argentina, Cristian is now teaching others the principles of truth and honesty that changed his life.
Many Jewish persons in Argentina have also made great changes in order to embrace the Christian good news. In fact, the Parque Centenario Congregation in Buenos Aires enjoys the fellowship of nineteen persons of Jewish descent. When her father died, Nora Cohen’s Jewish faith could not give her a satisfying answer as to why man dies, so she sought the answer from spiritism and astrology. Finally, Jehovah’s witnesses called with the Bible’s reasonable answer. Now, despite ostracism by her family, Nora is delighted publicly to declare her hope in God’s kingdom.
REACHING THE PEOPLE
Jehovah’s witnesses are determined to reach all the people of Argentina with the good news. They spend much of their own time, energy and financial resources to do so. Several Christian women, for example, from the Comodoro Rivadavia Congregation saved their money so that they could carry the good news to four isolated towns best reached by small aircraft. Imagine their delight when one man they had contacted there traveled 1,860 miles (3,000 kilometers) to attend a Christian assembly!
Full-time preachers also went to Río Grande and Ushuaia, at the far tip of Argentina​—two of the southernmost cities in the world. Within just a few months some of the local people were telling the good news right alongside their visitors!
APPRECIATING ASSOCIATION
In Argentina, assembling for Christian meetings is not always just a matter of a short ride in the family auto or on public transportation. Walking for miles through deep mud is a regular part of getting to meetings in the rain-forest areas of the extreme northeast. One family that regularly attends meetings lives on a cattle and sheep ranch. They must walk well over two miles and then ride a bus for the remaining thirty-seven miles. To go home, they have to wait until 3:30 a.m. for the returning bus! And in the south, many appreciative persons with limited means still travel hundreds of miles down from Andes Mountain villages to the Río Negro valley for large Christian assemblies. Almost 50,000 here in Argentina were present at twelve assemblies held in late 1974!
This appreciation is displayed, too, when traveling circuit overseers visit with special filmed slide presentations. Attendance often far exceeds the number of local Witnesses. One congregation of 167 had 432 present. Another had 98, with only 11 local Witnesses, and in another place just 16 welcomed 111 interested persons to this instructive program! The fact that many thousands more are reaching out for this good news was also evident when 66,641 attended the Lord’s Evening Meal held on March 27, 1975.
Thus the peaceful work of Jehovah’s witnesses is thriving in Argentina, bringing real confidence and hope to people disillusioned by the failures of this present world. For such persons, it is truly “good news of peace” that they bring.​—Eph. 6:15.
[Map of Argentina on page 488]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Buenos Aires
PAMPAS
Andes Mtns.
PATAGONIA
CHILE

