They Found Peace in a World in Turmoil
THE cover of this magazine depicts a fiery battle scene from Bosnia and Herzegovina. Can peace exist in such a place? Surprisingly, the answer is yes. While Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Muslim communities in that tragic land fight for territory, many individuals long for peace, and some have found it.
The Djorems were residents of Sarajevo, and they were Jehovah’s Witnesses. In the midst of all the turmoil in that city, they habitually visited their neighbors to share with them the good news of God’s Kingdom. (Matthew 24:14) Why? Because the Djorem family knew that this Kingdom is real, that it is already established in the heavens, and that it is mankind’s best and only hope for peace. Jehovah’s Witnesses have complete confidence in what the apostle Paul called “the good news of peace.” (Ephesians 2:17) Thanks to people like Bozo and Hena Djorem, many are finding peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A Real Peace to Come
There is more to say about the Djorems. First, though, let us talk of another couple who gained confidence in God’s Kingdom. Their names are Artur and Arina. They and their young sons used to live in a republic in the territory of the former Soviet Union. When civil war broke out, Artur fought for one of the sides. Soon, though, he asked himself, ‘Why am I fighting against these people who used to be my neighbors?’ He left the country and, after many difficulties, arrived with his young family in Estonia.
On a visit to St. Petersburg, Artur met Jehovah’s Witnesses and was impressed by what he learned about God’s Kingdom. Jehovah’s will is that very soon God’s Kingdom will be the only rulership over mankind. (Daniel 2:44) Then the earth will be a peaceful place, with no more civil wars or international conflicts. Isaiah prophesied about that time: “They will not do any harm or cause any ruin in all my holy mountain; because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.”—Isaiah 11:9.
Noting the artist’s impression of that future peaceful earth in a Bible study aid that a Witness showed him, Artur remarked that he used to live in a place that looked like that. Now, though, it was being ruined by civil war. Back in Estonia, Artur and his family are learning more about God’s Kingdom through a Bible study with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Peace Amid Turmoil
Psalm 37:37 says: “Watch the blameless one and keep the upright one in sight, for the future of that man will be peaceful.” In fact, the peace of one who is blameless and upright in God’s eyes is not limited to his future. He enjoys it right now. How is that possible? Consider the experience of a man named Paul.
Paul lives in a remote refugee camp in southwest Ethiopia, although he actually comes from a neighboring country. In his homeland, he met one of Jehovah’s Witnesses who worked for an oil company, and this man gave him a Bible study aid, The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life.a Paul never met the Witness again, but he studied the book carefully. Civil war drove him to a refugee camp in Ethiopia, and there he spoke to others about what he had learned. A small group came to accept this as the truth. Based on what they had learned, they were soon preaching to others in the camp.
Paul wrote to the Watch Tower Society’s headquarters asking for help. A minister sent from Addis Ababa was astonished to find 35 people waiting for him, ready to learn more about God’s Kingdom. Arrangements were made for help to be given on a regular basis.
How can it be said that people like Paul enjoy peace? Their lives are not easy, but they have faith in God. When affected by the turmoil of this world, they apply the Bible’s counsel: “Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving let your petitions be made known to God.” As a result, they have a contentment that is rare today. The apostle Paul’s words to the Philippian congregation apply to them: “The peace of God that excels all thought will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.” Indeed, they feel a close relationship with Jehovah, “the God of peace.”—Philippians 4:6, 7, 9.
A Present Peace
The enthroned King of God’s Kingdom is Jesus Christ, called in the Bible the “Prince of Peace.” (Isaiah 9:6) Of him the ancient prophet said: “He will actually speak peace to the nations; and his rulership will be from sea to sea and from the River to the ends of the earth.” (Zechariah 9:10) Inspired words such as these had a profound effect on the life of a man named José.
At one time José was in prison. He was a terrorist and had been arrested while making preparations to blow up a police barracks. He thought that only violence would force the government to improve conditions in his country. While he was in prison, Jehovah’s Witnesses began to study the Bible with his wife.
After José was released, he too studied the Bible, and soon the words of Psalm 85:8 began to apply to him: “I will hear what the true God Jehovah will speak, for he will speak peace to his people and to his loyal ones.” However, that verse concludes with a warning: “Let them not return to self-confidence.” Hence, one who seeks Jehovah’s peace will not presume to act independently or in opposition to His will.
Today, José and his wife are Christian ministers. They direct others to Jehovah’s Kingdom as the solution to problems that José formerly tried to solve with homemade bombs. They are willing to trust the Bible, which says: “Jehovah, for his part, will give what is good.” (Psalm 85:12) Indeed, José recently visited the barracks he had been planning to destroy. Why? In order to speak to the families there about God’s Kingdom.
Peaceful People
At Psalm 37:10, 11, the Bible says: “Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more; and you will certainly give attention to his place, and he will not be. But the meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.” What a glorious prospect!
Notice, though, that Jehovah’s peace is only for “the meek ones.” Those who seek peace may have to learn to be peaceful. This was the case with Keith, who lives in New Zealand. Keith was described as “powerful in build and personality, aggressive, and argumentative.” He was a member of a gang and lived in a house that was a veritable fortress, with gardens patrolled by three guard dogs to keep out intruders. His wife, the mother of his six children, had divorced him.
When Keith met Jehovah’s Witnesses, the good news had a profound effect on him. Soon he and his children were attending meetings with the Witnesses. He cut his waist-long hair and began speaking about God’s Kingdom to his former associates. Some of these also began studying the Bible.
Like millions of righthearted ones around the world, Keith had begun to apply the words of the apostle Peter: “He that would love life and see good days, . . . let him turn away from what is bad and do what is good; let him seek peace and pursue it.” (1 Peter 3:10, 11) Keith’s former wife consented to remarry him, and he is now learning to “seek peace and pursue it.”
Jehovah’s peace has been a lifesaver for many, including a one-time athlete born in the former U.S.S.R. This man won medals in Olympic competition, but he became disillusioned and turned to drugs and alcohol. After an eventful 19 years that included a three-year sentence to a labor camp in Siberia, a journey by ship as a stowaway to Canada, and two near-deaths because of his drug habit, he prayed to God for help to find a genuine purpose in life. A Bible study with Russian-speaking Witnesses of Jehovah helped him to find the answer to his questions. Today this man, like millions of others, has found peace with God and with himself.
The Resurrection Hope
Finally, let us return to Bozo and Hena Djorem in Sarajevo. This couple had a five-year-old daughter, Magdalena. Last July, the three of them were leaving home to engage once again in their preaching activity when all of them were killed by an exploding shell. What about the peace that they preached about to others? Did the shell that took their lives show that this was not a real peace?
By no means! In this system of things, tragedies happen. People are killed by bombs or shells. Others die of sickness or in accidents. Many die of old age. Those who enjoy God’s peace are not immune, but the possibility of such events does not leave them without hope.
Jesus promised his friend Martha: “I am the resurrection and the life. He that exercises faith in me, even though he dies, will come to life.” (John 11:25) The Djorems believed this, as do all of Jehovah’s Witnesses. And the Djorems had faith that if they were to die, they would be resurrected to an earth that then would be a truly peaceful place. Jehovah God “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”—Revelation 21:4.
Just before he died, Jesus said to his followers: “I give you my peace. . . . Do not let your hearts be troubled.” (John 14:27) We rejoice with the Djorems who had that peace and who will surely enjoy it more fully in the resurrection. We are happy for all those who worship Jehovah, the God of peace. Such ones have peace of mind. They enjoy peace with God. They cultivate peace with others. And they have confidence in a peaceful future. Yes, they have found peace, although they live in a world in turmoil. Indeed, all who worship God with spirit and truth enjoy peace. May you too find such peace.
[Footnote]
Published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Pictures on page 7]
They have found peace despite living in a world in turmoil

