Kingdom Proclaimers Report
“The Word of God Went On Growing”
THE Christian congregation grew from about 120 members to over 3,000 in a matter of hours after it was formed. (Acts 1:15; 2:41) The Bible explains that “the word of God went on growing, and the number of the disciples kept multiplying in Jerusalem very much.” (Acts 6:7) After just a few years, the newly formed congregation became an intercontinental organization with Christians in Africa, Asia, and Europe.
The Christian congregation today is likewise experiencing rapid growth. For instance, in Mexico, the number of Kingdom proclaimers has grown in just five years by more than 130,000 to 443,640! In 1995, 1 out of 59 people in Mexico attended the Memorial of Christ’s death as celebrated by Jehovah’s Witnesses. Yet, the spiritual harvest in that country is not completed, as is illustrated by the following experience.—Matthew 9:37, 38.
In one town in the state of Chiapas, no one had accepted a home Bible study with Jehovah’s Witnesses, even after they had preached the good news some 20 years in that area. Evidently many of the townspeople were intimidated by a man who had a reputation for being violent. They feared his reaction if he was to find out that they were studying the Bible with the Witnesses.
Two courageous Witnesses who moved into the area decided to tackle the problem by going straight to the man in question. When they arrived at his home, his wife answered the door and listened attentively to their message. She was especially interested in what the Bible says about living in a paradise on earth. But she acknowledged that her husband would make things very difficult for her if she was to study the Bible. The Witnesses explained that unless she carefully examined what the Bible says, she would never learn how to serve God and enjoy life on earth forever. She accepted a Bible study.
As expected, her husband was not pleased with her decision. He prohibited her from using her automobile to attend Christian meetings, although she was allowed to use it for other purposes. Despite his opposition, she regularly walked to the closest Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses, which was six miles [10 km] away. Soon others in town noticed her courage and determination. People began to listen when the Witnesses visited their homes. Some even started to accompany the woman to the meetings. After a short time, the Witnesses were conducting about 20 Bible studies in that town!
A friend of this woman also decided to study the Bible despite her husband’s opposition. Surprisingly, she was encouraged to do so by the husband of the first woman. After he spoke with her husband, the opposition ceased. So it was that after 20 years the seed of Bible truth finally sprouted, with more than 15 persons studying the Bible and attending Christian meetings, including these two women, who are now publishing the good news.

