From Our Readers
Handling Money  Thank you very much for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Manage My Money?” (December 22, 1988) Until now I was always looking for ways of spending money as quickly as possible. As a result, I was broke at the end of each month and had to borrow. What helped me most was the thought that responsible children and youths save some of their money. Now I have decided to save small amounts in a money box and to put larger sums in the bank.
T. B., Federal Republic of Germany
Battered Wives  I have been married for 24 years and reached my physical and mental limits due to my husband’s violence. To all appearances, my husband is a good worker and seems to be respected as an understanding and exemplary person. The article (November 22, 1988) was an encouragement, and I thought it moved the reader to have a positive outlook.
A. T., Japan
We are a domestic violence shelter in northern Michigan and provide services to women and children. Your statement that wife battering crosses every educational, social, and economic boundary can’t be stressed enough. Most people think it doesn’t and can’t happen in their family, neighborhood, or community.
B. S., Volunteer Program Coordinator River House Shelter, United States
Masturbation  Thank you, thank you, thank you for the very candid yet dignified series of articles on masturbation. (September 8, 1987; November 8, 1987; March 8, 1988) Among the helpful suggestions from which I have benefited was that of reading two chapters of the Bible daily. The results have been tremendous!
D. T., United States
AIDS  I work with an AIDS help-group. The medical information (October 8, 1988) was quoted from recognized sources and was presented in an understandable way. But your comments on the morals of the situation made my hair stand on end!
Whether you regard homosexuality as a disposition or a sin, as Christians we ought to love our neighbors as ourselves. Jesus touched lepers and did not turn away from the adulteress and other sinners. He should be our example.
H. S. (mother of three), Federal Republic of Germany
Jesus had compassion for sinners. He spent time in telling them the good news of God’s Kingdom, so that his enemies even called him ‘a friend of sinners.’ (Luke 5:30-32; 7:34) He also urged his listeners to abandon their wrongdoing. (Matthew 5:27-30) We likewise have compassion for those stricken by this terrible disease and feel obliged to alert our readers not only to the medical consequences of AIDS but also to its far more important moral implications. True, AIDS has many innocent victims, but the majority, so far, of those with the disease have contracted it as a result of their own conduct or that of their close associates. In either of these cases, it is conduct condemned by God. (1 Corinthians 6:9, 10; Acts 15:29) Acknowledging this fact serves, not to condemn individuals, but to highlight the benefits of holding to godly standards of morality.​—ED.

