Announcements
GIVING EXCLUSIVE DEVOTION TO THE CREATOR
Do you want to win the Creator’s approval and favor so as to enjoy unending life in his righteous new world now so near at hand? If so, now is the time to give him “exclusive devotion,” as the time is rapidly drawing near for Jehovah to bring righteous punishment upon all of those who hate him and do not give him proper devotion. (Ex. 20:5, NW) Throughout the world today there are many who have not yet had opportunity to learn of Jehovah’s kingdom and what is required of them to render exclusive devotion. No one realizes this more than Jehovah’s witnesses, who will continue to do all that they can to acquaint honest-hearted people with God’s requirements. During January they will offer good-will people a year’s subscription for the Watchtower magazine, exclusively devoted to announcing Jehovah’s kingdom, and the valuable 96-page booklet What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? for $1. Share in this joyful work and enjoy many blessings.
DAILY REMINDERS
Many persons receive daily God’s provisions without thinking of their source. Others thank God but do little in addition to show appreciation. However, throughout the year 1956 Jehovah’s witnesses have made a united effort to bring a full measure of their love and devotion into Jehovah’s spiritual temple of service. Their reward has been a year of blessed ministerial opportunities. How well the text chosen for the year 1956 has been fulfilled can best be determined by reading the thrilling 1957 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It details inspiring information about the expansion of praise during the months just completed and provides stimulating counsel for the months ahead through its section on “Daily Texts and Comments.” Highlighting this same theme of daily recognizing Jehovah’s provision, the 1957 calendar will daily remind you of your opportunities to serve God and your fellow men. Order the Yearbook at once. It is only 50c. Include your order for the calendar. It is 25c (or $1 for 5).
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
January 13: “The Good News of Salvation by Him,” ¶1-16. Page 744.
January 20: “The Good News of Salvation by Him,” ¶17-24, and Telling the Good News from Day to Day, ¶1-8. Page 749.
January 27: Telling the Good News from Day to Day, ¶9-25. Page 755.

