Do Not Fail to Call Back!
AN English airman gained a knowledge of the truth and took his stand. He had to make three trips to court and on each trip was escorted by the same military policeman. Of course he explained the reason for the trial and gave a good witness. The escort showed considerable interest and was promised that his name would be sent to the congregation for the local brothers to contact.
The policeman waited patiently for some weeks for the next witness to call at his home, during which period he succeeded in also interesting his wife, who for thirty years had been a member of the Christadelphians. Time passed, yet still no one called to contact the couple. But these were to get the truth in spite of this.
Some four months later the season known as Christmas came around. At the policeman’s home the decorations of colored paper hangings and Christmas tree were on show and the daughter brought in one of her playmates to see it. On being asked what kind of decorations she had at home the little visitor bluntly replied that at her house they did not have such things, as these were pagan and not from the Bible, and that they were Jehovah’s witnesses and went to the Kingdom Hall. The mother, hearing this, immediately wrote a note for the child to take to her mother asking if she would send the latest booklet of Jehovah’s witnesses and a songbook. When the sister received this, thinking it a strange request, she went to see what it was all about. And so again the truth contacted them.
That very week I was visiting the local congregation on the regular circuit visit. I was told of the family and arrangements had been made for me to visit and see the husband, who was traveling back from his camp deliberately to see these witnesses who had been so long in coming. I had a wonderful two hours and left having started a regular study with the wife and leaving the husband literature to take back to his camp, as well as “Make Sure of All Things”, as he had already tackled the forces’ padre. They were full of the truth and regretted the lost time that they had waited for the witnesses to call.
Four months later, when making the next circuit visit, I found that the husband had left the air force, both had started regular preaching and were awaiting the next assembly to be baptized. All this might have been lost if contact had not been made again through one of our smaller witnesses. What happened to the interest slip we shall never know, but it certainly stresses the essential need to report on all interest we contact if we cannot care for it ourselves, and that it is our responsibility until we are certain that other brothers have contacted the new ones and are following up the interest.—Report from London by a traveling representative of the Watch Tower Society.

