Declare Abroad the Excellencies of Jehovah
 1. What moves us to declare abroad the excellencies of Jehovah?
1 “Yours, O Jehovah, are the greatness and the mightiness and the beauty and the excellency and the dignity; for everything in the heavens and in the earth is yours.” (1 Chron. 29:11) How does our love and appreciation for Jehovah affect us? It moves us to ‘declare abroad the excellencies of the one that called us out of darkness into his wonderful light.’ (1 Pet. 2:9) We cannot stop telling others about our great God! We will have outstanding opportunities to proclaim Jehovah’s excellencies during the months of March, April, and May.
 2. What special campaign is planned to advertise the Memorial, and who may have a share?
2 Special Campaign to Advertise the Memorial: On Monday, April 2, we will highlight Jehovah’s excellencies by observing the Lord’s Evening Meal. A special invitation to this important event will be distributed earth wide from March 17 to April 2. All are encouraged to have a full share. This would be an excellent time for new ones to begin publishing the good news if they qualify. If you have Bible students or children who may qualify, take the initiative to speak with the elders.
 3. What might we say to invite people to the Memorial?
3 This campaign will be similar to what was done in connection with the “Deliverance at Hand!” District Conventions. Congregations will be sent enough invitations so that each publisher can have 50 copies and each pioneer can have 150 copies. Keep your presentation brief, perhaps saying: “This is your invitation to an upcoming important yearly event. You will be warmly welcomed. The details are on the invitation.” Of course, if the householder has questions, take the time to answer them. The appendix article on the Lord’s Evening Meal found in the Bible Teach book beginning on page 206 may be helpful in this regard. On weekends, we will offer the current magazines along with the special invitation. Keep track of any interest found, and arrange to call back.
 4. How will the special Memorial invitations be distributed?
4 Wherever possible, this special invitation should be handed personally to each householder. Therefore, make a record of not-at-homes, and arrange to call again at another time. Congregations that have a generous supply of invitations left over may leave them at not-at-homes during the last week before the Memorial, but not before that. Make sure that your return visits, Bible students, relatives, workmates, neighbors, and other acquaintances also receive an invitation.
 5. Why should we begin now to make our plans to auxiliary pioneer?
5 Auxiliary Pioneering: Can you declare Jehovah’s excellencies more fully by auxiliary pioneering during March, April, and May? Doing so will likely require some adjustments in your daily schedule. (Eph. 5:15-17) You can be sure that making an effort to do more in Jehovah’s service will bring joy and Jehovah’s blessing. (Prov. 10:22) Since the Memorial season is approaching, now is the time to begin making plans.​—Prov. 21:5.
 6. What can we learn from the experience of a 90-year-old sister who auxiliary pioneered last year?
6 One 90-year-old sister enjoyed the privilege of auxiliary pioneering last year. She stated: “Even though I really love gardening and wanted to start planting, I realized I needed to get my priorities straight. With a desire to put Kingdom interests first, I decided to auxiliary pioneer in March.” Was she blessed for her efforts? She says, “I feel more a part of the congregation, and this has drawn me closer to Jehovah.” Can we analyze our priorities and make similar adjustments as needed?
 7. Is it difficult to serve as an auxiliary pioneer?
7 Meeting the auxiliary pioneer requirement of 50 hours may not be as difficult as you think. Prayerfully consider your daily activities, make a schedule, and then note it on your theocratic calendar. You know your personal circumstances best. If you have poor health and lack stamina, perhaps you could share in the ministry for a couple of hours each day. If you work full-time or go to school, you may be able to auxiliary pioneer by sharing in the ministry in the evenings or on weekends.
 8. What enabled one married couple to auxiliary pioneer?
8 Many have been able to auxiliary pioneer as a family. In previous years one married couple hesitated to enroll because they felt their circumstances did not allow them to auxiliary pioneer. What did they do about it? “We prayed to Jehovah to help us accomplish what we had wanted to do together for so long.” With proper planning they were able to reach their goal. They added: “It was wonderful. We enjoyed many blessings together. Our suggestion is, try it. If we did it, you may be able to do it too.”
 9. What might you do during your next family study to prepare for the coming months of special activity?
9 Why not set aside time during your next family study to consider how all can increase their activity during the coming months? Even if your entire family cannot auxiliary pioneer, perhaps one member can do so with help and cooperation from the other members of the household. If not, possibly your family can set goals to spend additional time in the ministry during these special months of activity.
10. Why should we talk to others about our desire to auxiliary pioneer during this Memorial season?
10 Help One Another: Enthusiasm is contagious. Talk about your desire to auxiliary pioneer. This may encourage others to apply. In addition, those who have pioneered in the past may be able to give you suggestions that will help you to arrange your affairs and schedule so as to reach your goal. (Prov. 15:22) If you are able to auxiliary pioneer, why not invite another publisher, perhaps someone with similar circumstances, to join you in this enjoyable activity?
11. How can the elders generate enthusiasm for auxiliary pioneering in the coming months?
11 Many elders make the necessary arrangements to participate in this special avenue of service. (Heb. 13:7) This is indeed encouraging to the congregation! Elders also build enthusiasm by their conversations with others. A few kind words of encouragement or some practical suggestions may be just what is needed to move some to auxiliary pioneer. The service overseer will likely be arranging additional meetings for field service so that all can engage in group witnessing, even after work or school. These arrangements should be announced regularly. He will also make sure that all have sufficient territory and literature.
12. What might you be able to do if you cannot auxiliary pioneer?
12 Even if circumstances prevent you from auxiliary pioneering, you can offer encouragement to those who enroll, and you can pray for them. (Prov. 25:11; Col. 4:12) Perhaps you may be able to make arrangements to share with them in the ministry an additional day during the week or to stay out longer than you usually do.
13. What goal has been set for the United States, and how can your congregation contribute toward reaching it?
13 Goal of 160,000 Auxiliary Pioneers in April: The all-time peak of auxiliary pioneers for the United States branch was 153,774, reached in April 2000. Therefore, a realistic goal for this coming April is 160,000 auxiliary pioneers. We can reach it if an average of just 1 out of every 6 publishers in each congregation engages in the auxiliary pioneer work. Of course, some congregations will have even more publishers whose circumstances allow them to auxiliary pioneer. Such a congregation goal is easily within reach for most congregations. Imagine the excitement this will generate in your congregation and the positive effect it will have on the preaching work in your territory!
14. Why is April an excellent month to auxiliary pioneer?
14 Why is April an excellent month to auxiliary pioneer? The Memorial will be at the beginning of the month, giving us ample opportunity to make follow-up visits on those who attend. We will be offering the magazines, with the objective of placing the Bible Teach book on return visits and starting Bible studies. Therefore, auxiliary pioneering in April will provide many opportunities for starting Bible studies. In this country the days are longer and the weather is usually mild. In addition, the month of April has five Sundays and a worldly holiday, making it easier for those who work secularly and those who attend school to enroll.
15. Why should we have a sense of urgency as this Memorial season approaches?
15 Each Memorial season that passes brings us one year closer to the end of this system of things. The time left to tell others about our great God is reduced. (1 Cor. 7:29) Once this Memorial season has passed, the precious opportunities it gave us to praise our heavenly Father will be gone forever. May we make preparations now to do all we can during March, April, and May to declare abroad the excellencies of Jehovah!
[Box on page 4]
Can We Have 160,000 Auxiliary Pioneers in April?
▪ Analyze your priorities
▪ Discuss goals as a family
▪ Talk to others about your plans

