Imitate Christ in Your Ministry
1 Jesus set the example for us to follow in our ministry. His deep love for God and for people was demonstrated on many occasions and in many ways. He taught meek ones the truth and performed acts of loving-kindness in behalf of those who were afflicted and downtrodden.​—Matt. 9:35.
2 Jesus’ Example and Teachings: Jesus did not become sidetracked by involving himself in political affairs or mere humanitarian efforts to better the community. Nor did he allow any other well-intentioned pursuits to distract him or overshadow his primary work. (Luke 8:1) He focused on the preaching of the good news of God’s Kingdom as the only permanent solution to mankind’s problems. Jesus had a great work to do and limited time in which to do it. When people in Capernaum wanted Jesus to remain there, he said to his disciples: “Let us go somewhere else . . . that I may preach there also, for it is for this purpose I have gone out.”​—Mark 1:38.
3 After giving his disciples training, Jesus sent them out with these specific instructions: “Preach, saying, ‘The kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.’” (Matt. 10:7) He taught his followers that Kingdom interests should take priority in their lives. (Matt. 6:33) Jesus’ parting words to his disciples before he ascended to heaven made clear what they were to do. He said: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations.”​—Matt. 28:19.
4 Importance of the Kingdom: Jesus’ main topic of discussion was God’s Kingdom, and he urged his disciples to follow his example. Human efforts to solve mankind’s problems cannot be successful. (Jer. 10:23) Only God’s Kingdom will sanctify God’s name and provide permanent relief for mankind. (Matt. 6:9, 10) Teaching Kingdom truths to people who are “sighing and groaning over all the detestable things that are being done” helps them to live a happy, successful life now and hold fast to a reliable hope for the future.​—Ezek. 9:4.
5 Jesus continues to be involved in the preaching of the good news of God’s Kingdom, and he assures us of his support. (Matt. 28:20) To what extent does our ministry measure up to the model that Jesus set for us? (1 Pet. 2:21) In these momentous last days, may we do everything within our power to adhere closely to the example Jesus set in the ministry!

