Imitate the Great Teacher When Using the Bible Teach Book
 1. How did Jesus teach?
1 The Great Teacher, Jesus, always explained things in a simple, clear way. To stimulate the thinking of his listeners, at times he first asked them for their viewpoint. (Matt. 17:24-27) He directed attention to God’s Word. (Matt. 26:31; Mark 7:6) He was careful not to overwhelm his disciples with too much information, knowing that they would continue to learn. (John 16:12) Jesus was also interested in whether his disciples believed and understood what he taught them. (Matt. 13:51) The Bible Teach book is designed to help us teach in a similar manner.
 2. In what ways can we use the introductory questions for each chapter?
2 Introductory Questions: When you begin a chapter, it is good to call attention to the introductory questions under the title. Raise the questions rhetorically to whet the student’s appetite. Or you could invite him to comment briefly on the questions. There is no need to discuss his comments at length or to correct every wrong statement. You may simply thank him for his thoughts and begin consideration of the material. His comments on the introductory questions will help you to know if you need to give more attention to a certain portion of the lesson.
 3. How can we keep the study simple?
3 Scriptures: The study should center on the Scriptures. (Heb. 4:12) However, it is not necessary to read every cited text. Emphasize those that show the Scriptural basis for our beliefs. Texts that provide background information may not need to be read. The Bible Teach book presents the truth in an uncomplicated way. Keep the study simple. Focus on the main points, and avoid the tendency to talk too much about details or to bring outside material into the discussion unnecessarily.
 4. What determines whether we should take time during the study to consider information from the appendix?
4 Appendix: The appendix covers 14 topics that supplement the main text. Discussing these topics during the study is optional. For some subjects, you may choose to encourage your student to read the supplementary material on his own, especially if he understands and accepts the information in the main text. For example, if the student already believes that Jesus is the Messiah, it may not be necessary to consider with him the topic “Jesus Christ​—The Promised Messiah” when discussing chapter 4, “Who Is Jesus Christ?” On other occasions, it may be beneficial to take time during the study to discuss the appendix material or a portion thereof.
 5. If we choose to consider information from the appendix, how may we do it?
5 If you choose to discuss the appendix material, you may prepare questions in advance and consider the paragraphs with the student just as you would the main text. Or depending upon the needs of the student, you may choose to take a few minutes during the study to review the information with him. That will allow you to make sure he understands the material that he read on his own.
 6. How can the review box at the conclusion of each study be used?
6 Review Box: The box at the end of each chapter provides statements that usually answer the introductory questions. You can use these statements to review the main points of the chapter. Some publishers have found it helpful to read each statement and perhaps the accompanying scriptures with the student. They then ask the student to explain briefly how the scriptures prove the statement. This shows the teacher whether the student clearly understands the main points of the lesson and how these are supported by the Bible and whether he agrees with them. It also trains the student to use the Bible to explain the truth to others.
 7. How can we use the Bible Teach book to fulfill our commission?
7 The most effective way to fulfill our commission to teach people and to make disciples is to imitate Jesus’ methods of teaching. (Matt. 28:19, 20) The Bible Teach book can help us to do that. Make good use of it to teach others the truth in a clear, simple, and interesting way.

