Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting February 12
Song 52
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the February 15 Watchtower and the February Awake! In one of the demonstrations, show how to handle the potential conversation stopper “I’m not interested in religion.”​—See Reasoning book, pp. 16-17.
35 min: “Declare Abroad the Excellencies of Jehovah.”a To be handled by the service overseer. At appropriate points during the discussion, announce the time and location of the Memorial, arrangements for additional meetings for field service, and the congregation’s goal for auxiliary pioneers in April.
Song 147 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 19
Song 198
 5 min: Local announcements.
20 min: “Imitate the Great Teacher When Using the Bible Teach Book.”b When considering paragraph 6, have a brief demonstration showing a publisher using the box at the end of chapter 6 in the Bible Teach book to review the chapter with his student.
20 min: Can You Start a Bible Study in March? Audience discussion. During the first half of March, we will be offering the Bible Teach book with the goal of starting Bible studies. Review the suggestions in the January 2006 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, pages 3-6. Using one of the suggestions on page 6 or another presentation appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to start a Bible study on the initial call. Invite audience to relate outstanding experiences they have enjoyed using the book, especially in starting Bible studies.
Song 220 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 26
Song 29
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the March 1 Watchtower and the March Awake! In one of the presentations, show a publisher working business territory.
15 min: “Do Not Forget Those Who Are Inactive.”c Include comments on the May 1, 2004, Watchtower, pages 21-2, paragraphs 13-16.
20 min: “Imitate Christ in Your Ministry.”d As time permits, invite audience to read and comment on the cited scriptures.
Song 18 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 5
Song 32
15 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Give a copy of the special Memorial invitation to everyone in the audience, and review local arrangements for distributing it in the territory. Urge all to have a full share. Include a demonstration showing how the invitation may be used.
15 min: Preaching the Good News in an Orderly Manner. Talk and audience discussion based on Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, from the subheading on page 102 to the end of the chapter.
15 min: “Entrusted With a Treasure.”e As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
Song 104 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

