Kingdom Proclaimers Report
These Also Trust in Jehovah
IN A COUNTRY where the Bible educational work of Jehovah’s Witnesses is banned, some young people were asking themselves: “What is the purpose of life? Where can one find the truth? Why is there so much wickedness?” They did not get satisfying answers from the church or from their parents. Alcohol and drug abuse did not bring them peace of mind. One of these young men learned that a colleague was studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, and he decided to attend the Bible study and “save” his colleague by finding the weak spots of this organization. He found the opposite​—answers to questions that had troubled him. So he began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. In time, Bible truth changed the young man and he quit smoking, stopped getting drunk, and started taking more interest in his own family.
His parents pressured him to move out of their apartment because they were opposed to what he was learning. Then something happened that they thought would be impossible. He got a new apartment, which generally takes years to obtain. Commenting on this, the young man said: “The fact that I got to know God’s purpose, and that I applied the counsel of the Bible in my life, made it possible for me to regain my balance of mind and to stabilize the happiness of my family. My wife agrees with me, and we can look to the future with confidence.”
This young man now knows the meaning of Proverbs 3:5, 6 very well: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.”
In another country where the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses is banned, an elderly woman was contacted by a Witness. She told the Witness that she was disappointed in life. Her husband had died, her children were rude to her and she wept about her situation. But she listened to the comforting good news of the Kingdom and showed great interest. She wanted the Witness to talk to her daughter, who she said was obstinate, got drunk often, smoked and used bad language.
The sister called on the daughter, who listened to the Kingdom message and realized the great value of the truth. She agreed to a Bible study, and the power of the Scriptures changed her way of life and she dedicated herself to Jehovah and was baptized. This she did even before her mother, who was getting ready to take that important step. Soon the daughter was studying with three other individuals.
Can you imagine how happy the mother and daughter are now? They surely have reason for joy in that they have put their trust in Jehovah God and his loving provision for eternal life.​—Psalm 56:11.

