R388 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1882. 

NO. 3. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars 
by mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money 
Order or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 
postage stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



page 1 

THOSE who remit and cannot send money, check, or money 
order, will please send one or two cent U.S. postage stamps. 



WE have some copies of the EM. DIAGLOTT on hand, 
damaged on inside of cover slightly; price to ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER subscribers, $1.50, to others, $3.00. This is a valuable 
work for all Bible students. 



R388 : page 1 

The October number of ZION'S WATCH TOWER will 
partake of a missionary character. We will be sending out a very 
large issue to new readers— about two hundred thousand in all. If 
you desire you may share in the work of scattering the "good 
tidings of great joy," by sending copies of this missionary 
number to your Christian friends. Order as many as you can use 
judiciously, or send us their addresses and we will supply them. 



R388 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The battle between truth and error still rages fiercely. Time- 
honored errors are worshiped, and earnestly defended, while 
new unfoldings of truth, as well as the old foundation principles 
of true faith, are being attacked on every hand, not only by the 
enemies of God, but by those who verily think they are doing 
God service. Surely we are in the "evil day," of which we were 
forewarned that it would be very difficult to withstand the 
assaults of error. (Read Eph. 6:11-18.) This should forearm and 
prepare us. The prophet Malachi says (Mai. 3:2) of this "Day of 
the Lord" in which we are living- "But who may abide the day 
of his coming (presence, after arrival), and who shall stand when 
he appeareth (a presence made known, but not necessarily by 
natural sight. Thus, Jehovah appeared to Abram; i.e., made 
known his presence, the same Heb. word, raah, Gen. 17:1), for 
he is like a refiner's fire and like fuller's soap. And he shall sit as 
a refiner and purifier of silver (symbol of truth -he shall purge 
out error from truth dross from silver) and he shall purify the 
sons of Levi" (typical of believers). 

Seeing from the TOWER how the enemy endeavors to lull some 
to sleep with ease, comfort, and prosperity, in the matters of this 
life; how he perplexes and overcharges others in this world's 
busy cares; and how he seeks to draw others from the truth by 
error, we lift up the voice and cry aloud to those who have an 
ear to hear, saying: "We ought to give the more earnest heed to 
the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let 



them slip." Let us renew our vigilance, lest even now, when the 
"goal" is almost won, we should be deceived and allured from 
our racecourse. Let us, dear brethren, lay aside every weight and 
hindrance of earthly kind, and run with patience for the heavenly 
prize-unseen but eternal. What manner of persons ought we to 
be who have so much light on God's Word and plan, and such 
grand anticipations for the future; how separate from the world 
and its aims and ambitions? 

To stand— to maintain our standing -to keep on the armor of 
God— we need to have much and close communion with God, 
not only in the way of talking to him (prayer), but also and 
especially by listening to what he says to us (through his Word). 

We would suggest the following plan to you all, viz: that during 
the next six weeks you take up the following important subjects, 
both for your private study and more public discussion at your 
meetings:— 

(1) Was a "sin offering" or sacrifice necessary to man's 
reconciliation to God? 

(2) Did Jesus the Lamb of God put away sin by the sacrifice of 
himself? 

(3) If a sacrifice was necessary and was given and accepted, are 
we pardoned or are we ransomed? 

(4) Justification-are we not justified, old creatures (human), 
before we become sanctified, new creatures (spiritual)? 

(5) "You know your calling; brethren" -"What is the hope of 
our calling"? 

(6) Who had this, our hope, before Pentecost? Who, walked this 
narrow way to life before Jesus our Leader and Forerunner? 

Our view of the Scripture teaching on the above subjects you 
will find in your back numbers of ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 
"The Lord will bless each in proportion as he earnestly and 
candidly seeks to know what saith the Scriptures. "He that 
seeketh findeth. " 

Bro. Sunderlin, you will be glad to know, is gradually 
improving, though still quite weak and unable to write or 
preach. 

page 1 

We are obliged to omit samples of interesting letters this month 
for lack of room. 



R388 : page 1 



THE SEVEN CHURCHES. 



THYATIRA. Rev. 2:18-29. 

"And to the Messenger of the Congregation in Thyatira write. " 

It is claimed that the name Thyatira means "sweet savor of 
labor. " We think it applies to the first part of the period during 
which the church was said to be in the wilderness; the time also 
in which the papacy was in power. It would thus cover the 
period during which the true church, purified by persecution, 
relieved of its ordinary load of lazy dead-heads, and 
untrammeled by the class who always choose the popular side, 
was fully harnessed and faithfully laboring in the Lord's work. 
Many evidently had more zeal than knowledge, but they were 
faithful to the light they had. 

"These things sayeth the Son of God. " 

This is a more emphatic declaration of who the speaker is, than 
in any previous message. It was necessary. A usurper had arisen, 
who, as foretold by Daniel, had "a mouth speaking great things." 
Claiming to be the Vicar of Christ, he assumed to speak as the 
mouth-piece of God. 

Our Lord here announces himself as speaking through his 
written Word-his only authorized authority. This declaration 
would call to mind the words of Paul: "If any man preach any 
other gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be 
accursed. " 

"Eyes as a flame of fire. " Expressive of their piercing 
brightness. Despised and persecuted for the truth, as the little 
faithful company were, by those who claimed to be the church 
of God, it was a cheering thought to know that their exalted head 
"seeth not as man seeth"; but "the Lord knoweth them that are 
his." 

"His feet are like to polished brass. " The description here is very 
like that of the spiritual being seen by Daniel [10:6]: "Eyes as 
lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like in color to polished 
brass." This metal was perhaps the most useful and enduring 
known to the ancients. It seems as if he would say to them: Fear 
not in 

R389 : page 1 

all your terrible journey of 1260 years in the wilderness, lo! I am 
with you; we shall walk together; I will be your companion and 
guide. 

"I know thy works, and thy love and faith and service and 
patience, and thy last works are more than the first. " This is 
generous praise, and shows the Lord's appreciation of the 
faithful labors of the true church of this period. The language is 



quite similar to that used in addressing the first church, with the 
apparent recognition that works of Thyatira were even more 
abundant than those of Ephesus. 

"But I have against thee that thou sufferest the woman Jezebel, 
who calls herself a prophetess, and she teaches and seduces my 
servants to commit fornication, and to eat things offered to 
idols." 

The Bible is a wonderful book. We find in it a faithful record of 
human history, and many curious events, sometimes so strange 
as to be almost or quite disbelieved by the natural man. Various 
attempts have been made to prove the Bible unhistorical; that 
while it taught spiritual truths, it was not intended to teach 
history, science, etc., and was in those directions entirely 
unreliable. The light of modern research and criticism is fast 
scattering such infidelity, and proving, day by day, the antiquity 
and reliability of the Book of books. Not only is its historical 
and scientific truthfulness shining out clearly, but there also 
appears a strangely deeper vein of truth which seals its 
supernatural origin, by revealing the astonishing fact, that that 
history was a living, speaking, prophetic pantomime —a 
prophecy acted out in type by living characters. Even their faults 
and misdeeds faithfully noted (to the disgust of some over- 
particular people) being apparently necessary to fill up the anti- 
type. 

The history of Elijah, and his relations with Ahab and Jezebel, is 
one of these prophetic pictures, seen not in vision, but in real 
characters. As this type is familiar to many of our readers, and 
will be treated fully soon for the benefit of all, we only take 
space to note a few of the prophetic features. 

Jezebel, as the nourisher and protector of the prophets of Baal, is 
the type of the Papal Church, the mother of abominations. 1 
Kings 18:19; 2 Kings 9:22. Ahab, her husband, the king of 
Israel, represents the kings or kingdoms of Europe who 
committed spiritual fornication with the "mother church." 

The Elijah of Malachi 4, is evidently the Gospel church in its 
militant condition, and which must be fully come-filled up. 
Rom. 1 1 :25- before the trouble spoken of can fairly begin, 
seeing that they assist in pouring out the plagues. The three-and- 
a-half years of drouth and famine foretold by Elijah (during 
which he was miraculously fed) were typical of the three-and-a- 
half "times" or symbolic years of spiritual drouth and famine 
foretold by Amos (8:11), during the combined reign of the 
Babylonian Jezebel and her kingly paramours. 

R389 : page 2 

If we compare Dan. 7:25; 12:7, with Rev. 11:2,3,9,12, and 
12:6,14, we will find that they measure the same length of time. 
In symbolic language a "time" is composed of twelve months, of 



thirty years each (a day thus symbolizing a year). A symbolic 
year is 360 literal years, and 3-1/2 of these years, or 3-1/2 times 
360 is 1260. Also 42 months multiplied by 30 days to a month is 
1260 symbolic years. There is abundant proof that this is the 
way God intended us to calculate symbolic time. 

We thus see that the flight of the true children into the 
wilderness, from the face of the false church during 1260 years, 
while the harlot reigned a queen, and lived delicious ly with the 
kings of earth, was clearly foretold in Elijah's flight from the 
face of Jezebel, and the 3-1/2 years of famine. 1 Kings 19:3, also 
17:l-with Luke 4:25. 

The description of Jezebel in this message exactly fits the 
teaching of Rome. "To eat things offered to idols." How could 
the Pagan ideas taught by the Papacy, and clung to by 
Protestantism, be better described? The natural immortality of 
all men, as first taught by the most beastly of idolaters— the 
Egyptians-the eternity of sin; and, worst of all, the character of 
God so degraded that no heathen monstrosity ever invented by 
pagan priest-craft could compare with it. Instead of a loving 
Father, a vindictive Giant, kind indeed to his followers [are not 
the heathen so?], but infinitely cruel to, not his enemies alone, 
but also to those who, never having heard of him, could neither 
like nor dislike him. True, we were told that he-or rather his 
Son— was love personified; but this idea was so mixed up with 
the hideous doctrine of "eternal torment" that the result was 
Babylon [confusion]. 

"She teaches and seduces my servants to commit fornication." 

Churches are continually typified in the Scriptures by women, 
so the teaching alluded to is the following and union with some 
of the daughters of Babylon. So successful has been this 
seduction that Protestants generally would rather associate with 
an immoral member of an orthodox church, or a member of the 
body of anti-Christ, than a faithful and consistent Christian, who 
has thrown off the fetters of sectarianism. 

Rome has claimed to teach the doctrine of "one church"; but the 
direct result of her teaching has been the various creed-bound 
sects which still hold captive the spiritual Zion. 

"And I gave her TIME that she might repent; and she willeth not 
to repent of her fornication. Behold, I cast her into a bed, and 
those who commit adultery with her into great tribulation [see 
Rev. 2:21,22] if they repent not of HER works." [Sinaitic, 
Vatican, and Ephraim MSS., and other best authorities: "HER 
WORKS."] 

The time given for repentance must date, we think, from the 
dawn of the light of the Reformation. Strange to say, just about 
365 years have passed away since Luther began to preach 
against the errors of Rome. On the 3 1 st day of October, 1 5 1 7, he 



placed his ninety-five theses on the door of the church in 
Wittenberg. In a few weeks the theses were known throughout 
Christendom, having been translated into several languages. 
This is considered the beginning of the Reformation in 
Germany. Now, we see the force of the language of our Lord in 
this message. 

"I gave her [a] time that she might repent." A "time," 360 years 
from the first clear rays of light through Bro. Luther, brings us 
to the hour when our Lord said to the nominal Gospel Church- 
as shown by the parallels— "Your house is left unto you 
desolate. " If we read the signs of the times aright they have 
already entered the "affliction" promised. 

"And I will kill her children with death; and all the churches 
shall know that I am he who searcheth the reins and hearts; and I 
will give to you every one according to your works." 

Rome, in the days of Thyatira, endeavored to kill Thyatira's 
children with literal death; and the Lord cheers them by the 
assurance that the reverse would finally take place; and that 
while those who had imbibed that persecuting spirit of Jezebel 
would be stricken with spiritual death [the anti-type of the 450 
priests of Baal whom Jezebel fed, and whom Elijah destroyed], 
she (all having the spirit of Thyatira) would receive the glorious 
reward according to your works. This changed condition of 
things will also reveal to "all the churches" who it is that is 
doing the sifting work. 

"But to you I say: to the rest which are in Thyatira, as many as 
have not this teaching; who know not the deep things of Satan 
(as they say); I put upon you no other burden; but that which ye 
have, hold fast till I come. " 

It will be noticed that there is a peculiarity in the use of the 
expression "deep things." There are apparently certain ideas 
which "they" call deep things [of God] which our Lord calls by 
their proper name: "deep things of Satan." 

When we speak to a certain class about God's dealings with 
mankind, and of the justice [?] of consigning the ignorant to 
everlasting misery, as imputed to our heavenly Father, we are at 
once told that we cannot fathom God's purpose in allowing all 
this sin and misery; that he has not revealed his plans; that our 
reasonings are mere speculation, the whole matter belongs to the 
"deep things" of God, which he has not revealed. "Eye hath not 
seen, ear hath not heard," etc.; not knowing that Paul continues: 
"but God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit. " 

Although knowing that anti-Christ has loaded "Our Father's" 
name with odium, and his character with infamy, they still 
persist in asserting that it is not our business to attempt to clear 
him; he will do that himself on the day of judgment, when, 



according to their theology, it will be too late to do anybody any 
good. 

We, who see the plan of the ages, might be content to wait; but 
we have a right to expect that those who believe that the world is 
now on probation should do all in their power to place God's 
character and dealings in a proper light before the world. We 
would be ashamed to treat an earthly friend so, how much more 
the "friend above all others"? Thank God we have not learned 
this "voluntary humility." 

I love to tell the story, 
Because I know it's true. 

R390 : page 2 

To the faithful laborers in Thyatira he lays no other "burden. " 
He began his message by commending them for their "works" 
and "service." He ends by telling them to patiently carry this 
burden, holding fast what they have "till I come. " We think we 
know some still living who have the Thyatira spirit. 

"And he that overcomes, and he that keeps my works until the 
end, to him will I give authority over the nations; and he shall 
rule them with a rod of iron, as the vessels of a potter are they 
dashed to pieces, as I also have received of my Father." 

The promise to the overcomers of the Thyatira age is peculiarly 
appropriate. Rome, the false church, was at this time in the 
height of her glory, claiming to be the kingdom of God; that 
Christ's reign had begun- through his vice-gerent, the Pope. 
Claiming, of course, the promises given to those who reign with 
Christ, she did literally rule the nations with a rod of iron, 
dashing in pieces whom she would. 

The type (in a sense) of the iron rule and great power of the true 
kingdom was thus signified [made signs of— shown by signs- 
Rev. 1:1] before their eyes; making even their terrible 
persecution a reminder of the glory and power they were called 
to inherit. 

"And I will give him the morning star." 

These who would continue to "work" in harmony with God's 
plan (which they could only do by walking in the light of 
present truth), are promised not only increasing light, but 
advanced light— as if before it was due; also the first sure proof 
of "Day Dawn," and of the approach of the glorious Sun of 
Righteousness who shall rise-not to bring DARKNESS, (Is 
John 1:9 fulfilled?)-not to destroy, but with healing in his 
wings. "The leaves of the tree were for the healing of the 
nations." "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith 
unto the churches." 

W. I. MANN. 



R390 : page 2 



FAITH'S ALCHEMY. 



Some statements of the Bible seem as startling and impossible 
as the dream of the philosopher's stone. Surely, it is as easy to 
turn all things into gold as to verify the promise that "no good 
thing will God withhold from them that walk uprightly. " Where 
are the people who possess all good things? Not the adherents of 
any favored sect, for then all controversy would cease, and faith 
give place to sight. Shall we take refuge in the limitation of the 
promise to those who walk uprightly, and reply that until we 
find persons who never waver, stoop, or stumble, it cannot be 
said the promise has failed? But it is addressed to fallible 
mortals, and by the upright must be meant those who, in spite of 
failing, honestly and habitually try to be right with God. Do 
persons enjoy all things generally regarded as good? This is not 
the teaching of the Bible. It is unfair to interpret any book or 
document by the meaning we choose to place on some sentence 
opposed to the general tenor of it. The Bible in all its teachings 
and narratives shows that "many are the afflictions of the 
righteous." No one is invited to be a Christian by the bribe of 
receiving all the things the world accounts "good. " 

What then, is the meaning of the promise? That is good which is 
for our complete and lasting advantage. A bed in a garden may 
be cultivated, a wing of a house decorated, a member of the 
body cared for, so as to entail injury on the whole. It would not, 
therefore, be a good thing. A child may be gratified by a berry or 
a toy, which may prove a fatal injury. Bitter medicine, a painful 
operation, a difficult task, though regarded by the child as very 
evil, may be good things, no wise parent would withhold. As the 
physical nature is developed by exercise, and the mental by 
education, so the spiritual by the discipline of trial. If thus, we 
are trained to the conquest of self-will, to filial submission, and 
confidence toward God, it is a good thing of supreme value. 

The present life is the childhood, the training time of eternity. If, 
then, a transitory grief helps to fit us for everlasting bliss, it must 
be good, and not evil. But who can tell what is thus good? We 
feel present pain and pleasure, but cannot see their spiritual 
results. It is not necessary, it is not possible that we should. God 
does, and he has the power so to overrule all things as to secure 
the desired end. We do not argue the matter with unbelievers. 
They point to our poverty, sickness, disappointments, desires 
unsatisfied, prayers apparently refused; and in the faith God's 
Word warrants and his Spirit produces, we reply with Faber: 

Ills that God blesses are my good- 
All unblessed good is ill; 
And all is right that seems most wrong, 
If it be His dear will." 



This is the alchemy that turns sorrow into joy, sickness into 
health, death into life. It is illustrated in the history of God's 
children. We see it in the case of Joseph, Moses, David, and 
Asaph. (Psa. 73.) St. Paul learned to glory in the thorn in the 
flesh. 

Things are not what they seem. God alone perceives their true 
value and lasting results. He is infinitely wise, and cannot err; 
infinitely strong, and cannot fail; infinitely kind, and cannot 
neglect. He will keep back nothing that is good, nor give us 
what would injure. This is our culture time. 

That is best which promotes the fruitfulness in which God 
delights, and which will be our own true glory by his grace. 
Christians must not judge of things as men do whose 
possessions and hopes are limited by the present. We are 
pilgrims, and must estimate circumstances in view of their 
influence, not so much in making us comfortable on our way as 
in helping us home. Nobler aims involve severer toil; fiercer 
conflicts, costlier sacrifice. If we seek a nobler goal, let us not 
envy others their smoother path. If we would win a richer prize, 
we must fight a sterner battle. If we would attain a loftier height, 
we must clamber up sharper crags.— Newman Hall. 



R390 : page 2 

HE WAS A LIAR FROM THE BEGINNING. 

Many despotic and evil governments have tried to hold 
themselves in power by misrepresenting what would result from 
a change of government. Thus Satan- "the prince of this world"- 
-has deluded mankind in general, teaching that, though they 
indeed have a hard lot now, it would be a thousand-fold worse if 
Jesus were to come and establish his kingdom. Hence, not only 
the worldly fear the coming into power of earth's rightful Ruler, 
but many of God's children, too, fear, instead of love, that for 
which they pray- "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth 
as in heaven. " 

Thus, in everything it has been the deceivers' policy to 
misrepresent our loving Father's works and plans. It is 
astonishing, too, how much more readily even Christians receive 
Satan's lie than God's truth. And God allows his character to be 
traduced- probably designing that when, in coming ages, "the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth," then the 
magnitude of his love shall shine with increased splendor by 
contrast with Satan's slanders. 



R390 : page 3 



WAIT ON THE LORD. 

Wait, O thou weary one, a little longer, 
A few more years— it may be only days; 
Thy patient waiting makes thee all the stronger; 
Eternity will balance all delays. 

Wait, O thou suffering one, thy days of sorrow 
Bring to thy soul its richest gain. 
If thou a Christian art, a brighter morrow 
Will give thee ten- fold joy for all thy pain. 

Wait, O thou anxious one, the cloud that hovers 
In gathering gloom above thy aching head 
Is sent of God in mercy, and He covers 
Thee with His heavenly mantle overspread. 

Be patient and submissive; each disaster 
Will bring thee nearer to thy loving Lord. 
These trials make thee like thy blessed Master, 
Who knows them all, and will his grace afford. 

Be patient and submissive; strength is given 
For every step along the weary way, 
And for it all thou' It render praise in heaven, 
When dreary night gives place to perfect day. 

Yes, perfect day, the day of God, eternal, 
When not a shadow shall flit o'er the scene; 
In that fair land where all is bright and vernal, 
And we will be with Christ, and naught between. 

Wait, then, dear heart, control thy sad emotion, 
God will subdue each angry wind and wave, 
And when the voyage ends across life's ocean, 
Into the haven of sweet rest will save. 



-New York Observer. 



R391 : page 3 



LINE UPON LINE. 



"Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our 
Lord Jesus Christ." (Rom. 5:1.) 

Though a familiar text, we would that its full import were 
grasped more clearly by all God's children. It would be a source 
of pleasure and continual rejoicing to them all. It would be a 
firm foundation upon which the other teachings of God's Word 
would rest immovable, secure —a foundation which could not be 
moved, and from which our faith-building could not be shaken 
by every wind of doctrine. 



What is a justified condition, but a condition of guiltlessness? 
The act of justifying is the clearing or purifying or cleansing 
from sin. Any one who is pure, clean, perfect, or righteous needs 
not a justifier, for such are just of themselves. 

There has been but one "Just One" among men-our Lord Jesus. 
All others were sinners by nature, having inherited 
condemnation through Adam. All were unjust. Being unjust, 
they were all under condemnation to death. Being unclean, all 
are cut off from fellowship and communion with the holy and 
righteous God. The whole world lieth in condemnation - 
condemned to death. (Rom. 5:16,18.) 

Christ died the just (one) for the unjust (many) that he might 
bring us to God. (1 Pet. 3:18.) He brings us into harmony and 
fellowship with God by restoring us to the just or sinless 
condition, which Adam, our representative, lost for himself and 
us. Thus, Jesus becomes our Justifier, and justifies us from all 
things. (Acts 13:39.) Thus "being made free from sin," we may 
have communion with God, and can do works acceptable to God 
through Jesus Christ. (1 Pet. 2:5.) 

But it is objected-the text says we are justified by FAITH, and 
it does not say that our justification from sin required anything 
but FAITH. The text says nothing about the Just One, Jesus, 
dying to justify the unjust many. 

We reply that if any single text contained all the truth, the 
balance of Scripture would be useless— that one text would 
contain all the value. No single text contains all the truth. It is 
one of the fruitful causes of grievous errors that the Bible is not 
read more as a connected whole. But you are mistaken, our text 
does teach the necessity of a Redeemer to justify the unjust. 
Read the last clause: "justified... through our Lord Jesus Christ." 
Yes, we were all sinners— we could not justify ourselves. We 
could only be justified by one who would pay our penalty for us; 
then we might go free. It was for this cause that Jesus died, "the 
just for the unjust. " 

Do you inquire then, What has faith to do with the justification? 
We reply: Faith is the acceptance or belief of something. To be a 
proper faith, the thing believed must have proper and substantial 
reasons as a ground or basis of faith. A sound basis of faith is 
the Word of God. In our text, faith is the handle by which we 
accept of justification. We know that we are justified— or cleared 
from all Adamic condemnation —and reckoned of God as 
perfect, because he says so. He says, "There is, therefore, now, 
no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus." There was, 
and still is, condemnation to death resting on all others. We 
escape the condemnation, by reason of Jesus having paid the 
penalty of sin; and his redemption becomes applicable to every 
man as he comes to a knowledge of it, and accepts of it. That is, 
as soon as we accept of Jesus' death as our ransom price, that 



soon we realize or believe ourselves "justified from all things"; 
that soon we may know ourselves as no longer condemned 
sinners and aliens from God, but as his children, freed from 
condemnation by the full and sufficient ransom. 

Would to God, dear ones, that you all could realize yet more 
fully this "no condemnation," full "justification," this 
unblamable condition in which we stand who believe that Christ 
"was delivered (to death) for our offences, and was raised again 
for our justification. " (Rom. 4:25.) 

The justified by faith are very few, because for various reasons 
few believe that they are justified. Some who believe in the 
reality of sin, that all are sinners, and that Christ died for our 
sins, and redeemed us from the condemned condition, cannot 
realize themselves as being now, on that account, free from sin 
having no condemnation, and as pure and spotless as the snow 
in God's estimation. The only thing these lack, and it is an 
important lack, without which they cannot have full peace with 
God, is faith to realize or accept of the righteousness of Christ as 
the covering of all sin. Let us remember that "without faith it is 
impossible to please God," (Heb. 11:6.) or to "have peace (rest) 
with God." (Rom 5:1.) 

Another class who are not treated of by our text, and who have 
no right to comfort from it, do not believe that the race is under 
condemnation, and regard sin as a myth. These cannot be 
justified, because they do not recognize themselves as unjust. 

Another class to whom this text does not apply, includes those 
who admit that man is a sinner and needs to be justified, but 
who claim that sinners are justified unconditionally by the 
Father. That is, that God concluded that he would revoke his 
original sentence of death, and by his mighty power turn all 
sinners into saints. But if this were God's plan there would have 
been no necessity for the death of our Lord Jesus-the Just for 
the unjust. That this is an unscriptural faith, is readily seen, 
when we find that nowhere does God say that he will 
unconditionally pardon sin. Those who hold this view have no 
need of the last clause of our text- Justified... THROUGH Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 

Another class to whose theory this text would not fit, claim, that 
while all are sinners, and need to be justified or cleared from 
their sin; yet that this is effected not by unconditional pardon by 
Jehovah, nor by a ransom for sin, and the payment of sin's 
penalty by Jesus, but that each man in the act of dying, will pay 
his own penalty, and therefore be free from sin. They who hold 
this view have no right to use our text, for it speaks of 
justification (cleansing from sin) "through Jesus Christ"- 
something Jesus has done for us, and not something for us to do 
for ourselves, is the basis of the hope and peace of our text. 



Truly, it has been written that the wisdom of God is foolishness 
with men, and the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. 
(1 Cor. 2:14; and 3:19.) Thus it has ever been. Men have been 
searching for centuries to prove that man is susceptible of a 
moral training which would bring him into harmony with God; 
or that he could make satisfaction for his own sins by means of 
penance now, or by the act of dying, thus restoring himself to 
favor with his holy Maker who cannot look upon sin with any 
degree of allowance. Others rely on the love of God, vainly 
hoping that his infinite love will override his infinite justice, 
causing him to revoke his own original decree. 

All these, while they may lead astray good, candid minds, and, 
by their human sophistrising, may overthrow the faith of some 
in Jesus as the Redeemer, who "bought us with his own precious 
blood," they can never make void the testimony of God's Word, 
nor permanently lead astray those taught of God through his 
Word. These see in Jehovah a God infinite both in Justice and in 
Love— so just that he will "by no means clear (pardon) the 
guilty," (Exod. 34:7) yet so loving that he gave his only begotten 
son to die for our sins, and to redeem us from death, the sin 
penalty. 

Let us hold fast to the blessed Bible doctrine of Justification 
(freeing from condemnation) through our Lord Jesus Christ, 
accepting of it by faith. As it is written, so we believe that Jesus 
"put away sin by the sacrifice of himself"; and "without 
shedding of blood there is no remission (no "putting away," or 
"justifying"). (Heb. 9:22,26.) 

Thus upheld in our faith by Jehovah's Word, we will not be 
carried about by every wind of doctrine which Satan stirs in this 
"evil day" to lead us from our anchorage in Christ. Let us now 
look at the subject from another standpoint of view: 

DID CHRIST DIE IN VAIN? 

It is an indisputed fact that "the man, Christ Jesus," lived and 
died; but various are the views held as to why, and the value or 
utility of his life and death. 

Of so-called Christendom, probably one-half believe that Jesus 
was merely an imperfect (sinful) man like other men, except that 
he had more than ordinary ability— a man superior to his day-a 
man who, as a teacher of morals, properly ranked with 
Confucius, Socrates, and Plato, though, they think, less 
philosophical than the two last. His death they regard as 
remarkable for cruelty and injustice, but aside from the fact that 
he was a martyr to principles of truth, they recognize no merit in 
it. He died, say they, as any other man dies, and for the same 
reason. As a member of the same human family, he would have 
died as any other man sooner or later, anyhow. They say, the 
value of Jesus' life and death consists entirely in the moral 



teaching, influence, and example which it affords mankind, 
showing to all men that they should lead pure, moral lives, and 
rather sacrifice life than principle. Of this view are almost all 
connected with the "Universalist" and "Unitarian" 
denominations, as well as a large proportion in all other 
denominations, sometimes called "Liberal" and "Independent" 
Christians- "advanced thinkers," etc. 

These scout the idea that Christ died the just for the unjust; that 
"Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures"; that "with 
his stripes we are healed"; that "the Lord (Jehovah)... laid on him 
the iniquity of us all"; (Isa. 53:5,6.) that "he was delivered (to 
death) for our offences." They endeavor to explain away these 
and a hundred 

R392 : page 3 

other similar Scriptures. Failing in this, they give us plainly their 
idea; viz. : that such texts and such ideas of the object of Jesus' 
death, while good enough in past ages, will not stand the "light" 
and "thought" of this nineteenth century. 

With claims of superior wisdom and benevolence, they give us 
three advanced views on the subject. First, God is too 
benevolent, too loving, to require a penalty for sin of his poor 
weak creatures. [They overlook the fact that the God of love has 
permitted the evils and miseries of the last six thousand years to 
come upon the race, as part of the "wages of sin."] 

The second view is, that the act of dying and being entombed 
pays the sin penalty-that thus each pays for his own sin, and is 
then entitled to life, and needs no redeemer to die for his sins, or 
to ransom him from the power of the grave. (Hos. 13:14.) [An 
absolute proof of the falsity of this view is furnished in the case 
of Jairus' daughter (Matt. 9:18,23-25), the widow's son, and 
Lazarus (Luke 7:11-15; John 11:44), all of whom having died, 
and thereby, according to this theory, paid their own penalty, 
should be free from death after Jesus had restored life to them. 
But they all died again. This is proof that the death of the 
condemned does not make reconciliation for sin, nor entitle to a 
release from its penalty. The just must die for the unjust; the 
Lamb of God must take away the sin of the world ere they can 
have a right to everlasting life. 

The third view, though also incorrect, yet by far the most near to 
the Scriptural view, is, that the ills of the present life, coupled 
with a sufficiency of punishment in a future life, to be just and 
effective, and to reward each, will be the wages of sin. 

We wish every reader to note carefully that the "nineteenth 
century light," of which these so-called "advanced thinkers" 
boast, is an earthly light. It is such intellectual philosophy and 
science, falsely so called, against which we are warned. (1 Tim. 
6:20.) It not only ignores, but opposes the heavenly light-THE 



WORD OF GOD. Among the strong advocates of this view are 
Henry Ward Beecher and many of the great; and adherents with 
these 

R392 : page 4 

are the rich and the wise, according to this world; but they 
cannot boast the words of Jesus, or Paul, or James, or Peter, as 
proving or harmonizing with their "light." No; but they are the 
ones to whom we refer for our faith. Their united testimony is, 
that "There is none other name under heaven given among men 
whereby we must be saved" than the name of Jesus. (Acts 4:10- 
12.) How sad that some who once stood with us in full reliance 
on the ransom-the precious blood of Christ-as the basis of 
forgiveness of sins and future RESTITUTION from its penalty, 
have recently fallen into this grievous error. 

The argument of this large class of "advanced thinkers" is 
completely overthrown by the legitimate conclusions of their 
own arguments. Assuming that Jesus died, not to pay a penalty 
for us, they say he simply became our leader and example. They 
all claim that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and others, who 
lived and died before Jesus' day, are saved in the same sense, in 
the same way, and receive as great blessings and rewards as 
saints who live since Jesus set the example. Do they not thus 
believe? You answer, yes. Then we inquire, what advantage 
resulted from Jesus' example? If they of preceding ages got 
along just as well without it as we who have it, and if his death 
did not satisfy any penalty or legal claims of justice against us as 
sinners, we should be forced to the conclusion that Christ died in 
vain. If God had been as wise as these teachers, and had 
possessed some of the nineteenth century "light," the inference 
is that he would not have sent his only begotten Son to become a 
man, and to "taste death for every man. " 

The regular and attentive reader will notice that the foregoing is 
not our view of the teachings of Scripture. We believe that by 
the death of Christ the human nature of all before and since his 
day is justified to life; but that we living since his day, have the 
advantage, that by following his example in sacrificing the 
human nature, we may become partakers of a higher nature, viz. : 
a spiritual— even the divine nature. We merely used the 
argument of the opposition to overthrow their own theory. 

But while we oppose, and always expect to oppose, above every 
other and minor heresy, the views which, as above mentioned, 
deny that our Lord bought us with his own precious blood (1 
Cor. 6:20; 1 Pet. 1:19; 2 Pet. 2:1,2), and every other theory 
which ascribes salvation from death to any other name than 
Jesus, and by any other means than that "he died for our sins- 
the Just for the unjust; yet for very many who hold these views, 
we have much sympathy; in fact, we admire many of them. 
Controlled by benevolent reasoning powers, and confronted by 



the unreasonable and unscriptural doctrines of so-called 
orthodoxy, they could scarcely avoid an opposite extreme. It is 
the inclination of our present demoralized human nature to fly 
from one extreme to another. We only get the golden mean of 
truth when we let the human will and human wisdom cease, and 
accept God's word as its own interpreter. 

The views from which these generally fled, represent the faith of 
about the other half of Christendom, and are termed "Orthodox" 
views. The belief of this class, in a few words, is as follows: Sin 
is an awful reality, entailing upon all, through Adam, a penalty 
which must be paid, or not one of the race could ever be restored 
to life or communion with God. God, foreseeing that none of us 
could pay the price of our own or of each other's sins (because 
all were condemned), provided a ransom or substitute (Both 
words have the same meaning.) in the person of "the man, Christ 
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all," and "redeemed us" by 
dying "for our sins"— "the Just for the unjust." 

To all this we agree; thus far we have Scripture; but we can go 
no further with "Orthodoxy," for when they come to explain the 
nature of the penalty which Jesus paid for us, they leave both 
divine and human wisdom. They claim, unscripturally, that the 
wages of sin is everlasting torture and misery; some believing 
that it will be mental torture, and others that it will be physical- 
that God, before he had created man, had, in some distant 
locality, fitted up a place where the sinner may be tortured 
throughout eternity in surging billows of fire and flame. 

Somewhat less awful is the view of Papacy— that purgatory is a 
place of dreadful torture, which will end when the culprit has 
had sufficient punishment. Papacy found it necessary to use 
strong and forcible arguments when she undertook to convert 
the whole world; and Protestantism sought to make the 
inducements of Christianity still more striking by preaching an 
endless torture. 

Any benevolent mind, unbiased by prejudice, even though 
unenlightened by revelation, must see that there is something 
wrong in this theory; and positive proof of its falsity is 
furnished, when the fruitless attempt is made to harmonize this 
endless torture theory of men, with the substitution or ransom 
teaching of Scripture. By holding and mixing this truth 
(substitution) with this error (eternal torment), the truth is made 
to appear untrue. Thus, if the wages due to sinners was eternal 
torture in hell, and if Jesus became the sinners' substitute or 
ransom-then what? Then Christ is in hell suffering that torture, 
and must forever thus suffer to all eternity. Then he is not in 
heaven, at the right hand of God. (Mark 16:19.) 

This conclusion is, of course, preposterous and unscriptural; 
every logical mind sees this, and to escape the dilemma, some 
claim that Jesus suffered more agony in the few hours of his 



crucifixion than all men (over a hundred and forty billions) 
would be capable of suffering unitedly throughout eternity. 
Others seeing that this is as absurd as the former view, discard 
both the eternal torment and the substitution or ransom, and 
become disbelievers in the Bible as God's revelation. 

Still others, to compromise with reason, discard substitution, but 
roll the human tradition of eternal torment and purgatory as a 
sweet morsel under their tongue, determined to hold it at all 
hazards. A few, of whom we thank our Father it is our privilege 
to be, let go of the human tradition of eternal torture, but hold 
fast to the Bible teaching of Substitution, viz.: That Jesus "gave 
himself a ransom (Greek-antilutron— an equivalent price. See 
also "Webster's Dictionary.") for all" mankind. (1 Tim. 2:6.) 

Now, briefly, let us see why Christ died. We see that others 
either make out that his death was in vain, or, by tacking on 
eternal torment as the penalty he paid for us, they make void the 
Word of God by their traditions. 

First, then, we accept of substitution in its fullest sense, and 
claim that when "Christ died for our sins"— "the Just for the 
unjust"-when "the chastisement of our peace was upon him"- 
when "he was wounded for our transgressions and bruised for 
our iniquities," he took the place of the sinner before God, and 
suffered exactly the penalty of our Adamic sin— exactly what 
otherwise the entire race must have suffered. But now comes the 
question, What are the wages of sin which he must meet for us, 
in order to be our ransom or substitute? The Scriptures reply, 
"The wages of sin is DEATH." (Rom. 6:23.) Not life in torment, 
but the extinction of life is death. 

To this conclusion all Scripture harmonizes, viz.: that his death 
was the ransom which justifies all mankind to life, and makes 
possible (in God's due time) the resurrection of all that are in 
their graves. (John 5:28.) It was not the sufferings of 
Gethsemane, nor the weariness of his three-and-a-half years' 
ministry that 

R393 : page 4 

redeemed us— it was his death. "The Son of man came to give 
his life a ransom for many." (Matt. 20:28.) 

The Just one might have suffered ten times as much as he did, 
yet had it not culminated in death, it all would not have 
redeemed the unjust. The wages of sin was not torture, but 
death; hence to be our substitute, he must die, thus paying 
exactly our penalty. For this cause Christ died, the just for the 
unjust. 

The death of Jesus might have been accomplished in a less 
painful way, and it would have been equally our ransom price; 
but it pleased the Father that he should be not only the 
Redeemer, but also the Restorer of men. Hence, he must have an 



experience in our sufferings, in order to be able to sympathize 
with us, "For it became him (Jehovah)... in bringing many sons 
unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation (Jesus) perfect 
(on the spiritual plane) through sufferings." (Heb. 2:10.) 

Beloved, let no one take from you, by any means, this 
fundamental teaching of Scripture, this basis of all our hopes, as 
well as the basis of the world's hope of restitution. If Jesus did 
not become our ransom— our substitute— if the sacrifice of his 
humanity was not the "equivalent price" necessary to recover 
Adam and all who lost life through him as their representative 
head, none need expect to go free from death: Then our hope of 
a resurrection of the dead is vain. If the penalty of our sins is 
eternal torment, then Jesus did not pay it, and we must each 
expect to suffer it. But if, as the Scriptures teach, though so few 
believe it, the wages of sin is death, then we know that Jesus did 
pay our penalty. He died, or was cut off from life, "not for 
himself, " but for us, to give his life a ransom for many. (See 
Dan. 9:26.) 

This is Paul's argument, and when he would mention the very 
fundamentals of Christian faith, he says: "I delivered unto you 
first of all... how that Christ died for our sins, according to the 
Scriptures." (1 Cor. 15:3.) 

Referring to the preceding article, we would remark that no one 
can have a proper or full comprehension of Justification, unless 
he sees that as a race, we were in a condemned condition — 
condemned to death, not to torment; and now we are made 
happy by the Gospel (glad tidings) that Jesus was delivered (to 
death) for our offences, and was raised again for our 
justification." (Rom. 4:25.) We now know that since our penalty 
has been paid by our Redeemer, "God (the Father) is just to 
forgive us." He will not be unjust to withhold that right to life 
which has been purchased for us according to his own plan. 

Notice how firmly Paul stood on this doctrine of a full release or 
justification, and notice that he bases it, not on Jehovah's 
rescinding the penalty, but on the fact that Christ died. Paul's 
argument is that it is the same Jehovah who once condemned us, 
that now declares us freed from sin- justified— and he 
accomplished our justification by not sparing his own Son, but 
freely delivering him up for us all. He says "Who shall lay 
anything to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. 
[Consequently, if God justifies, no one has a right to condemn 
us.] Who is he that condemneth? [Tell such an one that] It is 
Christ that died. " Tell such that we are redeemed from death- 
the penalty of sin-because "Christ died for our sins." (Read 
Rom. 8:32-34,1.) 



R393 : page 4 



AN ASYLUM FOR THE EXILES. 

[From the N.Y. Herald] 

Our Constantinople correspondent sends the following: -Since 
the days when Sultan Bajazet offered an asylum to the Spanish 
Jews flying from the stakes and scaffolds of Ferdinand H, there 
never has been promise of such a wholesale migration into the 
Ottoman dominions as there is at present. Already upward of a 
thousand Russian Jewish refugees are wandering homeless in 
the streets of Constantinople, and this, in spite of all efforts to 
stem, or rather to delay, the stampede until proper arrangements 
can be made to receive them. The two pilot fish of the exodus- 
Mr. Lawrence Oliphant and Mr. James Alexander-have made 
Constantinople their headquarters. As to the sincerity, and as to 
the disinterestedness, both pecuniary and personal, of these two 
gentlemen in their efforts to repatriate the Jews, there is not the 
slightest doubt. But as to the method of realizing the 
philanthropic object that both have at heart, Mr. Oliphant, and 
Mr. Alexander hold somewhat different views. It will be 
remembered that two years ago Mr. Oliphant in his work, "The 
Land of Gilead, " advocated a beginning of the repatriation of the 
Jews by a settlement, under the auspices of a sort of joint-stock 
company, of a number of Jews from Eastern Europe and Asia in 
an agricultural colony situated in the territory which formerly 
belonged to the tribes of Reuben and Gad-a district comprising 
about a million and a half acres of rich alluvial soil, and 
bounded on the west by the Jordan and the Dead Sea. This most 
favored portion of Palestine is scarcely inhabited. It was once a 
portion of the great Hittite Empire of Western Asia, whose very 
existence had already been forgotten as far back as the days of 
classical antiquity, and whose greatness is only now just 
beginning to be revealed by modern research. Comparatively 
recent relics may also be found in the isolated eminences of this 
region, which contain reservoirs and cisterns constructed in 
Scriptural times, and which have fallen but slightly out of repair. 

ISLAM'S OPPORTUNITY. 

Mr. Oliphant's scheme warmly commended itself to the Sultan 
as an opportunity for proving that Islam could be more tolerant 
to a persecuted race, and hence more compatible with modern 
civilization, than some of the foremost nations of Christendom; 
and also as a means of obtaining a well secured and increasing 
revenue from 

R393 : page 5 

a province that from time beyond memory had yielded nothing 
to the imperial exchequer. Mr. Oliphant was even feted at Yildiz 
Kiosque, and the signature of the Sultan to the firman 
repatriating the Jews was hourly expected. At this promising 
stage of the negotiation Mr. Oliphant's work, "The Land of 



Gilead," unfortunately appeared. The Sultan at once thought that 
he saw the germs of Jewish autonomy, backed by England and 
France, springing up in his already dwindling dominions. 
Naturally suspicious, and prone to see a "nigger on every fence, " 
Abdul Hamid remembered that Mr. Oliphant was an 
Englishman, strongly backed by the late Lord Beaconsfield, by 
the Marquis of Salisbury, and by M. Waddington. Moreover, 
one of the numerous orthodox Moslem habitues of Yildiz 
Kiosque, singularly enough, translated to the Sultan various 
stirring passages from George Eliot's "Daniel Deronda," where 
the hopes and possibilities of a great Hebrew kingdom are so 
vividly portrayed. The wily sheik could have hit upon no better 
device to arouse the suspicions of the mystic, visionary mind of 
his imperial master. There was no longer any question at Yildiz 
of the repatriation of the Jews in Palestine; and Mr. Oliphant 
was henceforth regarded as a wolf in sheep's clothing, whose 
real mission was to insert an additional wedge in the already 
strained fabric of Ottoman autonomy. Three weeks ago Mr. 
Oliphant again appeared upon the scene. English influence being 
at the lowest known ebb at Constantinople, he is now urging the 
United States Minister-who is at present a persona gratissima at 
Yildiz Kiosque— to advocate the colonization scheme to 
Palestine; whither the Jews, for sentimental reasons, much 
prefer to go, and whither they can be transported at much 
cheaper rates than to America. 

MR. ALEXANDER'S VIEWS. 

The modus operandi of Mr. Alexander is somewhat different. 
Mr. Alexander-himself an Israelite-represents Mr. Cazelet and 
other well known Jewish capitalists in England, Germany, and 
France, who believe that all purely humanitarian efforts must 
fail unless established upon a sound commercial basis. Mr. 
Alexander demands of the Sultan a concession, allowing him to 
construct a railway, tramways, and ordinary roads within the 
vilayets of Aleppo, Tripoli, and Damascus. The length of the 
railway from the ancient port of Tripoli to Damascus would be 
about two hundred miles; and it is proposed to obtain a grant of 
the uncultivated land along the entire length of the line for a 
distance extending two miles on each side of it, whenever such 
land belongs to the government. The whole of the profits 
accruing from the proposed railways are to go to the 
government. The opening up of such a route would speedily 
develop the wonderful resources of the country. The estimated 
cost of the line is about $50,000 per mile; $10,000,000 for the 
whole distance. For the construction of the railway, and the 
occupation of the conceded territory, which would amount to 
eight hundred square miles, employment and a resting place 
would be found for a large number of Jewish refugees. Should 
the government refuse to grant land in the above named vilayets, 
then the promoters of this scheme would take any other 



concession of land suitable for colonization purposes. M. 
Alexander and his backers are practical business men, and they 
are fully aware that any wholesale migration of Jews into Asia 

R394 : page 5 

Minor or Syria would involve the greatest misery and privation, 
unless immediate employment be provided for them beforehand. 
M. Alexander and his agents have lists containing several 
thousand names of Russian Jewish artisans and mechanics who 
desire to emigrate to Turkey. The moment that the concession is 
granted these men and their families will be transported by 
special steamers to Syria, and upon their arrival will at once 
receive their wages. The Grand Vizier sent a few days ago a 
most favorable report upon M. Alexander's scheme to the 
Sultan, and last Sunday the Minister of Foreign Affairs received 
the delegates of the Jewish artisans and mechanics of Odessa, 
and assured them that a peaceful home denied them in Russia 
would be accorded to them in Turkey. 

AN OFFER OF REFUGE. 

The following is the translation of the letter of instructions 
written by the Porte to the Turkish Consuls:— "In all cases when 
Russian Jews express a desire to establish themselves in Turkey, 
the following conditions, which the Ottoman government 
imposes upon this immigration, shall be made known to them:— 
1. The immigrants must be established in separate groups, and 
they are at liberty to settle anywhere in the Ottoman dominions 
with the exception of Palestine. 2. Without any exception or 
reserve whatever, they shall be subject to the laws of Turkey, 
and shall become Ottoman subjects." It should be remembered 
that the legal status of the Jews in Turkey is exactly the same as 
that of all other Ottoman subjects, whether Moslem or Christian. 
They have their own hakam bachi, or chief rabbi, who is the 
head of their nation in the whole Empire, and its official 
representative at the Porte. The hakam bachi enjoys the same 
rank and privileges as the Greek and Armenian patriarchs. It is a 
curious fact, that whenever the Jews have been oppressed in 
Turkey, the oppression has come, not from the Moslems, but 
from Christians; and then not from rivalry in commerce, but 
from fanaticism. Jews cannot remain in Greece on account of 
bad treatment; and thus far the Turkish government has proved 
itself to be the only Oriental government capable of maintaining 
order between the Christians and the Jews. During Easter week 
at Jerusalem, the Turkish authorities are obliged every year to 
send two regiments of infantry to prevent the Catholics and the 
Greeks from tormenting and killing the Jews, and in all Turkish 
towns the Jews are specially placed under the protection of 
municipal councils. In Constantinople it is by no means rare to 
find Jews intrusted with high official functions, and many of 
them form part of the Sultan's Privy Council; and of all other 



subjects of the Porte, the Jews have always been the most 
peaceful and easily governed. 



R394 : page 5 

THE DRIFT. 

[From "The Christian" London.] 

THE JEWS IN RUSSIA. -The vast populations here now, for 
the most part, have but one word on their lips, and that word is- 
Palestine. Newspapers and pamphlets are issued daily, not only 
in pure Hebrew, but also in the Jewish dialect, so everyone may 
be able to get information on this all-absorbing topic. Books are 
offered for sale to learn the Arabic language; Hebrew maps of 
Palestine are hung up in shops, and Jews study them with great 
avidity. I have visited Russia on several previous occasions, but 
never have I witnessed before such a yearning for the land of 
their forefathers. 

My friend, Dr. Benzion, agent of the British Society for the 
Jews, who is esteemed and beloved by many out of the 70,000 
Jews that know him in this town, is rendering me invaluable 
assistance in my work. We have Jews with us from morning till 
evening; some come for the Gospel, others for information 
about Palestine, willing to place themselves under our 
leadership. 

With reference to the persecution my brethren have suffered, it 
is difficult for human pen to describe the awful things that have 
taken place. I visited Balta, accompanied by my friend, Mr. 
Benzion; we were most cordially received by the leading Jews 
of the town. The Rabbi and principal members of the 
community called upon us, and gave us the names of the persons 
who have suffered so dreadfully. It was the hand of Providence 
alone that saved the Jews in that town from utter destruction. In 
their deeds of darkness, the persecutors spared neither age nor 
sex, and to give instances of the foul wrongs committed would 
only be revolting to humanity. I trust the authorities will bring 
the perpetrators of these crimes to condign punishment. 

A. STERNBERG. 

Hotel du Nord, Odessa, Russia, June 5 . 

A private letter from one who has recently visited the persecuted 
Jews in Russia, whose numbers are counted there by millions, 
tells not only of their suffering, but of their deep desire to return 
to the land given to Abraham and his seed forever, and from 
which they have been long strangers because of their sins. We 
would fain hope that these sorrows are part of the plan of their 
tender, faithful God, of "alluring them into the wilderness and 



speaking to their hearts." (Hos. 2:14.) Truly, the ways of our 
God are past finding out. 

OBSTACLE IN THE WAY OF THEIR GOING TO 
PALESTINE.-A letter in the Times of May 31, by Mr. 
Lawrence Oliphant, on the emigration of Russian Jews, is of 
much interest at the present critical juncture in the history of the 
"nation scattered and peeled." Writing from Constantinople, 
after having visited Gallicia and Romania, he testifies to the 
strong and prevalent desire cherished by the mass of Russian 
Jews in favor of "wholesale emigration to Palestine." This desire 
is not confined to the poor, but is equally shared by the wealthy 
Hebrews, some of whom are prepared to subscribe largely 
towards the expense of transfer to the land of ancient promise. 

An unexpected obstacle, however, has arisen, which, for the 
present, is likely to paralyze the national movement toward 
Palestine. Russian Jewish refugees are permitted to enter the 
Ottoman Empire only on condition that they will become 
Turkish subjects, and that they will not settle in that "province to 
which they are most strongly attached by religious association. " 
Mr. Oliphant, after deploring this restriction, thus concludes his 
letter:- 

Meanwhile, whether owing to unfounded suspicions, or to some 
still more occult reasons, the fact remains that no Jew is allowed 
by the Turkish Government to enter Palestine from Russia. In 
what manner the British nation can come to the relief of at least 
a million of people prepared for an exodus, but who are 
trembling in panic-stricken suspense till the way is opened for 
its accomplishment, it is for them to consider. 

EMIGRATION TO SYRIA.-The terrible outrages upon the 
Jews in Russia have led to the formation of a Society for their 
relief, specially for the purpose of assisting them to North Syria. 
Of this Society the Earl of Shaftsbury is President, and the 
Viscountess Strangford, Lady President. 

Mrs. Finn, widow of H. B. M., Consul at Jerusalem, said in a 
recent address: "Now, what is to be done for this persecuted 
people? We know that the Mansion House Fund was established 
for their immediate relief, and to send to America, but families 
are returning because they are obliged to eat forbidden food; and 
they say, we would rather die of persecution in Russia than 
disobey God's laws. Now, we have opened a fund with the 
purpose of sending them to Syria. The Sultan will not allow 
them to go to Palestine, by which he means Jerusalem and a 
little of the adjacent countries, so we may still send them to 
Syria and fields further abroad. But we want the money to buy 
this land. The other day I was offered L.500 to buy land, and 
L.200 extra to build houses on it; but we want (and can we not 
have?) at once L. 10,000 for this purpose. The Christians of 
England have only contributed one-ninth of the Mansion House 



Fund; is that what is expected of us? I entreat you all, the 
Christian women of England especially, to give something, be it 
ever so small. " 



R394 : page 5 



THE WORLD IN ARMS. 



The aspect of the world at large is as portentous of destructive 
wars today as at any period of its history. 

England, resting securely in her island home, a republic in fact, 
a monarchy in form, and an empire in the vast extent of her 
possessions, is rocking with internal agitation. Ireland is almost 
a unit in determined aim and desperate plans to disfranchise the 
owners of her soil, and to free herself from British rule. Distress, 
terror, and pauperism mark her whole population, and 
assassinations, the most atrocious, are the exhibition of her 
weakness and her hate. The "no rent" cry is to some extent 
echoed through England, and communism is ripe through all the 
British realms. 

France is constantly changing her cabinets, and her Republican 
Government is hated by rival claimants to the crown, of 
Napoleon, of Orleans, 

R395 : page 5 

or of the Bourbon. Communism, crushed out a few years since 
in seas of blood, is lifting again its defiant head, while the 
national revenge is nursed against Germany, and the 
determination fostered, to wipe out the disgrace of Sedan, and 
recover Alsace and Lorraine. At the same time, her designs on 
Tunis, and her precarious hold on Algiers, awaken the 
suspicions of Italy and Turkey, and cause divisions amongst her 
people. 

Germany, under the rule of Bismarck, the man of "Iron and 
Blood," is restive. His tendency to absolute government, his 
disregard of the political and civil rights of the people, his far- 
reached policy, and almost satanic WILL, make him hated and 
feared by his countrymen, and to a great extent by the 
surrounding nations. Old Kaiser William is in his eighty-fourth 
year. His throne, in the nature of things, must soon become 
vacant. It is doubtful 

R395 : page 6 

whether either in Germany or in England, another monarch will 
occupy the throne. Republicanism, if not communism, abide 
their time in both countries, to assert their rights and show their 
power. 



Russia is a dark waste where terror reigns. The crushed worms 
turn on the iron-heeled oppressors, and plot in secret and stab in 
darkness, and drive the tyrant and his minions into their guarded 
palaces, haunted by horrors. 

Italy has a dread skeleton in the midst of her capital. The Pope is 
a continual menace to her stability as a nation, and the security 
of her government. At any hour papal fanaticism may burst forth 
like a cyclone and spread desolation through all his domain. The 
votaries of the Pope, in almost all Catholic countries, are ready 
at the call of the "Holy Father" to rush to his rescue— or, in other 
words, drive out the Italian king and government, and place the 
Pope on the throne of his predecessors. 

In the meantime, Egypt, the most ancient of kingdoms, and, as 
predicted of her when at the height of her power, "the meanest 
of nations" starts to the forefront and arrests the attention of the 
world. The Khedive, a foreign prince, under the nominal 
sovereignty of the Sultan of Constantinople, trembles on his 
throne, and "bows to the will of the nation. " That will is the 
exaltation of Arabi Bey, his enemy, to the control of all the 
citadels and forces of Egypt. "Egypt for the Egyptians," is the 
war cry of the natives, and for once in thousands of years the 
foreigner is flying from the Egyptian. 

England and France have sent their war ships to the mouth of 
the Nile. But menace has had no effect on the leaders of the 
Egyptian army. Torpedoes have been laid along the channel of 
the harbor of Alexandria, and resistance to all foreign 
intervention has been fiercely avowed. 

But while England and France have undertaken to settle the 
affairs of Egypt, the Sultan of Turkey has been playing a double 
game. He has given public assurances to the Khedive of support, 
while he has secretly encouraged the insurgents. And then 
Russia, Germany, Austria, and Italy, claim to have a voice and a 
part in the settlement of Egyptian affairs as a European 
question— indeed a world-wide one. 

What the outcome of all this will be, no human foresight can 
determine. But a half million of soldiers, armed with breech- 
loading rifles, in each of the countries named— all ready for 
action— the rulers of those countries anxious to divert the 
discontented peoples by forcing wars— the mutual jealousies of 
these rival powers, and the difficulties of adjusting the "Eastern 
Question," now centered in the Egyptian crisis-all are 
portentous. The world is in arms. A crisis is impending. Lord, 
haste the day when he whose right to reign shall come, and 
peace and joy and righteousness shall clothe the earth in beauty. - 
-Christian Repository. 



R395 : page 6 



"Let us remember that all our safety depends upon our 
cleaving, with full purpose of heart, to the slightest 
manifestation of Christ's wishes. Thus the many voices there are 
in the world will not move us from our steadfastness, nor will 
the unstable sea of deceitful, carnal interest be permitted to 
overwhelm our bark, nor hide from our eyes the light of 
heaven. " 



R395 : page 6 

THE SEVEN LAST PLAGUES. 

"And I saw another sign in heaven, great and wonderful, seven 
angels having the seven last plagues; [last] because by them the 
wrath of God was to be completed." Rev. 15:1. DIAGLOTT. 

Among the pictures of this wonderful book of symbols, this 
one of the pouring out of the "seven vials of wrath" stands out in 
marked prominence. As its name indicates, it is understood to be 
the closing act in the drama of this age. An important difference 
exists between our view and that of many others, however, in 
that they suppose the end of the age to be accompanied by the 
destruction of the people, and of the earth itself; while we 
understand that it is the ending of the present reign of evil, and a 
necessary preparation of mankind for the reign of righteousness. 
The connections in which we find the vials mentioned in the 
record, are in harmony with our views, and contradictory to 
theirs: it is followed by the symbolic pictures of the new age — 
new Heaven and Earth, binding of Satan, and reign of Christ. 

The great source of error in understanding these, as all of 
Revelation's symbols, is a too literal interpretation. It is read as 
though it were a statement of facts, instead of a statement of 
symbols. Before proceeding to the account of the plagues, the 
inspired penman records another symbol-the "sea of glass." 
This indicates that it stands related to the plagues, hence we will 
consider it first. From all the connections, we understand that it 
immediately precedes the plagues. 

"And I saw as it were a glassy sea, mingled with fire, and the 
conquerors of the Beast, and of his Image, and the number of his 
name, standing on the glassy sea, having harps of God. " 

Who these are, is shown by what they overcome— viz., the Beast, 
Image, and Number. Here we see the importance of an 
understanding of the symbols of chapter thirteen; for unless we 
understood what those symbols meant, we could not understand 
who is overcoming their influence. In this way God has made 
his Word self-interpreting. The understanding of one part or 
symbol is the key to an understanding of another. In harmony, 
then, with Rev. 13, we understand the overcomers here referred 
to, to be those Christians who are free from Papacy-the Beast- 



and from organized sectarian Protestantism —the Image— and 
from all who bear the characteristics of the number -that is, 
free, to the extent that these have not the slightest influence over 
our actions, professions, or thoughts —free indeed. 

This serves, too, to show about when the plagues are due, and 
when this sea of glass condition may be reached; for, if, as 
seems clear, the Image was formed by the organization of the 
"Evangelical Alliance," in 1846, then it is equally clear, that the 
overcomers of the "Image" could not occupy this position of 
favor and exaltation prior to that date. This furnishes a general 
reason for believing that the plagues must commence this side of 
the date mentioned, since it is during the pouring out of the 
plagues that the overcomers occupy this "sea of glass" 
condition. 

Having, then, ascertained who these overcomers are, and about 
when they thus stand, we pass on to consider the sea of glass 
mingled with fire, on which they stand. Sea, as heretofore 
explained, we understand to symbolize the masses of the people, 
and fire to symbolize judgments, or trouble. We therefore 
interpret this to mean -the people in trouble, under the 
judgments of God. Above the troubled people are the 
overcomers —calm, serene, untroubled. Their position shows 
that their standing is by faith. (Matt. 14:29.) To the eye of faith 
all is transparent. 

These overcomers sing a song. A song is a beautiful and 
harmonious expression. It is the song of Moses and the Lamb. 
That is, the song or preaching of these overcomers is in perfect 
accord with the Law and the Gospel. It is the same which Jesus 
(the "Lamb") taught, and which Moses taught in the Law and 
types. Not only does the description of the overcomers indicate 
that they are but a little fragment of the nominal church, but the 
words of this song teach us the same— that the class who 
proclaim these things are few. The words of the song are given, 
or the leading points of the preaching which will be done by the 
overcomers— "saying, Great and wonderful are thy works, O 
Lord God, the omnipotent. " 

Alas ! how few are sufficiently acquainted with God's plans to 
recognize the fact that they are great and wonderful. Very few 
can sing this first note of the song, and fewer yet can sing it to 
its close. The second note is, "Righteous and true are thy ways, 
O King of the nations." [Diaglott.] Look at this; we can sing of 
the righteousness and justice of God's dealing with the nations, 
since we have come to see how he has permitted evil and death 
to come upon all, as a lesson to teach us to appreciate life and 
righteousness. We can see righteousness, justice, mercy, and 
love in God's dealings, since we see in his Word that there is to 
be "a restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began. " (Acts 
3:21.) Who, but those who see the restitution to be accomplished 



in the next age, could sing this part of the song? Not one; 
Christendom in general fears to think of God's justice in dealing 
with the nations in general, the great majority of whom have 
gone down into death without any knowledge of the only name 
whereby we must be saved. The righteousness, and justice, and 
love of God's dealing, can only be seen by looking at the work 
of the next, as well as at that of present and past ages. Yes 
indeed, we rejoice to proclaim to all who have an "ear to hear"— 
Just and true are Jehovah's ways in ruling the nations. 

The next note is in perfect harmony with the last- "Who shall 
not fear, O Lord, and glorify thy name? Since thou alone art 
bountiful. " Our great Creator's every dealing is an act of favor- 
even the evil which man was permitted to bring upon himself is 
to be overruled for good; and we ask ourselves the question, 
Who shall not fear and glorify God when, in the coming age, his 
wonderful goodness is manifested, and when the knowledge of 
the Lord shall fill the whole earth. We would be inclined to 
believe that every one should praise his love everlastingly, were 
it not that Scripture clearly discloses a second death, which tells 
of some who will be accounted worthy of it. 

"For all the nations shall come and worship in thy presence, 
because thy righteous acts are manifested. " This is the last note 
of the song, and is full of force and meaning. How few are 
proclaiming, either publicly or privately, this part of the song. 
Some believe that many of the nations now dead are in a place 
of mental or physical torture, there to remain to all eternity. 
Others claim that they are dead, and will never again have life; 
others that those who are dead, will be raised from death to pass 
a mock trial, and be destroyed. But how few can sing this song 
of restitution, declaring that all nations shall yet come from 
death, and shall worship their Lord and Redeemer, when 
brought to a knowledge of the truth. (1 Tim. 2:4.) Even Sodom, 
a nation long since destroyed, shall come and worship. (Ezek. 
16:48-63.) 

Another symbol is the "harp of God. " The song is sung in tune 
and harmony with the harps. The harp of God we believe to be 
the Bible, its many strings or chords are the Law, the Prophets, 
the Psalms, the Gospels, and Revelation. Many Christians have 
the "harp," but few have it so strung and tuned that they can 
bring forth harmony enough to accompany the song of Moses 
and the Lamb. The overcomers have the harp well in hand-in 
fact, without it and the inspiration of its music, they never could 
have been overcomers. They have them tuned, too. How forcible 
this picture! Truly, it would have been incomplete without the 
harp of God. 

Another thought is suggested— the overcomers not only have the 
harp, and know how to sing this song of restitution, but they do 
sing it. There are some of God's children who have their harp 
considerably in tune, and who know the song, but who do not 



proclaim the glad tidings of coming restitution; they fear to face 
the opposition which this course would bring-the unpopularity 
which would attach to anything outside the religious rut of so 
called orthodoxy. These are not among the overcomers; they 
have not yet got a victory over the influence of the Beast and 
Image; they are yet in some bondage. All of the overcomers sing 
the song. Each of us should inquire of our own hearts whether 
we are tuning our harps and singing this song-Now is the time. 

Many of the Lord's dear children in mystic Babylon's captivity, 
have sat down beside her rivers so defiled by the mire of 
worldliness, and wept when they remembered God's favor to 
Zion in times past. They laid aside the harps of God, hanging 
them on the willows that weep over the grave of truth in 
Babylon. They that carried them away captive (the Babylon 
system) require of them a song and mirth, saying, "Sing us one 
of the songs of Zion." Yes, Babylon would like to see Zion's 
captives happy beside her muddy streams; and in the midst of 
her worldliness, would like to hear an occasional song of Zion, 
that she might boast of the Lord's favor. But "how shall the 
captive daughters of Zion sing the Lord's song in a strange 
land?" (Psa. 137:1-6.) To all such we cry: Take down your harps 
from the willows; flee out of Babylon into full liberty of thought 
and expression; tune your harps and sing the song of Moses and 
the Lamb. Sing of God's mighty love and the "restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets." 

The next thing shown to John is the coming of the seven 
messengers out of the temple to pour out the plagues. Since it is 
the saints who are "to execute the judgments written," (Psa. 
149:9), we interpret this "seven angels" to mean the saints. The 
living saints being the representatives or active agents of the 
entire anointed company— as "the 

R395 : page 7 

feet of Him. " It is the feet, or last part, who sing the restitution 
song of Moses and the Lamb, upon the glassy sea mingled with 
fire. How beautiful are the feet of Him that bringeth good 
tidings, that publisheth peace, that saith unto Zion, Thy God 
reigneth. (Isa. 52:7.) These same feet, as representatives on earth 
of the entire body, are to pour out the seven vials, or be 
associated more or less directly with the judgments coming. 
These are clothed with white linen; these have kept their 
wedding garments; they are robed in the righteousness of Christ- 
-"justified by his blood." They are the servants of God; the 
girdle representing a servant, and the gold of it representing 
divinity. They, as the servants of God, have a divine service to 
accomplish. 

When they had all gone forth from the temple it was filled with 
smoke, so that none could enter it. The temple symbolizes the 



church. The coming of the messengers out of the temple, 
symbolizes the coming of the overcomers out of the nominal 
church. When all such have come out, the temple (church) will 
be so full of smoke, (confusion) that no man would care to go 
into it. The messengers are now nearly all out, and already the 
smoke, or confusion, in the church, is considerable. Few care to 
enter even now, and recent reports of various sects show that the 
increase has been very slight for the past year. When we 
remember that the large proportion of new members received is 
from the Sunday School, we can realize how, even now, very 
few men (persons of mature thought) enter the nominal temple. 
The nominal church will be in this confusion until the seven 
plagues are poured out; during that time the Babylon, or 
confusion element, will be destroyed, and the cleansed temple of 
truth be again opened to receive justified believers— then as heirs 
of the earthly promises. 

[TO BE CONTINUED IN NOVEMBER NUMBER.] 
R396 : page 7 

THE KINGDOM OF GOD. 

An article recently published in a contemporary magazine, is 
sent us by a reader of the TOWER for an answer and criticism. 
The article in question claims to find a great deal of 
"Dispensational difference" between the expressions "kingdom 
of heaven" and "kingdom of God. " 

The writer endeavors, but signally fails, to prove that "kingdom 
of God" means a kingdom in men's hearts, and that the 
"kingdom of heaven" means the Millennial kingdom. While a 
great mistake made by Christians in general, undoubtedly is to 
ignore "dispensational statements" of truth, yet we believe it to 
be equally erroneous to go to an opposite extreme, and make 
differences where none really exist. It is difficult to estimate 
which of these extremes are the most injurious to truth. To 
sustain this theory, the writer is led to claim that Matthew's is 
"the Jew gospel," while the others, especially John's, are "the 
Christian's gospel." 

What absurdity-were not those writers-Matthew, Mark, Luke, 
and John— merely historians? Do they not witness merely, or 
record the things which Jesus said and did? How, then, could 
one write a Jewish, and another a Christian gospel? The usual 
view is that each of these evangelists wrote independently of the 
others, except John, whose gospel is supposed to have been 
written partly to supply points remembered by him, which had 
been omitted by the other writers. Each writer evidently has 
used some license in the use of words, hence no two give their 
accounts in exactly the same words. 



In the matter in question, Matthew uses the terms, "kingdom of 
heaven" and "kingdom of God" interchangeably, while the other 
writers use only the one, the last term. The word heavens 
signifies high, hence the kingdom of heaven is the high 
kingdom- higher than earthly dominions, and of course that is 
the "kingdom of God." We give more space to the consideration 
of this subject than we really think it worthy of, because quite a 
good many called "Brethren" hold tenaciously to it, and because 
we would like to prove to all that a theory based on a twist or 
turn of a word, and not on a general principle of Bible teaching, 
is unworthy of our consideration. 

That the two expressions are used interchangeably, will be seen 
by examining the following Scriptures: 

In Luke 19:11,12; and 21:31. The kingdom of God is mentioned 
in such an unequivocal manner, that none can doubt that the 
Millennial Reign is referred to. This of itself would destroy the 
theory quoted; but we will give some unquestionable proof that 
the expressions are interchangeable ones. In the following 
Scriptures, Matthew uses the words "kingdom of heaven," while 
other evangelists use "kingdom of God." 

Matt. 4:17: "Jesus began to preach and to say, Repent, for the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand." Mark 1:14,15 reads, "Jesus came 
into Galilee preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, and 
saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at 
hand." 

R397 : page 7 

Matt. 13:11: "It is given unto you to know the mysteries of the 
kingdom of heaven. " 

Mark 4:11: "Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the 
kingdom of God. " 

Matt. 19:23. "A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. " In verse 24, we have proof that Matthew uses the 
expressions interchangeably, for he there says "kingdom of 
God." The same language is quoted in both cases, kingdom of 
God, in Mark 10:24,25, and Luke 18:24 and 25. 

Matt. 19:14: "Suffer.. .for of such is the kingdom of heaven." 
Mark 10:14, and Luke 18:16, read "kingdom of God." 

Matt. 13:31: "The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of 
mustard seed." Mark 4:30,31: "Whereunto shall we liken the 
kingdom of God... it is like a grain of mustard seed." Luke 13:18: 
"Unto what is the kingdom of God like?... It is like a grain of 
mustard seed. " 

We shall offer no further evidence, though more could be 
presented; we believe the above sufficient to convince any 
unprejudiced mind, and it is useless to write for others. 



The theory which the foregoing view is required to support may 
be shown: How else, they inquire, can the church now be the 
kingdom of God in its present time of suffering; and be the 
kingdom in a still different sense during the Millennial reign, 
unless the present condition be called the kingdom of God, and 
the future the kingdom of heaven? We answer, no such 
distinction is needed. The church is the kingdom now, only in 
the prospective sense that a babe is a man. The kingdom is now 
ours by faith, in the same way that we have every other heavenly 
blessing. When we are exalted and glorified with our Head and 
Bridegroom, Jesus— that will be our exaltation, or the kingdom 
of God, the heavenly kingdom, "set up." (Dan. 2:44.) 

But they question— How is it that Luke says of the kingdom of 
God, it shall be within you, and cometh not with observation? 
We reply, you misread Luke 17:20. It speaks not of a kingdom 
present within those "Scribes and Pharisees -hypocrites," but of 
the manner in which the kingdom would come-It "cometh not 
with observation, neither shall ye say, lo, here! nor lo, there!" 
for it will be among men-a present, but invisible, power or 
government. 

In due time it will bring mankind into harmony with itself. Then 
the kingdom of God will be "among men"; then men will be 
visible representatives of the invisible or spiritual kingdom. To 
this agree the words of John 3:3,5, and 1 Cor. 15:50. Thus 
considered, the record is harmonious, without straining out a 
gnat and swallowing a camel, as our brother whom we criticize 
has done. 



R397 : page 7 

THE BODY, THE BRIDE OF CHRIST. 

We are always sorry to differ with those we love; yet, when 
necessary for the truth's sake, we must do it in the spirit of 
meekness— the spirit of love-the spirit of Christ. We believe that 
it is our Lord's wish that we "contend earnestly for the faith once 
delivered to the saints"; therefore we "have not shunned to 
declare unto you all the counsel of God. " We find that among 
the Apostles there were differences. (Acts 15; Gal. 2:11; 1 Tim. 
1:19-20; 2 Tim. 2:16-18.) Hence, we need not be surprised if 
such should be the case in this day. But should the faithful 
servant ignore doctrinal differences to maintain peace? Did Paul 
do so? No; as faithful servants, we should contend earnestly, at 
the same time striving to maintain unity of spirit in the bonds of 
peace, yet never sacrificing truth for either unity or peace, else 
we should not be able to grow in grace and knowledge— up to a 
stature of perfection in Christ. 



In its last two issues, Zion's Day Star presents, as new light, the 
idea that the body of Christ-the church -is different from the 
Bride of Christ -the church. They claim that the "body" means 
those who overcome the world following the example of Jesus, 
their Head (which we always held); but deny that the bride is the 
same class of overcomers. They claim that the body, with the 
head, constitute the Bridegroom, who, in due time, will be 
united to the Bride; and they claim that the Bride company, 
through weakness of the flesh, are not overcomers of the world, 
but are overcome by the world [the class whom both they and 
we have always heretofore recognized as the servant company 
of Rev. 7:9-17]. 

The question arises, is this true— have we heretofore labored 
under a misapprehension? We are not to conclude that because it 
is different from what we had thought, therefore it is erroneous; 
neither are we to conclude that because it is new, therefore it is 
new light. It might be new error. It might be darkness. Neither 
should we judge of its truth or falsity by the measure of our love 
for those who advocate or oppose the view. This is a lesson 
which all need to learn: that while human teachers are necessary, 
and should be esteemed very highly for their work's sake (1 
Thes. 5:13), yet they are to be respected and heeded only so far 
as they can show us a thus saith the Lord, for their teachings. Let 
us, then, inquire of the Lord what is truth on this subject, and 
receive his reply from his Word. 

When Jesus would teach the nature of the kingdom of God, he 
gives a number of parables or illustrations:— The kingdom of 
heaven is likened unto a merchantman seeking pearls; it is like 
to a man seeking a treasure in a field; it is like a young 
nobleman going into a far country to receive a kingdom; it is 
like to a grain of mustard seed; it is like to leaven hid in meal, 
etc., etc. Shall we conclude that each of these pen-pictures 
represents a different kingdom? If so, how many kingdoms of 
heaven there are, and how different from each other! But no; we 
all recognize the fact that these are different views of the same 
kingdom; that different illustrations are given to show more 
clearly different features of that one kingdom. 

Again, in Rev. 20 and 21 we have seven different pen-pictures 
of the operation and results of the kingdom established-(l) 
Satan bound for a thousand years (vss. 1-3); (2) Earthly thrones 
cast down, and the Overcomers reign with Christ a thousand 
years (vs. 4); (3) The holy and blessed of the first resurrection 
live and reign a thousand years with Christ (vss. 6-10); (4) The 
great white throne-Heaven and Earth flee-The dead judged 
from open books (vss. 11-15); (5) New Heaven and Earth-Holy 
City-its blessings to mankind (chap. 21:1-8); (6) The Bride, the 
Holy City— the kingdom of God come to earth (vss. 10-27); (7) 
The water of life flows freely— the world's troubles healed-the 
curse destroyed (chap. 22:1-3). 



Should we conclude that these are seven different kingdoms in 
operation, or, that they picture seven different thousand years? 
No; these views present to us from various standpoints the work 
of the one kingdom during the one thousand years. The saints 
live and reign at the same time that Satan is bound; and the 
dead, small and great, are brought to a full trial before the great 
white throne of justice during the same time, etc. 

When we read the many different titles of Jesus-the Prophet, 
Priest, King, the Son of God, Son of man, Man of sorrows, the 
Lamb of God, etc., should we conclude that these titles belong 
to different beings? Or, do they not belong to the same, and do 
they not all represent, from different standpoints the "Son of 
God"? 

So, if we look at the various names given by inspiration to the 
church of Christ, we find them many; we find, too, that each of 
these illustrative names serves to show some feature of our 
work, or of our relationship to Jesus better than any other title. 

The church is a company of soldiers fighting a good fight- 
overcoming the world under the leadership of the "Captain of 
our salvation." It is also a "royal priesthood"; each overcomer is 
a priest, and all regard Jesus as the High or Chief Priest of our 
profession. This shows the life of sacrifice. Another illustration 
is that of pupils or disciples learning and copying from their 
Master's example and precept, for "He hath left us an example 
that we should follow in his steps." (1 Pet. 2:21.) 

Another illustration of the church's position and relationship to 
Jesus, is furnished in the figure— the body of Christ. This 
illustration does not show the sacrifice, as does the priest 
illustration; it does not show the battle with the world, as does 
the soldier illustration; it does not show the following of Christ 
as our pattern and example; but it does show a feature which 
does not appear in any 

R397 : page 8 

of the other illustrations, viz.: the very intimate and close 
relationship which exists between Jesus and his church, and 
among all the members of the church. As every member of the 
human body moves under the control of the head, so every 
member of Christ is controlled by the will or spirit of our Lord, 
the Head of the church. As every pain or suffering of each 
member of the human body is known and shared by each other 
member, and especially by the head, so each member of the 
body of Christ is in sympathy with the other, and the Head, 
Jesus— "knows our every weakness." 

Our head is quickly touched with a feeling of our infirmities, 
and applies the relief, using one or another member of the body 
to bind up and comfort and bear the burdens of the injured 
member. 



R398 : page 8 

But, while this last is one of the most beautiful of the many 
illustrations of our relationship to Jesus, still each of the others 
are necessary. 

The temple is another figure and name given to the church. 1 
Cor. 3:16.) At one time each Christian is compared to a temple, 
in which God, by his spirit, dwells; and again, each Christian is 
compared to a living stone in the one great temple which God is 
building during this age, and from which his blessing is to flow 
to the world during the next age. This last figure shows the 
growth of the church as the other figures do not show it. Neither 
the soldier figure, nor the priest figure, nor the disciple figure, 
nor the body figure, none of these show the growth of the church 
as a whole; but the temple figure does show it. We, as living 
stones, are cut, polished, and builded, and so through this age, 
the temple "groweth," until Jesus, the top-stone, shall crown it. 
Then it will be perfect and ready for its great Millennial work. 

How necessary, then, are all these figures. Consider, for a 
moment, that if any figure were omitted, much would be lost. If 
we had only the figure of "the body," how would additions be 
shown? Suppose a body which received additional members- 
one joint, one toe, one finger, one eye, one ear, one member, at a 
time, it would be an absurd figure, and would not illustrate the 
addition of members to the church, as the temple figure does, 
though it (the body figure) well illustrates the oneness and 
perfection of the entire living church at any stage of its 
existence. It shows the possibility of the perfect thing growing 
or maturing in perfection. Thus, we are perfect in Christ from 
the very first, yet we are to grow in grace, etc. "Let as many as 
are perfect be thus minded." (Phil. 3:15.) 

And now we come to another figure of the church, viz. : that of 
the Bride, the Lamb's wife. This is the figure which our brethren 
think should be regarded as representing a different company- 
not the overcomers -not the body of Christ. Their argument is, 
If we are the body of Christ, we cannot be the Bride, because, 
say they, the body of Christ is to be married to the Bride of 
Christ. 

At first sight there is a plausibility here, but let us remember that 
each of these figures stands separate and alone, and the moment 
we begin to blend any two of them we get confusion. Now, let 
us see; suppose we were to say, We are to be members of the 
body of Christ, hence when we read of Jesus as the Captain, we 
should conclude that we are not the soldiers fighting the good 
fight, for we are members of the Captain's body. Or, when we 
read of Jesus as the Master, who set his disciples an example to 
follow in his footsteps, should we conclude that we are not 
disciples or followers, because we are of his body; and say we 
could not walk in his footsteps because we are members of his 



feet, making the footprints, and therefore could not follow them? 
Or, should we say that we are not members of the holy temple, 
because we are members of his body, and reason that a body 
could live in a temple, but could not be a temple? This would be 
as wise as to say that we could not be represented by the bride 
figure, because we are represented in the body figure. Who 
would disclaim being of the "royal priesthood" because another 
figure shows that we are members of the body? (1 Pet. 2:9.) 

Thus we see that if we try to blend these figures, we get 
confusion. Yet, who will claim that each of these figures 
represent different classes? No one; they each represent some 
special feature of our relationship. 

We next pass on, to notice that there is a relationship between 
Jesus and his church better illustrated by the Bride and 
Bridegroom figure, than by any other. Jesus went away, saying, 
"I go to prepare a place (home) for you, and I will come again 
and receive you unto myself. " How beautifully this is illustrated 
by the earthly marriage relationship. The time for marriage is 
not yet; the intended husband goes to a far country, promising to 
return and claim his faithful betrothed, and cause her to share his 
wealth, his name, his honor, etc., and to make her joint-heir to 
all his inheritance. 

The one condition on which all is promised is love and 
faithfulness— a love which overcomes the painfulness of lonely 
waiting, and surmounts the difficulties of the way, ever praying 
"Come, Lord (husband) Jesus, come quickly." 

What other illustration would so clearly and faithfully represent 
the relationship between the church and her Lord during the 
time of his absence? The body figure fails entirely to represent 
this. Suppose a head cut off and separated far from a body, yet 
both alive and longing for union. It would be an absurdity. But 
when we take the figure of the church, so repeatedly presented a 
virgin (pure woman), espoused to Christ, we can see how the 
absent Bridegroom and the waiting Bride look forward to the 
time of their union. The loving devotion of each is beautifully 
pictured here. And, as a true bridegroom desires for his bride, 
one whose love could overcome the obstacles in the way, so 
Jesus will claim for his bride only such as overcome the world, 
the flesh, and the devil, which together conspire to allure her 
from her absent Lord. The inspiration of the promise -"Faithful 
is he that calleth you who also will do it"— will keep his faithful 
Bride "unspotted from the world. " 

Note how plainly the Scriptures teach that Jesus, personally, is 
the Bridegroom, and not Jesus and the overcomers. John speaks 
of Jesus personally as the bridegroom. (John 3:29.) Jesus also 
speaks of himself individually as the Bridegroom (Matt. 9:15; 
Mark 2:19; Luke 5:34.) In Matt. 25:1,5,6,10, the Bridegroom is 
four times mentioned, and who will say that any of them could 



be applied to other than the individual Bridegroom, Jesus? No 
virgin went forth in any sense to meet a multitudinous 
bridegroom. The midnight cry was not, Behold, a multitudinous 
bridegroom cometh, nor did a multitudinous bridegroom in any 
sense tarry. 

The glory, the honor, the power, all came directly to the man, 
and the woman obtains joint-heirship by marriage (covenant 
union with him). So Jesus was the heir of all things (Heb. 1:2) 
and we inherited none of them, until called by the Father, we 
become his betrothed, and now we are heirs unitedly with him, 
for "He (the Father) that spared not his own Son, but delivered 
him up for us all, how shall he not with him, also freely give us 
all things?" Therefore, by union or marriage with him who is the 
heir, "all things are yours." 

To this view all the Old Testament types harmonize: Man was 
formed first, then woman was developed, and became his 
companion and joint-heir to the dominion of earth. So Jesus was 
first perfected, and since then the church is being prepared as a 
bride for her husband, and hopes to enter the joys of her Lord 
(husband). Adam's sleep and the rending of his side did not 
directly produce Eve, but merely the rib from which Eve was 
formed by God's power. So Jesus' death did not produce the 
church directly, but it produced a justified humanity (a rib), 
which, by God's power, is transformed into the glorious divine 
likeness of the second Adam, and she henceforth becomes his 
bride and help-meet. 

It will not do, to say that Adam was the type of the body 
(church), as well as of Jesus, for Paul tells us that he was a type 
of Jesus personally. He says, "The first man was of the earth 
earthy, the second man was the Lord from heaven. " That Paul 
meant Jesus who had already been perfected on the plane of 
glory, is evident from his subsequent remark— "As we have born 
the image of the earthy, (Adam) we shall also bear the image of 
the heavenly," (Jesus, the anti-type). As Adam alone represented 
our Lord and Adam and his wife were unitedly called Adam, 
(Gen. 5:2,) so Jesus alone was the Christ, (anointed) yet when 
we as his wife are united to him, the one name stands for the 
united ONE-The Christ of God. 

Look too, at the striking type of Isaac and Rebecca. Abraham 
the type of Jehovah, sends his servant a type of the Spirit, to take 
a bride for Isaac, who typified Jesus, the Son and heir. Isaac was 
the rightful heir of Abraham without any bride, but when she 
was united to him she became a joint-heir. So Jesus was first and 
individually appointed "heir of all things" by Jehovah (Heb. 
1:2); and since then we are invited to be heirs of God, also joint 
or united heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. 

When we read- "We brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of 
promise, " we must remember how we became as Isaac. Not that 



we were created heirs and joint-heirs, but that we become such 
by reason of our espousal (covenant— marriage) with Jesus. 
Rebecca was an heir of Abraham and joint-heir with Isaac while 
journeying to his home, and yet it was by hope and faith, and 
depended on her completing the journey; so we are now heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with Jesus by hope, by faith; but our full 
realization of it depends on our following on in the narrow way. 
We are "heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord 
(husband) if so be that we suffer with him," etc. Rom 8:17. 

Again, if the Bridegroom class, according to the Day Star, was 
not yet complete, how could Paul, in his day, addressing the 
church, say, "I have espoused you to one husband that I may 
present you as a chaste virgin to Christ"? Since every type of the 
Bridegroom and Bride shows that the Bridegroom was 
completed or perfected before the Bride was even called to 
union and joint-heirship, this is out of harmony with the view 
presented by our brethren. But it is entirely harmonious with the 
view we have all heretofore held, for Jesus was perfected in 
glory before the Spirit at Pentecost began to call the chaste 
virgin to be the "Bride, the Lamb's Wife. " 

No one can gainsay the fact that Jesus and Paul and Peter all 
recognized the calling of the Bride of Christ as in progress 
during the past eighteen 

R399 : page 8 

hundred years, and this of itself should be proof that the 
Bridegroom was Jesus, who alone was perfected on the spiritual 
plane, before the call of the church to be his bride. 

Paul's use of the two figures is clearly shown in Eph. 5. Here he 
does not blend, but links these illustrations -the body and bride, 
and shows them to refer to the same class. He is here addressing 
"the saints which were at Ephesus, and the FAITHFUL 
(overcoming ones) in Christ Jesus." (Chap. 1:1.) In chap. 1:23, 
he likens the church to the human body, of which Jesus is the 
Head; and in chap. 5:22-33, speaking to the same persons, he 
likens the church to husband and wife, exhorting husbands to 
love their wives, and wives to reverence their husbands, and 
thus exemplify the beautiful relationship between Jesus and his 
church. Verse 28 compares the wife to the body, saying, "So 
ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that 
loveth his wife loveth himself; for no man ever yet hateth his 
own flesh, but nourisheth it and cherisheth it, even as the Lord 
the church. " "For we (the same company-the church -the 
prospective bride) are members of his body, of his flesh, and of 
his bones." "For this cause (thus representing the heavenly 
union) shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall be 
joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh (one body). 
This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the 
church. " Could words express more plainly that the figures body 



and bride are used interchangeably, referring to the same class- 
the overcomers? 

When it is claimed that the title bride belongs to the class who 
are overcome by the world, and who do not keep their garments, 
etc., we object; we call attention to the fact that the Bride of 
Christ is everywhere spoken of as a "chaste virgin," and never as 
impure or in unholy alliance with the world (a harlot). But it is 
claimed that she comes out of Babylon! True, and who that is 
out and free did not come out of the Babylon or confusion? All, 
just as in the type all of typical Israel went into captivity, into 
literal Babylon, so here. It is well to read carefully the text, 
Come out of her (Babylon), my people, that ye be NOT 
PARTAKERS of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. 
(Rev. 18:4.) This shows that the class who are called out and 
obey are not partakers of Babylon's sins, but overcomers. 

In conclusion, since the Apostles urged the church as soldiers, as 
a priesthood, as disciples or imitators, as the body members, as 
living stones of the temple, and as "a chaste virgin, espoused to 
one husband-Christ,* we believe that all of these expressions 
were but variations of the same call, and to the same class, 
because during this Gospel Age there has been but one-the high 
calling; and all are "called in ONE HOPE of your calling. " 
Hence these distinctive titles refer, not to different classes, but to 
the same. 



*1 Tim. 6:12; Heb. 3:1; 1 Pet. 2:9,21; Eph 4:15,16; 1 Pet. 2:5; 
2 Cor. 11:2. 


