We Are the Sort Who Have Faith
Preaching the Kingdom on the Altiplano in Peru
BETWEEN the eastern and western ranges of the Andes Mountains​—where Bolivia and Peru meet—​lies the Altiplano. Its name means “high plain,” or “plateau.” Most of it lies in Bolivia.
The Altiplano is 60 miles [100 km] wide and over 600 miles [1,000 km] long, and its average elevation is some 12,000 feet [3,700 m] above sea level. Aboard a plane flying there from Peru’s coastal capital city, Lima, you pass snow-covered El Misti, a volcano that reaches through the clouds to an altitude of 19,101 feet [5,822 m]. Towering to over 20,000 feet [6,000 m] are the distant snowcapped peaks of Nevado Ampato and Nevado Coropuna. Coming suddenly into view is a vast plateau​—southern Peru’s Altiplano.
The capital of the Peruvian Altiplano is Puno, situated at the northwest end of Lake Titicaca, the world’s highest navigable lake. Because the region is over two miles [3 km] high, it takes a while for visitors to adjust to the thin air. Living by Lake Titicaca are the Quechua and Aymara Indians. Dressed in colorful red, green, or blue garments, they can be seen working on their chacras, or small farms. Though Spanish is the main language of Peru, Quechua and Aymara are also spoken on the Altiplano.
Spearheading the Preaching Work
Many of the humble, hardworking people speaking Quechua and Aymara have recently come to an accurate knowledge of Bible truth. This is largely because of Jehovah’s rich blessing on the zealous efforts of full-time Kingdom proclaimers serving as special pioneers.
For instance, special pioneers José and Silvia were assigned to the town of Putina, about 30 miles [50 km] from Lake Titicaca. Within two months, Silvia was conducting 16 home Bible studies, and José, 14. In just six months, the number of congregation publishers increased from 23 to 41. Meanwhile, meeting attendance rose from 48 to a peak of 132.
“When starting congregation meetings in these isolated communities,” says José, “we found it practical to begin with the Public Meeting and the Congregation Book Study. This makes it easier for newly interested ones to begin attending meetings.”
Two sisters​—one a pioneer—​first brought the good news to the isolated community of Muñani, about 13 miles [20 km] from Putina. There they started a Bible study with a blind man named Lucio.a He invited his brother Miguel, a lay Catholic missionary and community leader from a nearby area. When a friend asked Miguel why he went to Muñani every week, he said that it was to learn about Jehovah and his Word. The question then arose: “Why don’t we study the Bible here?” Because of the interest shown by people in Miguel’s community, the Witnesses soon arranged to hold meetings there.
Miguel began to share what he was learning with others. But what about his position as a lay Catholic missionary and deputy governor? In a meeting at the community hall, he announced his resignation as a Catholic missionary. Would another person be appointed? Someone in the audience said: “Why do we need another missionary when we are learning the truth?” Of course, this was a reference to the things taught by Jehovah’s Witnesses. Another person added: “We are not in agreement that you resign by yourself. Why don’t we all resign?” All in attendance then shouted in unison: “We all resign!”
Idols and crucifixes were discussed at a community meeting shortly thereafter. One man asked that all present read Deuteronomy 7:25, which says: “The graven images of their gods you should burn in the fire. You must not desire the silver and the gold upon them, nor indeed take it for yourself, for fear you may be ensnared by it; for it is a thing detestable to Jehovah your God.”
The man then asked those in favor of burning all the idols to raise their hands. All hands went up immediately. (Acts 19:19, 20) Now 23 of the 25 families in the community are studying God’s Word. Two persons are serving as unbaptized publishers, and five couples plan to legalize their marriage in order to have a clean standing before Jehovah.​—Titus 3:1; Hebrews 13:4.
Teaching With Cassette Recordings
Since literacy is low on the Altiplano, Watch Tower videos and cassette recordings in local languages are a great aid​—even for conducting home Bible studies. With the help of an audio cassette, a special pioneer named Dora conducts studies in the brochure What Does God Require of Us? Playing one paragraph at a time, she asks the Bible student questions on the material just heard.
A local radio station regularly broadcasts segments of the Require brochure in the Quechua language. It does the same with portions of Awake! magazine in Spanish. Hence, many people recognize the Kingdom message and want to learn more when Jehovah’s Witnesses call at their homes.
The Altiplano is far from the eyes of the world in general but not from God’s sight. Thanks to Jehovah’s love for mankind, many people living high on the Andean Altiplano are becoming part of the throng that glorifies his majestic house of true worship.​—Haggai 2:7.
[Footnote]
Some substitute names have been used in this article.

