Announcements
CHOOSING LIFE NOW TO KEEP ALIVE FOREVER—Deut. 30:19, NW.
Would you like to live forever? “Under present world conditions?” you ask. No, not under present world conditions, wherein there is nothing but unrest, sorrow, sickness, pain and death, but, rather, in a new world of God’s making. The choice is yours! (Deut. 30:19, NW) Those who want life must, said Jesus, ‘take in knowledge of the only true God, and of the One he sent forth, Christ Jesus.’ This constant taking in of right knowledge is aided by the publication of the Watchtower magazine twice a month. It deals solely with important and timely Bible subjects, particularly stressing the Kingdom and its progress. During February a year’s subscription for The Watchtower will be offered by Jehovah’s witnesses from door to door at the annual rate of $1. Three fundamental Bible booklets, including the recent release “This Good News of the Kingdom”, will be given free with new subscriptions. Whoever wants to do so may have a part in this grand service. Write the Watchtower Society for information or inquire of the nearest group of Jehovah’s witnesses.
MORE AND MORE ARE GOING!
As time passes more and more of Jehovah’s witnesses are planning to travel from the United States and Canada to 1955 assemblies in London, Paris, Rome, Nuremberg, Stockholm and The Hague, in addition to attending North American assemblies in Chicago, Vancouver, Los Angeles, Dallas and New York. Why should thousands of people travel to Europe to attend assemblies that will have the same basic program as the American meetings? Not just to sight-see, but basically for the strengthening of the Christian organization. They want to become acquainted with their Christian brothers in other lands, to be encouraged by their assemblies and to encourage them by attending these assemblies. Are you going? Will you receive this encouragement? Are your plans and arrangements made? Or are you just beginning to think about it? An ever-growing multitude is finding that it is possible for them to attend. Will you be among this happy group? Diligent effort may be required, but the reward is great! Your congregation servant will help you with your arrangements.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
March 6: Jehovah Leads His People. Page 80.
March 13: “A Right Kind of Minister.” Page 86.

