The Unchristian Caste System
TO MANY persons the term “caste” at once calls to mind the land of India, where the caste system has been a curse for for so many centuries. However, this subject of caste is not merely of theoretical or academic interest to those residing outside India. On the contrary, when considered in all its ramifications, it will prove to be most pertinent to all who would be guided by God’s Word, the Bible.
The English word “caste” comes from the Portuguese word casta, meaning “race,” and, by implication, unmixed or pure race. According to Webster’s Dictionary it is “a more or less separate order or class of persons in society who chiefly hold intercourse among themselves, the separation being based on such things as difference of wealth, hereditary rank or privileges, profession, occupation, etc.” It really is a false principle of social divisions into selfishly exclusive groups of persons (cliques), according to supposed social rank of persons having the same status or possessing common characteristics. Manifestations of the caste system would therefore include racial discrimination, the clergy-laity distinction, any clannishness because of “blood,” wealth, learning, etc., as well as any favoritism shown because of having in common an admiration for certain human leaders, or sectarianism, or because of belonging to certain age groups.
The caste system appears to have had its origin at the time the ruling and priestly classes were organized at Babel following the Deluge, when dynasties were developed as a subversion of the patriarchal family divisions authorized by Jehovah God and also illustrated in the family of Noah and the descendants of Jacob. In India the caste system goes back to more than a thousand years before Christ, instituted, it appears, by the light-skinned Aryan invaders to keep themselves as a superior class. This is borne out by the Indian word for “caste,” varna, which means “color.”
The caste system is unjust, incompatible with Christ’s rule to ‘do to others as we want them to do to us.’ It is a failure to “love your neighbor as yourself.” It deprives persons of their dues in fields political, economic, religious and social. Additionally, it shackles its victims with an inferiority complex.—Matt. 7:12; Mark 12:31, NW.
The caste system works harm not only to those it oppresses but also to those advantaged by it, for it exalts them; it breeds pride and prejudice, and “pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall.” Since God is said to dwell with the lowly and contrite ones, he must be far removed from the haughty and proud, for such are prone to say, “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?”—Prov. 16:18, AS; John 1:46, NW; Isa. 57:15.
NO CASTE SYSTEM AMONG ISRAELITES
God’s Word allows for no caste distinctions because of race, nationality or color, for, as the apostle Paul told the Athenians on Mars Hill, all can trace their origin to the one father, Adam. God “made out of one man every nation of men, to dwell upon the entire surface of the earth.” And as Elihu pointed out to Job, God “shows no partiality to princes, nor regards the rich more than the poor, for they are all the work of his hands.”—Acts 17:26, NW; Job 34:19, RS.
Instead of any caste distinction it is righteousness that counts with Jehovah, a point Peter so well made at the time the holy spirit was bestowed upon Cornelius: “God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” And such was true not only after the appointed “seventy weeks” of special favor to the Israelites came to an end but also long before then. In fact, twice the entire nation of Israel came near to being destroyed by Jehovah because of their rebellious course, first because of their idolatry in making the golden calf while Moses was in the mount, and second, because of their rebellion at hearing the unfavorable report of ten of the spies.—Acts 10:34, 35, NW.
Yes, time and again the natural descendants of Abraham were allowed to go into captivity and suffer death by pestilence, etc., because of their unfaithfulness. On the other hand, Gentiles who exercised faith were blessed by Jehovah. For a few examples, note the mixed multitude that followed the Israelites out of Egypt, Rahab, the Gibeonites, Ruth, the widow of Zarephath, the leper Naaman. Because Jesus called some of these unflattering facts to the attention of the Jews in his day they endeavored to kill him.—Luke 4:25-30.
While the Israelites were shown special favors, such was not because of their being a superior caste but because of the faith of their forefathers, because of Jehovah’s love for them, and for the sake of his name. They were commanded to treat the non-Israelites in their midst justly and lovingly: “The temporary resident who resides for a while with you should become to you like a native of yours, and you must love him as yourself.” “There should prove to be one law and one judicial decision for you and for the temporary resident who is residing for a while with you.”—Lev. 19:34; Num. 15:16, NW.
The fact that the Israelites were not permitted to intermarry with the pagans round about them was not because of caste but to keep Jehovah’s worship pure, for which reason also they were commissioned to act as executioners of the grossly immoral pagan worshipers of Canaan. Nor did they have any caste system based on tribal distinctions. While Judah was the royal tribe and Levi the priestly one, Jehovah repeatedly chose his judges and prophets from other tribes. Intermarriage was permitted so long as it did not cause confusion as regards tribal boundaries.
NO CASTE SYSTEM AMONG CHRISTIANS
Neither is there any Scriptural basis for a caste system among Christians. Christ’s words allow for no clergy caste among them: “Do not you be called ‘Rabbi’, for one is your teacher, whereas all you are brothers. Moreover, do not call anyone your father on earth, for One is your Father, the heavenly One. Neither be called ‘leaders’, for your Leader is one, the Christ. But the greatest among you must be your minister.”—Matt. 23:8-11, NW.
Nor do the Scriptures allow for any sectarian cliques in the Christian congregation because of personal preference for certain human “shepherds.” Speaking out against such divisive creature worship, Paul wrote: “Now I exhort you, brothers, . . . that you should all speak in agreement, and that there should not be divisions among you, but that you may be fitly united in the same mind and in the same line of thought. What I mean is this, that each one of you says: ‘I belong to Paul,’ ‘But I belong to Apollos,’ ‘But I to Cephas,’ ‘But I to Christ.’ Does the Christ exist divided? Paul was not impaled for you, was he? Or were you baptized in the name of Paul?”—1 Cor. 1:10, 12-15, NW.
Nor is there to be any favoritism or clannishness because of nationality, social standing, heredity or sex. That is why Paul, in his letters to Timothy and Titus, condemned concern over genealogies and why he wrote to the Galatians that in the Christian congregation “there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor freeman, there is neither male nor female; for you are all one in union with Christ Jesus.”—Gal. 3:28, NW.
Lest any think themselves better because of material wealth and so develop a caste whose company they would favor, the apostle Paul counseled: “Give orders to those who are rich in the present system of things not to be arrogant, and to rest their hope, not on uncertain riches, but on God.” (1 Tim. 6:17, NW) The disciple James, Jesus’ half-brother, severely criticized those in his day who showed favoritism to the rich, as if they were a special caste, saying: “My brothers, you are not holding the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, our glory, with acts of favoritism, are you? For, if a man with gold rings on his fingers and in splendid clothing enters into your assembly, but a poor man in filthy clothing also enters, yet you look with favor upon the one wearing the splendid clothing and say: ‘You take this seat here in an honorable place,’ and you say to the poor one: ‘You keep standing,’ or ‘Take that seat there beside my footstool,’ you have class distinctions among yourselves and you have become judges rendering corrupt decisions, is that not so? If, now, you practice carrying out the kingly law according to the Scriptures, ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself,’ you are doing quite well. But if you continue showing favoritism, you are working a sin, for you are reproved by the law as transgressors.”—Jas. 2:1-4, 8, 9, NW.
THE PRACTICAL APPLICATION
While all these points seem so logical and self-evident when we reason on them in the light of the Scriptures, putting them into practice is not so simple, because of the inherited selfish bent of our minds. We must therefore be alert and put forth special efforts if we would be free from all traces of caste, such as practicing favoritism or clannishness because of certain common characteristics. We should “lean over backwards,” as it were, to avoid any suspicion of caste. If we seem to be in a favored position because of the color of our skin, or because of education, Christian maturity, youth, position of responsibility in the Christian congregation, we should make it a point to associate with those less favored in any of these respects, for the sake of building up Christian unity; doing so, not condescendingly, but as equals, appreciating that Jehovah can use them to impart a blessing to us even as he can use us to impart a blessing to them.
On the other hand, we must not, because of being less favored in certain respects, belittle ourselves and acquire an inferiority complex, imagining that more favored brothers do not want to associate with us. Remember, no one who is faithfully carrying out the righteous requirements of Jehovah need ever feel inferior or out of place in the midst of God’s people. Nor should we “play up” to those more advantaged in any respect because of the favors they may be able to bestow, either of a material or of a spiritual nature.
And while not practicing caste distinctions ourselves we must not think it our duty to change the world in this respect. We can no more do that than we can convert the world to Christianity. Some have criticized the apostle Paul for not condemning slavery in his day but counseling slaves to be obedient and content with their lot, but such overlook that it is not the commission of Christians to reform this old world. At best we can only set an example. What Paul had to offer to the slaves in his day was of far greater value than the political and economic freedom agitated by social reformers. He brought them the truth of God’s Word and kingdom, which made them free from bondage to Satan, to Satan’s system of things, to sin, to false religion and to death, giving them the hope of everlasting life; even as Jesus told his followers: “If you remain in my word, you are really my disciples, and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”—John 8:31, 32, NW.
The same is true today. It is not for Christians to strive to put an end to the injustices of the caste system or to chafe at certain conditions among God’s people that are due to the laws of Caesar and over which Christians have no control. All eat of the same spiritual food, have the same privileges of service and the same hope; and these are the things that matter.
So, briefly reviewing, we have seen that there is no Scriptural basis for any caste system, for any favoritism, class distinctions, sectarianism, cliques or special groups existing among Christians. If we love Jehovah with all our heart, mind, soul and strength and our neighbor as ourselves, we shall exalt neither ourselves nor others. And by living according to the Christian principle of love not only shall we bring happiness to our brothers as well as ourselves but we shall also be giving a witness to those on the outside, even as Jesus stated: “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”—John 13:35, NW.

