R522 : page 1 

VOL. V. PITTSBURGH, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1883. NO. 2. 



page 1 

ZIONS 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRISTS PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected 
from other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :- -Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. 
You may send paper money to the amount of two 
dollars, by mail, at our risk. Larger amounts may 
be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or Registered 
Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign 
subscribers will be 65 cents a year. Please 



send us no foreign money or postage stamps, as we 
can make no use of them. Remittances may be 
made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lords 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. 
Freely we have received and freely we would give 
the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, 
buy and eat-yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." And you that have it— 
"Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "- 
ISAIAH 55 :1,2\ 



page 1 

SEND the names of any to whom you 
think sample copies of the TOWER 
would be a blessing; or we will send 
you samples for your neighbors-Free. 



POST OFFICE CHANGES. 

The post office authorities now refuse 
all papers not properly addressed. 
This will account for some not getting 
their paper lately. When the name of 
your village or town is different from 
the name of the post office be sure to 
send the latter. 

The safest way to send money is by 
"POSTAL MONEY ORDER." The rates 
have recently been reduced. 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 



We again have a full supply of this 
very valuable work. For the benefit of 
new readers we would state that it is a 
Greek Testament having under each 
Greek word the corresponding English 
word, and is thus the most literal translation 
of the New Testament. Besides 
this, it has in another column alongside 
a very clear and emphatic translation, 
showing the emphasis of the Greek 
which is generally lost to the English 
reader. 

As we have said before, we repeat 
now, we know of no more valuable help 
than this in the study of the Scriptures. 
If we could not get another, we would 
not take ten dollars for the copy we use. 

The regular price for the work in 
cloth is four dollars-which, everything 
considered is not too high; but by 
special arrangements we have been enabled 
to offer it at $1.50 per copy to 
our subscribers. 



R522 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

We see darkness lifting in certain 
directions and with certain classes. 
The dawning light of truth which soon 
shall flood the world and permeate the 
present recesses of error and sin, is even 
now growing a little more grey as the 
darker shadows flee. 

The interest in truth in general, upon 
all subjects, is spreading daily, and upon 
the most weighty and important subject 
of religion it is making rapid strides. 
Of course this does not apply so fully to 
the more advanced religious truths. But 
even of these advanced truths we may 
say, that they are making rapid strides 



among the truly consecrated, i.e., 
among those consecrated to God only, 
and not to a sect. 

The TOWER goes into over 10,000 families 
monthly, and though some in those 
families bitterly oppose it, it is steadily 
commending the truth to the consecrated, 
and hundreds of hearts and 
hands are daily contriving ways for 
spreading its message of the justice, 
wisdom, power, and love, of our God. 

The TOWER goes monthly to about 
800 ministers of various denominations, 
and though some take it in secret and 
send us the names of fellow ministers to 
whom to send sample copies, who would 
not be known as the sender; and some 
preach long and loud against the "glad 
tidings," yet the truth is spreading and 
is affecting, directly and indirectly to 
some extent, the utterances of probably 
one-third the pulpits of this land and 
many in England. There is no resisting 
it; for it is of God. The King is 
present and is leading his truth, long 
trampled in the dust, to certain victory. 

We mentioned in a recent issue that 
there are nearly two millions of Swedes 
in this country, among whom are many 
earnest Christians some of whom are 
becoming interested in "this way." We 
mentioned also the desire to furnish 
such, a tract similar in substance to our 
issue, No. 4, Vol. 4, of TOWER, and the 
establishment of a FUND for this special 
purpose. Some are now inquiring 
about it, and though we have to report 
but a small sum, yet it was mostly subscribed 
during August; and a few more 
months similar would enable us to 
publish at once. The fund now contains 
$153.08. We lay before you as 
usual extracts from a few 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Marion, Iowa. 

DEAR EDITOR:-- A gentleman called 
at my study a few days ago, and I received 
of him a little pamphlet entitled, 
"Food for Thinking Christians." I did 
not think the pamphlet of much importance 
at the time, but from curiosity more 
than anything else, I began to read it, 
and I soon found that the title was not 
a misnomer, but that it was indeed food 
for thinking Christians. I have not 
finished reading it yet. Some facts, I 
think, will bear re-reading. I find in it 
many new and valuable ideas, and, as I 
am bound by no man-made creed, I am 
at perfect liberty to receive them. 

Many of the positions are new to me, 
and as beautiful as they are new. Part 
VIII., on "The Narrow Way to Life," 
advances some new thoughts in regard 
to Christ that thoroughly revolutionize 
my former notions. 

Well, I simply thought I would drop 
you a line to say I am being greatly 
profited by this little pamphlet, and I 
wish you God- speed in the good work 
of teaching the living oracles. 

In the one Hope, , M.D. 

Pineville, Mo. 
MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-By a 

fortuitous circumstance, which, however, 
I regard as providential, ZIONS 
WATCH TOWER was brought to my attention, 
and I was much astonished to 
think I had lived so long on the outskirts 
of civilization without knowing 
what was going on. I have been waiting 
and trusting, a little like the old 
prophet Elijah, almost thinking I was 
left alone, when to my astonishment I 
learn from the TOWER that a work is 
going on, and thousands are yet in existence 
who do not bow the knee to the 
image of Baal or Babylon. 
I have passed my three-score years 



and ten, and three over. I was indoctrinated 

into the faith of Christ and consecrated 

to the service of God in my 

twenty-third year. Having drank deeply 

at an early period of the sentiments 

that seem to pervade the TOWER, I 

turned away from the doctrines of men, 

and regarded myself measurably as 

standing alone. I have written much 

upon the heavenly theme, as well as 

spoken much, but, to all appearances, to 

no avail. I appeared to address an unappreciative 

people. But now, as two 

drops of water, if placed in close proximity, 

will flow together by the law of 

affinity, so is my joy enlarged, and my 

heart goes out to you, my brother. 

Having waded through many vicissitudes 
through a long life, and now 
standing on the verge of the grave, as 
it were, I cannot expect to reach the 
period which will usher in the reign of 
the Christ of God. But, be this as it 
may, I have a well-grounded hope that, 
whether living or dead, I shall stand in 
my lot at the end of the days; when all 
tears shall be wiped away, and when his 
suffering and waiting saints-the body, 
the bride of Christ- shall be received 
and installed into the everlasting kingdom 
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 

Will you please send me the TOWER? 
Being decrepit with age, I am unable to 
work much, and can scarcely meet the 
demands of nature, food and raiment, 
and if you will so regard it, I am one of 
the Lords poor. From what I can 
learn, the circulation of the TOWER is 
great, and what astonishes me is to 
think that a work of such magnitude 
and of such a character has grown up 
without my knowledge. I wish to learn 
more of it, and would be exceeding 
glad if you could spare the time from 
your pressing duties to correspond with 
me, giving a full detail of matters. You 



speak of the flock as being small; this, 
however, is not strange to me, but how 
small or how large are matters of my 
present solicitude.... 
Your brother in Christ, . 

page 1 

Nottingham, England. 

MY DEAR SIR:-I am glad to say 
the work here is progressing amongst 
my own congregation, and also amongst 
outsiders. "The kingdom of God 
cometh not with observation," and so 
the work makes no great show at present, 
but it is advancing in many minds. 
I have little trouble with those people 
who have been accustomed to go straight 
to Gods Book and abide by that, and 
who are truly walking with God. To 
let go old prejudice is comparatively 
easy to a mind made receptive by the 
Spirit of God. I have endeavored to 
act wisely, and not to ride roughshod 
over old views, as that might have 
aroused opposition and have defeated 
my object, which is to "lead into the 
light." Acting upon this method, I 
think I am finding my reward in a more 
ready reception of the truth than one 
might have expected. 

Yours ever truly in our Lord Jesus, 



R522 : page 1 

Moes River. 

BRO. RUSSELL-Dear Sir: While 
visiting friends, not long since, I saw 
the WATCH TOWER for the first time. 
My friend gave me some numbers of the 
TOWER, also "Food for Thinking Christians." 
I am highly delighted with them. 

I am, and have been for twenty-five 
years, a minister of the Gospel, but have 
not dug after truth as much as I might. 



I want to know more of these things. 
O, what good, blessed gospel truths I 
find in "Food for Thinking Christians." 
Will you be so kind as to write me as 
soon as possible, and send me as many 
papers as you can, not only for myself, 
but for others, who are just now hungering 
and thirsting after righteousness? 
I am yours, &c., . 

page 1 

Brayfield, 111. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have been 
reading your publications about twelve 
months; have compared with Scripture 
and find nothing to conflict. I have 
been a Baptist for several years, and 
have been reading and searching for 
truth; and I confess that I have received 
much light, and been led through many 
dark places, through the WATCH TOWER. 
I can read and understand the 
Scriptures better than ever before. I 
endorse the teachings of the TOWER. 
God has laid wide the gap through your 
publications, and seeing it, I have walked 
out of sectarian bondage, believing it 
better to obey God than man. I am 
not preaching in a public way, but am 
doing all I can in other ways to get men 
to see and understand the truth, though 
I meet with some opposition. 

Yours truly, . 

Topeka, Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER:-I feel as though 
I stood alone here in Topeka in regard 
to these teachings; but it has inspired 
in me a better hope and a more abiding 
peace and love for God and man and 
the holy Scriptures than I ever had 
before, and I would rather stand alone 
throughout this harvest time, than to 
stand with and be of those whose faith 
is in the teaching of the nominal church. 



I feel that it is a sore trial to be so 
bitterly opposed by those, even of my 
own household, and to be misjudged by 
them. 

I do rejoice in a bright hope that 
ere long, I may be gathered with all 
those that are entirely Christs, and be 
ever with him; and I do pray that the 
WATCH TOWER may be blessed to all 
those that are hungering and thirsting 
after righteousness. 

Yours truly, . 



R523 : page 1 
SHACKLES BREAKING. 

The following is the brief report of a 
sermon of a Presbyterian minister of this 
city, delivered to his congregation not 
long since and clipped by us from a 
Pittsburgh daily paper. It serves to 
show the drift of intelligent thought on 
certain subjects. Though this Brother 
shows in this sermon no evidence that 
he understands Gods plan or has any 
special insight to the teachings of Scripture 
on the subjects, yet it does show 
that he has a reasonable mind and is 
honest enough to express his convictions 
in a manner which, to say the least, 
must endanger his title, honors and 
salary in Babylon. 

We pray that the Lord may guide 
him into the truth more and more. As 
he gives evidence of some reason and 
candor, two indispensable qualities for 
growth in grace and knowledge, if he 
also be wholly consecrated to the Lord 
and not to a sect, or creed, so that he 
shall rejoice to sacrifice all for the truth, 
counting not his life dear unto him, 



R523 : page 2 



then doubtless he will be owned and 
esteemed of God proportionately as he 
becomes disowned and dishonored by a 
worldly system, called the Church, but 
which is now given up and "spued 
out." The extract is as follows: 

"Yesterday morning the Rev. E. R. 
Donehoo delivered a sermon which is 
at variance with the old and accepted 
idea of the future life. The following 
extracts give an idea of the Reverend 
gentlemans views: 

"For the work of a man shall he render 
unto him and cause every man to 
find according to his ways. Yea, surely 
God will not do wickedly, neither will 
the Almighty pervert judgment. "-- 
\Tob34:ll-12\ 

The old doctrine of the literal hell of 
fire and brimstone is not very strenuously 
urged even by the most rigidly orthodox 
in these days. Nor has the surrender 
of this idea been followed by a 
declining confidence in the authority of 
Scripture. It cannot be denied that in 
proportion as the harsh and cruel dogmas 
of Christian doctrine, which once 
were the constitutional elements of every 
pulpit discourse, are abandoned, the 
beauty and harmony of Divine truth 
begins to appear. There was a time 
not very far distant when the chief 
argument employed in persuading men 
to give up sin, was in so picturing the 
condition of the lost in hell as to inspire 
the impenitent with terror and 
thus drive them through sheer fright 
into the fold of believers. The idea of 
present reward, from the pursuit of that 
which is in itself good and true and 
virtuous was scarcely ever brought into 
view. Through the influence of such 
instruction, it became the settled conviction 
amongst a large class that one 
or the other fate awaits every one immediately 



at death: Hell with its unmitigated 
miseries or Heaven with its 
unmingled joys. To have failed of the 
heavenly standard, even in the slightest 
degree, is to plunge into the deepest and 
most hopeless abyss of hell eternally. 
To have spent a lifetime in open and 
defiant rebellion against God, and yet in 
the final hour to have repented and 
sued for mercy is to escape every torment 
of the damned and to attain to all 
the bliss in store for the righteous. 

Such are the teachings with which 
sinners have too often been terrorized 
and saints regaled. All this may be 
good theology, which I doubt, but of 
this I feel perfectly assured that it is out 
of all proportion to the ordinary views 
of justice and equity, and utterly out of 
accord with the dictates of enlightened 
reason. If human courts should undertake 
to administer the law on any such 
principle, the judges would be held up 
to public scorn and society would rise 
up with the one common impulse to 
protest against such a partial, unjust 
and inhuman method of procedure. 
The punishment must have some relation 
to the enormity of the offense before 
the community will quietly acquiesce 
in its infliction. 

The great error with too many religious 
teachers has been that they have 
constructed their theology, so far at 
least as heaven and hell are concerned, 
not from the word of God, the only reliable 
authority at hand, but from the 
distorted and ghastly visions of Dante, 
or the equally grotesque and wholly unreliable 
imaginings of Milton, or the 
monstrous conceits so characteristic of 
the revivalists of the last century. 

The rule laid down by Christ is the 
safe one and in harmony with every 
portion of revealed truth: "Unto whomsoever 
much is given, of him shall much 



be required." The application of this 

rale should set at rest forever the delusion 

so often entertained that God will 

dispense indiscriminate rewards to His 

friends and indiscriminate punishments 

to all who have broken his law. The 

doctrine taught by Christ is that the 

more light the greater will be the punishableness 

of sin. To the Pharisee of 

his time he said: "If ye were blind ye 

should have no sin, but now ye say we 

see, therefore your sin remaineth." 

And James bears like testimony: "To 

him that knoweth to do good and doeth 

it not, to him it is sin." Knowledge 

carries corresponding responsibility. "If 

I had not come and spoken unto them 

they had not had sin, but now they have 

no cloak for their sin." From this we 

learn that a knowledge of the gospel 

brings with it a responsibility to accept it. 

While increased knowledge brings 
with it increased responsibility it must 
not be therefore inferred that mere 
ignorance will of itself constitute an excuse. 
The ignorance may be self-incurred, 
it may be guilt, neglect of available 
opportunities to inform oneself, in 
which case no mitigation in the punishment 
may be expected. 

What is true of punishment is as true 
of rewards. The reward will be in proportion 
to the service done and work 
rendered and character sustained and 
duty discharged. Each man here and 
now is determining for himself what degree 
of misery or happiness shall be 
meted out to him in the eternal world. 
And however strictly the great Judge 
will punish every transgression, I have 
no fear that Satans dominions will bear 
any proportion to those of an omnipotent 
King. After sin has been thoroughly 
punished and every rebel consigned 
to his doom the redeemed shall be 
made up of all ages and climes, innumerable 



as the sands of the sea shore, 
not one excluded from heavens joys 
in the end, but those who deliberately 
invoked their awful doom." 



R523 : page 2 

FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT. 

"If these things be in you and abound, they 
make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful 
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus 
Christ."- V 2 PET. 1:8\ 

Good works and knowledge are so 
closely related that it is useless to think 
of separating them; they are produced 
by the same Spirit. Believing this, the 
TOWER seeks to present the deep 
things of God not to a worldly class, 
but to the consecrated, in whom the 
fruits of the Spirit are being produced, 
realizing that the natural man 
[the unconsecrated] receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God, for they are 
foolishness unto him, neither can he 
know them, because they are spiritually 
discerned.-ClCor. 2:14\) 

Wherever, therefore, and in proportion 
as we find the fruits of the Spirit, 
we expect to find the Spirit which produced 
those fruits. And all possessing 
this Spirit and using it, will be able not 
only to grow in grace but in knowledge 
also, and shall be neither barren nor unfruitful 
in the KNOWLEDGE of our Lord. 

This statement of the inspired Apostle, 
that a man cannot be fruitful in the 
graces and barren in the knowledge of 
the Lord, may and should astound some 
who boast of their graces and freely admit 
their ignorance of the Lord and his 
plans. 

Many who seem to be religious have 



only a form of godliness, a form of faith, 
a form of patience, a form of charity, a 
form of brotherly kindness. May we 
not, on Peters authority, safely set it 
down that those graces are like clusters 
of grapes tied on to thorn bushes and 
not the real fruit of the vine, if we find 
not with them that essential favor of 
God-a "knowledge of the Lord Jesus 
Christ?" May we not conclude that 
such, if ever purged from sin by faith in 
the sin sacrifice, have been blinded by 
the God of this world, and "cannot see 
afar off'-cannot grasp or appreciate 
the things future in the unfolding of our 
Fathers plan. ("Verse 9" and "Jno. 16:13".) 

The Apostle continues, "verse 10": 
"Wherefore the rather, brethren, give 
diligence to make your calling and 
election sure." As though he said on 
this account you must criticise yourselves 
very closely to see that you are 
developing the real fruits of the Spirit, 
remembering the test I have given you, 
that the real fruits will have among 
them, prominently, an increasing knowledge 
of our Lord-a close, intimate acquaintance 
and communion with him— 
in which he will reveal himself to us by 
showing us "things to come." 

Nor can the knowledge fruit be obtained 
independent of the other fruits- 
[though a parrot-like form of knowledge 
might exist without the others, it 
should be thus recognized as only the 
form] -because these various fruits are 
results of the same spirit or sap. And 
if one of these fruits withers and dies, it 
indicates that the supply of sap is being 
cut off, that the spirit is being lost by 
that branch, and surely indicates that all 
the fruits are withering and dying. Let 
all these fruits be in you and abound; 
quench not the Spirit. "For if you 
do [bear all] these things ye shall never 
fall: for so an entrance shall be ministered 



unto you abundantly into the everlasting 
kingdom of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ." f Verses 10,1 T.) 

R524 : page 2 

But, does some one suggest, that thus 
making knowledge one of the necessary 
fruits of the Spirit would exclude from 
the spiritual class many ministers and 
others? We reply, that while knowledge 
is essential, it does not follow that 
the knowledge must be perfect. It has 
pleased our Father to permit a veil of 
error to be drawn across his plan- 

" Which veils and darkens His designs." 
And only as it becomes due time does 
he remove that veil gradually, finally 
completely finishing "the Mystery of 
God." Hence, knowledge as a fruit of 
the Spirit, could never heretofore reach 
the same size which it now may and 
should attain. God expects the size of 
this fruit to be proportionate with its 
opportunities and possibilities. As an 
illustration- we refer you to the words 
of Albert Barnes, quoted in another column. 
These prove that what he knew 
of Gods character, as revealed through 
nature and in our Lord Jesus, had won 
his heart, so that, in comparison, the 
errors of that man-made theology were 
irreconcilable. As the due time for 
these mists to be cleared away has come, 
we should expect all such to advance in 
the shining path. 



R524 : page 2 
ACCEPTABLE WITH GOD. 



"Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation 
of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O 
Lord, my strength and my Redeemer."- 



V PSA. 19:7-14\ 

In the midst of the trying scenes of 
this day of the Lord how necessary that 
all the little company of consecrated ones 
should continually breathe this prayer. 
Doubtless all feel the almost overwhelming 
force with which the tide of 
innumerable temptations are brought to 
bear against them. To some the 
world presents unusual attractions, to 
some business brings increasing cares, 
to some error presents its most plausible 
and deluding forms, and to others 
weariness in the conflict with temptations 
within and without calls for rest 
and inactivity; and because iniquity 
abounds the love of many waxes cold. 

The inspired Psalmist not only puts 
this prayer in our mouth, but he suggests 
the means by which we may be 
acceptable to God, recommending the 
Word of the Lord as able to bring 
about this desired result, saying: "The 
law (margin-doctrine) of the Lord is 
perfect, converting the soul "-bringing 
us back to a condition of harmony with 
God. Without a close study of the 
teaching of our Fathers Word it is impossible 
to do or think those things that 
are pleasing in his sight. "The testimony 
of the Lord is sure, making wise 
the simple." Those who come to the 
Word of the Lord in simplicity of heart, 
with no other desire than to know his will, 
shall surely obtain the heavenly wisdom. 

"The statutes (precepts-teachings) 
of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart 
-imparting the necessary stimulus to 
enable us to stem the tide of opposition. 
"The commandment of the Lord is pure, 
enlightening the eyes"-giving us the 
right ideas of justice, love, etc. "The 
fear of the Lord is clean, enduring forever." 
Filial fear of the Lord, which 
dreads to do anything to break the existing 



harmony, is a right and proper 
fear, not a slavish fear; and this loving 
fear will endure forever between those 
whose hearts are thus in harmony with 
God. 

"The judgments of the Lord are 
true and righteous altogether." His 
judgments as to right and wrong in any 
matter are always correct. If we cannot 
trust our own warped and erring judgment, 
we may always find a clear and 
unmistakable expression of our Fathers 
unerring judgments in his precious Word. 

"More to be desired are they than 
gold, yea, than much fine gold: sweeter 
also than honey and the honeycomb." 
We should thus appreciate and search 
for our Fathers judgments, our Fathers 
expressions of justice and right and 
truth. "Moreover, by them is thy servant 
warned, and in keeping of them 
there is great reward." We are warned 
against the danger and errors into which 
our own warped and erring judgment 
would lead us; for "Who can understand 
his (own) errors?" Let our prayer 
ever be, "Cleanse thou me from secret 
faults. Keep back thy servant also 
from presumptuous sins." If we presume 
to set up our judgment against the 
Lords judgment in any matter, as expressed 
in his Word, we fall at once into 
the snare of the adversary. 

In view of these things, let us humble 
ourselves under the mighty hand of 
God, meditating much upon the precepts 
and teachings of his Word, that 
through them we may be imbued with 
their spirit. And thus the words of our 
mouth and the meditations of our heart 
shall be acceptable in the sight of the 
Lord, our strength and our Redeemer. 
MRS. C. T. R. 



R524 : page 2 
NOAHS ARK. 

The following item is clipped from 
the Chicago Tribune of August 13th: 

"London, August 9th. A paper at 
Constantinople announces the discovery 
of Noahs ark. It appears that some 
Turkish Commissioners appointed to 
investigate the question of avalanches 
on Mount Ararat suddenly came upon 
a gigantic structure of very dark wood 
protruding from a glacier. They made 
inquiries of the inhabitants. These had 
seen it for six years, but had been 
afraid to approach it because a spirit of 
fierce aspect had been seen looking out 
of the upper window. The Turkish 
Commissioners, however, are bold men, 
not deterred by such trifles, and they 
determined to reach it. Situated as it 
was among the fastnesses of one of the 
glens of Mount Ararat, it was a work 
of enormous difficulty, and it was only 
after incredible hardships that they succeeded. 
The ark was in a good state 
of preservation, although the angles- 
observe, not the bow or stern-had 
been a good deal broken in its descent. 
They recognized it at once. There was 
an Englishman among them who had 
presumably read his Bible, and he saw 
it was made of the ancient gopher wood 
of Scripture, which, as every one 
knows, grows only on the plains of the 
Euphrates. Effecting an entrance into 
the structure, which was painted brown, 
they found that the admiralty requirements 
for the conveyance of horses had 
been carried out, and the interior was 
divided into partitions fifteen feet high. 
Into three of these only could they get, 
the others being full of ice, and how far 
the ark extended into the glacier they 
could not tell. If, however, on being 



uncovered it turns out to be 300 cubits 

R525 : page 2 

long it will go hard with disbelievers in 
the book of Genesis." 



The gopher wood of which the Ark 
was built, is generally supposed to be 
the cypress, famous among the ancients, 
and frequently mentioned in Scripture. 
It is remarkable for durability. Instances 
are related of doors and posts made of 
this wood which had lasted 1,100 years. 

Remembering, also, that Mt. Ararat 
is covered with perpetual snow and ice 
for more than 3,000 feet below its summit, 
and that an earthquake which shook 
it in the beginning of the present year 
(1883) broke loose tremendous quantities 
of this ice, burying under the avalanches 
whole villages, we cannot but 
think that the foregoing article is not 
so unreasonable as might at first appear. 
The same wise God who placed the 
Great Pyramid "in the midst and in 
the border of Egypt," for a sign, 
now but commencing to speak to men 
of science, may have hidden away 
Noahs Ark, burying and preserving 
it in ice, ready to be another witness to 
the most illiterate. We can only say, it 
would be "just like God," and in perfect 
harmony with our teachings, that 
the outward evidences of the truth of 
the Bible, for the instruction of the 
natural man, should begin to increase; 
and we expect that these will multiply 
during the coming thirty years. 



R524 : page 3 



PRAISE OUR GOD. 

"All nations whom thou hast made shall come 
and worship before thee, O Jehovah, and shall 
glorify thy name."- v Ps. 86:9 V ; v Rev. 15:4\ 

Arise all down-cast souls, arise, 
No longer sit in mournful gloom; 
Go forth to meet your risen King, 
Who comes victorious to the throne. 

Rejoice, rejoice, glad songs of praise 

To Gods eternal glory raise. 

Lo! Satan vanquished from Him flies, 
The "powers of darkness" dread the light; 
The grave is opened by His power, 
The bruised Serpent yields the fight. 

Rejoice, rejoice, glad songs of praise 

To Gods eternal glory raise. 

Alone he fought the glorious fight, 
Alone he conquers every foe; 
Then unto him let anthems rise, 
And songs of love forever flow. 

Rejoice, rejoice, glad songs of praise 

To Christs eternal glory raise. 

Earth then as Eden-man restored- 
All bright and happy here below; 
Saints glorified and with their Lord, 
Who shall not praise thee then, O God! 

Rejoice, rejoice, glad songs of praise 

To Gods eternal glory raise. 

From "Zions Watch Tower" now we see 

So near, that grand and glorious day; 

The thousand years of jubilee, 

When love once more mankind shall sway. 
Rejoice, rejoice, glad songs of praise 
To Gods eternal glory raise. R. C. 



R525 : page 3 

OUR GOSPEL HID TO SOME. 



"Therefore having this ministry, even 
as we received mercy we faint not; but 
have repudiated the secret things of 
shame; not walking in craftiness, nor 
falsifying the Word of God; but by the 
exhibition of THE TRUTH approving 
ourselves to every mans conscience in 
the sight of God. 

But if, indeed, our Glad Tidings be 
veiled, they have been veiled to those 
who are perishing [lost], to those unbelievers 
whose minds the God of this 
age blinded, in order that they might 
not [or, so that they cannot] see clearly 
the effulgence of the Glad Tidings of 
the Glory of the Anointed One who is 
the likeness of God." f2 Cor. 4:1-4 V ). 

The above rendering in the Diaglott 
brings to the surface of this passage a 
beauty and meaning, more difficult to 
grasp from the common translation. 
How true and forcible this expression, 
and how applicable to the Glad Tidings 
as now seen shining out in fullness and 
beauty, declaring our Father perfect, not 
only in Wisdom and Power, but also in 
Justice and Love. 

Very much of what is preached today 
as Gospel, is far from being glad 
tidings. Instead of revealing the glory 
of Gods character, a vast amount of 
what is taught, like rubbish, almost 
conceals the truth held, and dims and 
tarnishes Gods justice and his love by 
misrepresentation; and though instilled 
into men from childhood, it does not 
commend itself to the conscience of even 
its advocates. In proof of this, we 
quote the following from the pen of that 
good man, Albert Barnes, who, alas, was 
much blinded by the deceptions which 
the Prince of this Age had engrafted on 
theology before his day. Were he living 
now and brought in contact with 
the glad tidings now shining, probably 



he would rejoice in the light from the 
Word of God." 

Mr. Barnes says: 

"I see not one ray to disclose to me 
the reason why sin came into the world, 
why the earth is strewn with the dying 
and dead, and why man must suffer to 
all eternity. I have never seen a particle 
of light thrown upon these subjects 
that has given a moments ease to my 
tortured mind, nor have I an explanation 
to offer or a thought to suggest 
that would be a relief to you. 

"I trust other men, as they profess to 
do, understand this better than I do, 
and that they have not the anguish of 
spirit that I have; but I confess, when 
I look on a world of sinners and sufferers, 
upon death-beds and grave-yards, upon 
the world of woe, filled with hearts to 
suffer forever; when I see my friends, 
my parents, my family, my people, my 
fellow citizens;- when I look upon a 
whole race, all involved in this sin and 
danger; when I see the great mass 
of them wholly unconcerned; and when 
I feel that God only can save them, and 
yet he does not do it, I am struck 
dumb. It is all dark, dark to my 
soul, and I cannot disguise it. "-Albert 
Barnes Practical Sermons, p. 124. 

Of the Glad Tidings which we proclaim 
-some publicly, some privately-it 
is true that we repudiate the darkness 
and traditions of men brought from the 
"dark ages"-"not walking in craftiness 
[substituting traditions for Gods Word], 
nor falsifying the Word of God- [wresting, 
twisting and ignoring Scripture] 
but by the EXHIBITION of the TRUTH 
approving ourselves to every mans 
conscience. Not that all will acknowledge 
the force, grandeur and harmony 
of our teachings, but we may be sure 
that "in the sight of God" all who hear 
and carefully weigh these Glad Tidings 



will in their hearts approve it as reasonable 
and beautiful; unless, as the Apostle 
here remarks, the God of this age [Satan 
-" John 14:30"] has blinded their 
eyes. If our glad tidings be hid- 
veiled, obscured-it is not the fault of 
the glad tidings, for to all who can see, 
it is glorious, harmonious and bright. 
Where it comes and cannot be seen, 
the fault is not in the light but in the eye. 

As originally created, man was in his 
Creators mental likeness: Justice, Mercy, 
Love, etc., in man were the same in 
kind as in God: so much so that they 
could and did, even since the fall, reason 
together on these subjects ("Isa. 1:18"). 
But from the very outstart Satans 
policy seems to have been to blind men. 
He blinds and obscures and obliterates, 
as far as possible, these God-like qualities 
in them; and in addition seeks to 
misrepresent Gods character, and thus 
hinder their recognition of these qualities 
in Jehovah. 

Looking about us to-day we see people 
thus blinded everywhere, and from 
various causes. Some worship the work 
of their hands. In them the moral 
qualities-justice, love, etc., are almost 
extinguished. These retain scarcely 
any of the image of God, in which man 
was created. They are almost totally 
blind: yet in their blindness they are 
"feeling after God, if happily they 
might find him," as Paul expresses it 
("Acts 17:27"). Another class he blinds 
in an opposite way- with pride and 
liberty of earthly wisdom, science falsely 
so called. Vainly puffed up by their 
own wisdom, this class often become 
fools, who say in their hearts "There is 
noGod"("Psa. 14:1"). 

Another class who escaped his arts 
as applied to the two classes just mentioned, 
Satan seeks to blind in yet another 
way: this class has caught some 



glimpses of Gods character; they see 

a little of his power, but to his justice, 

wisdom and love, they are blinded by 

Satan who, by mixture of dishonoring 

falsehoods with their little truth, conceals 

the grandest elements of the divine 

nature. Those thus blinded cannot appreciate 

the glad tidings. This is no 

less true of many called Christians today, 

than of religionists in past 

centuries. 

When Jesus wanted to point out the 
blind in his day he did not mention the 
heathen, but the favored people of 
Israel, and especially the Pharisaic Doctors 
of the Law. It was to these he 
said that they were "blind leaders of the 
blind" CMatt. 15:14"). Satans method 
by which he blinded the Pharisees, was 
the same which he now uses with such 
effect on a similar class. Jesus mentions 
their cause of blindness-"Ye have 
made the commandment of God of none 
effect through your traditions" ("Matt. 15:6"). 
Satan could not get Israel to 
forsake the law and become idolaters, 
therefore he took the opposite course, 
and by multiplying the forms and ceremonies 
of religion, he satisfied their consciences, 
while he blinded them to the 
spirit, or true meaning of the Law. 
So now, with the spread of general intelligence, 
Satan keeps changing his 
tactics to hinder the light of the glad 
tidings from being appreciated. 

For a time, through Papacy in the 
dark ages, Satan had succeeded not 
only in blinding men by religious forms, 
but in almost extinguishing the glorious 
light; for he had almost destroyed the 
Lamp itself--"Thy Word is a lamp." 
Bibles were destroyed until it was supposed 
that none remained. But God, 
though permitting the prince of this 
world to reign, did not leave men in 
total darkness, and soon the fires of the 



reformation began to light up the world 
and scattered much of the darkness. 

But our wily foe, unable to restrain 
the light (the truth) transformed himself 
into a seeming angel of light (messenger 
of truth). He led the reformation 
into success, pride, and worldly 
honor, and introduced a worldly spirit 
so as to blind them in an opposite direction. 
As Israel had the Law, these 
have the Bible; but they glory more in 
printing Bibles, owning Bibles, and 
reading Bibles, than in studying and 
understanding them. Bibles are bought 
and worshiped and occasionally read; 
but the creeds of past ages and traditions 
of the Fathers are studied and practiced. 
Satan now, unable to hinder the publishing 
of Bibles, endeavors to have them 
read through creed-tinted spectacles. 
These will blind them so that the light of 
the glorious glad tidings can scarcely be 
discerned. 

Many who have been led to see some 
light, are blinded by fear; they fear to 
let their light shine; they fear to let 
any one know that though once blind, 
now they begin to see. These wear 
their goggles when others are in sight, 
and take them off a few moments when 
alone. They have the spirit of bondage 
and fear which bringeth a snare and 
blindness upon them again. Such are 
not worthy to be of the Bride, the Lambs 

R526 : page 3 

wife, as Jesus said: "Whosoever is 
ashamed of me and of my words... 
of him also shall the Son of Man be 
ashamed when he cometh in the glory 
of his Father with the holy angels" 
OMark 8:38 v ). 

Let the dear saints who by the truth 
have been translated out of darkness 
into this glorious light wherein we 



stand and rejoice, give special heed to 
another blinding influence. We have 
known some who had clean escaped 
from all those snares and blindings, and 
who had seen much of the glory of the 
glad tidings, who were still pursued by 
the adversary, and again brought into 
bondage and darkness, being led into 
spiritual pride and ambition; and such 
the adversary harnesses into the service 
and blinds to the truth, by engaging 
them in manufacturing and spreading 
fancied new light which has foundation 
and support neither in hoary tradition 
nor in Scripture, and whose only passport 
is that it is new. 

Of such are some of the modern 
theorizing s on the Atonement, which 
strike at the very foundation of the 
Christians hope, and are blinding and 
overturning the faith of some. 

Some others are blinded by prosperity: 
Satan throws them handfulls of 
gold, and their eyes become so fastened 
on it, that soon the glories of the glad 
tidings begin to fade from view, and 
they, too, are in outer darkness. Others 
are blinded by the cares of this life. 
They are made to appear necessities, so 
that all the energies of life may be absorbed 
in the things which perish; and 
that the heavenly things, being neglected, 
may fade from view. Let us beware of 
every blinding influence and keep the one 
thing constantly before us, saying as 
did Paul: "This one thing I do, forgetting 
the things which are behind and 
reaching forth unto those things which 
are before, I press toward the mark for 
the prize of the high calling of God in 
Christ Jesus" fPhil. 3:13- 14 v ). 

THE PERISHING BLINDED ONES. 

Thus seen, the blinded ones, not only 
embraced nearly all of Jesus day, but 



nearly all of every age since; and the 
Apostle says they are the perishing 
--the lost. What does he mean? Some 
tell us he means that all these billions 
of blinded ones are going to a place 
and condition of eternal torture because 
blinded by Satan. We answer, no; they 
and we were ALL lost-perishing in death 
because of Adams sin-and the difference 
between those who SEE by faith 
the glorious promises of God, as though 
already fulfilled, and those who are 
blinded by Satan so that they cannot 
see, is, that those not blinded have joy 
and peace through believing, and are 
reckoned SAVED both by God and 
themselves, while the blind are still in 
the lost condition- still under condemnation, 
even though Christ died for them. 
The benefit of Christs death becomes 
applicable to each, as he by faith grasps 
Christs sacrifice as the "propitiation for 
our sins." The blinded ones are unable 
to realize the ransom, hence are still 
among the lost or condemned. 

But we inquire, Shall it be thus forever? 
Will Jehovah forever permit the 
god of this world to blind men, so that, 
though the sacrifice for sin has been 
given, the blinded cannot see and take 
the benefit of it, by accepting their share 
in it? 

Oh, no; there comes an end to 
the reign of "the god of this world." 
He who redeemed men is commissioned 
to "put down all rule and all authority 
and power" other than that of Jehovah 
fl Cor. 15:24,25^). The great clock of 
the Ages has just tolled the close of 
Satans 6,000 years reign: the appointed 
"heir of all things," Christ- Jehovahs 
vice-gerent-is present, and the binding 
of the great blinder-the prince of this 
world, the prince of darkness-is commenced. 
When he is bound and shut 
up for a thousand years that he may 



not deceive and blind the nations during 
the reign of Christ, think you will the 
mass of the world be blinded still? If 
it required his continued arts to prevent 
the true light of the gospel from being 
seen, what will be the result of his 
binding? Surely it will be, sight to the 
blind. 

To this agree the words of the 
prophet: "Strengthen ye the weak 
hands and confirm the feeble knees. 
Say to them that are of a fearful heart 
be strong, fear not: Behold your God 
shall come with vengeance, even God 
with a recompense; he will come and save 
you." "THEN the eyes of the blind shall 
be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall 
be unstopped." 

The RANSOM for sin will then be 
clearly seen, "and the ransomed of the 
Lord (all who will accept of Christ as 
the propitiation or satisfaction for sin), 
shall return (from the lost and perishing 
condition) to Zion (Gods fortress) 
with songs and everlasting joy upon 
their heads; THEY shall obtain joy and 
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall 
flee away." flsa. 35\) 

Does some one inquire why the god 
of this world was so long permitted to 
blind mankind to the glories of Gods 
character and plans? We reply that it 
was not long in Gods estimation. A 
thousand years are to him but as one 
day-as a watch in the night. Then, 
too, he had an object in permitting 
Satans reign. It furnished bitterness 
and distress to men in their experience 
under sin, which prepares them to appreciate 
the true light and reign of 
righteousness when due. And the blinding 
of the many served to develop and 
select the choice first-fruits unto God 
and the Lamb, the "little flock," who are 
to be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their 
Lord, who shall share with Christ the 



glories to follow. They are to share in 
the bruising of Satan fRom. 16:2(T) and 
in blessing and restoring of sight to the 
blind. 

It was referring to this future healing 
of the deaf and opening of blinded eyes 
of the understanding, that Jesus said to 
the disciples: "Greater works than these 
shall ye do." Thus far Jesus disciples 
have never done greater works than his 
for the blind and lame and sick but in 
the dawning Millennial Day, they with 
him shall do the greater works- -they 
shall not only heal the bodies but the 
minds of men. 

In fact Jesus miracles were also 
types of spiritual blessings yet future, 
as we read: "These things did Jesus, 
and manifested forth (showed beforehand) 
his glory" f John 2: IT). The 
glory of Jesus is still future and will be 
shown "when he shall come to be 
GLORIFIED IN HIS SAINTS, and to be admired 
in all them that BELIEVE IN THAT 
DAY."f2Thes. 1:1(T). That coming 
glory was foreshadowed by his miracles. 
When it is remembered that very 
many of his miracles, in fact most of 
the notable ones, were done on the 
seventh or Sabbath day, it will be 
seen that this also was typical, and 
foreshadowed the fact that the great 
healing time would be the seventh 
thousand years-the Millennium-the 

R526 : page 4 

great Sabbath of rest in Christ, in 
which the world will be reinvigorated 
and perfected for the eternal ages of 
sinlessness to follow. 



R526 : page 4 



"JUDGMENT TO COME." 

It is a common thing to hear people 
talk of "the judgment day," as though 
there were but one judgment day, and 
that was in "the world to come;" or, if 
we were to state it according to the 
popular theology, we should say the 
world to which we go, meaning by the 
word we, all mankind. We understand 
this misconception to come from not 
"rightly dividing the Word of truth." 

There is no doubt that there is another 
world, or state or being, to which Jesus 
our blessed Redeemer and Lord has 
gone "to prepare a place" for us, and, 
when so prepared, "will come again" 
and receive us unto himself. fJohn 14:23\) 
But the word us does not apply to 
the world in the sense of embracing the 
whole human race, as is clear from a 
following Chapter (16:2(T): "Verily I 
say unto you, that ye shall weep and 
lament (at his absence), but the world 
shall rejoice; and ye shall be sorrowful, 
but your sorrow shall be turned into 
joy." Again, in the v 15th chap., 18 and 19 v 
vers., Jesus says: "If the world hate 
you, ye know that it hated me before it 
hated you. If ye were of the world, the 
world would love his own, but because 
ye are not of the world, but I have 
chosen you out of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you." 

We think no one can fail to see a 
clear distinction made here between 
"the world" and a class for whom 
Jesus was about to go and "prepare a 
place." He was to prepare the place, 
and they were to be prepared for the 
place through the teaching of the Holy 
Spirit, "the Spirit of truth, whom the 
world cannot receive, because it seeth 
him not, neither knoweth him." 

They (the disciples) were to become 
acquainted with the Spirit of truth, not 



the letter only, but the very nature of 
truth, the truth itself, should be their 
guide fJohn 14:17,26^ and v 15:26 v ), 
enabling them to judge themselves according 
to the "law of sin and death," 
and according to "the law of the Spirit 
of life in Christ Jesus." They see that, 
according to the law of sin and death, 
they are condemned to death because 
the account of sin stands against them 
in "the books," and it is a just account, 
and they acquiesce in it; but the Spirit 
of truth reveals to them the glorious 
fact that, by the law of the Spirit of life 
in (through or by) Christ Jesus," they 
are redeemed (liberated) from the law 
of sin and death; that the race is to live 
again in a coming age on account of 
this ransom; but that now (during the 
gospel age) those who hear and believe 
this may stand clear of the account, 
"made free from the law of sin and 
death," (because if they believe it, they 
will love the Redeemer, and condemn 
sin) and be reckoned NOW, what the 
world shall realize in fact, alive in (by, 
on account of Christ, fl Cor. 15:22\ 
-Diaglott.) 

But here a seeming difficulty arises; 
it is asked, how it is that they are made 

R527 : page 4 

free from the law of sin and death and 

yet have to die? But, it must be remembered, 

that they are already dead 

under the law of sin (i.e., legally), but 

they are to be saved from (out of) 

death, not from dying. This is to be a 

fact with the world in the coming age, 

and, to him who believes it now, it is 

now reckoned, i.e., he is reckoned as 

having suffered the penalty of the law 

of sin, and as having been restored to 

life by "the law of the Spirit of life in 

Christ Jesus." His faith causes him to 



walk according to "the Spirit of life." 
"There is, therefore, NOW no condemnation" 
to such an one. 

Such have ears to hear the gospel 
invitation to the higher life, the "high 
calling," which involves the consecration 
of that redeemed and restored nature, to 
death, with Christ. This call to the 
higher life, to be made a "partaker of 
the divine nature," is not a command, 
but is a "holy invitation," a glorious 
privilege, to suffer and die with Christ 
that we may be also glorified together. 

This, then, is a part of the present 
judgment (trial) of this world, the judgment 
which is now in progress among 
"the elect," and this judgment will exempt 
them from any further judgment 
("condemnation"). fJohn 5:24\) 

But there is another order of judgment 
going on now (to which we referred 
in the last number) in which the 
rulership of this world is being judged, 
and is about to be cast out, and then 
will follow the judgment to come. 
OActs 24:25\) 

But, does some one ask, if the human 
race are judged twice? We answer, 
most certainly they are. A little 
thought will convince any one who is 
familiar with the Scriptures that this is 
the case, for all men have been judged 
once already; for "it is appointed unto 
men once to die;" that is, one judgment; 
for man would not have been condemned 
to death unless judged to be 
transgressors of some law, and "after 
this (still another) judgment." Not for 
the same transgression surely. What 
was the first judgment and sentence of 
the race for? For the sins of the 
fathers. The "fathers ate the sour 
grapes and the childrens teeth are set on 
edge." fJer. 31:29 v ; ^Deut. 5:9\) For 
the whole human race suffer now for the 
fathers sins, or because they sinned? 



Yes, in a certain sense, (i.e., in Adam) 
yet not altogether for their individual 
sins, but the nature of the fathers, being 
polluted by sin, is transmitted to the 
children who come under the sentence 
of death for having the nature (disposition) 
to do just as the fathers did; as 
rebels in heart, they are under sentence 
of death. Then it is not for actual 
transgression that men die? Not for 
that only, but it is for the disposition to 
transgress. ("Matt. 5:28\) The inherited 
taint renders them unfit to live, 
because with such a nature they cannot 
keep Gods law. ("Rom. 8:7".) Then, 
will the judgment to come consign them 
to eternal death, or eternal suffering, because 
they did not keep Gods law in 
this age or life? Surely not; for it 
was their inability to keep it that caused 
their death, and called forth the mercy 
and love of God the Father and Son, 
who found a ransom for them, and 
brought them from death again, and restored 
to them what they lost in Adam. 
But will all that was lost in Adam be 
restored? Certainly; there will be a 
restitution of all things which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all his holy 
prophets." ("Acts 3:21"; "Ezek. 16:44-63"; 
"Jer. 31:16", &c.) But if all that was 
lost in Adam is to be restored to all 
men, does some one ask what is the 
incentive to a holy life now? The incentive 
is exceedingly great; it is even 
an opportunity and the only one- -we 
see no "second chance"-to attain unto 
the divine nature-IMMORTALITY. 
During the gospel age is the accepted 
time for that ("Luke 4:19"; "2 Cor. 6:2"); 
and if any one receiving an invitation 
to that "high calling" fails to 
make his "election sure," it will be an 
eternal loss, one which can never, 
NEVER be retrieved, though it should 
be "sought carefully with tears." 



All men will be restored to what was 
lost in Adam, unconditionally, "for 
since through a man, there is death, 
through a man also there is a resurrection 
of the dead; for as by Adam all die, 
so by the anointed also, will all be restored 
to life" fl Cor. 15:21,22V- 
Diaglott.) But to this "high calling" 
there are "hard" conditions; it is a 
reaping where he "had not sown." 
The conditions are so hard that but few 
will accept them, for the conditions are 
even sufferings and death; not of the 
old nature, already under sentence of 
death, but of the perfect human, like 
what Jesus had, and with which the believer 
is credited. But those who accept 
these hard conditions do so "for the 
glory set before" them, and are passed 
from death (legally, out of) into life 
fMark 8:35 v ), and shall not come into 
condemnation" (process of judgment) 
again. fJohn 5:24\) But all the rest of 
mankind will come "after this" into 
judgment. 

That they will have a future trial, i.e., 
probation and judgment, is clear from 
several scriptures to which we have referred, 
and from the fact that man suffers 
the penalty of sin (death) before 
the "judgment to come;" hence the 
judgment to come must be after probation 
to come; for how can judgment 
(krima, an accusation charge) be 
brought concerning a transgression for 
which penalty has been suffered, and 
from which the subject has been redeemed? 
They were cast into prison 
(death, the penalty) till they should pay 
the "uttermost farthing." A redeemer 
paid it, and they are free. Who shall 
now condemn again for that? But now, 
with a knowledge gained from bitter experience, 
may come another probation 
which shall be a success. The first 
probation was in a representative, 



Adam, by whom all die; another, 
Christ, represented them, and by him 
all live again, (in a resurrection) and 
from that onward the probation is 
every man for himself. Herein we discern 
the thought of Paul when he said 
fl Tim. 5:24 v ): "Some mens sins 
are open beforehand, going before to 
judgment, and some they follow after." 

The works of the little flock composing 
the mystical body of Christ are 
manifest, and are judged beforehand 
(the first and second man, the man 
Adam and the perfect man in Christ 
Jesus, are both judged beforehand, i.e., 
before the "restitution" race are). 
"There is, therefore, now no condemnation 
of (judgment against) them 
which are in Christ Jesus," (the little 
flock) nor will there ever be, for the 
rule by which men will be judged in the 
coming judgment will be the same as 
that by which they are judged now, 
viz.: the law of God as embodied in the 
holy Scriptures, which will then be 
"opened" to the understanding of all 
and no longer sealed fRev. 20:12 v ); 
so that he who is unjust or unholy according 
to that law, will forever stand 
so judged by it, until he becomes 
changed or restored in his nature. 
And let no one vainly think that in the 
judgment to come there will be any 
other standard, for he who is unjust 
now, by the same standard, will "be 
unjust still." fRev. 22:1 T.) 

But there is one notable element that 
will necessarily be left out of the "judgment 
to come;" that is, the element of 
redemptive or propitiatory sacrifice, or 
representative suffering. Christ having 
offered one sacrifice (of this kind) for 
sins, forever sat down on the right hand 
of God, from henceforth expecting till 
his ENEMIES be made his footstool," 
fHeb. 10:12,13"), i.e., as we understand, 



instruments of service, not members 
of his body. So, we understand, 
there will be no more offerings of this 
kind, hence no more forgiveness of 
sins; every one who shall be subject to 
that judgment (trial) shall expiate his 
own sins. Stern justice will preside 
then. Christ having died to save that 
which was lost, namely, the ability to 
keep the law, that, being restored, man 
will be required to keep it or be beaten 
with many or few stripes according to 
the extent of his transgressions. These 
stripes will not be vindictive but reformatory. 
Verily "it is a fearful thing to 
fall into the hands of the living God;" 
yea, "Fear him, which, after he hath 
killed, (and brought again from death) 
hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say 
unto you, fear him." fLuke 12:5\) 
This is the "fiery indignation which 
shall devour the adversaries" ("eat up" 
opposition). fHeb. 10:4\) Who 
among us shall dwell with the devouring 
fire? 

The Christ of God "will not fail nor 
be discouraged till he have set judgment 
(right) in the earth flsa. 42:4 V ); 
and yet he will not break the bruised 
reed nor quench the smoking flax, but 
will bring forth judgment unto truth 
(right according to truth). None will 
suffer for the sins of their fathers then 
as is now the case. (See v Ex. 34:7 V ; 
v Deut. 5:9\ and human experience all 
around.) It will then no more be said, 
"The fathers have eaten sour grapes 
and the childrens teeth are set on edge," 
but "the soul that sinneth it shall die." 
"The son shall not bear the iniquity of 
the father, neither shall the father bear 
the iniquity of the son." fEzek. 18:20\) 
No one will die again on account of 
another; no one live again on account 
of another. 

But the inquiring mind naturally 



asks, Why was not this course pursued 
with man in the first place? We 
answer that God is just, and it would 
not have been according to his law of 
justice to imperil and hold man to such 
a strict account, without a possibility of 
redemption, UNTIL he had had experience 
with sin, and become acquainted 
with its awful results; but now, after 
having learned the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin, (which is the great lesson now 
being taught to the world,) and having 
(when brought again from the dead) 
ability given to keep the law, it is but 
justice to require it, and to attach a 
penalty, as at first, to the violation of it. 

In the beginning the judgment was, 
"In the day thou eatest thereof thou 
shalt surely die," and then and there 
a Saviour, Redeemer was provided, a 
city of refuge for him who had unwittingly 
forfeited his life. But we are not 
told of any such Saviour, city of refuge, 
in the age to come. True, "Saviours 
shall come up on mount Zion to judge 
the mount of Esau" fObad. 2V), but 
these saviours we understand to be 

R528 : page 4 

typified by those who judged Israel, 
and will be leaders and guides, kings 
and priests, but not Redeemers. 

So, a similar judgment is to be given 
in the coming age, that was given in 
the beginning, for violation of Gods 
law, viz.: death. This is the "second 
death," from which we are told of no 
resurrection; at least, if so, we are not 
aware of it. But he who in this present 
age having died with, or in Adam, is 
awakened of the Spirit and consecrates 
himself to death with Christ (this would 
be his second legal death), is not hurt of 
it, for he shall "find it" again in the 
first resurrection. fMark 8:35 v ; v Rev. 2:1 V; 



v 20:16\) 

O, blessed thought, that "Righteousness 
and judgment are the habitation 
(base) of his throne." 

"O, that men would praise the Lord 
for his goodness and for his wonderful 
works to the children of men." 
J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R528 : page 4 

"AFTER DEATH THE JUDGMENT." 

We believe that to the great majority 
of mankind (to all except the Church), 
their judgment or trial will be after 
death-after the Adamic death-has 
been legally cancelled, and is being 
swallowed up of life, as is well expressed 
in the foregoing article by our 
brother; but the text at the head of this 
article so frequently used as it is by our 
brother, in the foregoing article, as the 
proof of that coming judgment, we object 
to, because it is used by the Apostle 
to teach a totally different thing, as may 
be seen from a careful examination of 
the entire argument in which these 
words were used. fHeb. 9:6-28\) 

Pauls argument is to those who were 
familiar with the typical service of the 
typical sanctuary. In their typical service, 
there was a remembrance made of 
sins each year; and each year on the 
Day of Atonement a typical sacrifice 
was offered which never actually put 
away sin, but which was merely typical 
of the real work to be done afterward 
by Christ. For the blood of bulls and 
goats could never put away sin, and 
they were merely figures or illustrations 
for the time of the real sacrifice, "The 
Lamb of God which taketh away the 
sin of the world"-who "put away sin 



by the sacrifice of himself." 

It was arranged of God, that the entire 
process of atonement for mans sin 
should be presented in types or patterns 
for our instruction, that the man of God 
should be thoroughly furnished. Accordingly, 
they had the Most Holy to 
represent the presence of Jehovah- 
heaven itself; and the death of Christ 
was illustrated by the priests every year 
-they using animals to represent themselves 
in death. When the bullock, 
which was "for," or represented the 
Priest, was killed, it represented the 
death of the priest, and thereafter the 
priest represented Christ as a "new 
creature," and took the blood-the evidence 
of his sacrifice of his former self 
-with him into the Most Holy, to present 
it as the ransom price for the 
peoples sins, and thereby to procure 
for the people Gods forgiveness of their 
sins and future favor. 

R528 : page 5 

But, as these men in this work were 
to typify Christ and his perfect work, 
that must be shown; hence the law, that 
if the priest failed to offer exactly the 
proper sacrifice, and in a proper manner, 
he would die at the second vail and 
not be permitted to enter the Most 
Holy, and hence would fail to make 
atonement for the peoples sins, and to 
come out to bless them. But, if every 
thing was perfectly done, the priest and 
his sacrifice were accepted of Jehovah, 
and the blotting out of sins and blessings 
of the people followed. It will be 
seen, then, that with these men who for 
years had typified Christ in the consecration 
or killing of the animals which 
represented them-after this representative 
death-came their judgment or 
trial. Was it perfectly done in all respects? 



If so, their judgment would 
be favorable, and they would come forth 
to typically absolve the sins of the 
people and bless them. 

As thus in type it is appointed for 
these men (priests) to die representatively, 
etc., SO ALSO Christ was once 
offered-died really-to bear the sins of 
many; and it was needful, as shown in 
the type, that he must go to have the 
sacrifice accepted in the Most Holy. 
We have evidence that he lives in that 
Most Holy, or perfect spiritual condition, 
which is proof to us that his was 
an acceptable sacrifice, and that in due 
time he will come forth with a blessing 
for all, for whose sins he paid the ransom 
price-his own life. 

The Apostles reason for making 
this argument is obvious. The Jews derided 
the idea of a Saviour dying without 
saving them, expecting that Messiah 
would reign in great earthly power 
and splendor. Paul shows them that 
Christ must needs first suffer to purchase 
--redeem-before he could save 
and bless, and that this had all been 
shown in the types of the Law. As it 
is appointed unto men (your priesthood) 
first to die and then to go into 
the Most Holy, etc., BEFORE the blessing 
could come, SO ALSO it is with 
Christ, of whom your men were but 
types or shadows. (See also "TABERNACLE" 
pamphlet, p. 61, and TOWER 
of October, 1880.) 



R528 : page 5 

THE UNMERCIFUL SERVANT. 

V MATT. 18:23-35\ 

This parable has been urged by some 



as in opposition to the necessity of 
Jesus death as our ransom, or substitute, 
in the settlement of the Adamic 
penalty. They argue that this parable 
teaches the contrary, that God FREELY 
FORGIVES all Adamic sin, and hence 
neither requires men to pay it, nor yet 
that Jesus should pay it for us, the just 
for the unjust. But this is a false presentation 
of the teaching of this parable, 
and results either from having a theory 
which they seek to prop with some 
seeming scriptural evidence, or from a 
too careless examination of the parable. 

The parable does not relate to dealings 
between God and the world of sinners; 
but between God and his covenanted 
children, called here, as elsewhere, 
"bond- servants." They are those 
who have already been justified from 
Adamic guilt by Christs ransom, and 
who have consecrated themselves to 
God to be his servants forever. These 
are acquainted with the will of their 
king and know how, through weakness 
of the flesh and temptation, they have 
failed to render to God all which their 
covenant calls for, and when they have 
gone to the Father and asked [as members 
of the body of Christ- in the name 
of their head] for mercy, they have always 
found him very merciful and he 
forgave them and said, Go in peace: as 
Jesus said, "Whatsoever ye shall ask of 
the Father in my name, He will do it." 

In return, it is expected that such 
shall be ready to exercise the same leniency 
toward their fellows. If they do 
not, they need not expect any leniency 
from their Father in the matter of their 
covenant keeping, but must be kept to 
the strict letter of it, and will be delivered 
over to trouble and distress in the present 
life sufficient to make them sympathize 
with the weak and erring. 

The same lesson is taught in the 



Lords prayer. Forgive our trespasses 
as we forgive those who trespass 
against us. It is the church which 
prays "Our Father"-the church already 
made free from Adamic guilt. 



R528 : page 5 

v REVELATION-CHAP. 4\ 

"After these things I saw, and behold a door 
opened in heaven, and the first voice which I 
heard, as of a trumpet, speaking with me, saying: 
Come up hither and I will show thee the things 
which must come to pass hereafter. Straightway 
I was in the Spirit." [Revised Ver.] 

When we listen to the description of 
a scene, as told by two or more observers, 
it is of much importance that we 
know both the time and the standpoint 
of the different witnesses. The chapter 
we are about to examine comes under 
this rule. 

In the Book of Revelation we believe 
that John, personally, always symbolizes 
the beloved disciples-the faithful 
in the Church- who are alive at the 
time required by the events described. 
We think the Master referred to this in 
7ohn 21:22^: "If I will that he tarry 
till I come, what is that to thee? follow 
thou me." "This saying, therefore, 
went forth among the brethren that 
that disciple should not die; yet Jesus 
said not unto him that he should not 
die, but if I will that he tarry till I come, 
what is it to thee?" If we observe the 
standpoint from which John sees each 
vision we will know that of the class he 
represents. 

Verse first tells us that the vision is 
of things "after" the events of the preceding 
chapter. The last period was 



while the Lord stood at the door knocking 
[being present, of course,] and when 
he is about to spue out of his mouth 
the present proud and worldly Church. 

R529 : page 5 

That process has begun, so that it is 
now due that the class symbolized by 
John should, in a symbolic sense, be 
caught up and enabled to see things 
from a purely spiritual standpoint. 

In Johns first vision, while he is 
given a glimpse of hidden things, he 
remains on the Isle of Patmos. Patmos 
means mortal. This symbolizes that 
the Church of Johns day could only 
see coming events from a mortal standpoint. 
Now he-rather we, whom he 
represents-are "caught up" in the 
spirit of our minds, and see spiritual 
things from an exalted position never 
attained to before. 

Johns vision, then, as described in 
this chapter, shows events as seen by 
us, or rather so many of us as have attained 
to this standpoint or spiritual 
position. This is in a sense the beginning 
of Johns visions. At the first 
revelation made to him he saw only our 
Lord and the lamp-stands; the messages 
were delivered to him in words. 
From this time forward he is allowed to 
see events and conditions in a series of 
vivid pictures-the clearest way of 
representation. 

He sees an open door in heaven. 
What heaven? When Paul was shown 
visions of things to come he was "caught 
up [better, snatched away] to the third 
heaven." f2 Cor. 12:2\) John also saw 
at last the third heavens and earth fully 
established. As most of our readers 
know, the progression of these so-called 
heavens is not upward, but onward. 
The first heavens and earth were before 



the flood; the second, this present evil 
world and its ruling powers (first and 
second are under Satan); the third, the 
new heavens and earth, wherein dwelleth 
righteousness. The third will be 
under the rule of Christ and his saints. 
It is during this latter that all the glorious 
promises of peace and prosperity 
will be fulfilled. "His rest shall be 
glorious." This dispensation of the 
kingdom of God is symbolically termed 
a new heavens (government) and new 
earth (subjects) in contradistinction 
from the heavens and earth which now 
are, "The present evil world," or order 
of things. It was to this Millennial 
kingdom that Paul was caught away in 
vision f2 Cor. 12:2 V ). 

As the powers of the third heaven 
take possession, the powers of the second 
are "shaken" until they are destroyed. 
OMatt. 24:29VHeb. 12:26\) 
The Lord tells us in "Matt. 24:3 V, that 
after he has come he "will send forth 
his angels with a great trumpet, and 
they shall gather together his elect 
from the four winds." (See also 
"lThess.4:16,17\) 

It is evident, then, that the open door 
which John saw was the entrance to the 
third heaven-the first step toward the 
place of power for those whom John 
represents. What brings them there? 
John says that the first voice which he 
heard was as of a trumpet, which said: 
"Come up hither." 

During the sounding of the seventh 
trumpet, under which we now are, the 
announcement was made: "The kingdoms 
of this world are become those 
of our Lord and of his Christ." fRev. 11:15".) 
The prophetic word has shown 
us that the Christ has come, that he has 
entered upon his reign. Believing this, 
and knowing what the result would be 
in the earth, business has been sacrificed 



and pleasure relinquished that we might 
know and spread the truth. Every new 
truth received and cherished has been a 
stepping-stone upward. The Lord has 
been our Guide, and we have been led 
into "green pastures." 

The first object to meet the gaze of 
John is that of a glorious King seated 
on his throne. This is the Father, the 
"Ancient of Days." He is "to look 
upon like a jasper and a sardine stone." 
The jasper is supposed to mean the 
diamond. It is described as "most 
precious" and "clear as crystal." Being 
the most brilliant of all the gems, it 
fittingly symbolizes the glory of God; 
the light (luminary, or source of light) 
of the New Jerusalem. fRev. 21:ll-23\) 
The sardine is a stone of a red 
color. We think it here symbolizes 
love, which is the underlying element 
in all Gods actions-tinging the glory 
through which it shines. 

The throne is encircled by a rainbow 
"like unto an emerald." A rainbow is 
the "token" of a covenant. fGen. 9:12-17\) 
The queen or emerald color 
probably symbolizes freshness and vigor; 
that Gods plans are, like nature in the 
spring-time, filled with life, and continually 
developing and unfolding- 
blossoming into luscious fruit for the 
sustenance and pleasure of His 
creatures. 

We are now introduced to 

THE TWENTY-FOUR ELDERS. 

Around the throne of God are seen 
twenty-four thrones, on which are seated 
twenty-four elders. Many opinions 
have been given in regard to who these 
symbolize. With present light we present 
the following: It is clear that, being 
symbolic, they cannot be individual 
saints. It cannot well be the Church 



of the first-born, as they appear under 
another symbol. It is unlikely that they 
represent angels. 

There have been, as we count, twenty-four 
prophets that have prophesied of 
"things pertaining to the kingdom of 
God." Their testimonies here seem to 
be personified, exalted and enthroned. 
The two witnesses of "Rev. 1 1:3-12" are 
evidently the Old and New Testaments 
thus personified, as we think we can 
clearly show when we come to them. 
They, too, were exalted to (symbolic) 
heaven-the place of honor and authority 
in the Church. 

These twenty-four witnesses for God, 
while now more or less despised and 
disbelieved, will yet be proved true and 
faithful, and will thus be similarly exalted 
in the sight of all men. (Comp. 
"Luke 10:15".) As yet, we only are enabled 
thus to see them. They are 
clothed in white, denoting purity. The 
crowns of gold symbolize their divine 
authority. 

At the present time the Church, in a 
great measure, ignores their witness- 
failing to understand it. In the future 
reign both the Church and the world 
must bow to their authority, as they 
will then have lost the privileges that 
were promised in the New Testament. 

"Out of the throne [of God] proceed 
lightnings and thundering s and 
voices." These refer to the mutterings 
of the tempest which is already gathering 
over the Church and the world. 
Others beside ourselves see the approaching 
storm, but they fail to recognize 
from whence it comes. 

Before the throne are seen seven lamps 
of fire burning, which are the seven spirits 
of God-the seven (perfect or complete 
number) channels through which 
God is about to manifest his power. If 
we compare carefully "Rev. 1:4,12,20"; 



"2:1"; "3:1"; "5:6", we find that they are the 
church of the first-born. These were 
called from the beginning "the light of 
the world," but from henceforth they 
are to "shine forth as the Sun in the 
kingdom of their Father." CMatt. 13:43\) 
These, too, are to be the honored 
instruments by which he will smite the 
nations, pour out his plagues, and shed 
light and truth upon mankind. "This 
honor hath all his saints." ("Ps. 149\) 

In full view of the throne is also seen 
"a sea of glass." This sea is soon to 
be mingled with fire ("Rev. 15:2"). From 
our standpoint it is transparent. The 
sea represents the unfettered, irreligious 
masses of the people. We are enabled 
to see clearly the internal forces that 
control them, what they are about to 
do, and why they do it. We can see 
that the fire is "already kindled." We 
see it smouldering in their breasts, ready 
to break out, a wild, unquenchable 
whirlwind of flame, when the due time 
comes. The whole matter is clear as 
crystal from the standpoint of those who 
are walking in the light. 

Around and in the midst of the 
throne are seen the four cherubim or 
living ones, here translated "beasts." 
Before we can understand what they 
represent here, we must take a glance 
at what is revealed in regard to them in 
earlier times. 

THE CHERUBIM. 

These strange creatures are first 
brought to view in "Gen. 3:24\ where 
they appear with flaming swords as the 
guardians of the way leading to the 
tree of life. They are next seen at each 
end of the mercy- seat on the ark in the 
wilderness ("Ex. 25:18"). In the most 
holy of the temple two new representatives 
of immense size were placed, between 



which the ark was set. fl Kings 6:23\) 
They were seen in vision by 
"Isaiah (6:2-6 v ) and by "Ezekiel (1:5-16"; 
v 10:l-2r). They are always connected 
with the immediate presence or 
with the throne of God. Evidently at 
the entrance to Eden they represented 
or accompanied the presence of God. 
(compare v Gen. 4:3, 16\) Isaiah and 
Ezekiel saw them as supporting or carrying 
the throne or chariot of Jehovah. 

Looking at the mercy- seat as representing 
this chariot or throne, the same 
idea is expressed in the relation of the 
cherubim to the ark-both in the tabernacle 
and temple. (See also v l Chron. 28:18\ 
v 2 Chron. 3\) Jehovah is frequently 
spoken of as dwelling between 
or above the cherubim. fEx. 25:22 v ; 
v Num. 7:89 v ; v l Sam. 4:4 V ; v Ps. 18:10"; 
"Isa. 37:16\ 

Some who have failed to recognize 
them as symbols, have supposed that 
they were a high class of angels, a kind 
of body-guard of the Most High. He 
has no need of such. He dwells amid 
admiring and adoring worshipers. 

What, then, do the cherubim symbolize? 
We think they personify the attributes 
of God. Scholars have suggested 
a number of attributes. We think that 
there are just four which are fundamental, 
namely: Power, Wisdom, Justice 
and Love. These four include all 
others. For instance: independence, 
omniscience, holiness and benevolence 
are dependent on or similar to the above 
mentioned in their absolute perfection 
as God has them. On these his throne 
is represented as being supported. 

When the way back to Eden was 
closed by "the cherubim," it was not 

R530 : page 5 

only the act of his power and justice; 



it was also done by wisdom and love. 
"Cursed is the ground for thy sake" was 
the utterance of love and wisdom. Idleness 
destroys; activity develops. The 
latter made the Greeks, even in a rugged 
country, a finely developed people; 
while idleness ruined Rome, with the 
treasures of the world at her feet. 

In the tabernacle two small cherubim 
appear. They are a part of the mercy-seat 
and seem to grow out of it. Before 
we can appreciate this picture we 
must remember that the tabernacle represented 
things as they exist during 
the Gospel age: the temple, as they will 

R530 : page 6 

be during the Millennial age. Again, 
the picture is not as seen from Gods 
standpoint, but from that of the church. 
The mercy- seat in a sense represents 
Christ. Many who cannot see the love 
and justice of God apart from Christ, 
believe that they are somehow bound 
up in him. These two attributes of God 
are very indistinct to them; they cannot 
see them; except that in some manner, 
too deep for their understanding, 
they are blended in Christ. Again, 
previous to the advent of Jesus, even 
the love is hidden; only the "stern" justice 
appears. The love was in Christ, 
but was not yet made manifest. Previous 
to the atoning sacrifice the picture 
appears like this. The mercy-seat is 
the place of justice-but man has been 
proved guilty. Until satisfaction has 
been made there is no hope. Power 
and wisdom-the two cherubim- stand 
at either end, their wings uplifted as if 
ready to fly to the rescue, but their feet 
are held by justice. They cannot move. 
They look expectant toward the mercy- seat, 
waiting, watching for the blood of 
atonement which shall set them free to 



do their willing work. But these cherubim 
are said to over-shadow the mercy-seat. 
This is also true, for if the blood 
of atonement is not forthcoming, they 
stand as the guardians of justice and the 
terror of the evil-doer. 

In the temple, which represents the 
church in the Millennial age, two new 
and very large cherubim were made. 
[Probably nearly twenty-one feet high.] 
They are represented as standing on 
each side of the ark, their outer wings 
touching either wall, and their inner 
wings touching each other, thus filling 
the whole expanse. f2 Chron. 3:10\) 

These two new cherubim would seem 
to represent the other two attributes that 
had been so obscure before, but are now 
made glorious by the additional light of 
the new dispensation. [There was one 
lamp stand in the tabernacle and ten in 
the temple.] The chief work of the 
Millennial age will apparently be to 
show that these two glorious attributes 
-love and justice-are not lame or impotent; 
they stand upon their own feet; 
they are independent, yet in perfect 
harmony, and that they are "of one 
measure and of one size." 
CI Kings 6:25\) 

We cannot in this follow minutely the 
description of the cherubim as seen by 
Isaiah and Ezekiel, neither have we 
sufficient light as yet, but we will notice 
a few points that are easily seen. These 
two prophets seem, like John, to represent 
the living saints. To them "the 
heavens were opened." fEz. 1:T; v Rev. 4:1\) 
They see "visions of God," and 
Jehovah sitting upon a throne." flsa. 6:1\) 
They see the cherubim around 
and under the throne. They hear them 
rest not from crying, "Holy, holy, holy," 
etc. That is, we now see that all of 
Gods attributes are in perfect harmony, 
and that in ceaseless chorus they are 



sounding forth his praise, and revealing 

the fact that "the whole earth is full of 

his glory,"-to those who have their 

eyes opened. We are sent to preach, 

as the Lords new mouth-piece, a message 

that is offensive to "a rebellious 

house," even to those who believe themselves 

to be the "Israel of God." It is a 

message of "lamentations, mourning and 

woe." fEz. 2:10\) We are given the 

book to eat. [What a blessed feast it 

is!] It is "like honey" in our mouths; 

but having been digested, it leads to 

self-denial, to crucifixion, to death. 

OEz. 3VRev. 10\) 

We realize our weakness, but when 
the hot coal from the altar touches our 
lips, we are ready to answer, "Here am 
I, send me." The message is, "Go and 
tell this people: Hear ye indeed, but 
understand not; and see ye indeed, but 
perceive not." "Declare fat the heart of 
this people, and its ears declare heavy, 
and its eyes declare dazzled," etc. 
[Youngs trans.] "Then, said I, Lord, 
how long? And he answered, Until the 
cities be wasted without inhabitant, and 
the houses without man, and the land 
be utterly desolate." flsa. 6:5-13\) 
At the voice of the cherubim the door 
posts of the temple move, and the house 
is filled with smoke flsa. 6:4 V ; v Ezek. 10:4 V ; 
v Rev. 15:8\) [For an illustration 
of this see "Seven Last Plagues," 
ZIONS WATCH TOWER, June, 1883. 
The four faces of the cherubim will be 
treated when examining v chap. 6\] 

In v Rev. 4:9-1 r, John hears the 
cherubim "give glory and honor and 
thanks to him that sitteth on the throne," 
and immediately the twenty-four elders 
fall down before him, saying, "Worthy 
art thou, our Lord and our God, to receive 
the glory and the honor and the 
power: for thou didst create all things, 
and because of thy will they are and 



were created" f Rev. 4: IT]. 

When we can hear the power, wisdom, 
justice, and love of God proclaiming 
in perfect harmony the glory and 
honor of our Father, then indeed his 
twenty-four witnesses ring out his praise 
as never before, and we realize that he 
created all things, both good and evil, 
and that they exist by his permission 
and shall ultimately work out his 
pleasure. W. I. M. 



R530 : page 6 
v REVELATION-CHAP. 5\ 



"And I saw in the right hand of Him that 
sat on the throne a book written within and on 
the back [or outside] close sealed with seven 
seals, and I saw a strong angel proclaiming with 
a great voice, Who is worthy to open the book 
and to loose the seals thereof? And no one in 
the heaven, or on the earth, was able to open the 
book or to look thereon." 

From Johns exalted stand-point he 
is enabled to look both backward and 
forward over the landscape; and that 
he may better understand Gods dealings 
he is shown the unfolding of the 
plan from the first. Hence the events 
of this chapter carry us back to the beginning 
of the Christian dispensation. 

When Ezekiel and John are said to 
have received the scroll, or book, it was 
openfRev. 10:2 V f Ezekiel 2: 1(T). At 
this date, but at the stand-point of this 
view, it had not yet been opened. The 
book signifies the plan and purpose of 
God as written in the law and the 
prophets. It was sealed perfectly (with 
seven seals) until Christ began to open 
it. 

When the disciples asked our Lord, 



after his resurrection, in regard to the 
plan, he answered: "It is not for you 
to know the times or the seasons which 
the Father hath put in his own power, 
[or grasp] but you shall receive power 
[to understand] after that the Holy 
Spirit is come upon you." ("Acts 1:7-8"). 
Life, immortality and sonship have only 
been seen since that time ("2 Tim. 1:10"; 
"John 1:12"). A mighty angel, with a 
great voice, cries: "Who is worthy to 
open the book, and to loose the seals 
thereof? And no one in heaven or on 
the earth [symbolic] was able to open 
the book or to look thereon." Probably 
this angel symbolizes the Law, which, 
from the time of its deliverance through 
Moses, had been proclaiming as unworthy 
all who sought to overcome by it. 

The faithful are represented as weeping 
because of the obscurity and want 
of knowledge in regard to the plan. 
"And one of the elders said unto me, 
Weep not, behold the Lion of the tribe of 
Judah, the Root of David, hath overcome, 
to open the book and the seven 
seals thereof." This elder proves to be 
the old patriarch Jacob, who made the 
prophecy on his death-bed when blessing 
his sons. ("Gen. 49:8-12"). 

John now sees "in the midst of the 
throne" and of the living ones and the 
elders "a Lamb standing, as though it 
had been slain." We recognize at once 
the One whom John the Baptist introduced 
to the Jews as "The Lamb of 
God who taketh away the sin of the 
world." He comes and receives the 
scroll out of the right hand of the One 
sitting on the throne. Not until he had 
passed the last test, had endured "to 
the end," had risen in victory a spiritual 
body, had been caught away in glory, 
did he receive the wonderful scroll 
which "the angels desired to look into." 

Ten days after our Lord ascended, 



the Holy Spirit was given, which at 
once began to unfold the truth to the 
church. When this took place John 
saw the four living ones and the twenty-four 
elders falling together before the 
Lamb, each having a harp, with which 
they sing a new song, saying, "Worthy 
art thou to take the book and to open the 
seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and 
didst purchase unto God with thy blood 
[men] of every tribe and tongue and 
people and nation, and madest them to 
be unto our God a kingdom and priests; 
and they [shall] reign upon the earth." 

When it was seen that these all acknowledged 
and testified of Jesus, it 
was indeed a new song and a glorious 
one; and when we listen to the beautiful 
harmony as the melodious chords ring 
out from all the golden harps, our 
prayers and thanksgiving go up in the 
sweet incense from the golden bowls 
they have brought us. It is glorious 
news to the called of the Gentiles. 
Many are striving hard to find a way to 
prove themselves Israelites after the 
flesh. How much more glorious to belong 

R531 : page 6 

to the spiritual family who shall 
inherit the divine nature and attain to 
the rank of the royal priesthood "after 
the order of Melchisedec" ! 

As the vision of the restitution of all 
under the dominion of Him who "shall 
be a priest upon his throne" CZech. 6:13"), 
rises before John, he seems to turn 
and look down the stream of time to 
the glorious consummation of the plan 
of salvation; and, lo, the messengers 
that are in the presence of the throne, 
even myriads of myriads and thousands 
of thousands, he heard saying with a 
great voice, "Worthy is the Lamb that 
hath been slain, to receive the power and 



riches and wisdom and might and 
honor and glory and blessing." And 
as the wave of thanksgiving and praise 
floats out over the world, the whole 
creation catches the strain and joins in 
the song: "And every created thing 
which is in heaven, and on the earth, 
and under the earth, and on the sea, and 
all things that are in them, heard I 
saying, Unto Him that sitteth on the 
throne, and unto the Lamb, be the blessing 
and the honor and the glory and the 
dominion for ever and ever. And the 
four living ones said, Amen. And the 
elders fell down and worshiped." 
W. I. M. 



R531 : page 6 

THE OBJECT OF OUR LORDS RETURN. 



DISCOURSE I. 

[At the request of some of the readers, we 
will publish reports of six discourses delivered 
by the editor in Allegheny City in 1878, published 
at that time in some of the public prints. 
The edition of "OUTLINES OF SERMONS" published 
some time ago is exhausted. To those 
whom we have been obliged to refuse we suggest, 
that this series may meet the approval of 
some of you and to some extent serve your purpose. 
Below is the first one of the series.] 

Why does the Lord return? We do 
not ask if he will return, for as every 
Christian student of the Bible well knows 
that is one of the central themes of the 
Apostles teaching-the coming of our 
Lord and our gathering together unto 
Him. It was repeatedly used by Jesus 
to comfort the disciples--"! will come 



again and receive you unto myself." 

But while all are agreed as to the fact 
--the manner and the object are subjects 
upon which there is great difference 
of view. As we are now dealing 
with the latter-the object-let us examine 
the various leading views on the 
subject, of which there are six. Four of 
these views make the coming of 
Christ "a coming" in name only- 
devoid of a personal advent. The other 
two views hold that the coming is a 
personal presence, but differ regarding 
its object, etc. 

First— Among the former, we find the 
chief to be, that death is the coming of 
Christ. The holders of this view scarcely 
know why they think so. Simply, 
they have that idea. This is the most 
unscriptural of all views, for while not a 
single text supports it, there are hundreds 
to contradict such a thought. The 
church is everywhere taught to look for 
and "love His appearing," while death 
is pronounced an enemy. "The last 
enemy which shall be destroyed is 
death." "For this purpose Christ was 
manifested that He might destroy 
death." Substitute the second coming 
of Christ for the word death in this 
passage, and what would you have? 
A second view is-That the power 
manifested on the day of Pentecost 
evinced Christs return as having taken 
place, and to be a coming in spiritual 
power and energy to His people. Such 
forget that Jesus characterized this 
as the coming of another, consequently 
not of himself, when he 
said, "I will pray the Father, and 
He shall send you another comforter, 
even the Spirit of Truth." There is a 
sense in which the Spirit represented 
Christ during his absence. For instance 
Jesus declared that he would be present 
with the twos and threes gathered in 



His name ("Matt. 18:20"). This He has 
done by the Spirit; comforting those 
who came seeking His blessing. In the 
same spiritual sense He has abode with 
His church all the way down; as he 
said, "Lo, I am with you always, even 
unto the end of the age." "Matt. 28:20\ 
Yet, personally, he was to be absent 
until the end of the age, as he taught. 

A third view is-That Christ came at 
the destruction of Jerusalem, because 
Jesus mentions His coming in the same 
conversation in which He refers to the 
destruction of Jerusalem. Overlooking 
the fact that three distinct questions are 
asked by the disciples, ("Matt. 24:3"), 
which received separate answers. Jesus 
gave them to understand that His coming 
was not imminent; there would be 
wars, etc., but the end is not yet. He 
said, "Nation shall rise against nation, 
and kingdom against kingdom," ("Matt. 24:7"). 
This was not fulfilled before the 
fall of Jerusalem, for until that time 
and for long after the Romans held the 
nations in the quiet and peace of servitude. 
Again, he says, "These good 
tidings of the kingdom shall be preached 
in the whole inhabited earth (NEW 
VERSION) for a testimony unto all the 
nations; and then shall the end come." 
This has only been fulfilled during the 
last few years. America, Australia and 
some other large portions of the world 
were probably unknown to the early 
church. Then He mentioned certain 
signs and said, "When YE see ALL 
these things then know that it is nigh, 
even at the door." This generation 
(the one seeing these signs) shall not 
pass away until all these things are fulfilled. 
The generation then living did 
not see all those signs. 

Further, John the Revelator, who 
wrote some 26 years after the destruction 
of Jerusalem, was ignorant of Christs 



having come, and Jesus himself also, 
for while one says, "Behold! I come 
quickly," the other answered, "Even so, 
come Lord Jesus." fRev. 22:20 v ). 

A fourth view is-That Christ comes 
in conversion of sinners; so continually 
coming, more and more. This cannot 
be what Jesus referred to when He said, 
"All the tribes of the earth shall mourn 
and wail because of him when they see 
him coming." Do they mourn and 
wail when a sinner is converted? The 
chief objection to the four views just 
mentioned is that the real personal coming 
is ignored. Of the two classes who 
hold to a personal coming of our Lord, 
one is called Pre-millenarian [before 
the Millennium], and the other Post-millenarian 
[after the Millennium]. 

Of the latter class are most of 
so-called orthodox Christians. They 
believe that he has been coming all the 
way down in the growth of the church 
and the advancement of science and 
civilization, but that he will also come 
personally to crown his triumphant 
church, when she shall have put down 
all opposing authority and power; and 
that he, through her efforts, will put all 
enemies under her feet. Others, who 
claim only a personal coming, believe, 
in about the same order of events; that 
through the missionary labors of the 
church the world will be converted and 
thus usher in the millennial age, at the 
close of which the Lord will come, wind 
up earthly affairs, reward believers 
and condemn sinners. They have much 
scripture which, if taken disconnectedly, 
seems to favor this view. But even these 
we believe, when Gods word and plan 
are looked at as a whole, will be found 
to favor the view we are advancing, viz: 
That Christ comes before the conversion 
of the world; that the church is 
now being tried, and that the reward 



promised the overcomers is: that they 

shall share in this reign:-- "To him that 

overcometh will I give to sit with me 

in my throne." ("Rev. 3:21\) "And 

they lived and reigned with Christ a 

thousand years." ("Rev. 20:4"). "Ye 

which have followed me," etc. CMatt. 19:28"). 

R531 : page 7 

"If we suffer with Him we 

shall also reign with him." ("2 Tim. 2:12"). 

There are two texts in particular used 
by our Post-millennial brethren to which 
we would refer. One is, "This gospel must 
first be preached in all the world for a witness. 
Then shall the end come." They 
claim this to mean that the gospel will 
convert the world before the end of the 
gospel age. We, Pre-millennial believers, 
claim that witnessing to the 
world does not mean converting the 
world, that the object of the present witnessing 
is principally "To take out a 
people for His name," the church, who at 
Christs coming are united to Him and 
receive His name. ("Rev. 3:12".) The 
"other text" is— "Sit thou on my right 
hand, until I make thine enemies thy 
footstool." The thought generally gathered 
from this Scripture is, that in 
heaven God has a throne on which He 
sits continually, and then when "Christ 
sat down on the right hand of the 
Majesty on High," He sat down also 
upon the same throne. This is a misconception. 
The throne of God as referred 
to is not an ivory or golden seat, 
but refers to His supreme authority 
and rulership, for "Heaven is my throne 
and earth is my footstool," and Paul 
says, "God hath highly exalted Him 
(Christ) and given Him a name above 
every name," etc. He has given Him 
authority above every other, next to 
the Father. If Christ sits upon a material 



throne until His enemies are made 
His footstool, (all subdued) then of 
course He could not come until the 
Millennial reign was fully inaugurated. 
But if it means the exalting to power, it 

R532 : page 7 

would not interfere with His coming 
and subduing all things unto Himself." 

"Right hand" signifies the chief place 
--position of excellence or favor. And 
the words of Jesus to Pilate agree with 
this thought: "Hereafter ye shall see 
the Son of Man sitting on the right 
hand of power, and coming in the 
clouds of heaven." fMark 14:62 v ). He 
will be on the right hand when coming 
and remain at the right hand during the 
millennial age. 

These two last named views demand 
a thorough examination. There are 
able arguments possible on both sides; 
yet both are not true. We propose, 
therefore, to take a glance at the plan 
of God for saving the world, believing 
that in so doing we shall find the relation 
and bearing of both the first and 
the second comings, and know where 
to locate the latter. 

First, then: Has God a plan? All 
must agree that He has; although, almost 
all are inclined to think and talk 
of His dealings as though He were 
dealing by a rule of chance, and governed 
entirely by circumstances. No; 
He that would condemn a man for 
building a tower without first counting 
the cost, shall He build and people a 
universe without matured plans and due 
forethought? No, brethren, "known unto 
the Lord are all His ways from the 
beginning." God has a plan or purpose, 
and we know that "all His purposes 
shall be accomplished." But how shall 
we find that plan? It is revealed to us 



in Gods Word. "Search the Scriptures," 
as Paul says. "Compare Scripture with 
Scripture," for 

"God is His own interpreter, 
And He will make it plain." 

We are too much inclined to ask 
What does my church say?, about any 
question, instead of "What saith the 
Scriptures? Too much theology is 
studied and the Bible not enough. With 
the thought, then, that "The Scriptures 
are able to make us wise," that the 
"Testimonies of the Lord are sure, making 
wise the simple" (teachable), and that 
"all Scripture given by inspiration of God 
is profitable, that the man of God may 
be thoroughly furnished," let us study. 

Notice first that the Scriptures divide 
human history into three great successive 
periods, called "The world that was," 
(the age ending with the flood), "The 
present evil world," (the age commencing 
at the flood and ending with the 
coming of Christ a second time), and 
lastly, "The world to come," (the age 
commencing with the second coming of 
Christ) the endless age, or "World 
without end." This arrangement is not 
mere fancy, but is strictly scriptural. A 
proper understanding of these ages enables 
us to "rightly divide the word of 
truth," and it seems impossible to understand 
his plan without first recognizing 
them. 

Peter mentions all of them. Q2 Pet. 3:6,7,12\) 
Paul speaks of "the present 
evil world, and of the world to come." 
Jesus also distinguished between them, 
and calls the devil the prince of this 
world, fJohn 14:30"), and promised reward 
to His faithful followers "in the 
world [or order of things] to come, etc. 

While Christ has all power in heaven 
and earth, for wise purposes, He has 
not heretofore made use of it, permitting 
evil to reign and measurably control 



the world, and the devil to be 
"prince of this world," or order of 
things. But the time is promised when 
"He shall take to Himself His great 
power and reign," exalting His church 
and giving her "power over the nations," 
so that instead of as now, being 
"subject to the powers that be," she 
shall "rule the nations." 

But when will He thus assume control? 
When the Gospel church, "His 
body"-Ecclesia-is complete, evil 
now being permitted, for the trial of 
faith, and the perfecting of the saints. 
This time is synchronous with the 
sounding of the "seventh trumpet." 
fRev. 11:15".) Here the mystery (church) 
of God is finished-and "the kingdoms 
of this world" become the kingdoms 
of our Lord and His anointed 
(church). Now, we inquire, is this 
transfer of authority from Satan to 
Christ caused by the conversion of the 
nations to Christ through preaching 
the Gospel? We answer, no; at this 
time the nations are not converted. See 
the "eighteenth verse": "And the nations 
were angry, and thy wrath is come." If 
converted, they would not thus be hostile, 
neither would Gods wrath come 
upon them. On the contrary, God 
teaches in many Scriptures that a great 
time of trouble will come upon the 
nations. "Come, behold the desolations 
which the Lord hath made in the 
earth; He maketh wars to cease unto 
the ends of the earth." fPsa. 46:8- 10"). 
This is the way God tells us He will 
make wars to cease. The next clause 
informs us that then He "Will be exalted 
among the heathen and in all the earth." 
This chastisement of nations is designed 
for their good, and is as necessary to 
them as chastisement to the children of 
God now, and it will have this effect; 
for "When the judgments of the Lord 



are abroad in the earth the inhabitants 
of the world will learn righteousness, 
flsa. 26:9"). It is in this new dispensation 
that, with Evil or Satan bound, the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth as the waters do the sea." 
The conversion of the world, instead of 
being due now, while the devil is 
"prince of this world," will, David 
says, be "When the kingdom is the 
Lords and He is the Governor among 
the nations, (then) all the ends of the 
world shall remember, and turn to the 
Lord, and the kingdoms of the nations 
shall come and worship before Him." 
CPs. 22:27-28"). 

"The present evil world" contains 
three separate ages; the Patriarchal age, 
lasting from the flood to the death of 
Jacob; the Jewish age, lasting from the 
death of Jacob until the death of Christ 
--when He gave them up, wept over 
them, and said: "Your house is left 
unto you desolate." CMatt. 23:38\) The 
Gospel age, lasting from Christs baptism 
and anointing until the full company of 
"the church of the first born" is complete, 
and He comes-the "sounding of 
the seventh trumpet, the resurrection 
and reward of saints and prophets." 
CRev. 11:16".) 

We know not how many ages may 
be in "The World to Come," but that 
there is more than one we are assured, 
for Paul speaks of "The ages to 
come." fEph. 2:7\) The first of these 
alone is dealt with in Scripture-the 
millennial age, during which the saints 
shall live and reign with Christ a thousand 
years. CRev. 20:4"). 

Having gotten an outline, let us look 
more particularly at Gods doings and 
sayings; and now, I will astonish you, 
doubtless, until you reflect, when I say 
that, according to His word, God is not 
now trying to convert the world, nor has 



He been during past ages. What has 
He been doing? "Taking out a people 
-Church— for His name." Dont think 
this wonderful, as it is only putting in a 
striking form what all Calvinists believe, 
among whom are Baptists, Presbyterians 
and others, viz: That God is 
now electing-or choosing His Church 
out of the world. Yes, and all our 
brethren who believe in free grace must 
admit that if "all His purposes shall 
be accomplished," and "Gods word 
shall prosper in the thing whereto it 
was sent"; if these Scriptures are true 
God did not purpose the conversion of 
the world during the past 6,000 years, 
else it would be accomplished. Neither 
did He send His Word to convert the 
world up to the present time, else it did 
not prosper in the thing whereto He 
sent it. These two views have been 
dividing points in the churches for centuries, 
viz: Election and Free Grace. 

We believe the Scripture to teach 
both, but that it requires the observance 
of "Heavens first law," order, to rightly 
divide the Word of truth on this 
subject. 

There is no scriptural account of Gods 
giving mankind any law, nor but very little 
light of revelation during the age preceding 
the deluge. One promise shines 
out: "The seed of the woman shall 
bruise the serpents head"; but even this 
required future revelation to be comprehended. 
God had, however, a few faithful 
servants, some of the patriarchs, who 
had light above the masses; these shone 
as lamps in a dark way. 

The Patriarchal age had increase of 
light. It was now revealed that this 
seed was not only to crush evil (the 
serpent) but to "bless all the families of 
earth." Still Gods church was represented 
by but one man at a time-Noah, 
Abraham, Isaac, etc. 



These Patriarchs were elected or 
chosen. "God called Abraham, and 
said," etc. Abraham and his kin was 
called. His parents were idolaters. He 
had many sons and daughters, but only 
one son was chosen. "In Isaac shall 
thy seed be called." "Of Isaacs two 
sons, only one was chosen, "as it is 
written (says Paul, v Rom. 8:11 and 12 v ), 
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I 
hated" (loved less). God chose before 
they were born, "That the purpose of 
God according to election might stand." 
Now, remember, I do not say that God 
elected one to go to heaven and the 
other to hell. Far from it. We will 
talk of Esaus portion and the non-elect 
on a future occasion. 

At Jacobs death another advance 
step in Gods plan is taken, and typical 
or fleshly Israel is formed. From this 
time one man no longer represents God 
in the world; but a nation; all the sons 
of Jacob and their posterity. And now 
we have an elect nation or church, and 
God gives all His special blessings to 
it. Other and larger nations-Egypt, 
Chaldea, &c.-are passed by; left without 
light and without knowledge, while 
these are given to Israel. "What advantage 
then hath a Jew? Much every 
way, chiefly because to them was committed 
the oracles (laws and testimonies) 
of God." This is Pauls statement. 
fRom. 3:2 V ). God speaking to 
them says: "You only have I known of 
all the families of the earth." fAmos 3:2"). 
This people alone was recognized, 
and this continued until Christ came, 

R533 : page 7 

and after that-until for lack of faith 
they were given up and their house left 
desolate. 
During Christs ministry he preached 



to them and would not suffer His disciples 
to go to any others, saying as he sent 
them out, "Go not into the way of the 
Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans 
enter ye not." Why so, Lord? 
"I am not sent save to the lost sheep of 
the house of Israel." All His time was 
devoted to them until death, and here 
was his first and grandest gift, not for 
Israel only, but for all; for Jesus Christ, 
by the grace of God, tasted death for 
every man. fHeb. 2:9 V ). And now, also, 
in the Gospel age, a certain sort of 
election obtains. Some parts of the 
world are more favored than others 
with the Gospel (which is free to all 
who hear). Contrast yourself with your 
privileges and knowledge with yonder 
heathen man who never yet heard the 
call. 

When this called-out company (called 
to be the "sons of God," "heirs of 
God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ 
our Lord"-"our high calling") is 
complete, then the plan of God for the 
worlds salvation is only beginning. Not 
until then can THE SEED "bruise the 
serpents head" and bless all the families 
of the earth. For the seed is not 
Jesus, the head alone, but the church 
also, which is His body, as Paul informs 
us CGal. 3:29 v ), "Which seed is Christ; 
and if ye be Christs, then are ye Abrahams 
seed, and heirs according to the 
promise." The same company are to 
bruise the serpent. fRom. 16:20\) "The 
very God of Peace shall bruise Satan 
under your feet shortly." 

The Gospel age makes ready the 
chaste virgin (church) for the coming 
bridegroom. In due time the bridegroom 
comes and they that are ready are 
united. The second Adam and the 
second Eve become one, the new creation 
and the glorious work of elevating 
mankind in the world begins. The 



river of living waters will flow from the 
New Jerusalem-the symbol of the 
glorified church ("Rev. 22:1-3"). Then 
the conversion of the world will be due. 
The church, now the "espoused virgin," 
will then be "the Bride, the Lambs 
wife," and, with her Lord, she shall share 
in ruling, teaching and restoring mankind 
from the curse. Then shall the Spirit and 
the Bride say, come! and whosoever 
will, let him take of the water of life 
freely." ("Rev. 22:17"). What is now a 
"well of water in you," will then be a bountiful 
river-enough for all. Thus seen, 
the object of the Lords return is to exalt 
and glorify his Bride-the elect 
church- and with and through her to 
"bless all the families of the earth." 



R533 : page 7 

CHRISTIANITY VS. CHURCHIANITY. 

We are living in an age of shams and 
counterfeits. Satan seems to have 
abandoned the hope of crushing out the 
Christian Church by a process of undisguised 
hostility, and now seeks to 
destroy her efficiency by stealthily 
draining off her vitality, and robbing 
her of every supernatural element. He 
"transforms himself into an angel of 
light," and often assumes to be the 
special friend and guardian of the 
Church. Craftily he infuses his deadly 
virus and inculcates his plausible 
philosophy, until the moral perception 
is obscured, the conscience is distorted, 
and policy runs nearly the whole 
ecclesiastical machinery. Thus a popularized 
religion-which costs nothing 
and is worth nothing-is readily accepted, 
while the old religion of the 
cross is utterly discarded. The consequence 



is, that there is religion enough, 
and Churchianity enough, but a great 
famine for real Christianity. We meet 
with thousands all over the land who, if 
catechised in regard to their spiritual 
condition, reply with much self-assurance 
that they are members of such a 
Church. They assume that the Church 
is an ark of safety; and, once ensconced 
within her enclosures, all further anxiety 
ends. Let us try to unmask this dreadful 
delusion of the devil. 

There is a difference, we may premise, 
between the real and the nominal 
Church of Christ. The former is composed 
of all true Christians. Its boundaries 
are therefore invisible, as no man 
can tell exactly where to draw the lines. 
The latter is composed of those who 
assume the Christian name and practice 
the ordinances of Gods house. It is 
commonly called the visible Church, 
because its boundary lines are known. 
The epithet may apply to a single local 
society of a given denomination, or to 
the aggregate of local societies of all 
denominations. We use the term, in 
this paper, to designate the outward or 
visible Church. 

1 . Christ and the Church are not 
identical. There may be ten thousand 
Churches, but there is only one Christ. 
Nor can all those Churches supply the 
place of our one, blessed, all-sufficient 
Saviour. A man may be saved without 
the Church, but he cannot be saved 
without Christ. A man may be in the 
Church and not be saved; but he cannot 

R533 : page 8 

be in Christ without salvation. 

Sinners sometimes become members of 

the Church; but only saints are members 

of Christ. A person may live in 

the Church for years, with the old heart 



of carnality and selfishness; but "if 
any man be in Christ, he is a new 
creature." 

The requirements of the Church are 
often wrong and ruinous; but the claims of 
Christ are always reasonable and right. 
The Church may become a sink of pollution; 
but Christ is ever the perfection of 
purity. The Church may be rent with 
divisions; but Jesus Christ is not 
divided. The Church may become 
terribly entangled in mysticism and 
error; but Christ is always the embodiment 
of light and truth. The Church 
may change her name and her nature; 
but Christ is "the same yesterday, to-day, 
and forever." The Church may 
be a crutch to walk with, but she 
is a poor Christ to trust in for salvation 
and eternal life. 

2. Christian worship and Church 
worship are not identical. Vast multitudes 
cling to some Church establishment 
as a drowning man would cling to 
a life-boat. They bow obsequiously to 
her priestly and official mandates, and 
imagine that the blind servility which 
they tender to the Church will be accounted 
acceptable service offered to 
Christ. The simplicity of the Gospel is 
lost in the imposing forms and glittering 
accompaniments of modern churchism. 
Splendid church edifices attract 
the eye. Splendid music charms the 
ear. Splendid prayers are addressed 
to the CONGREGATION. Splendid sermons 
please the fancy, and leave deluded 
sinners to slumber on. Church 
rivalry has achieved a glorious success, 
if success consists in gorgeous temples, 
tall steeples, loud-sounding bells, thundering 
organs, ostentatious dressing, 
theatrical singing, pointless praying, 
rhetorical preaching, careless hearing, 
and unscriptural practicing! 

Much of the current worship is done 



by proxy. Lazy religionists surrender 
their sacred rights to others. They 
take it for granted that the preacher is 
on the right track, and readily swallow 
whatever may be doled out from the 
pulpit, without using their own brains 
in searching for the hidden treasures of 
truth. Thus religious ideas are transmitted 
from generation to generation, 
until tradition exerts a more powerful 
influence than the Bible in molding the 
sentiments of men. There comes to be 
a fashionable faith, as well as a fashionable 
dress. To embrace a certain 
stereotyped circle of doctrinal views entitles 
a man to the claim of "orthodoxy"; 
but let him not venture one 
step out of the beaten track, if he would 
not be denounced as a deluded heretic! 
But few have the moral courage to 
question the decisions of the Church, 
much less to discard what she has 
labeled as "orthodox." The verdict of 
a few leading denominations has thus 
grown up into a threatening tyranny; 
and the multitude cannot think of 
stemming the mighty tide. So they 
bow down in their narrow enslavement 
and worship this curiously-fashioned 
but pious-looking idol-the Church! 
Since all idolatry is an abomination to 
God, we have no more right to worship 
a church than we have to worship a 
golden calf! We rob the Lord of his 
rightful honor, and ourselves of the 
highest bliss of Christianity, by looking 
to the Church too much, and "looking 
unto Jesus" too little. What can be 
done to deal a staggering blow to this 
cruel church- worship of the day, and at 
the same time give us more exalted and 
ravishing views of Jesus Christ? There 
is a grand failure to carry out the ultimate 
design, when the appliances of the 
Gospel result only in the production of 
Churchianity. Our perception, our 



prayers, our faith, and our adoration 
must overleap the narrow precincts of 
the outward Church, and rise up to the 
eternal throne! "Worship God!" 

3. Christian fellowship and Church 
fellowship are not identical. The followers 
of Christ are called upon to 
"love one another with a pure heart 
fervently." Indeed, this is one of the 
Scriptural tests of discipleship. "We 
know that we have passed from death 
unto life because we love the brethren." 
All Christians constitute one family, 
and love is the golden tie designed to 
bind their hearts together around the 
common cross. But love is a tender 
plant that needs to be reared with a 
hand. Hence the many exhortations 
of Scripture to "consider one another" 
--to "be kindly affectioned one to 
another"-to esteem others better than 
ourselves-to "bear one anothers burdens" 
-to exercise a forgiving spirit- 
to "let brotherly love continue"-to 
"endeavor to keep the unity of the 
Spirit in the bonds of peace." All such 
injunctions point out the danger of 
alienated feelings and poisoned affections, 
and show the importance of making 
a special effort to promote Christian 
unity and love. How disastrous are 
the results of not regarding these Gospel 
precepts !— A. A. Phelps. 



R534 : page 8 

QUESTION COLUMN. 

Ques. A Brother writes to heartily 
endorse our expressions in last issue 
relative to the Inter. S.S. Lessons, etc., 
and asks, Can we not have a lesson leaf 
for children which would rightly present 
the Scripture teachings to them? 



Ans. In our opinion Sunday-schools 
and all kinds of schools are good and 
useful in proportion as they teach anything 
valuable or useful. Let children 
be taught morality of every sort, and instructed 
in the first principles of the 
Gospel, and all they can understand concerning 
Gods character, and of the harmony 
between Gods two revelations- 
the book of nature and the book of revelation. 
Thus they will be prepared for 
useful and honest lives as men and women 
--loyal and obedient to their Creator 
and Redeemer. 

But we who are in training for the 
high calling cannot turn aside from the 
special work of this age-the work of 
preparing "the Bride, the Lambs wife." 
The Bride is to make herself ready; 
and just at the present moment, when 
the last touches of adornment are being 
put on preparatory to the wedding, 
every members service is required in 
this all-important, present work. Soon 
our exalted position of heavenly power 
with the Lord, will enable us to render 
substantial aid to all work, for the blessing 
and elevating of humanity. The 
very work for which we are now in preparation 
is the restoring and blessing of 
all the families of the earth. 

To all saints who have a talent for 
teaching and explaining, and who see 
the truth clearly, we suggest that you 
"cast your net on the other side of the 
ship" and become fishers of men and 
women rather than of children; and 
fish for one class only, viz.: the consecrated 
in Christ Jesus, and to these do 
as did Aquilla and Priscilla to Apollos 
-show unto them "the way of God 
more perfectly." fActs 18:26-28\) It 
is the eleventh hour, but go ye also 
into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right 
shall be your reward. It is too late now to 
expect fruit for this vintage from new 



slips, but you may be of service to the 
older fruit-bearing branches by tearing 
off some of the old withered leaves, and 
thus letting in the sunlight of grace and 
truth with power to ripen their fruit. 

Ques. Is it possible for a parent to 
cast all care on Jesus and not be worried 
about the future condition of grown 
children, who, though members of the 
nominal church and free from gross sins, 
yet manifest much love for the world 
and have no appetite for spiritual 
things? 

Ans. We think that a proper appreciation 
of the Lords character and plans, 
while it would not lead to carelessness 
in using every opportunity to reach him 
that hath an ear to hear, yet would be 
free entirely from worry. Under all 
circumstances let us give thanks. 

In the first place, probably your sons 
and daughters, like thousands of others, 
are not new creatures in Christ-old 
things have not passed away and all 
things have not become new to them; 
hence they would not be heirs of spiritual, 
heavenly things. For this reason 
God does not reveal to them things 
which they cannot have. No such human 
eye hath seen, nor ear heard, 
neither hath it entered into the heart of 
man the things which God hath in reservation 
for those that love him [the 
consecrated "new creatures"]. But 
God hath revealed these things to the 
new creatures by his Spirit. 
ClCor.2:9-10\) 

Being of the earth earthy, they shall 
in due time be blessed by being restored 
to the perfection of the earthly condition, 
and to a perfect enjoyment of earthly 
blessings, because redeemed by the precious 
blood. In their resurrection (or 
perfecting) they shall come fully to the 
image of the first man, "very good"; 
but those who, through consecration, 



have changed their nature, will be no 
longer men, but "new creatures"- 
spiritual beings-and shall bear the image 
of the Head of the heavenly house 
when perfected. As was the earthly one, 
Adam, such like will they be also that 
are earthly: and as is the heavenly one, 
Jesus, such like will they be also that are 
heavenly. 

The difficulty is, that the church, having 
misconstrued the Gospels present 
mission to witness to the world, and to 
develop a "little flock," came to the conclusion 
that she must NOW convert the 
world, hence she has bent her energies 
in that direction, and almost ignored the 
deeper work upon the "little flock." 
The work of converting the world being 
slow, she naturally concluded that she 
must not be too particular as to whom 
she received, else she would seem to 
make no progress. Accordingly she 
lowered her standard. Therefore many 
persons have been told that they are 
Christians, and invited to join church, 
who never were converted, and know 
nothing about entire consecration. Such 
are not new creatures, and, consequently, 
cannot sympathize with the rules of self-sacrifice 
laid down in Scripture for the 
little flock. As such constitute, probably, 
three fourths of the membership of 
the nominal church, it is not surprising 
that spirituality and spiritual truths are 
at such a discount in it. 

Again, we say, rejoice- -rejoice that 
you may overcome and be of that spiritual 
seed which shall bless and restore 
the nations. Rejoice that your children 
are moral, and do all that you can to 
supply them a basis for morality in the 
expression and illustration of Gods 
character in your words and conduct. 
Rejoice as you think of the blessings to 
come upon them and all mankind when 
the kingdom is the Lords and he is the 



governor among the nations. Rejoice 
evermore, and in everything give thanks: 
"For he is good-His mercy endureth 
forever." "Blessed is the man that 
trusteth in him." 

Ques. Please let us know your opinion 
of the very distinct physical features 
of the present day, such as cyclones, sun 
spots, etc. I know your position concerning 
political and religious changes 
as fulfilling the scriptural statements of 
the shaking of the heavens, earthquakes, 
etc., but not concerning these 
physical phenomena? 

Ans. We understand that great physical 
as well as political and religious 
revolutions are now in progress. Just 
what these are, may not be very clearly 
seen, but these are as certain to bring a 
blessing to earth as the others, though, 
like them, the change may be attended 
with distress and temporary confusion. 

It seems certain that to make the 
earth into a paradise like Eden, such as 
the prophecies picture, and a fit place 
for the restored race, some great 
changes of climate, etc., must occur. 
Looking back, we find that some important 
changes of climate, etc., took 
place at the time of the Deluge; a 
change which at once affected the longevity 
of humanity, for before that life 
averaged 500 to 1,000 years, but immediately 
afterward it was shortened. (See 
v Gen. 6:3 V ; v 9:29 v ; v ll:32\) Furthermore, 
we learn that until the flood, there had 
been no rain on the earth, it being 
watered by a mist instead. fGen. 2:5,6\) 
These changes occurred at the end 
of the first world or dispensation-at 
the beginning of "The present evil 
world," or dispensation-and we think 
that a proper time to expect another 
change to a better condition would be 
at the close of the present evil dispensation, 
at the threshold of "The world 



[dispensation] to come," wherein dwelleth 
righteousness. That these changes 
will be sudden we do not believe, but 
think that the all- wise Director of the 
work has so planned that physical and 
higher changes run parallel and keep 
pace with each other. 

As we find the forty years, from 1874 
to 1914, A.D., prophetically marked 
out as the time for the change of earths 
administration, it would seem not unreasonable 
to suppose that the proper 
physical changes might occur during 
the same period. "Not that we expect 
all changes to be completed in the 
specified forty years, but that by that 
time the new systems and arrangements 
will be thoroughly introduced, which will 
be gradually improving, and will reach 
absolute perfection at the same time 
that mankind in general will reach absolute 
perfection by restitution. Thus 
the perfect earth and its perfect Lord 
(man) will both be prepared to enter 
upon the ceaseless ages of perfection 
into which shall never enter sin, death, 
pain or sorrow. 

So, then, to us let the physical contortions 
and quakings and tempests and 
angry waves, speak of the better condition 
coming, just as the social revolutions 
speak of a more blessed time 
coming to the groaning creation who 
shall be delivered into the liberty of 
sons of God. fRom. 8:2 1\) 

Whirlwinds or cyclones are disturbances 
occurring in the air or heavens- 
caused by disorders therein, and which 
exercise a baneful influence upon the 
earth. These physical disorders illustrate 
the origin of much of the worlds 
trouble; it will be caused by disorders 
in the symbolic heavens or church normal. 
Notice how this trouble and 
whirlwind are symbolically mentioned 
by v Jeremiah 25:29-36\ Notice how the 



chief distress is specified as coming 
upon the nations [governments] and 
upon the shepherds and principal of the 
flock-nominal. 

Ques. Why was the brazen serpent 
used as a type of Christ? 

Ans. Undoubtedly to teach and develop 
faith. But we presume you to 
mean, Why was the serpent used as a 
symbol of Jesus? We answer, that the 
serpent represents sin, evil-the curse 
and brass (copper) represents the human 
nature. (See Tabernacle Tract.) 
This was a fitting type of Jesus, because 
as a man he was made sin (i.e., reckoned 
and treated as the personification 
of all the evil and sin of the race, as 
their representative or substitute) for us 
(He) who knew no sin. 


