Announcements
“LIFE-GIVING KNOWLEDGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The greatest service any man or woman could possibly render to humanity today is to impart to them the knowledge of God and encourage them to run to and fro through His Book in personal Bible study. Knowledge of this kind, if taken in and acted upon, will result in its bringing life to its possessor. Appropriate now when there is so much falsely called “knowledge”, Jehovah’s servants on earth have set aside the month of August as the “Life-giving Knowledge” Testimony Period. The book “Let God Be True” and the latest self-covered booklet will be offered to all kinds of men world-wide, on a contribution of 35c. Align yourself with this life-giving work and turn in a report of what you do in this month.
APPRECIATION FOR BLESSINGS
North American 1951 district assemblies are over. Soon those in Europe follow. What joys of association, worship and service such gatherings provide! The inspiration and fresh zeal they stir up in us do not fade but continue and increase. And why not? Does not the spiritual bounty, “food at the proper time,” nourish and strengthen Jehovah’s servants and witnesses for endurance in these critical days? Every partaker is enriched and built up, and so continues to grow in determination to serve his Creator and Provider. Such in turn aid their neighbors to take and eat the life-giving knowledge. Joyously they make known to others this good news of the blessings of Jehovah God; yes, their appreciation is shown by following through with zealous action. Why not share in today’s grandest of all activities on earth? and then be sure to send to us a report of time you so use, or turn it in to the company of Jehovah’s witnesses nearest you.
THEOCRATIC AID TO KINGDOM PUBLISHERS
For the person who wants to have a part in the joyful work of announcing Jehovah’s kingdom the above-titled book will provide unequaled help. It is the finest presentation of practical aid to develop the individual’s ability to carry on this God-given work. Discussed are such important subjects as, how to study and remember, how to compose and deliver public talks, correct grammar and its proper use, letter writing, fine points of argumentation and their application, facts about the various Bible translations and helps, such as dictionaries and concordances, and how best to use them. A large section is devoted to a history of religions. Clothbound, 384 pages, 50c.
CORRECTION ON “WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
The June 15 Watchtower, on page 384, outlined study material for July 15, 22 and 29. It should have assigned material for only July 22 and 29, as July 15 study material is given in the June 1 Watchtower. Hence for the week of July 22 company groups should study from the June 15 Watchtower the articles “The Place of God’s Word in Our Lives” and “Free Moral Agency and the Word”, and for the week of July 29 the entire article on “The Spirit, the Organization, and the Word”.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 19: The 1,290 and 1,335 Days of Daniel’s Prophecy.
Week of August 26: More Liberation Prophecy to Be Fulfilled.

