Jehovah’s Word Endures Forever!
PRACTICALLY all books grow old and out of date. Either they are revised and corrected or they are discarded as relics of the past. Thousands simply die with their authors. The one outstanding exception, of course, is the Bible. The world’s oldest book, yet it is still as fresh and true as when its first pages were written more than 3,460 years ago.
No other book, in whole or in part, has been translated into a thousand languages and more. No other book has penetrated so many countries and influenced so many people. Upon the Bible many civil laws and judicial decisions are founded. However, the Bible has not always enjoyed such popularity; often its enemies have greatly outnumbered its friends. No story is packed with more horrors and tragedies than that which tells of the Bible’s fight to live. Truly, had the Author of this book, Jehovah God, not also been its Preserver, it would not have endured down to this twentieth century!
And why was this Word of God preserved until now? The apostle Paul declares that it was written for our comfort and hope, and to serve as a warning to us upon whom the accomplished end of this system of things has arrived. (Rom. 15:4; 1 Cor. 10:11; 2 Tim. 3:16, 17, NW) Therefore, in this most critical time, when all the “brilliant” leaders of this benighted old world are but fireflies in the darkness, how true the psalmist expresses the thoughts of God-fearing men today: “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.” (Ps. 119:105) Walking in this divine light leads up the highway to the new world, concerning which the Bible is bursting with descriptive promises. Just think of it, a paradise earth free from crimes, calamities, sicknesses, wars and death itself!
At the great battle of Armageddon everything belonging to this old world, including its plans and promises, will topple and fall. Why not, therefore, put your hope and trust in something that will endure? Yes, God’s Word will survive this old world, and its principles and precepts will become theocratic law of the new world.
So if you want to survive with the Bible and live in that glorious new world, you must begin now to study and follow its counsel. Do you have a Catholic Douay Bible? Read it! Do you have the Jewish Leeser translation? Read it! Do you have the King James Version? Read it! Or if you want a real thrill in understanding, get the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures, in modern English! After reading and studying God’s ‘word of truth’ (John 17:17, NW), you too will catch up the proclamation first made by Isaiah, and repeated by the apostle Peter eight hundred years later: “The word spoken by Jehovah endures forever.”—Isa. 40:8; 1 Pet. 1:25, NW.

