VOL. XVIII. SEPTEMBER 1, 1897. No. 17. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 254 

Divine Secrets Revealed 255 

"He Will Show Them His 
Covenant" 257 

"He is Faithful Who Hath 
Promised" 258 

The Book of the Covenant 259 

Lending to the Lord 260 

Poem: Scatter Seeds of Kindness 263 

Living the New Life 263 

Interesting Letters 268 

page 254 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



ALL ABOUT HELL. 



"What Say the Scriptures About Hell?" is the title of a pamphlet in 
which every text of Scripture containing the word hell is cited and examined 
in the light of Scripture and reason, together with other Scriptures 
and parables supposed to teach eternal torment. Price 10 cents; 
50 cents per doz.; $4.00 per hundred. 



R2208 : page 255 

DIVINE SECRETS REVEALED. 



"The Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; 
and he will show them his Covenant."— Psa. 25:14. 

IS THERE any secret in connection with the 

divine plan? Are not all of God's arrangements 

so plain that "a wayfaring man, tho unlearned, need not 

err therein?" Are not all of the steps of the plan of 

salvation so simple that even a child may understand 

them? 

Oh no! very evidently not; for everywhere we find 
the utmost diversity of opinion respecting the divine 
plan. Not only is there a great variety of heathen 
theories utterly false, but the various theories which 
obtain amongst Christian people are in violent antagonism 
the one to the other. Even amongst the worldly-wise 
of Christendom how various are the conceptions 
of God's intention and method respecting his 
creatures? These differences are represented in the 
various theologies of all the various sects. His plan is 
claimed to be one of "Free Grace" in which he gives 
an equal opportunity to all his creatures to share; yet, 
looking about us we see most evidently that all are not 
alike privileged, not alike informed and not alike circumstanced. 
On the other hand, there is the claim of 
an "Election" which denies that grace is free to all, 
and holds that it is restricted to the favored few. Besides 
these, we have various other conflicting theories 
in Christendom, and the most obtuse thinker must admit 
that where so many theologians, college professors 
and doctors of divinity are in dispute, the unlearned 
"wayfaring man" has many chances to err in his endeavor 
to grasp the divine plan. 

Observation therefore sustains, as most literally 
true, the statement of our text that the Lord's plan is 
a secret: and it is in agreement with the statement of 
other Scriptures respecting the "mystery of God," 
"hidden from past ages and dispensations." In harmony 
with this is the fact that all the prophets have 
spoken more or less obscurely and in parables, not excepting 
the Great Prophet, our Lord Jesus, of whom 
it is written, that "he taught the people in parables 
and dark sayings"— "and without a parable spake he 
not unto the people." He promised, nevertheless, 
that in due time the holy spirit would be granted as a 
guide and instructor to his true disciples: "He will guide 
you into all truth" and "show you things to come." 
(Jno. 16:13.) Some of the mysteries of God were due 
to be understood at once, and some more gradually 
down through the age, but the great unfolding of the 
divine mystery we are expressly told was reserved until 
the close of the Gospel age, when "the mystery of God 
should be finished," which he hath kept secret from 
the foundation of the world.— Rev. 10:7. 



Even so much of the divine plan as was due to be 
revealed by the spirit and to be understood step by 
step during this Gospel age, was intended only for a 
special class, and not for the world in general. The 
Apostle Paul emphasized this when he declared, "The 
natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of 
God, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually 
discerned." "But God hath revealed them 
unto us by his spirit; for the spirit searcheth all things, 
yea, the deep [hidden, obscure] things of God." 
-1 Cor. 2:14,10. 

This same thought is before us in our text, "The 
Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him." As 
this has been true all the way down throughout this 
age, it is still true, and the finishing of "the mystery 
of God" in the close of this Gospel age must therefore 

R2208 : page 256 

be expected to be understood and appreciated only by 
this special class of the Lord's people,— those who fear 
or reverence him. We are to make a distinction between 
those who fear or reverence the Lord and those 
who fear or reverence man and the work of man, sectarian 
systems, creeds, etc. "The fear of man [and of 
man's churches] bringeth a snare," and hinders growth 
both in grace and in knowledge;— hinders an appreciation 
of the "Secret of the Lord." "But the fear [reverence] 
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom," and 
this wisdom, if continued, leads to fuller knowledge of 
God, to greater confidence in him, and to that degree 
of intimate friendship and sonship which is the key to 
the understanding of the "Secret of the Lord." 

Abraham was called the "friend of God;" because 
he had the divine confidence, so that God made known 
to him certain things that he did not make known to 
others: "The Secret of the Lord" was with Abraham, 
so far as that Secret could be communicated to any one 
at that time. For instance, in the matter of the destruction 
of Sodom, the Lord said, "Shall I hide from 
Abraham [my friend] that thing which I do?" And 
it was because Abraham was the friend of God that he 
also made known to him something of the divine plan 
for human salvation: as the Apostle declares, God 
"preached beforehand the gospel to Abraham, saying: 
In thee shall all the nations be blessed.'"— Gal. 3:8. 

While it was not possible for Abraham or any one 
else than God to fully comprehend this statement, or to 
understand therefrom the lengths and the breadths of 
the divine plan of salvation, yet it contained the whole 
gospel, in the same sense that an acorn contains a great 
oak tree. So likewise our Lord at the first advent 
spoke in parables to the nominal house of Israel, 
that "Seeing they might see and not believe, and hearing 
they might hear and not understand;" yet, a certain 
few, full of faith and obedience and consecration 



to the Lord, were not thus treated; but, on the contrary, 

were treated as "friends" and had much explained 

to them. Thus our Lord said to the disciples 

when they inquired concerning the significance of a 

parable, "To you it is given to know the mysteries of 

the Kingdom of God; but to them that are without, 

these things are spoken in parables." And again he 

said to the same devoted disciples, I have not called 

you servants, for the servant knoweth not what his 

Lord doeth; but I have called you friends, because whatsoever 

I hear of the Father I have made known unto 

you.— John 15:15. 

This "mystery" of the divine plan, hidden in 
parables, in figures, and in symbols from the world, 
and from the nominal Christian,— hidden from all except 
the fully consecrated children of God— is most 
beautifully symbolized in the Book of Revelation. As 
therein recounted, John was shown in a vision a symbolic 
panorama, illustrative of the subject. The heavenly 
glories were symbolized and the Father shown seated 
upon the throne of his glory, holding in his right 
hand a scroll sealed with seven seals. This was the 
Mystery, the Secret of the Lord, unknown to any one 
but himself— his plan for the salvation of the world. 
John in the symbol hears the proclamation, "Who is 
worthy to open the Book and to loose the seals?"— 
who is worthy to have committed to his care, the execution 
of the great divine plan, wonderful for its wisdom 
and love, and its lengths and breadths and depths 
and heights past human comprehension— that he may 
open it and execute it? A silence followed; and John 
fearing that this signified that none would be found 
worthy, and that hence the divine plan would never be 
fully revealed, and therefore could not be fully executed, 
wept much. But in the symbol the angel again 
touched him and said, "Weep not! for the Lion of the 
tribe of Judah,' the 'Root of David,' hath prevailed to 
open the Book, and to loose the seven seals thereon." 

Ah yes! this was one significance of the severe trials 
and sufferings of our dear Redeemer;— in humbling 
himself, leaving the glory with the Father, becoming 
a man and ultimately giving his life a ransom for all, 
he was doing two works: not only (1) redeeming us 
with his own precious blood, but (2) additionally by 
this obedience he was commending himself to the 
Father, and proving himself worthy to be the Father's 
agent and representative in carrying out all the great 
"mystery of God" hidden from previous ages and dispensations. 
-Eph. 3:3-5. 

The interim of thirty odd years, in which our Lord's 
humiliation and subsequent exaltation took place, is all 
passed over in the vision, and the symbol merely shows 
in the midst of the throne "a lamb, as it had been 
slain:" how forceful the illustration to those whose 
eyes are anointed that they may discern its meaning. 
And now the symbolical panorama proceeds, and shows 



us the Lamb approaching Jehovah and receiving from 
him "the mystery of his will," the great plan of the 
ages, as mapped out in the divine purpose from before 
the foundation of the world. As soon as the "mystery 
of God" was committed to "the Lamb of God;" who 
had already fulfilled an important part of that plan by 
redeeming the world with his own precious blood, he 

R2209 : page 256 

receives homage, as it is written: "Him hath God highly 
exalted, and given him a name that is above every 
name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow 
of things in heaven and things on earth," and "that 
all men should honor the Son even as they honor the 
Father." 

Then came the opening of the seals: the disclosing 
of one after another of the various features connected 

R2209 : page 257 

with the divine purpose. Each seal as it was loosed 
permitted the scroll as a whole to open a little wider, 
and a little wider, thus permitting "the mystery of 
God" to be a little more clearly discerned. And so 
God's people down through this Gospel age have been 
privileged to know something of the "Secret of the 
Lord;"— the divine plan. But not until the last seal 
was broken, did the scroll fly wide open, permitting the 
"Mystery of God" to be fully disclosed; as it is written: 
"In the days of the voice of the seventh angel, 
when he shall begin to sound, the Mystery of God 
should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants 
the prophets."— Rev. 5:1; 10:7. 

This same thought, that God's consecrated people 
will have intelligence respecting his plans far different 
from any the world will have, is everywhere kept prominently 
before us in the Scriptures, and must therefore 
be considered a very important indication with all who 
profess to be God's people;— distinguishing whether 
they are merely his "servants," or whether they are 
still more intimately connected and have received the 
spirit of adoption as serving "sons," and are being 
treated as sons;— made acquainted with the Heavenly 
Father's plan. 

Our text speaks merely of the fear (reverence) of 
the Lord, but, as we have seen, this reverence continued 
leads into the very deepest work of grace obtainable; 
—to a fullness of consecration to the Father's will 
and service. It is of this class who fear (reverence) 
the Lord that we read,— "They that feared the Lord 
spake often one to another, and the Lord hearkened 
and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written 
before him for them that feared [reverenced] the Lord, 
and that thought upon his word [esteeming his Name, 
his Honor, his Will above any earthly, sectarian name 



or work]. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of 
hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I 
will spare them [they "shall be accounted worthy to 
escape" the severity of the great time of trouble with 
which this age shall end], as a man spareth his own 
son that serveth him." These who reverence the Lord, 
in this full and Scriptural sense, are surely the Lord's 
"elect," "the body of Christ," the "overcomers," the 
"little flock," the "royal priesthood," who shall reign 
with Christ, and with him bless all the families of the 
earth in due time. 

The privilege of this "royal priesthood" to know 
"the Secret of the Lord," to comprehend "the deep 
things of God" hidden from others, was beautifully 
symbolized and typified in the privileges of the Jewish 
priesthood. When the Tabernacle was set up, with 
its beautiful golden furniture, lamp stand, table of shew 
bread, golden altar, etc., all symbolizing spiritual 
things, they were covered over, hidden, not only from 
the ordinary Israelite, but even from the Levitical 
"servants" of the Tabernacle, who were not even permitted 
to look therein. The privilege of seeing those 
typical secret things, reserved exclusively for the priests, 
thus typified "the royal priesthood" and their exclusive 
privilege of understanding the mysteries of God, his 
Secret. 

"HE WILL SHOW THEM HIS COVENANT." 



But our text adds, "He will show them his covenant." 
This is stated as tho it were a very important 
matter to see or clearly understand God's Covenant: 
and it is an important matter, for God's Covenant is 
really the key to the entire divine plan. What God 
promised to Abraham in the Covenant, "In thee and in 
thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed," 
included directly and indirectly all the riches of divine 
grace. Yet, how few see this. We do not say how 
few of the world see this, for we should not expect any 
appreciation of the divine Covenant on the part of 
"them that are without." But we say, How few of 
those who have named the name of Christ, and nominally 
stand related to spiritual Israel— how few of these 
know or care anything whatever about the divine 
Covenant. 

Alas, that Satan should so grossly blind the eyes 
of so many, that they should have no interest in the 
divine Covenant and not even know that there is a divine 
Secret or Mystery! Satan has gotten them thoroughly 
imbued with the delusion that God's plan is, 
—that every poor human creature born in sin, shapen 
in iniquity and schooled more or less in vice and superstition, 
shall have a few years of very imperfect opportunity 
to hear one or the other of the many conflicting 



creeds and theories of Christendom (or a jargon of them 
all), to thoroughly reform his life and become a copy 
of God's dear Son; and that if he does not succeed in 
doing these things, with the thousand chances to one 
against him, he shall be relegated to an eternity of torture. 
Alas ! we say, that Christians should ever conclude 
that this is the plan of God. Truly, it was an 
enemy of God (Satan) who put before the people so 
monstrous, so God-dishonoring a doctrine as this: and 
persuaded them that this is the length and the breadth, 
the height and the depth of divine wisdom, and love, 
and provision for poor fallen humanity. 

But with our eyes anointed, and our hearts fully 
consecrated to the Lord and fully desirous to know just 
what is his will and his way, we look at the Great Covenant, 
and behold, it opens gloriously before us into 
three parts: (1) All the families of the earth— every 
member of the human family is to receive a blessing. 
(2) The Seed of Abraham is to be the channel of these 
divine blessing to every creature. (3) This Seed in 

R2209 : page 258 

its primary sense we find meant our Lord Jesus Christ; 
but in its secondary sense it includes the "bride the 
lamb's wife," his jointheir in this Covenant and in all 
of the divine mercies. This is clearly set before us by 
the Apostle in his letter to the Galatians.— 3:16,29. 

With this thought in view we realize at once that 
none of the spiritual blessings of this Covenant were 
possible until Christ Jesus, the Head of the Seed had 
finished his course and been glorified; and we see that 
the Lord's work since that time has been the gathering 
of the "elect" Church to be the "bride," the 
"body of Christ." We see also that the work of blessing 
cannot begin in its proper sense until this entire 
"Seed" is complete and glorified: and that with this glorification 
of the Church with her Lord, in the end or 
"harvest" of this Gospel age, will come the time 
mentioned by the Apostle Paul in his letter to the 
Romans (8:18,23), when the "groaning creation" 
shall be blessed by the "manifestation of the sons of 
God," in the glory of the Kingdom. This spiritual 
Seed of Abraham (Christ and the elect Church) has 
indeed been the salt of the earth, throughout the Gospel 
age, and has helped to preserve the world from utter 
deterioration; but this is but a small part of the great 
blessing which God designs to send through the Church 
to the world. The "light" of truth as it has been dimly 
shining during this night, is properly compared to a 
candle or lamp, but the "light" of the Church glorified 
in the Kingdom during the Millennium is properly 
represented as "the Sun of righteousness, which shall 
arise with healing in its beams." 

The Covenant then shows us our privilege of the 
present time, of becoming "heirs of God and jointheirs 



with Jesus Christ our Lord, if so be that we suffer with 
him, that we may be also glorified together." And it 
shows us the object of this trial, the object of this election, 
the object of the glorification of the Church, to 
be a work of mercy, blessing, helpfulness, toward the 
remainder of mankind. The Covenant is broad: it does 
not promise, merely, that all the families of the earth 
who will be so fortunate as to be living at the time 
when the Seed is complete will receive a blessing; 
neither does it merely say that all the families proceeding 
from Abraham, dead and living, will receive a 
blessing; but comprehensively it promises a blessing to 
"all the families of the earth,"— those who have fallen 
asleep in death as well as those who will be alive 
at the time of the establishment of Christ's Kingdom. 

To this end our Lord Jesus became Master or 
"Lord of the dead:" he bought all with his own precious 
blood: "He is the propitiation for our sins [the 
Church's sins] and not for ours only, but also for the 
sins of the whole world." And as we have received a 
blessing as the result of his ransom, so in God's due 
time "all the families of the earth" will also receive a 
blessing because of the ransom. It is from this standpoint 
that the Church is called the "first fruits unto 
God of his creatures,"— not the entire harvest. The 
first-fruits are to be used of the Lord as his instruments 
for blessing the remainder. 

And in the coming blessing, to the families of the 
earth, the natural seed of Abraham are to be given a 
place or preference, a priority over others;— "To the 
Jew first." As the spiritual blessings were offered to 
them first, so the earthly favors are to be offered to 
them first. They shall obtain mercy "through your 
[the Church's] mercy." (Rom. 11:31.) And after 
Israel shall have obtained mercy, a blessing through 
the glorified Spiritual Israel, then in turn natural Israel 
shall let the light shine upon others— "all the families 
of the earth;" until in due time the promise shall be 
fulfilled that Christ as the true light shall enlighten 
"every man that cometh into the world." (Jno. 1:9.) 
Oh glorious covenant! luminous with divine Love and 
Wisdom. -Rom. 11:33. 

R2210 : page 258 

THE COVENANT SURE AND EVERLASTING. 



And is this Covenant sure? It is sure; as the great 
Apostle points out, God took special care to so state 
this Covenant repeatedly to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob 
and to repeat it through the prophets; thus giving us 
most absolutely his word on this subject. But lest this 
should not be thought conclusive enough on a subject 
of so great importance, lest some should fear that there 



might be a contingency involved, by which that covenant 
might be vitiated, the Apostle points out that 
God not only gave his word but also his oath, that its 
engagements should be strictly fulfilled and in no wise 
miscarry. He says,— 

"God, willing more abundantly to show unto the 
heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed 
it by an oath: that by two immutable things, in 
which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a 
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold 
upon the hope set before us: which hope we have as an 
anchor to the soul."— Heb. 6:13-19. 

"HE IS FAITHFUL WHO HATH PROMISED." 



Those who have the "Secret of the Lord," and to 
whom he has not shown the significance of his Covenant 
should forthwith examine themselves, to see 
whether or not the fault be unfaithfulness on God's 
part or failure on their part to come up to God's conditions. 
They should strictly inquire within whether 
or not they have been sufficiently and properly reverencing 
God, or whether their reverence and worship 
has to any degree been to man and to human institutions, 
churches, etc.— whether they ever became "servants" 

R2210 : page 259 

of God and, if so, whether they progressed and 
became servant sons. 

And those to whom the Lord has disclosed his 
Secret, and the significance of his Covenant, should see 
to it that these divine favors lead their hearts to still 
greater reverence for the Lord. For we may be assured 
that if the reverence is lost the Secret will slip from us, 
and the Covenant become more and more dim. And 
here we perceive God has placed a great test: He has 
permitted the great adversary to malign his character, 
and to traduce his plan, and to misrepresent the teachings 
of his Word to such an extent that the majority 
of those who name the name of Christ are at first influenced 
to turn to the Lord chiefly from fear of eternal 
torment. Their activities in mission work and in their 
general Christian course are actuated chiefly by fear and 
sympathy— sympathy for those whom they esteem to be 
in danger of eternal torture at the hands of a loveless 
and unjust God, and fear for themselves, lest they 
should not be spared a similar fate. Love to God finds 
no room under such conditions. In fact, it would be 
impossible for any one to truly love a God of such merciless 
character. But, amongst those who outgrow 
their creeds and fears are some who, in opposition to 
their false instructions, learn to think better of their 
Creator, and by faith grasp sufficient from his Word to 



beget a love for him which produces a fullness of consecration 

to his service; and thus they become sons of 

God: and then, by entering into divine fellowship 

through Christ, these have committed to them the 

"Secret of the Lord" and are shown something of his 

Covenant. 

This fullness, however, does not come all at once; 
it is a gradual development, step by step. If the truth 
is rightly received it leads onward into more of the 
truth, and into more of its grace; but if wrongly received, 
it may lead outward, away from the Lord 
and his Word, away from his Secret, away from his 
grace, into utter darkness with the world. Nor is it 
infrequently the case that those who lose their abnormal 
fears lose practically all their reverence for the 
Lord, and become careless with reference to his Word, 
and with reference to their conduct. Such "receive 
the grace of God in vain;" in some respects, indeed, 
it does them injury, instead of bringing them blessings. 

In our fallen condition we need some strong impellent 
motive, to enable us to live righteously, soberly, 
godly in this present evil world. And if the abnormal 
fear and superstitious dread be removed before a 
love for God, for righteousness and for truth has 
been implanted, the probabilities are that the knowledge 
of God's grace in such will fall upon stony ground. 
But where the spirit of the Lord has been implanted, 
where the spirit of the truth, the holy spirit of Love, 
has begotten to newness of life, where love to the Lord 
and appreciation of his goodness is the ruling and controlling 
element of life, there the increase of knowledge 
of the divine Secret and Covenant will bring increasing 
blessings of heart, of mind and of daily life. (Compare 
Isa. 29:13; 1 John 4:18.) It was for this that the 
Apostle prayed for the early Church, saying,— "That 
ye might be able to comprehend with all saints [the Secret 
of the Lord] the lengths and the breadths, the 
heights and depths of the love of Christ which passeth 
knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness 
of God."-Eph. 3:17-19. 

THE BOOK OF THE COVENANT. 



As we have just seen, the divine blessings are all 
hidden in the Abrahamic Covenant,— to which were 
added because of sin the Mosaic (typical) Covenant 
and its antitype the Covenant in Christ, the New Covenant 
sealed with his blood. 

The Bible is the great Book of these Covenants. 
And it like every other feature is considerably hidden, 
obscured, to the natural man; and its deeper and grander 
presentations can be seen only through the vail of types 
and shadows, parables and symbols. And the privilege 
to look beyond this vail, and to grasp the spirit of 



the truth, is reserved in large degree for the class mentioned 
in our text foregoing:— "The Secret of the Lord 
is with them that reverence him, and he will show them 
his Covenant." 

To this class— them that fear the Lord and have 
his Secret and know his Covenant— the Bible becomes 
a Chart of the Ages, which shows not only the coast 
lines and rocks and sand bars of the six thousand years 
of evil, but also the blessed port then to be reached, 
and the glorious land of blessing and righteousness and 
divine favor— the thousand years of Christ's Millennial 
reign. 

To this same class the Bible is a Compass also, 
which, in connection with the Chart, indicates to them 
the divinely directed route, by which they are to escape 
certain troubles coming upon the world, and by which 
they are to obtain certain trials and experiences which 
will be valuable to them in fitting and preparing them 
to be jointheirs with Christ in the Kingdom. Without 
this Compass they might indeed be able to judge in 
clear weather of some portions of the route, but never 
satisfactorily: and in times of storm and darkness, sun, 
moon and stars obscured, these, like the world, would 
be left to the mercy of their own imperfect judgments 
as to which way to steer, and would feel all the trepidation 
and uncertainty which so many others feel, were 
it not for their Compass. But the Compass can be 
seen, and its directions followed, however dark or obscure 
the natural light; and following its directions the 

R2210 : page 260 

Lord's people are to attain unto their high calling- 
make their calling and election sure. 

The Lord's Word, in the hands of this same class, 
may be compared to a Telescope, whose properly adjusted 
lenses represent the bringing into harmony of 
the human will with the divine will, in Christ. Careful 
adjustment is required that we may get a proper 
focus; but when this condition is obtained, wonderful 
things through the Bible we see. The far off and indistinct 
promises are brought nigh, made clear and 
plain. Hitherto unseen features of the divine character 
and plan are made manifest; and by the aid of this 
Telescope the lengths and breadths, the heights and 
the depths of divine Wisdom and Love and Power may 
be much more closely approximated by our finite 
minds. 

To this same class the Bible is also a Microscope. 
The proper adjustment of its lenses— the complete consecration 
of the human will to the divine— brings to 
bear upon all the little affairs of life a power which 
magnifies them, and shows us their importance as never 
seen by us before, and as cannot be seen by the world 
in general. Through the Bible as a Microscope, we 
can see that all the trifling affairs of the present life 



are potentialities, which, under divine direction, are 

working together for good to "the called ones according 

to his purpose." It magnifies the Law of God, 

shows us how grand, how sublimely perfect and altogether 

reasonable, is every requirement of God. It 

shows us that the weaknesses and imperfections which 

hinder us from measuring up to the standard of that 

perfect Law are inherited from father Adam. It shows us 

that the blemish of sin has affected not only our physical 

systems, but also our mental and moral faculties; and 

thus it points out to us that our own reasoning on every 

subject requires to be re-adjusted and harmonized with 

the spirit of the divine Law; and thus it enables us by 

such mental and moral adjustment to obtain what the 

Apostle calls "the spirit of a sound mind." It not only 

shows us what we could not see before of our own 

shortcomings, but graciously it indicates also how after 

coming into Christ and being covered with his robe 

of righteousness by faith, we may to some extent make 

up for these deficiencies by adding to our faith fortitude, 

and to fortitude knowledge, and to knowledge 

self-control, and to self-control patience, and to patience 

piety, and to piety brotherly-kindness, and to brotherly-kindness 

Love, which things, as they more and more 

abound, will incite us to cultivate fruitfulness, in the 

use of the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

-2 Pet. 1:5-8. 

In view of the blessings attached let us strive more 
and more to retain and to cultivate that true reverence 
for the Lord, which is not only the beginning of wisdom 
but also its end; that through it we may have the 

R2211 : page 260 

benefit and helpful assistance of all the gracious provisions 
which God has made for the progress of those 
who love him, in knowledge and in character; that in 
due time, if we faint not, we may inherit the promises 
and share the glories of our Father and our Lord. 



R2211 : page 260 

LENDING TO THE LORD. 

-SEPTEMBER 5.-2 COR. 9:1-11.— 

"For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, tho he 
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that we through his 
poverty might be rich."— 2 Cor. 8:9. 

OUR lesson inculcates Christian benevolence- 
alms giving. It is addressed to the Corinthian 
Christians and is on behalf of Christians in 
and about Jerusalem. A question arises why collections 



should be made for the Christians at Jerusalem 
more than for the Christians at Corinth. There were 
three reasons: (1) A severe famine had prevailed in 
the vicinity of Jerusalem. (2) Jerusalem was not a 
commercial city, and therefore money was less plentiful. 
(3) It would appear that the classes who received 
the gospel in and about Jerusalem were chiefly the 
poor, and we can readily judge from the open persecutions 
of the truth there that there was also a great deal of 
quiet opposition to all who sympathized with the gospel 
of Christ. As small shop people they were probably 
boycotted; and as laborers they probably were as far 
as possible rejected except as necessity might demand 
their services. On the contrary, the cities of Greece, 
Macedonia and Asia-Minor were prosperous; and as far 
as we may judge the class of society which accepted 
the gospel was in many cases the better element. 

This was indicated in our last lesson by the statement 
that the "chiefs of Asia" dissuaded Paul from 
going before the people at the colosseum. These chiefs 
of Asia were generally quite wealthy and prominent 
men. We remember also in the same lesson the fact 
that the books of magic, which were burned after the 
owners had accepted Christ, represented a very large 
amount of money. Probably, therefore, their owners 
were correspondingly wealthy. We remember also the 
favorable decision of the town clerk at Ephesus; and 
the fact that Tyranus was so in sympathy with the 
Apostle's teaching as to permit the use of his schoolroom. 
We recall the conversion of Serges Paulus, the 
deputy governor, at Paphos; also Dionysius, one of the 
professors in Mars Hill college at Athens; and Damaris 

R2211 : page 261 

of the same city; and Justus of Corinth; and Crispus, 
chief ruler of the synagogue in the same city. 

The question naturally arises, Why should the 
same gospel attract the well-to-do and middle classes in 
Greece and Asia-Minor and Thessalonica, and attract 
few outside the poorer class at Jerusalem? The answer 
would seem to be (1) that among the Jews who had 
long been acquainted with the true God, the true religion 
and the gracious promises of the Messiah, a religious 
pride had developed, especially amongst the 
wealthy and the learned. And because their religious 
system was in advance of every other religious system 
in the world, the learned attributed a like superiority 
to themselves individually— they "trusted in themselves 
that they were righteous, and despised others." 

This was the secret of Israel's being "blinded" to 
the gospel. The leaders and theologians were so self-conscious, 
and relied so implicitly upon their interpretations 
of the divine promises as centering in themselves, 
that they could not regard the humble Nazarene 
and his unlearned followers except as impostors. And 



when, later, the gospel began to be preached to the 
Gentiles their opposition was increased; for it was utterly 
contrary to every thought of their religious pride 
that God would accept either the humble Jews or the 
Gentiles to his favor, and reject themselves, the leading 
representatives of his cause and work. 

But amongst the Gentiles the case was very different: 
while the illiterate masses were firmly bound in 
the superstition of their various religions, those who 
were of an honest mind among the better educated 
were quick to discern that many of the features of their 
own religions were superstitions merely. They had 
probably, previously, been somewhat attracted to the 
Jewish religion as being much more reasonable than 
their own, as we find that the Gentiles readily resorted 
to the Jewish synagogues; but the Jewish religion 
would necessarily be unsatisfactory to them since it 
would appear to be very narrow, limiting the divine 
blessings in a special manner to Israelites— a people 
whom they considered rather inferiors in the arts at 
that time. But, the gospel, throwing wide open the 
door to those who desired righteousness, truth and 
goodness, of every nation, people, kindred and tongue, 
would naturally commend itself to the class we describe 
as being the most reasonable explanation of the Jewish 
doctrines and their grand eventual outcome, and long 
hidden meaning. 

At all events, the saints at Jerusalem were poorer 
than were the saints in Corinth. It was therefore appropriate 
that the Apostle should suggest to the latter 
the propriety of sending a gift to the former. Living 
at a time when the conveniences for transferring money 
were very inferior to the very poorest known to-day, 
the only possible method seemed to be that the various 
congregations should send their gifts at the hand of the 
Apostle when he would go to Jerusalem the following 
year. And Paul's words intimate that the suggestion 
made by him nearly a year before, to the Corinthian 
brethren, had been well received, and the collections 
zealously entered upon. For this reason it was "superfluous" 
for him to write in this connection particulars 
respecting the necessity for and propriety of this 
collection; but he hints to them that there was a bare 
possibility that the work zealously begun a year before 
might not have been patiently carried out, and that 
after he had boasted somewhat to others of their love 
and zeal for the Lord, he would regret if coming to 
them, enroute to Jerusalem, it should be found that 
after all they had failed to have their donation ready. 

In his previous epistle to the Corinthians he had 
suggested methodical charity, saying, "Now concerning 
the collection for the saints, as I have given instructions 
to the Churches at Galatia, even so do ye. 
On the first day of the week let every one of you lay 
by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there 
be no gathering when I come." 



It was the Apostle's experience, as it is the experience 
of all thoughtful people, that systematic charity 
is better than spasmodic charity: not only is the result 
generally larger, but the influence upon the giver is 
more beneficial: it keeps an object before the mind, a 
service to be rendered as unto the Lord. And with 
many the opportunity for serving the Lord's cause with 
money is almost the only opportunity for service. Of 
course, where a consecrated child of God can do so it 
is far better that he should give to the saints after the 
manner of Paul and his traveling associates— giving 
spiritual gifts and blessings, either by public preaching, 
or by house to house visiting: presenting the truth 
either by the printed page or by tongue or both. 

But there are others so circumstanced in life 
through lack of talent, or strength, or opportunity 
(hindered by prior mortgages upon their time— family 
obligations) that practically their only chance for serving 
the Lord and manifesting their love for him is 
through their gifts to his cause and to his people. For 
such to be deprived of the opportunity of exercising 
themselves in the Lord's service in this manner either 
through a lack of a cause needing their assistance, or 
through lack of instruction respecting this method of 
divine service, would be to deprive them of an important 
opportunity of service, and correspondingly to deprive 
them of the blessings which always follow every 
service to the Lord, whatever its character. 

We notice, therefore, that the Apostle felt very 
free to recommend to the Church the grace of giving 
and to even press upon them the fact that their liberality 

R2211 : page 262 

in proportion to their ability, would in a large degree 
be an index of their love for the Lord and the 
gospel. But, here we note in contrast, that the same 
Apostle did not ask alms of these believers when first 
they received the Lord's grace; lest they should in any 
manner get the impression that the gospel was being 
preached from mercenary motives— for lucre's sake. 
Accordingly, we find that rather than mention money 
the Apostle preached to these very same Corinthian 
brethren for more than a year without a suggestion as 
to remuneration; laboring with his own hands at his 
trade of tent-making, rather than be chargeable to any. 
He reminds them of this later on in this same epistle. 
-2 Cor. 11:7-9. 

Let us note also the change which the full appreciation 
of the gospel wrought upon the believers at 
Corinth. At first they were so negligent of their privilege 
that seemingly they never thought of volunteering 
financial assistance to the Apostle while he was 
serving them by the labor of his own hands, and receiving 
some assistance from believers in other places. 
But, after the grace of God entered more fully into 



their hearts and they began to appreciate the value of 
the truth which they had received,— that it had brought 
them priceless blessings of hope and joy and faith and 

R2212 : page 262 

character— they had a zeal, a "forwardness" to do 
something financially in the Lord's service. And now 
that the Apostle was absent from them, and after his 
course had proved to them that he sought not their 
money but themselves, to do them good; he felt free to 
draw their attention to the great blessing that would 
come from liberality in the Lord's cause in proportion 
to their ability and love. 

Urging this matter he gave them a parable, saying, 
"He that soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; 
and he that soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully." 
And this reminds us of the proverb, "There 
is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that 
withholdeth more than is proper, but it tendeth to poverty. 
The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that 
watereth shall be watered also himself." (Prov. 1 1:24,25.) 
The evident lesson is that the Lord is pleased 
to see his people cultivate breadth of heart as well as 
breadth of mind;— generosity in proportion to their 
knowledge of him and his generosity. 

The Scriptures nowhere declare that cases of absolute 
privation amongst the Lord's people are proofs 
that at some time in their past lives when possessed of 
means they failed to use a portion of it in charity, in 
the Lord's service; but the inspired words above quoted 
come very close to giving this lesson. At all events, 
it is profitable that we lay this testimony to heart and 
that each child of God henceforth shall be earnestly 
careful that out of the blessings of the Lord coming to 
us all from day to day some measure be carefully, 
prayerfully and lovingly laid aside as seed to be sown 
in the Lord's service according to the best wisdom and 
judgment which he will give us. How many have that 
carefulness for themselves either in using every penny 
as fast as it comes, or in being so interested in laying 
by for the outworking of future plans, that they feel 
they can spare nothing for charity. How many such 
can afterward see that they made a great mistake, when 
their accumulations suddenly vanished, either by reason 
of sickness or accident or bank failure or what not; 
and how then they have good reason to regret that 
they sowed no "seed" after the manner described by 
the Apostle in the sixth verse of our lesson. 

Our Lord showed us how he measures our gifts; 
that he esteems them not according to the amount given, 
but chiefly according to the spirit which prompts 
the gift, when he drew attention to the poor widow 
who cast in two mites into the Lord's treasury. Our 
Lord declared that from the standpoint of his estimation 
the poor widow had cast in a larger sum than any 



of the wealthy who had given merely out of their 
abundance, and not to such an extent that they felt it. 
How many of the Lord's people would be more "fat" 
spiritually to-day, if they would give attention to the 
exercise of this talent, this opportunity for service, we 
cannot say; the Lord only knows. But this lesson 
makes it incumbent upon us to point out a privilege in 
this direction which is within the reach of the very 
poorest. 

Very seldom is it necessary to caution people 
against over-much giving; yet in some instances such 
caution is proper, and in some instances in Scripture 
giving has been restrained. No one should give to the 
extent of causing privation to those dependent upon 
him. Nor should any one give to such an extent as to 
bring upon him financial bankruptcy and cause losses 
to others. The apostolic rule for giving we have quoted 
above. The laying by should be in general, "according 
as the Lord hath prospered him." The degree 
of our prosperity should be the measure of our charities. 
"The spirit of a sound mind" is inculcated by 
the Scriptures, upon this as upon every subject. 

"The Lord loveth a cheerful giver." And gifts 
in any other spirit than a cheerful one might just as 
well not be given: they will bring no blessing. The 
Lord does not appreciate such giving: it has no "sweet 
odor" in his estimation. The gift, to be appreciated 
of the Lord, must be a thank-offering, prompted by a 
realization of a debt of everlasting gratitude, to him 
from whom cometh every good and every perfect gift. 
And to such, the Apostle assures us, "God is able to 
make all things abound." All who give anything in 
the divine service, time, talent, strength, money or influence 

R2212: page 263 

—any or all of these— will find themselves proportionately 

abounding in the different graces; because 

such are in the right attitude of heart to grow in grace. 

But, the Apostle seems to imply further that such 
will have "sufficiency in all things" as well as be able 
to "abound in every good work." In thinking of sufficiency 
in any direction the condition of the mind must 
be taken into account. Sufficiency may not mean luxury 
and every comfort, but "all sufficiency" is gained 
always where there is "godliness with contentment." 
In proof that he is inculcating no new theory respecting 
the divine care over those who are seeking to scatter 
to others a portion of the blessings that come to 
them, temporal or spiritual, the Apostle quotes from 
the Psalms. -112:9. 

When in the last verse the Apostle speaks of 
"being enriched in everything," we are not to understand 
him to mean that the Lord's people will all be 
enriched financially. The Apostle himself was an example 
of how the Lord's people do not become wealthy. 



He is speaking rather of the enrichment of the heart, 

as he says in another place, speaking of himself and co-laborers 

in the gospel work: We are "as poor, but 

making many rich;"— rich in hope, rich in faith, rich 

in love and all the various concomitant graces which 

these imply. 

Our Golden Text reminds us of the grandest example 
of self-denial in the interest of others on record 
—the gift by our Lord Jesus of himself for the world. 
He was rich in the possession of the spiritual nature 
and its honors and glory, yet for our sakes he became 
poor, taking the human nature that he might redeem 
us; and to this end he surrendered even life itself at 
Calvary, that through his sacrifice we might become 
rich:— become possessed of divine favor, and the riches 
of divine grace in Christ; even jointheirship with him 
who is now our exalted Lord at the right hand of divine 
Majesty. But to attain this jointheirship with 
him, we must study to be like him, to have his spirit; 
and like him desirous of sharing whatever he may give 
us of either temporal or spiritual favors with others, 
particularly the "household of faith;"— either to feed 
or clothe it, spiritually or temporally, as circumstances 
may dictate. "The liberal soul shall be made fat." 

R2215 : page 263 

SCATTER SEEDS OF KINDNESS. 



"Loving words will cost but little, 

Journeying up the hill of life; 
But they make the weak and weary 

Stronger, braver for the strife. 
Do you count them only trifles? 

What to earth are sun and rain? 
Never was a kind word wasted; 

Never one was said in vain. 

"When the cares of life are many, 

And its burdens heavy grow 
For the ones who walk beside you, 

If you love them, tell them so. 
What you count of little value 

Has an almost magic power, 
And beneath that cheering sunshine 

Hearts will blossom like a flower. 

"So as up life's hill we journey, 
Let us scatter all the way 

Kindly words, to be as sunshine 
In the dark and cloudy day. 

Grudge no loving word, my brother, 
As along through life you go, 

To the ones who journey with you; 



If you love them, tell them so." 



R2212 : page 263 

LIVING THE NEW LIFE. 

--SEPT. 12.-ROM. 12:9-21.- 

"Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good."— Rom. 12:21. 

WHILE the Apostle Paul was a wonderful logician, 

and in his writings has set forth the 

elements of Christian faith along doctrinal lines more 

than any other apostle, yet we notice that he is in pursuit 

of a certain object: he is not beating the air, not 

discussing theological points for the sake of making an 

argument or showing his own ability. His arguments 

along doctrinal lines lead the reader in every instance 

onward and upward, as a stairway, to a grand upper 

room of perfected Christian character: and nowhere is 

this more manifest than in his epistle to the Romans. 

Beginning with the distinctions between the Jew, informed 

respecting God, and to some extent respecting 

his will and his plan, and contrasting these with the 

general ignorance prevailing amongst all classes of Gentiles, 

"without God and having no hope in the world," 

he carries the mind forward, pointing out how the degradation 

had come, and how the knowledge of God had 

reached Israel first, not because Israelites were better, 

but because of the divine favor, "grace," "election." 

He points out nevertheless that "the Law made 
nothing perfect," but was merely a pedagogue (a servant 
whose business it was to take children to school); 
thus the Law was to bring Israel to Christ, the great 

R2212 : page 264 

Teacher, that they might learn of him. He points out 
further that, while Israel was seeking divine favor, 
they failed to get the chief blessing because they were 
not thoroughly candid with themselves, and hence mistook 
the mission of Moses' Law. They hypocritically 
claimed that they kept that Law inviolate and were entitled 
to its blessings,— eternal life, etc.,— whereas they 
should have admitted that the Law was so grand and 
so perfect, and themselves so fallen from perfection, 
that they were unable to keep it; and they should have 
looked to the Lord for help. In this attitude of mind 
they would have been ready to receive eternal life as a 
gift, through Jesus Christ our Lord; and would have 
given up seeking it by the perfection of their own works. 
So the Apostle points out that Israel failed because 
they sought the blessing not by faith but by works. Thus 
"Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; 



but the election hath obtained it, and the rest were 
blinded." (Rom. 1 1:7.) He then points out that this 
fall of Israel into blindness and the calling of a peculiar 
people from among the Gentiles to complete the "elect" 
company was foreknown of God and declared by him 
through the prophets. (Rom. 9 and 10.) But he shows 
that Israel is not cast off forever, and that when the 
elect class is complete all Israel shall be saved from the 

R2213 : page 264 

blindness into which they stumbled in the rejection of 
Christ; and that their recovery then will be the signal 
for blessings upon the whole world. 
-Rom. 11:15,25,32. 

It is after eleven chapters of argumentative, logical, 
beautiful, instructive, blessed reasoning that the Apostle 
reaches the crown of his argument, saying (12:1), 
"I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of 
God [presented in the previous eleven chapters] that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable 
to God, which is your reasonable service." He is 
addressing the "elect" body of Christ, of which a part 
was being gathered from among the Jews and the remainder 
being made up from those called from among 
the Gentiles. These should know what are the terms 
and conditions upon which God hath "called" them; 
viz., (1) to suffer with Christ in this present time, and 
(2) to be glorified and reign with him in the coming 
age, to bless the world. These should know the reason 
for their sufferings and the character which God would 
develop in them, and without which they would not be 
"fit for the Kingdom." It is concerning some of these 
characteristics, necessary to those who would make 
their "calling and election sure," that our present 
lesson treats. 

"Let love be without dissimulation." He had already 
explained the necessity for love; but he now puts 
us on guard against a merely feigned love, which would 
only outwardly appear kind and polite. The true spirit 
of love, a holy spirit, will not be a dissimulating one, 
a hypocritical one: the love will be genuine, heartfelt 
as well as mouth expressed. This love is to be toward 
God, and toward all in proportion as they are God-like, 
or striving to be so. It is to be a love of that which is 
good, right, pure, true. 

"Abhor that which is evil." We are not merely to 
avoid doing that which is evil, not merely to have no love 
or affinity for evil; but more than these we are to hate, 
to abhor evil. And as the love for God and for all 
things true and pure and making for righteousness is 
to be cultivated, so the abhorrence of sin and impurity 
of every kind is to be cultivated, so that the stronger 
we become in Christian character the more intense will 
be our love for the good and pure and true, and the 
more intense will be our opposition to the untrue, the 



impure, the sinful. The more we learn of the beautiful 
harmonies of this heavenly grace of love, and the 
more they become the melodies of our own hearts, the 
more distressing and repugnant and abhorrent will sin 
and selfishness, "the spirit of the world," be to us: just 
as discords in music grate upon our ears in proportion 
as our knowledge and appreciation of musical harmonies 
grows. As holiness and sin are opposites, so our 
feelings toward these must be represented by the sentiments 
of love and hatred. To grow cool in love for 
righteousness, is to lose some of the abhorrence for sin. 
Let us therefore cultivate in ourselves hatred for sin, 
selfishness impurity and every evil way, that we may 
find it the easier to cultivate in our hearts the beautiful 
graces of the holy spirit. 

"Cleave to that which is good." The thought is, 
adhere to, be cemented to, that which is good. There 
is a constant tendency not only from our own fallen 
natures, but also from the world and the devil, to separate 
from that which is good and pure and noble. 
And we must resolutely determine, that at all hazards 
and for all time, by the Lord's grace, we will adhere 
to him,— the truth, the way, the life. 

"Be kindly affectioned." The thought here seems 
to be: Cultivate among yourselves that kind of affection 
which properly belongs in a family, where the 
blessing or honor of one member signifies the blessing, 
honor and advancement of all. Perhaps the Apostle 
thus delicately suggests the impropriety of any manifestation 
of affection except such as would be proper 
between brethren: as we read in another place, "Love 
as brethren."— 1 Pet. 3:8. 

"In honor preferring one another." That is, rejoicing 
more if honor come to another than if it had 
come to self. Our hearts should be so unselfish 
that we would take pleasure in seeing honor and prosperity 
come to another, and rejoice in it: and so sympathetic 
that a brother's failure would cause us as much 

R2213 : page 265 

chagrin as if it were our own failure. This is the holy 
spirit which unfeignedly rejoices with those who rejoice, 
and weeps with those who weep. 

"Not slothful in your affairs." The word here 
does not refer specially to mercantile business, but to 
affairs in general. The class addressed, who are seeking 
to make their calling and election sure, are to "do 
all things as unto the Lord;" and nothing done for the 
Lord should be done in a slovenly manner. We are in 
a world full of opportunities for good or evil: there are 
few on our side, the side of God and of righteousness; 
and whoever realizes this, and is fully consecrated to 
the Lord, will certainly be aroused from slothfulness 
which is natural to many in the fallen condition. If 
the battle of truth against error, of light against darkness, 



does not awaken us to energy in the Lord's service, 
it marks an unfavorable condition of heart. And 
to the consecrated child of God, every affair of life- 
eating, drinking and all other business in this 
present life— is to help us to serve the interests of our 
Master's cause. 

"Fervent in spirit." This is placed in contrast 
with sloth: if as stewards of divine mercy and truth we 
are slothful, it is because we are cool in our love to the 
Lord; hence the Apostle's instruction that we should 
be hot, fervent in spirit. The Greek word here translated 
"fervent" signifies to be hot, to boil. We are 
reminded of our Lord's words to the Church of Laodicea, 
boastful of its works but luke-warm in the spirit 
of its love. "I know thy works, that thou art neither 
cold nor hot: I would that thou wert cold or hot. So 
then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor 
hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth." Let all who 
have received the Lord's spirit take heed lest they get 
into a lukewarm condition and lose the Lord's favor: let 
them cultivate rather a growing appreciation of the mercies 
of God, which growing appreciation as fuel will 
add fervency to our love and zeal for his truth, and 
for purity in our own hearts, and for service to others. 

"Rejoice in hope." We are not to expect to have 
much in the present life to rejoice in, if we are faithful 
to our "calling;" because, "through much tribulation 
shall ye enter the Kingdom." Our rejoicing is to 
be in hope— looking into the future. The eye of faith 
is to see what the natural eye cannot see, the crown of 
life and all the glorious things "which God hath in 
reservation for them that love him [fervently]." And 
here is the advantage of doctrinal knowledge: it inspires 
hope; it gives a foundation for hope. Knowledge 
cannot bring us to the Kingdom; but it may be a great 
help in building us up and preparing us for it, by constantly 
holding before us the hopes which God designs 
should stimulate and encourage us while running the 
race for the great prize. 

"Patient in tribulation." Our word tribulation is 
derived from the Latin tribulum, the name of a roller 
or threshing machine used in olden times for cleaning 
wheat, removing from it the outer husk or chaff. How 
appropriate the thought when applied to the Lord's 
consecrated people, who in the Scriptures are symbolized 
by wheat. Our new natures are the kernel, 
the real grain: yet this treasure or valuable part is covered 
with the husk of earthly conditions. And in order 
that the wheat may be made properly ready for the 
"garner" and for usefulness, it is necessary that each 
grain shall pass through the tribulation necessary to 
separate those qualities which, until separated, render 
us unfit for the future service to which we are called 
of the Lord. In proportion as we are able to realize 
our own imperfections, and the perfect will of God 
concerning us, we will be enabled to bear patiently, 



and even with a certain kind of rejoicing, all the tribulations 
which the Master shall see best to let come upon 
us. "We glory in tribulations also."— Rom. 5:3. 

"Instant in prayer." No advice that the Apostle 
could give to the class addressed could be more vitally 
important than this. 

"Ah, whither could we flee for aid when tempted, desolate, dismayed? 
Or how the host of sin defeat had suffering saints no mercy-seat. 

Prayer, communion with God, is indispensably 
necessary to our spiritual welfare; and the appreciation 
of the privilege of communion with the Most High and 
with our Redeemer, or the lack of such appreciation, 
as the case may be, indicates tolerably clearly our fervency 
or our coldness with reference to the things of 
the Lord. People may be fervent in serving schemes 
or plans of their own, or human systems and theories, 
and have little desire for prayer; but those who serve 
the Lord and his truth from a hot, fervent heart, will 
so realize their imperfection and their own inability in 
the divine service, that they will desire and will continually 
seek the Master's guidance and direction with 
reference to the service they are rendering to him. 

If, therefore, we ever feel a growing indifference, 
either to private prayer or to public worship or to social 
prayer-meetings, we may be assured that it is a very 
dangerous sign of one of two things. (1) Either that 
our love is growing cold, or (2) that our love is misplaced, 
misdirected, placed upon some earthly scheme 
or ambition, and is not fervent toward the Lord. And 
whichever is found to be the difficulty should be corrected 
at once. The appreciation of prayer, like the 
growth of love, and like the increase of fervency of 
spirit, is a matter for development; and the best fuel, 
as above suggested, is the consideration of the divine 

R2214 : page 265 

mercies already enjoyed. 

"Distributing to the distresses of saints." The 
Greek word here rendered "distributing" signifies to 

R2214 : page 266 

make common. The thought evidently is, that altho 
Communism is not encouraged in Scripture, nor is it the 
best method in this present time, while it is better that 
each should have the responsibility largely for his own 
affairs and be the steward of his own talents, nevertheless 
that feeling of brotherhood is to prevail amongst 
the saints, which would "make common" to others of 
the spiritual family, such things as are necessities to 
them. Love, not Selfishness, is to control. 

"Given to hospitality." The Apostle's language 
here does not signify if requested we should not be inhospitable; 
but it means much more: literally, it signifies 
following after hospitality— going out after, or 



seeking for opportunities for the exercise of hospitality. 
This principle is as applicable to the poor as to the 
rich. If what we have is plain or common, the hospitable 
use of it will just as truly show our heart-intentions 
as tho it were the best. Some, we fear, fail to 
cultivate this grace; and if they exercise hospitality are 
inclined to give better than they have, and perhaps 
would go into debt in order to entertain more lavishly 
than their circumstances would justify. This is wrong. 
It is not cultivating the grace which the Apostle here 
inculcates, but is cultivating a very evil weed,— pride. 
Let us learn not only to love without dissimulation, 
but also to follow after hospitality without dissimulation, 
without seeking to show off better conditions than 
are really ours. 

"Bless them which persecute you." This is a quotation 
from the sermon on the mount. It addresses a 
mind enlightened by the divine Word, that has thus 
drawn against it the opposition of Satan, and of those 
whose understandings he has darkened. It means an 
opposition of persecution not for wrong-doing, or as 
busy-bodies in other men's matters, or for nonsensical 
peculiarities, but persecution for the truth's sake. It 
implies a heart full of love and sympathy and pity; for 
no other heart could really and truly bless its persecutors 
and wish them no evil, but good. This is the kind 
of a heart, overflowing with the holy spirit of the Lord, 
that is able to rejoice with those in prosperity, to weep 
with those who sorrow and even able to forget its own 
tribulations or adversities. 

"Be of the same disposition toward each one." Be 
sympathetic toward the very humblest brother or sister 
as well as toward the most refined. "Mind not high 
things." Do not allow your affections and sentiments 
merely to go out along ecstatic lines, but bring your 
mind down so as to enter into sympathy with those of 
God's people who financially and intellectually are in 
a low estate. 

"Be not wise in your own conceits." This is a further 
injunction to humility. Those who are always 
minding high things and overlooking the humbler ones 
of the Lord's people usually do so because of too high 
an opinion of their own wisdom and intelligence. Few 
things more blemish an otherwise developed Christian 
character than a conceit which separates him or her 
from the humblest of the Lord's flock. Moreover, 
there is no more dangerous thing than such an opinion 
of one's own wisdom. This condition is described 
as being "heady," "high minded." It naturally leads 
into error, and to a fall from both the letter and spirit 
of the truth. "Pride goeth before destruction, and a 
haughty spirit before a fall." Let all beware of this 
terrible disease. Nothing is a greater hindrance and 
stumbling-block to the ministers of the nominal churches 
to-day (hindering them from receiving the truth) 
than this kind of pride in their own wisdom, which 



leads to and is distinguished by the unscriptural division 
of believers into "clergy" and "laity." And there 
is equal and even greater danger along this line 
for those who have received present truth, and who are 
seeking to minister it to others. Let all of the Lord's 
people, especially those who have a little more knowledge, 
and who attempt to make known the riches of 
divine grace, be specially on guard against attacks of 
the enemy from this quarter. 

"Recompense no man evil for evil." Much of the 
previous instruction of this lesson relates to our dealings 
with the brotherhood; but here the Apostle points 
out a general line of conduct toward all men. There 
is a general tendency on the part of well-intentioned 
people to recognize a line of justice and a desire to vindicate 
justice and to punish evil doers. The Apostle 
points out that this is not the rule governing the Lord's 
family. It is not improper for the world to have laws 
and regulations for criminals, in the interest of society; 
and the Apostle is not discussing those, nor finding 
fault with them. He is treating rather of the minor 
affairs of life in which various evils may be inflicted 
and resented without coming directly under the control 
of civil laws. The policy of the Christian is to be not 
along the lines of slothfulness, animosities, revenges 
and perpetual conflicts, but to the contrary of all this; 
because of his greater knowledge of how sin came into 
the world, and how all mankind are fallen mentally, 
morally and physically, and how God has sympathy with 
the poor groaning creation and has provided a ransom 
for all, and that in due time a restitution for all shall 
be possible. And he is to have a heart so full of sympathy 
with this plan, that he will be generous, and 
God-like, toward the sin-blinded ones— anxious chiefly 
for the opening of the eyes of their understandings, 
and for an opportunity of blessing and helping them, 
rather than entertaining feelings of revenge. 

"Provide things honest in the sight of all men." 
Realizing that part of the service which the Lord requires 

R2214 : page 267 

of him is an honest provision for the necessities 
of himself and family, the true Christian will seek to 
live up to this reasonable requirement. If he cannot 
obtain employment at that which he prefers, he will 
be bound in honesty to take some other employment, 
in order to meet his obligations. Few things are more 
likely to bring dishonor upon God's people in the sight 
of the world than dishonesty. Of course, none of the 
saints would steal; but there is another way of being 
dishonest, which seems to slip by many consciences 
under certain circumstances. This is the dishonesty 
of purchasing on credit by actually or impliedly promising 
a payment at no distant date when there are no 
assurances of ability to pay at that date, as the merchant 



is led to presume. Some indeed seem to encourage 
themselves in such dishonest methods, persuading 
themselves that they are exercising "faith" in God, that 
he will provide means for the payment of their debts. 
This is a great mistake. God has never authorized any 
one to go into debt for him, and such a faith has no 
backing in God's Word. On the contrary, he instructs 
his people not to go into debt; but he says, "Owe no man 
anything." A good plan is to always live within our 
income and, if possible, to "lay by in store that we 
may have to give to him that needeth." 

"Live as peaceably with all men as lieth within the 
range of your possibilities." With the various crooked 
natures of the world, and with our own imperfect dispositions 
(more and more coming under control of grace 
however) it will be a difficult matter to avoid all friction. 
But while in the interest of peace we are to submit 
to trifling wrongs and injustices with good grace, 
yet there is a place where we must draw the line; a 
place where our desire for peace must not control; that 
is, whenever a principle is involved. Here is a great 
difficulty: those who are naturally peaceable, will be 
tempted to pursue peace even at the expense of principle, 
and in conflict with the divine commands; on the 
other hand many of those who are firmest in defense of 
righteous principles are inclined to be combative, and 
have great need to guard themselves and to cultivate 
this disposition for peace, which is a part of the divine 
character which we are to copy. The rule should be, 
"First pure [truthful and loyal to righteousness] then 
peaceable."— James 3:17. 

"Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves"; but preferably 
get out of the way of your opponents and their 
wrath, remembering that it is written, "Vengeance is 
mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." Hence we do not 
need to feel that justice needs to be vindicated at our 
hands. God will take care of the vindication of his 
own justice. If it were left in our hands to mete out 
justice to those who mistreat us and say all manner of 
evil against us falsely for Christ's sake, we would 
doubtless make many mistakes. We should therefore 
be glad that the matter is not in our hands at present, 
and that divine wisdom and justice will repay to evil 
doers with greater mercy than we would probably be 
able to exercise. Our feelings, therefore, should be 
largely those of sympathy and pity for wrong doers, 
remembering that surely either in the present life or 
in that which is to come a man shall reap according 
to his present sowing. 

For these reasons and in order to cultivate in us 
more of the divine mind, we are instructed to be kind 
to our enemies and not to see them want for necessities 
of life. Such treatment will be more likely than any 
other to do them good, and to win them as friends. We 
are not, however, to treat them kindly in order to see 
how badly we can make them feel under it. We are 



to treat them kindly because love is the principle of 
our nature, the "new commandment" of our Lord and 
Master, the holy spirit which is more and more actuating 
us. We are to treat them thus, regardless of 
whether we ever melt them by our kindness in the 
present life or not. 

R2215 : page 267 

"Be not overcome of evil." We are to remember 
that there is a constant conflict between good and evil, 
that each has its servants, or soldiers, and that we have 
enlisted on the side of good, under the Captain of our 
salvation, with the engagement that we will "fight a 
good fight." We are never, therefore, to take up or 
to use evil words or methods or manners. To do so 
is temporarily to join the enemy, or to admit that his 
implements and methods are better than those of the 
Captain to whom we belong. To answer anger with 
anger, evil report with evil report, bitter words with 
bitter words, slander with slander, persecution with 
persecution, blow with blow, or any of these, would be 
to endeavor to overcome evil with evil. This which 
is natural to our fallen natures is what we are commanded 
to avoid, that we may the more thoroughly 
cultivate the new nature. To be misled by the adversary 
to use his methods in any of these ways is to 
be overcome of evil. 

"Overcome evil with good." The fact that the Lord 
so directs us is proof (1) that it is practicable and (2) 
that it is preferable. Faith accepts these declarations 
of divine wisdom on the subject; and experience endorses 
or ratifies them. Whoever has tried, has found 
that evil can be overcome with good, in many instances. 
Not infrequently, however, all the good that you 
can do in return for evil will work no change in the 
evil-doer; he goes on in his evil way, is more insistent, 
and more intolerant. Nevertheless, the course of the 
Lord's people cannot vary; they are authorized to do 
only good, and to keep on doing good whether it shall 
melt the opposition or not. In this, we are but following 

R2215 : page 268 

the divine example. God causes the rain to fall 
upon the crops of the good and of the evil; he causes 
the sunshine to come indiscriminately, upon the just 
and the unjust. "His tender mercies are over all his 
works." And even by and by, when his vengeance 
shall be exercised, it will still be in love and kindness; 
(1) that those who will may be benefited by the 
discipline of trouble, and (2) that those who will 
not benefit may be destroyed from among the people; 
to the end that their baneful influence may be removed 
forever. Let us all more and more seek to live the 
new life. 



R2215 : page 268 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



MR. M. L. MCPHAIL, Illinois. 

DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER:-It was through a 
recent letter received from Mr. C. T. Russell that I 
obtained your name and address. And I now take pleasure 
in penning you a few lines. 

You do not know— O yes! I think you do,— but 
certainly only a few can know, what exceeding blessedness 
has come to me through my brief acquaintance 
with Mr. Russell and his works. And how I long for more! 

I am a middle-aged man of 40. I was brought up 
a Christian from my mother's knee. 

Eleven years ago (about), I lost my sweet wife, 
after a marriage of 2-1/2 years. She was a devoted 
Christian, so good, so beautiful, so true; for her sweet 
sake I could willingly have died. But God took her 
from me, leaving me with no children, no cares, but 
a crushed spirit, a broken heart and almost a rebellious 
inclination. But these extremities set me to thinking 
as I had never thought before. 

I have long felt that Christian religion ought to 
be a great deal more or a great deal less than that 
usually presented either by pen or pulpit. I accordingly 
went into the ministry in the Methodist Church. 
And while I enjoyed working for my Master according 
to my limited knowledge and ability, I learned to 
feel more and more that the Methodist Church did not 
mean business: did not believe what it presented nor 
try to present what it did believe. 

After working hard for 2-1/2 years I was obliged to 
stop from nervous prostration. And really, the teaching 
of this church is enough to prostrate the nerves of 
anybody who is honest enough to work consistently in 
harmony with such views. Thus I left the pulpit: but 
I could not leave off thinking. Last winter I advertised 
in the Chicago Record for truth, thus,— 
PERSONAL NOTICE. 

Correspondence wanted from any one who is a candidate for absolute 
and abstract truth. Address: Box 142, , 111. 

This ad was echoed and enlarged by the Tribune, 
and I received many answers: among them VOL. I. of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, a copy of the WATCH TOWER and 
"What Say the Scriptures about Hell?" These were 
sent me by a brother Dixon, of Iowa, and this was the 
first that I ever heard of the good people at Allegheny. 
But I have feasted on it since that time. 

Then it was, upon inquiry concerning who and how 
many accepted this interpretation of the Word, that I 



learned of the little band so near as Chicago. Now it 
so happens that I expect to spend two or three days in 
Chicago some time in September (perhaps before the 
middle). I have a number of friends in and near the 
city, and I think I would like to meet some of you 
people and have a nice long talk with you personally, 
if it be agreeable to you. 
I am Yours in Christ, R. W. LOVERING. 



California. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Quite accidentally, 
the other day, I became acquainted with a miner, returned 
to these parts from Alaska. He has done fairly 
well there. 

I found that he did not believe in "One word of 
the Bible, not one word from beginning to end of the 
book!" I told him there was a surprise in store 
for him, and gave him two TOWERS and lent him VOL. 
I. of MILLENNIAL DAWN. A few days after I saw him 
again before he had finished VOL. I., and he said: "I 
am going back to Alaska early in March, and want to 
take all those books with me!" I am sure he is now 
well on the road to grasp the truth. 

Will these be the first of the DAWNS to go to the 
Arctic Circle? If so please let the TOWER readers 
know that Mr. Walker has the honor of God to bear 
the Light manifested at the close of the Gospel age into 
the Arctic regions. 

Yours very truly, ALFRED R. PEARSON. 



Tennessee. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write you that you 
may know how the Lord's few are getting along at this 
place. We have had six meetings from place to place 
since I wrote you last, and had a soul refreshing time 
at each gathering. But as our homes are so scattered 
over the neighborhood that house to house meetings 
are very inconvenient, I have fitted up a good house on 
my place, at the edge of our little town, to be used as 
a meeting house for God's people. To-morrow will be 
our first gathering at our new meeting place. I pray 
the Lord may bless us in our effort. 

Last Saturday the Baptist church, which is three 
miles from here, held a meeting in which they proposed 
to discuss among themselves what they call the Russell 
doctrine. The questions were asked through a 
question box. Three important questions,— "To what 
extent does the atonement reach?" "How far does the 
Redemption extend?" "Is there to be a restitution 
of all things?"— were assigned to one Burl. Henry, said 
to be the ablest minister in the Baptist Northern Association. 
Mr. Henry answered those three questions 



in broad terms as taught in the MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
Then they all rose up and told Mr. Henry that he would 
have to stop advocating such doctrine, or they would 
turn him out of the church; but Mr. Henry frankly 
told them that he did not care if they did turn him out 
of their church, that they could not stop him from 
preaching this Gospel of the Kingdom, except they 
stopped his breath. Thus it is, one by one, they keep 
coming as the Lord's sheep to his bountiful provisions. 

May the Lord bless you in your every effort to 
spread the truth. Yours in Love and Christian 
fellowship, G. E. TOLIVER. 



page 269 
