Chapter Nineteen
Continue to Speak God’s Word With Boldness
 1. (a) What good news did Jesus’ disciples proclaim, but how did some of the Jews react? (b) What questions might we ask?
NEARLY 2,000 years ago, God’s Son, Jesus Christ, was anointed as the future King over all the earth. Jesus was executed at the instigation of religious enemies, but Jehovah raised him from the dead. Through Jesus, everlasting life was now possible. When Jesus’ disciples publicly proclaimed this good news, however, persecution broke out. Some of them were thrown into prison, even flogged and ordered to stop speaking about Jesus. (Acts 4:1-3, 17; 5:17, 18, 40) What would they do? What would you have done? Would you have continued to witness boldly?
 2. (a) What marvelous news needs to be proclaimed in our day? (b) Who have the responsibility to preach the good news?
2 In 1914 the King of God’s Kingdom, Jesus Christ, was enthroned in heaven to rule ‘in the midst of his enemies.’ (Psalm 110:2) Next, Satan and his demons were hurled down to the earth. (Revelation 12:1-5, 7-12) The last days of the present wicked system had begun. When this time period ends, God will crush the entire satanic system of things. (Daniel 2:44; Matthew 24:21) Survivors will have before them the prospect of everlasting life on an earth that will become a paradise. If you have embraced this good news, you will want to share it with others. (Matthew 24:14) But what response can you expect?
 3. (a) How do people respond to the Kingdom message? (b) What question must we face?
3 When you proclaim the Kingdom good news, some people may welcome it, but most will be indifferent. (Matthew 24:37-39) Some may ridicule or oppose you. Jesus warned that opposition might come from your own relatives. (Luke 21:16-19) It may also come at your place of work or at school. In some parts of the earth, Jehovah’s Witnesses are even under governmental ban. When confronted with such circumstances, will you continue to speak God’s word boldly and “stand firm in the faith”?​—1 Corinthians 16:13.
Not Relying on Our Own Strength
 4. (a) To prove ourselves faithful servants of God, what is a basic requirement? (b) Why are Christian meetings so important?
4 Basic to being a faithful servant of Jehovah is reliance on his provisions. One of these is congregation meetings. The Scriptures urge us not to neglect them. (Hebrews 10:23-25) Those who have continued to be faithful Witnesses of Jehovah have exerted themselves to be regular in attendance at meetings with fellow worshipers. At these meetings our knowledge of the Scriptures is increased. Also, our appreciation of well-known truths grows, and our awareness of ways in which to use them is sharpened. We are drawn closer to our Christian brothers in united worship and are strengthened to do God’s will. Jehovah’s spirit provides direction through the congregation, and by means of that spirit, Jesus is in our midst.​—Matthew 18:20; Revelation 3:6.
 5. When Jehovah’s Witnesses are under ban, what is done about meetings?
5 Do you regularly attend all the meetings, and do you make personal application of what you hear discussed? Sometimes, when Jehovah’s Witnesses are under ban, it is necessary to hold the meetings in small groups in private homes. Places and times may vary and may not always be convenient, some meetings being held late at night. But in spite of personal inconvenience or danger, faithful brothers and sisters put forth earnest effort to be present for each meeting.
 6. How do we demonstrate our reliance on Jehovah, and how can this help us to keep on speaking boldly?
6 Reliance on Jehovah is developed by regularly turning to him in heartfelt prayer, realizing that we need God’s help. Do you do that? Jesus prayed repeatedly during his earthly ministry. (Luke 3:21; 6:12, 13; 22:39-44) And on the night before his impalement, he urged his disciples: “Keep on the watch and praying, in order that you do not come into temptation.” (Mark 14:38) If we encounter indifference to the Kingdom message, we could be tempted to slow down in our ministry. If people ridicule us or persecute us, we might feel tempted to keep quiet to avoid problems. But if we pray earnestly for God’s spirit to help us to keep on speaking boldly, we will be safeguarded against giving in to those temptations.​—Luke 11:13; Ephesians 6:18-20.
A Record of Bold Witnessing
 7. (a) Why is the record in Acts of special interest to us? (b) Answer the questions provided at the end of this paragraph, emphasizing how the information can benefit us.
7 The record contained in the book of Acts is of special interest to all of us. It tells how the apostles and other early disciples​—people who had feelings like ours—​overcame obstacles and proved to be bold and faithful witnesses of Jehovah. Let us examine a portion of that record with the aid of the following questions and cited scriptures. As we do so, consider how you can personally benefit from what you are reading.
Were the apostles highly educated men? Were they individuals who by nature were fearless, regardless of what happened? (John 18:17, 25-27; 20:19; Acts 4:13)
What enabled Peter to speak boldly before the Jewish court that had condemned God’s own Son? (Matthew 10:19, 20; Acts 4:8)
What had the apostles been doing during the weeks before they were brought before the Sanhedrin? (Acts 1:14; 2:1, 42)
When the rulers ordered the apostles to stop preaching on the basis of Jesus’ name, how did Peter and John reply? (Acts 4:19, 20)
After their release, to whom did the apostles again look for help? Did they pray for the persecution to stop, or what? (Acts 4:24-31)
By what means did Jehovah provide assistance when opposers tried to stop the preaching work? (Acts 5:17-20)
How did the apostles show that they understood the reason why they had been delivered? (Acts 5:21, 41, 42)
Even when many of the disciples were scattered because of persecution, what did they continue to do? (Acts 8:3, 4; 11:19-21)
 8. What thrilling results came from the ministry of the early disciples, and how have we come to be involved?
8 The work of preaching the good news was not in vain. About 3,000 disciples were baptized at Pentecost 33 C.E. “Believers in the Lord kept on being added, multitudes both of men and of women.” (Acts 2:41; 4:4; 5:14) In time, even a fierce persecutor of God’s people, Saul of Tarsus, became a Christian and boldly began witnessing to the truth. He came to be known as the apostle Paul. (Galatians 1:22-24) The work that began in the first century has not stopped. It has gathered momentum in these last days and has reached all parts of the earth. We have the privilege of sharing in it, and as we do so, we can learn from the example set by loyal witnesses who served before us.
 9. (a) What opportunities did Paul use to witness? (b) In what ways do you spread the Kingdom message to others?
9 When Paul learned the truth about Jesus Christ, what did he do? “Immediately . . . he began to preach Jesus, that this One is the Son of God.” (Acts 9:20) He appreciated God’s undeserved kindness to him, and he realized that everyone needed the good news that he had received. Paul was a Jew, and according to the custom of the day, he went to the synagogues to give a witness. He also preached from house to house and reasoned with people in the marketplace. And he was willing to move into new territories to preach the good news.​—Acts 17:17; 20:20; Romans 15:23, 24.
10. (a) How did Paul show that while bold, he was also discerning in the way he witnessed? (b) How might we reflect Paul’s qualities when witnessing to relatives, workmates, or schoolmates?
10 Paul was bold but also discerning, as we should be. To Jews he appealed on the basis of the promises made by God to their forefathers. To Greeks he spoke on the basis of things with which they were familiar. At times he used his own experience in learning the truth as a vehicle for giving a witness. He said: “I do all things for the sake of the good news, that I may become a sharer of it with others.”​—1 Corinthians 9:20-23; Acts 22:3-21.
11. (a) What did Paul do to avoid repeated confrontations with opposers? (b) When might we wisely imitate Paul’s example, and how? (c) From where does the power come to keep on speaking boldly?
11 When opposition made it seem better for Paul to preach in another area for a time, he did so instead of forcing repeated confrontations with opposers. (Acts 14:5-7; 18:5-7; Romans 12:18) But he was never ashamed of the good news. (Romans 1:16) Though Paul found the insolent​—even violent—​treatment by opposers unpleasant, he “mustered up boldness by means of our God” to keep on preaching. He said: “The Lord stood near me and infused power into me, that through me the preaching might be fully accomplished.” (1 Thessalonians 2:2; 2 Timothy 4:17) The Head of the Christian congregation, Jesus, continues to provide the power we need to do the work he foretold for our day.​—Mark 13:10.
12. What gives evidence of Christian boldness, and what is the basis for it?
12 We have every reason to continue speaking God’s word boldly, just as Jesus and other faithful servants of God did in the first century. This does not mean being inconsiderate or trying to force the message on those who do not want it. But we do not give up because people are indifferent; nor are we silenced by opposition. Like Jesus, we point to God’s Kingdom as the rightful government of all the earth. We speak with confidence because we represent Jehovah, the Universal Sovereign, and because the message we proclaim is not from us but from him. And our love for Jehovah should be our strongest motive for praising him.​—Philippians 1:27, 28; 1 Thessalonians 2:13.
Review Discussion
• Why is it important to share the Kingdom message with everyone possible, but what reactions can we expect?
• How can we show that we do not rely on our own strength to serve Jehovah?
• What valuable lessons do we learn from the book of Acts?
[Pictures on page 173]
As in the past, Jehovah’s servants today speak God’s word with boldness

