Chapter Two
Magnify Jehovah as the Only True God
 1. Who is the only true God?
THE Bible says that although there are many who are viewed as gods, “there is actually to us one God the Father.” (1 Corinthians 8:5, 6) That “one God” is Jehovah, the Creator of all things. (Deuteronomy 6:4; Revelation 4:11) Jesus referred to him as “my God and your God.” (John 20:17) He agreed with Moses, who had earlier stated: “Jehovah is the true God; there is no other besides him.” (Deuteronomy 4:35) Jehovah is far superior to any objects of worship, such as idols, deified humans, or his enemy Satan the Devil, “the god of this system of things.” (2 Corinthians 4:3, 4) In contrast to all of these, Jehovah is, as Jesus called him, “the only true God.”​—John 17:3.
 2. As we learn about God, how should our lives be affected?
2 Appreciative people who learn about God’s heartwarming qualities, as well as what he has done and will yet do for us, are drawn to him. As their love for Jehovah grows, they feel impelled to magnify him. How? One way is by telling others about him. “With the mouth one makes public declaration for salvation,” states Romans 10:10. Another way is by imitating him in word and deed. “Become imitators of God, as beloved children,” says Ephesians 5:1. To do so more fully, we need to know Jehovah as he truly is.
 3. What are God’s main qualities?
3 Throughout the Bible, there are many statements that identify God’s outstanding qualities. His four main attributes are wisdom, justice, power, and love. ‘With him there is wisdom.’ (Job 12:13) “All his ways are justice.” (Deuteronomy 32:4) He is “vigorous in power.” (Isaiah 40:26) “God is love.” (1 John 4:8) However, of God’s four main qualities, which is the most outstanding, the one that more than any other identifies what kind of God he is?
“God Is Love”
 4. Which of God’s qualities was fundamental to his creating the universe and all living things?
4 Consider what motivated Jehovah to create the universe and intelligent spirit and human creatures. Was it his wisdom or power? No, for while God used those, they were not the motivating forces. And his justice did not require that he share the gift of life. Rather, God’s great love prompted him to share the joys of intelligent existence with others. Love moved him to purpose that obedient mankind should live forever in Paradise. (Genesis 1:28; 2:15) Love caused him to arrange for the lifting of the condemnation that Adam’s transgression brought upon mankind.
 5. According to the Bible, Jehovah is the personification of which quality, and why?
5 Thus, of all of God’s qualities, the most outstanding is his love. It is his essence, or nature. As important as his wisdom, justice, and power are, the Bible never says that Jehovah is any of those. But it does say that he is love. Yes, Jehovah is the personification of love. This is love guided by principle, not emotion. God’s love is governed by the principles of truth and righteousness. It is the highest form of love, as exemplified in Jehovah God himself. Such love is an expression of complete unselfishness and is always accompanied by tangible evidence of action.
 6. What makes it possible for us to imitate God, even though he is superior to us?
6 It is this wonderful quality of love that enables us to imitate such a God. As lowly, imperfect, mistake-prone humans, we may think that we could never do so successfully. But here is another example of Jehovah’s great love: He recognizes our limitations and does not require perfection of us. He knows that we are far from perfect now. (Psalm 51:5) That is why Psalm 130:3, 4 says: “If errors were what you watch, O Jah, O Jehovah, who could stand? For there is the true forgiveness with you.” Yes, Jehovah is “a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger and abundant in loving-kindness.” (Exodus 34:6) “You, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive.” (Psalm 86:5) How comforting! How refreshing it is to serve this marvelous God and to experience his loving, merciful care!
 7. How can Jehovah’s love be seen in his works of creation?
7 Jehovah’s love can also be seen in his works of creation. Think of the many good things Jehovah has provided for our enjoyment, such as beautiful mountains, forests, lakes, and oceans. He has given us food in amazing variety to delight our taste and sustain us. Too, Jehovah has provided a vast array of beautiful and fragrant flowers as well as the fascinating animal creation. He made things that would give humans pleasure, even though he did not have to. True, living in this wicked world in our present imperfect condition, we cannot enjoy his creation to the full. (Romans 8:22) But just imagine what Jehovah will do for us in Paradise! The psalmist assures us: “You are opening your hand and satisfying the [proper] desire of every living thing.”​—Psalm 145:16.
 8. What is the most outstanding example of Jehovah’s love for us?
8 What is the most outstanding example of Jehovah’s love for humankind? The Bible explains: “God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.” (John 3:16) Was it because of man’s goodness that Jehovah did this? Romans 5:8 answers: “God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.” Yes, God sent his perfect Son to earth to give his life as a ransom sacrifice to redeem us from the condemnation of sin and death. (Matthew 20:28) This opened the way for people who love God to gain everlasting life. Thankfully, God’s love extends to all who want to do his will, for the Bible tells us: “God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.”​—Acts 10:34, 35.
 9. How should we be influenced by the fact that Jehovah has given his Son as a ransom for us?
9 How should the fact that Jehovah has given his Son as a ransom for us, opening the way to everlasting life, influence how we use our lives now? It should deepen our love for the true God, Jehovah. At the same time, it should make us want to listen to Jesus, who represents God. “[Jesus] died for all that those who live might live no longer for themselves, but for him who died for them.” (2 Corinthians 5:15) What a pleasure it is to follow in Jesus’ footsteps, for he was exemplary in imitating Jehovah’s love and compassion! This is shown by what Jesus said to humble ones: “Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and you will find refreshment for your souls. For my yoke is kindly and my load is light.”​—Matthew 11:28-30.
Showing Love for Others
10. What are some ways we can show love for fellow Christians?
10 How can we show that we have the kind of love for fellow Christians that Jehovah and Jesus have for us? Notice the many ways we can do this: “Love is long-suffering and kind. Love is not jealous, it does not brag, does not get puffed up, does not behave indecently, does not look for its own interests, does not become provoked. It does not keep account of the injury. It does not rejoice over unrighteousness, but rejoices with the truth. It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. Love never fails.”​—1 Corinthians 13:4-8; 1 John 3:14-18; 4:7-12.
11. For whom else should we show love, and how?
11 For whom else should we show love, and how? Jesus said: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit, teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.” (Matthew 28:19, 20) This involves sharing the good news of God’s incoming paradisaic new world with those who are not yet our fellow Christians. Jesus clearly showed that our love should not be limited to those sharing our beliefs, for he said: “If you love [only] those loving you, what reward do you have? Are not also the tax collectors doing the same thing? And if you greet your brothers only, what extraordinary thing are you doing? Are not also the people of the nations doing the same thing?”​—Matthew 5:46, 47; 24:14; Galatians 6:10.
“Walk in the Name of Jehovah”
12. Why can God’s name apply only to him?
12 Another important aspect of magnifying the true God is knowing, using, and teaching others his unique name, Jehovah. The psalmist expressed this heartfelt wish: “That people may know that you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.” (Psalm 83:18) The name Jehovah means “He Causes to Become.” He is the Great Purposer, always bringing his purposes to a successful conclusion. And only the true God can rightly bear that name, for humans can never be sure that their efforts will succeed. (James 4:13, 14) Jehovah alone can say that his word “will have certain success” in that for which he sends it. (Isaiah 55:11) Many are thrilled when they first see God’s name in their Bibles and learn what it means. (Exodus 6:3) But they will be benefited by this knowledge only if they “walk in the name of Jehovah . . . forever.”​—Micah 4:5.
13. What is involved in knowing Jehovah’s name and walking in his name?
13 Regarding God’s name, Psalm 9:10 states: “Those knowing your name will trust in you.” This involves more than just knowing of the name Jehovah, which does not automatically mean trusting in him. Knowing God’s name means appreciating the kind of God that Jehovah is, respecting his authority, obeying his commands, trusting him in all things. (Proverbs 3:5, 6) Similarly, walking in the name of Jehovah implies being dedicated to him and representing him as one of his worshipers, truly using our life in harmony with God’s will. (Luke 10:27) Are you doing that?
14. If we are going to serve Jehovah forever, what is needed besides a sense of duty?
14 If we are going to serve Jehovah eternally, more than a sense of duty must impel us. The apostle Paul urged Timothy, who had been serving Jehovah for many years: “Be training yourself with godly devotion as your aim.” (1 Timothy 4:7) Devotion comes from a heart filled with appreciation for the person to whom the devotion is directed. “Godly devotion” expresses profound reverence for Jehovah personally. It manifests loving attachment to him because of unbounded esteem for him and his ways. It causes us to want everyone to hold his name in high regard. We must cultivate godly devotion in our lives if we would walk in the name of Jehovah, the only true God, forever.​—Psalm 37:4; 2 Peter 3:11.
15. How can we give God our exclusive devotion?
15 To serve God acceptably, we must give him undivided worship, since he is “a God exacting exclusive devotion.” (Exodus 20:5) We cannot love God and at the same time love the wicked world, of which Satan is god. (James 4:4; 1 John 2:15-17) Jehovah knows exactly what kind of person each of us is trying to be. (Jeremiah 17:10) If we truly love righteousness, he sees that and will help us endure our daily trials. Backing us up with his powerful holy spirit, he will enable us to triumph over the wickedness so rampant in this world. (2 Corinthians 4:7) He will also help us maintain our strong hope of everlasting life on a paradise earth. What a glorious prospect that is! We should deeply appreciate it and willingly serve the true God, Jehovah, who makes it possible.
16. What should you want to do, along with millions of others?
16 Millions of people earth wide have gladly accepted the invitation of the psalmist who wrote: “O magnify Jehovah with me, you people, and let us exalt his name together.” (Psalm 34:3) Jehovah invites you to be among the growing multitudes in all nations who are doing this.
Review Discussion
• What kind of person is Jehovah? How are we benefited by getting a clear understanding of his qualities?
• How can we help other people to learn the truth about God?
• What is involved in knowing Jehovah’s name and walking in his name?
[Pictures on page 14]
Jehovah, in his great love, ‘will open his hand and satisfy the desire of every living thing’

