VOL. XIII. JUNE 1 & 15, 1892. NOS. 11 & 12. 

"TO US THERE IS ONE GOD." 

1 COR. 8:5,6. 



"Hear, O Israel! Jehovah our God is one— Jehovah. 
Deut. 6:4. 

The word "god" signifies mighty one, but 
not always the all-mighty one. It is used as 
the translation of each of four Hebrew words— 
—el, elah, elohim and adonai— all, in the common 
version of the Bible, signifying the mighty, 
or great. It is a general name, often and 
properly applied to our heavenly Father, as well 
as to our Lord Jesus, to angels and to men. 

In Deut. 10:17 elohim— a mighty or great 
one— is used in referring to Jehovah the almighty 
God, as well as to other gods. "Jehovah 
is a God of gods." 

In Gen. 32:24,30 and in Judges 13:21,22 
an angel is called god— elohim. 



In Jer. 16:13 earthly heathen kings and governors 
are called gods— elohim. 

In Exodus 7:1 Moses is called a god— elohim. 

In Exodus 21:6; 22:8,9,28, the word elohim 
is evidently used to refer to the Judges 
of Israel appointed by Moses, because they were 
mighty ones, or persons in authority; and the 
translators of the common version have rendered 
the word "judges" except in the last instance, 
when they rendered it "gods." They 
were corrected by those who arranged the 
marginal readings; but remember, it is this 
same word— elohim. 

In Exodus 12:12 the princes of Egypt are 
referred to as gods— elohim. See margin. 

In Psa. 82 the distinction of beings referred 
to by the word god is very marked— "God 
[elohim] standeth in the congregation of the 
mighty [el]: he judgeth among the gods [elohim]." 
Here the first word god evidently refers 
to Jehovah, the Almighty One, while the 
others refer to other mighty ones— the Church, 
the sons of God, of whom Jesus is the head or 
chief, and of whom it is written (verse 6), "I 
have said, Ye are gods [elohim]; and all of you 
are children of the Most High [el yon, the 
highest God]." 

But, says Paul, "Though there be [many] that 
are called gods (as there be gods many and 
lords many), to us there is but one God, the 
Father." (1 Cor. 8:5,6.) The Father is the 
mighty one over all other mighty ones— the 
One God over all. None others are mighty or 
great, save as they receive their greatness, as well 
as their existence, from him. And it is to this 
one fact that the attention of Israel is called 
in the above words of Moses— "Hear, O Israel! 
Jehovah our God is one— Jehovah." 

The word Jehovah is not a general name, 
like the word god, but a proper name, the 
distinctive personal name of the Almighty Father, 
and is never applied to any other being. 
The name Jehovah, like other proper names, 
should not be translated. In our common version 
of the Old Testament its distinctiveness 
as a name is lost by being generally translated 
LORD. Some erroneously suppose that the name 
Jehovah applies also to Christ. We therefore 

R1410 :page 164 

cite a few of the many scriptures to prove that 
this name belongs exclusively to the great First 
Cause of all things. "I am Jehovah; this is 
my name, and my glory will I not give to another." 
(Isa. 42:8). "I appeared unto Abraham, 



unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name 

El Shaddai [God Almighty], but by my name 

Jehovah was I not known unto them." (Exod. 6:3.) 

"That men may know that thou, whose 

name alone is Jehovah, art the Most High over 

all the earth. "-Psa. 83:18. 

Jehovah is frequently declared to be the Savior 
of men because he was the Author of the 
plan of salvation, our Lord Jesus being the savior 
in a secondary sense, as the instrumentality 
through whom the plan of Jehovah was executed. 
David makes the distinction between 
Jehovah and our Lord Jesus very marked in 

R1411 :page 164 

Psa. 110:1— "The Lord [Jehovah] said unto 

my Lord [adon, master— Christ] sit thou at my 

right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool." 

Our Lord Jesus and Peter call attention 

very forcibly to this scripture and to the distinction 

made. -Luke 20:41-44; Acts 2:34-36. 

While the Scriptures are so very clear concerning 
the distinct individuality and exact 
relationship of Jehovah and our Lord Jesus, it 
seems marvelous that the idea of a triune God 
—three Gods in one, and at the same time one 
God in three— should ever have gained prominence 
and general acceptance. But the fact 
that it has been so generally accepted only goes 
to show how soundly the Church slept while the 
enemy bound her in the chains of error. We 
believe in Jehovah and in Jesus and in the Holy 
Spirit, and fully accept the fact that our Lord 
Jesus is a god— a mighty one— though we cannot 
accept the unscriptural and unreasonable 
theory that he is his own father and creator, 
and must reject as unscriptural the teaching 
that there are either three gods in one person 
or one god in three persons. The doctrine of 
the Trinity had its beginning in the third century, 
and has a very close resemblance to 
the heathen doctrines prevalent at that time, 
particularly Hindooism. The only text in the 
Scriptures which was ever claimed to affirm that 
the Father, Son and Spirit are one god is a 
portion of 1 John 5:7,8, which reads: "For 
there are three that bear record in heaven, the 
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and 
these three are one; and there are three that 
bear witness in earth, the spirit and the water 
and the blood: and these three agree in one." 
We state an undisputed and indisputable fact 
when we say, that this is the only text favorable 
to the Trinitarian view, and that the words 
above in italics are spurious, and were introduced 



here by Trinitarians in the fifth century, 
because there was no scriptural statement to 
support their theory, which was then becoming 
popular. Trinitarians themselves admit this, 
and in all recent translations the spurious 
words are omitted. See the Emphatic Diaglott, 
Young's Translation, the Revised Version, the 
American Bible Union Translation and the Improved 
Version. The latter says:— 

"This text concerning the heavenly witnesses 
is not contained in any Greek manuscript 
which was written earlier than the fifth century. 
It is not cited by any of the Greek ecclesiastical 
writers; nor by any of the early Latin 
fathers, even when the subjects upon which 
they treat would naturally have led them to 
appeal to its authority: it is therefore evidently 
spurious." 

It will be observed that the sense is complete 
without the interpolated words italicized above, 
and the teaching in perfect harmony with the 
context, which would not be the case were the 
interpolated words admitted. The inspired 
Apostle is showing that "the Son of God 
is he that came by water and blood" to be the 
Redeemer of mankind; that is, he came by 
baptism into water, the symbol of his full consecration 
even unto death, and also by blood, 
the actual fulfilling of his consecration vow, 
even unto death, the shedding of his blood. 
He came, "not by water only [not by consecration 
only], but by water and blood"— both 
the typical and the literal baptism into death. 
"And it is the Spirit that beareth witness, 
because the Spirit is truth." (1 John 5:6.) The 
Spirit of God bore witness after the water baptism 
that this was his well beloved Son in 
whom he was well pleased. (Matt. 3:17.) And 
again, after his baptism into death, the Spirit 
bore witness to his still being the well beloved 
Son, in raising him from death and highly exalting 

R1411 :page 165 

him to the right hand of power. Thus, 
as verses 7 and 8 assert, There are three that 
bear witness that this Jesus is the Son of God— 
the Spirit, the water and the blood. The testimony 
of the Spirit at his consecration and 
symbolic baptism in water, and again at his 
resurrection, marks our Lord Jesus as indeed the 
Son of God. 

Touching the rise of the Trinitarian view, 
Abbott and Conant's Religious Dictionary, 
page 944, says:— 

"It was not until the beginning of the fourth 



century that the Trinitarian view began to be 
elaborated and formulated into a doctrine and 
an endeavor made to reconcile it with the belief 
of the Church in ONE GOD." "Out of the 
attempt to solve this problem sprang the doctrine 
of the Trinity." Trinity "is a very marked 
feature in Hindooism, and is discernible in Persian, 
Egyptian, Roman, Japanese, Indian and 
the most ancient Grecian mythologies." 

In Lange's Critical Commentary, in reference 
to this spurious passage, we read: "Said words 
are wanting in all the Greek Codices; also in 
the Codex Sinaiticus [the oldest known MS.], 
and in all the ancient versions, including the 
Latin, as late as the 8th century; and since that 
time they are found in three variations. Notwithstanding 
the Trinitarian controversies, they 
are not referred to by a single Greek father, or 
by any of the old Latin church fathers." 

This passage is pronounced an interpolation 
by such authorities as Sir Isaac Newton, Benson, 
Clarke, Home, Griesbach, Tischendorf 
and Alford. 

In Hudson's Greek and English Concordance 
we read: "The words are found in no Greek 
MSS. before the 15th or 16th century, and in 
no early version." Says Alford, "unless pure 
caprice is to be followed in the criticism of 
the sacred text, there is not a shadow of reason 
for supposing them genuine." Tischendorf says, 
"That this spurious addition should continue 
to be published as a part of the epistle, I regard 
as an impiety." T. B. Woolsey inquires: "Do 
not truth and honesty require that such a passage 
should be struck out of our English Bibles 
—a passage which Luther would not express in 
his translation, and which did not creep into 
the German Bible until nearly fifty years after 
his death?" 

Dr. Adam Clarke, the learned Methodist 
commentator, in his notes on this passage, says: 
"It is likely this verse is not genuine. It is 
wanting in every MS. of this epistle written before 
the invention of printing, one excepted— 
Codex Montfortii, in Trinity College, Dublin. 
The others which omit this verse amount to 
one hundred and twelve. It is wanting in both 
the Syriac, all the Arabic, Ethiopic, Coptic, 
Sahidic, Armenian, Slavonian, etc.; in a word, 
in all the ancient versions but the Vulgate; and 
even of this version many of the most ancient 
and correct MSS. have it not. It is wanting, 
also, in all the ancient Greek fathers; and in 
most even of the Latin." 

John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, endeavored 
to support the doctrine of the Trinity, 



because he supposed this text to be genuine: 
yet in one of his sermons from this text, 
he quoted the words of Servetus— "I scruple 
using the words 'trinity' and 'persons,' because 

1 do not find those terms in the Bible"— 
and added, "I would insist only on the direct 
words unexplained, as they lie in the text." 

He labored hard to prove the doctrine of the 
Trinity, because he believed this spurious passage 
was genuine, the information regarding the 
ancient manuscripts of the Bible being recent. 
For instance, at the time of the preparation of 
our King James' or Common Version, the translators 
had the advantage of but eight Greek 
MSS., and none of them of earlier date than 
the tenth century. Now, however, there are 
about seven hundred MSS., some of which, especially 
the Sinai tic MS. and the Vatican MS. 
No. 1209, are very old, reaching back to the 
third century. 

R1410 :page 165 

Like some other doctrines received by Protestants 
through Papacy, this one is accepted 
and fully endorsed, though its educated adherents 
are aware that not a text of Scripture can 
be adduced in its support. Nay, more: any one 
who will not affirm this unscriptural doctrine 
as his faith is declared by the articles of the 
Evangelical Alliance to be non-orthodox— a 
heretic. 

However, it behooves us as truth seekers to 
deal honestly with ourselves and with our Father's 
Word, which is able to make us truly 

R1410 :page 166 

wise. Therefore, ignoring the traditions and 
creeds of uninspired men and corrupt systems, 
let us hold fast the form of sound words received 
from our Lord and the Apostles.— 

2 Tim. 1:13. 

Let us inquire of these standards of the true 
Church what is truth on this subject. Paul answers 
clearly and forcibly— There is "one God 
and Father of all." (Eph. 4:6.) And again 
he says, "There be gods many and lords many, 
but to us there is but one God, the Father, out 
of whom are all things, and we of him; and 
one Lord Jesus Christ, through whom are all 
things, and we through him." (1 Cor. 8:5,6.) 
We believe this exactly: All things are of our 
Father— he is the first cause of all things; and 
all things are by our Lord Jesus. He, "the beginning 
of the creation of God" (Rev. 3:14), 



has been the agent of Jehovah in all that has 
since been done— "Without him was not anything 
made that was made."— John 1:3. 

Jesus' testimony is the same. His claim was 
that he was a son, an obedient son, who did not 
do his own will, but the will of his Father who 
sent him— "Not my will but thine be done." 
Again, Jesus said, "The Son can do nothing of 
himself"— "The Father that dwelleth in me, 
he doeth the works." (John 5:19; 14:10.) 
True, he also said, "I and my Father are 
one;" but he shows in what sense they are one 
by his prayer that just so his disciples all might 
be one. (John 10:30; 17:11.) This desirable 
oneness is that which results from having 
the same mind or spirit, a oneness or harmony 
of heart, plan and action. 

Many dishonor the Master, though they think 
they honor him, when they contradict his direct 
teachings, affirming that the Father and the Son 
are one and the same being and equal in all respects. 
No, says Jesus, "My Father is greater 
than I." (John 14:28.) And he also says that 
God is not only his Father, but ours:— "I 
ascend to my Father and your Father, to my 
God and your God." (John 20: 17.) A better 
translation of Phil. 2:6, given in the 
Emphatic Diaglott, settles the question of the 
Father's supremacy, in harmony with other 
scriptures, such as 1 Cor. 15:28 and John 14:28. 
It reads thus: "Who, though being in a 
form of God, yet did not meditate a usurpation, 
to be like God." See also quotations 
from other translators in Diaglott foot note, 
all giving the same sense. The idea here is the 
very opposite of equality, as conveyed in the 
King James translation. Jesus did not claim 
equality, nor aspire to a usurpation of God's 
authority. That was Satan's claim and effort, 
who said, "I will exalt my throne above the 
stars of God. ...I will be like the Most 
High."-Isa. 14:12-14. 

Jesus said: "Ye call me Lord and Master, 
and ye say well, for so I am;" but "call no 
man on earth Father, for one is your Father, 
which is in heaven." (John 13:13; Matt. 23:9.) 
Peter and Paul convey the same thought, 
saying, "The God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ hath begotten us." (1 Pet. 1:3; Eph. 3:9-11; 
Gal. 1:3,4; Rom. 16:25-27.) How 
clear and harmonious are these words of our 
standards; and we could quote much more in 
perfect harmony. 

Briefly stated, then, we find the Scriptures to 
teach that there is but one Eternal God and 
Father— who is "from everlasting to everlasting" 



(Psa. 90:2; Rom. 16:26,27)-and that 

the one who was the beginning of his creation, 

since called Jesus, though inferior to the Father, 

was superior to all other and subsequent 

creatures, in whose creation he was the active 

agent of Jehovah. When a redeemer was needed 

for mankind, in harmony with the Father's 

wish, but not of compulsion, the chief and first-created 

Son of God was, by divine power (the 

philosophy of which is beyond our full comprehension) 

transferred to a lower plane of existence 

—the human: he was born and grew to mature 

and perfect manhood. Hence his life principle 

was not derived from the human channel, 

and was not that which was forfeited by the sin 

of Adam. 

He was a fully developed, perfect man, according 
to the Law, at the age of thirty years, when 
he immediately consecrated himself as a man 
to the Father's will, offering himself a living 
sacrifice on our behalf at baptism. The sacrifice 
was accepted, and he was filled with the 
holy Spirit of the Father. (Matt. 3:16,17.) 
The power of God came upon him there. (Acts 10:38.) 

R1410 :page 167 

This power of God in him was that 
to which he continually referred. It was the 
same power that was afterward manifested 
through Peter, Paul and others, though in our 
Lord's case it was more marked, because he, 
being a perfect man, could receive the spirit 
without measure, whereas all imperfect members 
of his Church can have only a measure 
of the spirit. -John 3:34; 1 Cor. 12:7. 

When Jesus' sacrificial ministry was over, 
ending at the cross, he had finished his work- 
ins work as a man. When he arose he was no 
longer a human being, but a "new creature" 
perfected. Since his resurrection, Jesus has 
been a partaker of the divine nature, the same 
nature as the Father. This present highly exalted 
condition of our Lord was given him as 
a reward of obedience to the Father's will. 
(See Phil. 2:8,9.) This scripture implies that 
his present glory is greater than the glory he 
possessed before becoming a man: otherwise it 
would not have been an exaltation. Now, having 
the divine, immortal nature, he cannot die. 
And being thus highly exalted, all power in 
heaven and in earth is now given unto him 
(Matt. 28:18), so that he is able to save to the 
uttermost, to save completely— to awaken from 
death and restore to full perfection. 

How straightforward and simple is the Scriptural 



statement compared with human traditions. 

For instance, in what a jumble of contradictions 

do they find themselves, who say 

that Jesus and the Father are one person. This 

would involve the idea that our Lord Jesus 

acted the hypocrite, and only pretended to address 

the Father in heaven, when he himself 

was the same Father on earth. Such must conclude, 

too, since we read that God tempteth 

not, neither is tempted of any, that the temptation 

of the devil (Matt. 4) was only a farce. 

So with the death of Jesus: The Father is and 

always has been immortal, and hence cannot 

die, and if Jesus was the Father, then he must 

have only pretended to die. Then all the statements 

of Jesus and the prophets and apostles 

relative to Jesus' death and resurrection are 

false, and they were false witnesses in testifying 

that God raised Jesus from the dead, if he did 

not really die. 

If they admit that Jesus really died, they take 
the other horn of the dilemma; for, believing that 
their three Gods are one in person, when Jesus 
died they must all three have died. If they all 
died, who raised them to life? This, too, would 
conflict with the statement of Paul (1 Thes. 1:10) 
that the Father raised up Jesus from death; 
for if the Father and Son are the same being, 
then the Father was dead when the Son was 
dead. 

Shall we thus contradict the Apostles and 
Prophets and Jesus himself, and ignore reason 
and common sense, in order to hold to a 
dogma handed down to us from the dark ages 
by a corrupt, apostate church? Nay; "To the 
law and the testimony; if they speak not according 
to this word, it is because there is no 
light in them." (Isa. 8:20.) We thus see that 
the Father and the Son are two separate and 
distinct persons, though one in mind, purpose, 
aim, etc., the Son having submitted fully to 
the Father's will and plan in all things. 

THE HOLY SPIRIT. 



We next inquire, What saith the Scriptures 
with regard to the holy Spirit? The nominal 
churches, Papal and Protestant, affirm that the 
holy Spirit is a distinct person, and they also 
say that these three persons are at the same 
time one person— "a great mystery." Yes, 
truly it is a mystery, such as is characteristic of 
Babylon's confusion. But to those who turn 
away from the traditions of men to the Word 



of God, all is clear and plain. 

We suggest that whatever definition of the 
term "holy Spirit" will meet all known conditions, 
and harmonize all passages of Scripture 
bearing thereon, may be understood to be the 
true meaning of the term. We will first give 
what we conceive to be such a definition, and 
then examine the Scriptures bearing on the subject 
which might be supposed by some to conflict 
with the views we shall present. 

We understand the Scriptures to teach, in the 
manner just suggested, that the holy Spirit is 
not a distinct person, but that it is the divine 
will, influence or power, exercised everywhere 
and for any purpose, at the divine pleasure. 
God exercises his spirit or energy in a variety 

R1410 :page 168 

of ways, using various agencies, and accomplishing 
various results. 

Whatever God does through agencies is as 
truly his work as though he were the direct 
actor, since all those agencies are of his creation; 
just as a contractor for a building is said 
to build a house, though he may never have 
lifted a tool toward it. He does it with his 
materials and through his agents. Thus, when 
we read that Jehovah God created the heavens 
and the earth (Gen. 2:4), we are not to suppose 
that he personally handled them. He used 
various agencies— "He spake, and it was done 
[He gave his orders, and they were promptly 
executed]; he commanded, and it stood fast." 
(Psa. 33:6-9.) It did not spring instantly to 
order; for we read that time was used in creation 
—six days, or periods of time. 

We are told plainly that all things are of the 
Father— by his energy or spirit; yet that energy 
was exercised through his Son. The Son of 
God, afterward called Jesus, was used in the 
creation of the world. (John 1:3; Heb. 1:8-12.) 
And when we turn to Genesis, we find 
it stated that the power which created was God's 
Spirit— "The Spirit of God brooded over the 
face of the waters." (Gen. 1:2.) Hence the 
only reasonable inference is that it was the 
spirit, energy or will of Jehovah, active through 
his Son— or the plan of God, executed by the 
Son. 

Another way in which God's Spirit was exercised 
was through the prophets. They "spoke 
as they were moved by the holy Spirit"— by 
the will or energy of Jehovah. (2 Pet. 1:21.) 
That is, God used them to express his mind, 
though his mind, his spirit, his thoughts, were 



not in them; for though they expressed it they 
could not understand his mind. (1 Pet. 1:12.) 
God's spirit acted upon, but not in them. In 
that servant age (Heb. 3:5; Gal. 4:4-7), the 
faithful servant carried the Lord's message as 
it was laid upon him; but the sons of God, during 
this Gospel age, are brought into fellowship 
with their Father and made acquainted with his 
plans. Thus they are not merely acted upon 
mechanically by God's spirit or energy, but 
they partake of, or imbibe, his mind or spirit 
through his revelation of his plans to them, 
which they can receive in proportion as they 
submit their own wills and plans to his. And 
having his mind, they become co-workers together 
with him in carrying out his plans. 
"The servant," though faithful, "knoweth not 
what his Lord doeth," but the confidential son 
is made acquainted with the plans and partakes 
of the Father's spirit and interest in his work. 

The masculine pronoun he is often and properly 
applied to the holy Spirit, because God, 
whose spirit it is, is represented as masculine, 
indicative of strength. It is called the holy 
Spirit, because God is holy, and because there are 
other spirits (powers, influences), somewhat similar 
in operation, which are evil. God is true 
and righteous, hence the spirit of God is called 
the "Spirit of truth." It is thus contrasted 
with the "spirit of error," and the influence 
which error exerts. (1 John 4:6.) Satan is recognized 
as the chief or prince of evil, during 
the present time, and his influence or spirit is 
exercised in his servants, in much the same way 
that the spirit of God works in his children. 
This is "the spirit which now worketh in the 
children of disobedience."— Eph. 2:2. 

The number seven is often used to represent 
perfection or completeness, and so we read 
of the seven spirits of God. (Rev. 1:4; 3:1.) 
And in like manner we read of seven wicked 
spirits. (Matt. 12:45.) The spirit or influence 
of evil proceedeth from the "father of lies;" 
and the spirit or influence of truth proceedeth 
from the heavenly Father.— John 15:26. 

Man is to some extent independent of either 
of these influences. He has a mind or spirit 
of his own (1 Cor. 2:11), but he is so constituted 
as to be subject to influence from without, 
either good or evil. In the present time God 
permits evil to triumph to some extent, for 
the testing and development of the "body of 
Christ," and also for the discipline of mankind 
in general. Now, the spirit of evil often transforms 
itself into an angel of light (truth), and 
what wonder if he puts forward the children of 



disobedience, in whom the spirit of error works, 
and palms them off as saints? (2 Cor. 11:14,15.) 
What wonder if, under the guise of greater 
honor to our Lord, he succeeds in deceiving many 
into unscriptural doctrines, thus beclouding the 

R1410 :page 169 

mind and covering many glorious truths? During 

this age, when justified believers fully surrender 

their human minds to God to be moulded 

and fashioned after the divine mind, under 

the guidance and influence of the Spirit of 

truth, they are brought to the divine standpoint 

of purpose, will and aim, and thus to this extent 

of mental conformity they become partakers 

of the divine nature, which nature they 

will receive in its fulness when they have obediently 

followed the Spirit's guidance, even unto 

death. 

Thus the consecrated are transformed (made 
new creatures) by the renewing of their minds 
by the holy Spirit of God. Thus we are changed 
from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. 
(Rom. 12:2; 2 Cor. 3:18.) This is termed 
the begetting of the spirit: that is, it is the beginning 
of the divine life. Such are therefore 
reckoned as sons of God on the divine plane. 
In surrendering the mind, the whole being is 
surrendered, since the mind or will is the controlling 
power. 

Those who resign themselves to God are "led 
of God," "taught of God," andean "serve 
the Lord in newness of spirit." They will have 
a "spirit of meekness," and the God of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, can give unto 
them the "spirit of wisdom and revelation" 
in the knowledge of him, the eyes of their 
understanding being enlightened; that they 
may know what is the hope of his calling, and 
what the riches of the glory of his inheritance 
in the saints.— Eph. 1:17,18. 

By contrast, too, we can see that as Satan is 
the adversary of God and his saints, and his 
plans to usward, his spirit, mind, energy, influence, 
would be exercised to oppose the Church. 
He does not oppose openly, but under guise of 
the Spirit of God. As the "spirit of fear" he 
attacks many, and if they follow him, they 
never make progress, but become unfruitful in 
the knowledge and love of God. The spirit of 
fear says, It is a great mistake to think that 
Christ died for all, and it is presumption to believe 
that all will eventually be released from 
bondage to death. The same spirit of fear says, 
Your own sins are not forgiven; you are still 



a miserable sinner. Thus does the spirit of 
"error," "fear" and "bondage" give the lie 
to the statements of the Spirit of truth, which 
says that Christ gave his life a ransom for all, 
to be testified in due time (2 Tim. 2:6); that 
all that are in their graves shall hear the voice 
of the Son of man and come forth (John 5:28); 
and that there is now no condemnation 
to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not 
after the flesh but after the Spirit.— Rom. 8:1. 

As the spirit or mind of God leads to peace, 
joy and faith in his promises, the spirit of error 
leads to faith in unpromised things, joy in 
earthly pleasures, and peace in slumber. As we 
read (Rom. 11:8), it is a "spirit of slumber," 
and alas! how many have been deluded into this 
condition. Because the influence of the spirit 
of error is exerted in this subtle way, it is 
called a "seducing spirit; and the Apostle assures 
us that "The spirit [of truth] speaketh 
expressly, that in the latter times some shall 
depart from the [true] faith, giving heed to seducing 
spirits." (1 Tim. 4:1.) To what extent 
Satan has succeeded in seducing God's children, 
and supplanting truth with error, all must judge 
by noting the testimonies of the Word of truth. 

The spirit of the world is another name for 
the "seducing spirit," the world being largely 
under the control of the spirit of the prince of 
this world. His spirit or influence works in 
and largely controls the children of this world. 
And the spirit or influence of the world is one 
of the mighty levers wherewith the prince of 
this world opposes the spirit of truth. 

Alas! how great an influence, and how strong, 
is exercised by these evil spirits or influences— 
the spirit of Satan, the spirit of the world under 
his control, the "spirit of Antichrist" 
(John 4:3), the spirit of bondage, of fear, of 
pride, of error and of sin. Hence the injunction 
that we test, try and prove the spirits, not by 
their claims and outward appearances merely, 
but by the Word of God. "Beloved, believe 
not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether 
they be of God"— and know "the spirit of 
truth" from "the spirit of error."— 1 John 4:1,6. 

Those having the mind or spirit of God are 
said to be heavenly or spiritually minded. The 
spiritually minded are so transformed, so entirely 
different from what they were in their former 

R1410 :page 170 

earthly minded condition, that they are called 
"new creatures." However, the new mental 
creation or transformed mind is still identified 



with the human body— the body of its humiliation. 
But when the earthly house is dissolved, 
sacrificed, dead with Christ, we shall have a 
building of God— a new house— a glorious body, 
in harmony with, and fit for, the indwelling of 
the new mind. (2 Cor. 5:1.) As in Jesus' case, 
so in ours, the new body will be received in the 
resurrection— not by all, but by those now 
mentally or spiritually begotten of the spirit of 
truth. The resurrection is the birth of this new 
creation. Jesus was the first thus born. (Rev. 1:5. 
— Diaglott.) Thus we reach the perfect 
spiritual condition, and become spiritual beings, 
fully changed into the glorious likeness of 
our Lord (Rom. 6:5), who is now "the express 
image of the Father's person." (Heb. 1:3.) 
Such things as pertain to the heavenly condition, 
and can be seen only by the eye of faith 
through God's Word, are called spiritual things. 

Now we are prepared to understand Paul's 
teaching in 1 Cor. 2:9-16: "Eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into 
the heart of man (the natural man), the things 
which God hath prepared for them that love 
him. But God hath revealed them unto us by 
his Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, 
yea, the deep things of God." That is, having 
the mind or spirit of God, that new mind 
prompts us to search into the deep things of 
God, to study that we may know and do his 
will as obedient sons. Having the mind or 
spirit of our Father, we will take heed to his 
Word and plans, that we may work in harmony 
with him. "For what man knoweth the things 
[mind, will, plans] of a man, save the spirit 
[mind] of man which is in him? Even so, the 
things of God knoweth no man, but the spirit 
ofGod."-l Cor. 2:11. 

"Now we have received the spirit [or mind] 
of God, that we might know the things that 
are freely given to us of God." But "the 
natural man receiveth not the things of the 
spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, 
neither can he know them, because they are 
spiritually discerned." They are understood 
only by those who have the spirit or mind of 
God, the spirit of his plan, and the spirit of the 
truth. These are more and more filled with 
the spirit of the truth and the spirit of obedience 
to it, not by comparing spiritual things 
with natural things, as the natural man does, but 
by "comparing spiritual things with spiritual." 
(1 Cor. 2:13.) "He that is spiritual judgeth 
all things [he is able to understand and properly 
estimate both human and spiritual things], 
yet he himself is judged of no man." No natural 



man can understand or rightly judge of the 

motives which prompt the spiritually minded 

"new creature" to willingly sacrifice things 

valuable to the natural man. Hence we are 

counted as fools by the worldly minded (1 Cor. 4:10), 

by those who have "the spirit of the 

world." 

This mind or spirit of Christ is the same as 
the spirit of God, for Christ sacrificed his own 
spirit (will), and was filled with the spirit of 
God— "For even Christ pleased not himself." 
-Rom. 15:3. 

Jesus said, "The words that I speak unto 
you, they are spirit and they are life." That 
is, they express the mind or spirit of God, in 
giving heed to which is life. It is for this 
cause that Jesus said, "Search the Scriptures." 
We are not merely to read them as a duty, but 
to search them diligently as a privilege, to the 
intent that we may know the spirit or mind of 
God. If we would be filled with the spirit of 
God we must drink deeply of the fountain of 
truth— his Word. Our earthen vessels are very 
imperfect and leaky, and it is easy to let the 
spiritual things slip (Heb. 2:1), in which case 
the spirit of the world, which is all around us, 
quickly rushes in to fill the vacuum. Therefore 
it behooves us to live very close to the 
fountain of truth, the Word of God, lest the 
spirit of God be quenched, and we be filled 
with the spirit of the world. But if constantly 
filled from the fountain of truth, we will not receive 
the spirit of the world, but the spirit 
which is of God. And it is thus that we may 
know the things which God has in reservation 
for us— even the deep things of God. Thus we 
see that what the natural man could not know, we, 
receiving the mind, influence, or spirit of God, 
may know. (1 Cor. 2:12.) Therefore, "Let 
the same mind be in you which was also in 
Christ Jesus," for "if any man have not the 

R1410 :page 171 

spirit of Christ he is none of his."— Rom. 8:9. 

The holy spirit or mind should not be confounded 
with the fruits of the spirit or the gifts 
of the spirit, though its possession always yields 
the peaceable fruits of patience, meekness, love, 
etc. In the beginning of this age its possession 
was often accompanied, not only by fruit, 
but also by miraculous gifts of teaching, tongues, 
miracles, etc. (1 Cor. 12); but these, as well as 
their necessity, have largely passed away, as the 
Apostle foretold they would, the gift of teaching 
still remaining because still needful to 



"the body." 

Believing that the foregoing is a consistent 
and correct statement of the Bible teaching on 
this subject, which the Scriptures quoted, we 
think, prove, we proceed to examine the texts 
generally supposed to conflict with this understanding 
It should be borne in mind, however, 
that the translators of the Scriptures from 
Greek into English were Trinitarians, and naturally 
translated as much in harmony with their 
belief as they could. 

OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 



(a) "Quench not the spirit." (1 Thes. 5:19.) 

To quench signifies to extinguish, as to extinguish 
a fire or light. The Greek word from 
which it is translated occurs eight times in the 
New Testament, and in every other text it refers 
to quenching fire or light. Carry this 
thought with you and observe that by reason 
of having God's holy mind or spirit we are 
called "the light of the world" (Matt. 5:14); 
but if we should be seduced into worldliness by 
the spirit of the world, our light would be 
quenched, or extinguished. "If the light that 
is in thee become darkness [be extinguished], 
how great is that darkness!"— Matt. 6:23. 

(b) "Grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby 
ye are sealed unto the day of redemption." 
(Eph. 4:30.) To seal is to mark or designate. 
The children of this world may be distinguished 
by certain marks, and so may the children of 
God, the new creatures in Christ. The mark 

of the one class is the spirit (mind, disposition, 
will) of the world; in the other class the seal 
or mark is the spirit (mind, disposition, will) 
of God. From the moment of true consecration 
to God, the evidence, marks or sealing 
may be seen in words, thoughts and actions. 
These marks grow more and more distinct daily, 
if we keep growing in grace, knowledge 
and love. In other words, the spirit (mind) of 
God becomes our mind or spirit in proportion 
as we give up our own human will or spirit, and 
submit in all things to the will or spirit of God. 
Thus we are to let or permit the same mind to 
be in us that was also in Christ Jesus our Lord 
—a mind to do only the Father's will. Hence, 
our new mind or spirit is holy or God-directed. 

In this text the Apostle urges that we do 
nothing which will be a violation of our covenant, 
and thus a grief to the holy spirit or 
mind of God in us, or in other words, which 



would wound our conscience as new creatures 
in Christ. "Grieve not the holy Spirit [mind] 
of God [in you], whereby ye are sealed." 

(c) The spirit of truth— "shall not speak of 
himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, he shall 
speak, and he will show you things to come." 
(John 16:13.) The disciples, as Jews and natural 
men, had been looking at things from an 
earthly standpoint, expecting a human deliverance 
and a human kingdom. Jesus had talked 
of the kingdom, but not until now had he explained 
that he must die, and must leave them 
to go into a far country to receive the kingdom 
and to return. (Luke 19:12.) Comforting them, 
he assures them of another who would lead them 
and teach them— a Comforter that the Father 
would send in his name, or as his representative 
for the time. They must not get the idea that 
the coming comforter is to be another Messiah, 
or a different teacher; hence he says, "He 
shall not speak of himself;" that is, he shall 
not teach independently and out of harmony 
with my teaching, "but whatsoever he shall 
hear, that shall he speak." That is, the same 
things which I have taught, which you have 
been hearing, he will elaborate and teach more 
fully— "He shall glorify me, for he shall receive 
of mine and shall show it unto you." 
"All things that the Father hath are mine [his 
plans and my plans are all one]; therefore said 
I that he shall take of mine, and shall show it 
unto you." The new teacher will not turn 
your minds from me to himself; but all the 

R1410 :page 172 

teachings of the coming Comforter will be in 
harmony with my teachings, and to show you 
more fully that I am the Messiah. Neither 
need you doubt the truth of the Comforter's 
teachings, for it is the Spirit of Truth, and proceeds 
from the Father. (John 15:26.) This 
Spirit of Truth will be my messenger to communicate 
to you my doctrines, and will show 
you things to come. 

Even so it has been: the Spirit of Truth has 
been showing to the Church during this age 
more and more of the coming glory and glorious 
work of Christ and the depth of the riches 
of God's plans to be fulfilled in him. Thus 
Christ has been glorified in the Church. 

Jehovah is the author of truth, and all the truth 
which has reached and guided the Church during 
this age has therefore proceeded from him, 
from whom cometh every good and perfect gift. 
He has sent it through channels long since prepared 



—through the prophetic and typical teachings 
of the past, opened up to us through the 
inspired words of Jesus and the apostles. Thus 
has God's spirit, the spirit of the truth, led us 
day by day and shown us "things to come." 

(d) "But the Comforter, which is the Holy 
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, 
he shall teach you all things, and bring all 
things to your remembrance whatsoever I have 
said unto you." (John 14:26.) "Ghost" is but 
another and bad translation of pneuma, generally 
rendered "spirit." 

The fact that the Father sends the holy Spirit 
shows that it is under his authority and control, 
just as your powers are under your control. (See 
1 Cor. 14:31.) Only those who have followed 
in the footsteps of Jesus, sacrificing the human 
will and receiving the mind or spirit of God, 
can understand the import of these words of 
Jesus. To the natural man, an explanation of 
this text is impossible; but he who has the 
mind of Christ realizes that it is a comfort indeed. 
No matter how painful the crucifying of 
the flesh may be, we have learned to view it all 
from God's standpoint, and to esteem present 
affliction as light, compared with the glory that 
shall be revealed in us. Thus the holy spirit 
shall be in you; your spirit or will having been 
transformed, made new, is now holy. Produced 
by the truth, it is the spirit of the truth 
and may be lost only through your receiving a 
spirit of error, a spirit of slumber, or the "spirit 
of the world," any of which, if received, will 
quench and drive out the holy spirit of truth 
from the heart. 

The mind of Christ, or the new spirit, leads 
us to search the Scriptures, God's storehouse of 
truth. Thus the spirit of truth works in us. It 
also enables us to comprehend God's Word; 
for the more we can get to see from God's 
standpoint the more reasonable to us does his 
Word become, that we through patience and 
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, while 
enduring present afflictions.— Rom. 8:26; 15:4. 

(e) "And they were all filled with the Holy 
Spirit, and began to speak with other tongues, 
as the Spirit gave them utterance." (Acts 2:4.) 
In this case, not only were the disciples filled 
with the Spirit or mind of God, which was God 
working in them, but God by his Spirit also 
acted upon them, conferring special "gifts," for 
a special purpose. 

It must seem absurd to every one to talk 
about a person being in several hundred persons, 
but many feel compelled to say so, because 
of their unscriptural theory. In thinking of it, 



every intelligent person has to think of the 
power or influence of God in those men, no 
matter how stoutly they say that it is a person who 
is diffused into a number of persons. We cannot 
too carefully discriminate between the 
Spirit of God and these miraculous "gifts" 
by which those acceptable to God were at first 
marked out. These "gifts" were for the establishment 
of the Church, and were different in different 
members; but they were not to be compared 
with "the fruits of the Spirit"— joy, peace, faith, 
patience, love, etc. To have the latter proved 
adoption, but not so the gifts, for though a 
man had gifts of tongues and of miracles, he 
might be but a sounding brass and a tinkling 
cymbal. The holy Spirit has abode in the 
members of the Church throughout the Gospel 
age, as was promised, though many of the 
"gifts," being no longer needful, have passed 
away, as the Apostle predicted.— 1 Cor. 13:8-11. 

(f) "But Peter said, Ananias, why hath 
Satan filled thine heart, to lie to the Holy Spirit 

R1410 :page 173 

and to keep back part of the price of the land?" 
(Acts 5:3.) Satan had filled Ananias' heart with 
his spirit of covetousness. God had filled Peter 
with his spirit, and one of the gifts of God's 
spirit, conferred upon Peter, was the gift of 
"discerning of spirits." (1 Cor. 12:10.) In 
verse 3, the lying is said to be unto the Holy 
Ghost (spirit or mind of God), and in verse 5, 
it is said to be unto God. The idea is the same, 
and thus we have the term Holy Ghost or Holy 
Spirit defined to be the mind of God, whether 
in the Father or in his representatives and 
agents— as in this instance in Peter. 

(g) "Then Peter said unto her [Sapphira], 
How is it ye have agreed together to tempt 
the Spirit of the Lord?" (Acts 5:9.) As with 
Ananias, so with his wife, their lying was 
reckoned to be not to Peter and the Church as 
men, but to God, whose agent and representative, 
through the Spirit, Peter was. 

(h) "But whosoever speaketh against the 
holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither 
in this world, neither in the world to come." 
(Matt. 12:32.) Read the context: Jesus had 
just exercised the power of God by casting out 
a devil. The Pharisees saw the miracle and 
could not deny it; but, to turn aside its force, 
they said it was performed by the power of the 
devil and not by God's power. But in answer, 
Jesus claims that he cast out devils by the Spirit 
[influence or power] of God. Then he upbraids 



them for being so malicious— a generation 
of vipers, so set on the traditions of their 
church that their eyes were blinded against the 
simplest kind of reasoning. It was so plainly 
evident that the power which opposed and cast 
out evil must be good, that they were inexcusable 
in ascribing it to Satan. They might and 
would be freely forgiven for supposing him, as 
a man, an impostor, and hence for blaspheming 
him; but they were wholly inexcusable for that 
gross prejudice which would ascribe such a 
good deed to the power of Satan. This, their 
sin, would not be among those forgiven. It 
must be punished; it will neither be forgiven in 
this present life, nor in the next, the Millennial 
age; it indicates more than Adamic depravity, 
and must have stripes. 

(i) "The spirit said unto Philip, Go near, 
and join thyself to this chariot." (Acts 8:29.) 
We fail to see in this anything demanding another 
God. We think the influence or spirit 
of God could indicate this to Philip in a variety 
of ways. In what way he was influenced 
is not stated and is immaterial to us. 

(j) "The Spirit said and unto him, Behold, 
three men seek thee." (Acts 10:19.) We would 
make the same criticism of this as of the 
former objection. It is immaterial how the 
power or spirit of God addressed to Peter this 
information. Possibly it came as an inspired 
thought into his mind, or possibly he was guided 
by three men's voices and the three visions, 
and accepted these as evidences of the mind or 
will of God as to his going. 

(k) "The Holy Ghost said, separate me 
Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I 
have called them." (Acts 13:2.) We are not 
told in what manner the holy Spirit said or indicated 
the setting apart specially of these two. 
It is very probable, however, that they were 
"called" and "set apart" by the holy Spirit 
in much the same manner that all true ministers 
of God are now called and set apart. All 
the fully consecrated— begotten— children of 
God are called to preach, each according to 
his ability. The Spirit says to us all, "Why 
stand ye idle?... go ye also into the vineyard." 
But, where special ability and opportunity to 
teach or expound God's Word is possessed by 
any of the consecrated, that special ability and 
opportunity should be recognized as a special 
call to the more public work of the ministry— 
the talents possessed emphasizing the general 
call of the holy Spirit. 

In speaking of his call to the ministry (Gal. 1:1), 
Paul mentions his authority of the Father 



and Son, but ignores the holy Spirit entirely; 
which would be inexcusable if the holy Spirit 
were a person, and, in fact, the person actually 
appointing him. But it is entirely consistent 
when we regard the holy Spirit as the holy influence 
from the Father or the Son, or from 
both conjointly, as their purposes are one. 
Gal. 1:1 reads, "Paul, an apostle, not of men, 
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God 
the Father, who raised him from the dead." 
(1) "For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost 
and to us," etc. (Acts 15:28.) The decisions 
reached in the matter under consideration 

R1410 :page 174 

seemed to be the judgment of the Church, and 
in harmony with God's will and plan. 

James, the chief speaker at the council, gives 
the clue to how God's will or mind was then 
ascertained; and we find it the same method 
which we use to-day. He argues from Peter's 
statement of God's leadings in the matter of 
Cornelius, and from an unfulfilled prophecy 
which he quotes. The conclusion drawn from 
these, he and all the Church accepted as the holy 
Spirit's teaching. Examine Acts 15:13-18. 

(m) "And were forbidden of the Holy Ghost 
to preach the Word in Asia." (Acts 16:6.) 
Like the others, this text in no way indicates 
that the holy Spirit is a person. As to how 
God's power or influence was exercised to direct 
their course away from Asia we know not, but 
possibly by unfavorable circumstances, or by a 
vision. No matter how, the lesson is that God 
was guiding the apostles. An illustration of 
one of the Spirit's ways of leading them is 
given in the context, verse 9. "A vision appeared 
to Paul in the night. There stood a 
man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, 
'Come over into Macedonia, and help us;' and 
after he had seen the vision, immediately they 
endeavored to go into Macedonia, assuredly 
gathering that the Lord had called them for to 
preach the gospel unto them." All these various 
dealings teach us that the methods by 
which God taught and led in those days were 
not very different from those he now uses. 

(n) "Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth 
in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions 
abide me." (Acts 20:23.) Nothing here indicates 
personality. As an illustration of the 
agencies by which the holy power of God informed 
Paul of the bonds awaiting him at 
Jerusalem, see Acts 21:10-14. 

(o) "The flock over which the Holy Ghost 



hath made you overseers, to feed the Church of 

God." (Acts 20:28.) Paul, addressing the 

Church, not the world, says, "The manifestation 

of the Spirit is given to every man [in 

Christ] to profit withal"— "GOD hath set some 

in the Church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, 

thirdly teachers," etc.— "and there are 

diversities of operations, but it is the same GOD 

which worketh all in all." (1 Cor. 12:6,7,28.) 

This explains how God through his holy Spirit 

sets men apart to various offices which he 

deems needful to the Church. It contradicts 

the thought of the holy Spirit being another 

person, and shows that God did the work by 

his Spirit. These elders of the Church had consecrated 

themselves to the Lord's service, and 

were chosen because of special fitness and talents, 

by their brethren (in whom also was the 

holy Spirit, the will of God), to be overseers of 

the flock. And though called to office through 

human instrumentality, they accepted the service 

as of God's direction and appointment. 

(p) "God hath revealed them unto us by 
his Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, 
yea, the deep things of God." "Which things 
also we speak, not in the words which man's 
wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost 
teacheth." (1 Cor. 2:10,13. Read the context.) 
This, as we have already shown, proves that 
the holy Spirit or mind of God in us, as his 
children, enables us to comprehend his plan, 
etc., even the deep things of God, by coming 
into full harmony with him through his Word. 
We have also noticed the context (verse 12), 
where Paul, in explaining the subject, tries 
to make it plain by comparing "the Spirit 
which is of [from] God," in us, with "the 
spirit of the world," which influences "the natural 
man." It is clear that the spirit of the 
world is not a person, but a worldly mind. 
The spirit or mind of God in his children is 
no more a person than is the spirit of the world 
with which it is here contrasted. 

(q) "But the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness 
unto him: neither can he know them, 
for they are spiritually discerned." (Verse 14.) 
This is a forcible statement of what we have 
already seen. A man who is filled with the 
worldly spirit is unprepared to see the "deep" and 
glorious things of God— the things which God 
hath prepared for them that love him. This is 
a close test if applied. Have you the Spirit of 
God? Have you been taught by it (through 
the Word) any "deep things" which the natural, 
worldly man cannot appreciate? 



Alas ! how often have we felt the force of 
this distinction between natural and spiritual 

R1410 :page 175 

as we have talked with some of the professed 
teachers of to-day, many of whom are blind 
leaders of the blind, when they confessed and 
sometimes boasted of their ignorance of "the 
things which God hath prepared for them that 
love him." Thereby they proclaim that they 
have not the mind of God, do not know his 
plans, and cannot have much of his Spirit, the 
Spirit of the Truth, when they have not much 
of the truth from which that Spirit flows. The 
test here given of our possession of the Spirit 
is our ability to discern and appreciate the deep 
things of God which are hidden from the worldly 
—"God hath revealed them unto us by his 
Spirit." 

INEXPRESSIBLE GROANINGS. 



(r) "The Spirit itself maketh intercession 
for us with groanings which cannot be uttered, 
and he that searcheth the hearts knoweth the 
mind of the Spirit."— Rom. 8:26,27. 

How much this expression of our Father's 
loving care has been misunderstood by his 
children! Who that has been taught that the 
holy Spirit is a person, and, as the catechisms 
state it, "equal in power" with the Father, has 
wondered why it could not utter groanings. 
Many a Christian brother has endeavored to 
make up for this supposed weakness or inability 
of the holy Spirit to express itself, by redoubling 
his own groanings. But it would be 
equally strange if it be understood to mean 
that the holy Spirit, as the influence or power 
of the Almighty Jehovah, is unable to express 
itself. We know that in past ages this influence 
found abundant expression by words and 
deeds of the prophets. We know that in this 
age all the apostles attest its power over 
them. What can it mean, then— "The Spirit 
itself maketh intercession for us with groanings 
which cannot be uttered?" The mistake is in 
supposing that it is God's Spirit which supplicates. 
It is the spirit of the saints which supplicates 
and often cannot express itself. 

Let us look at the text with its connections, and 
the ground for our conclusion will be evident. 
Paul had just been speaking of sin-burdened 
humanity groaning in its fetters. He assures 



us that it shall be given liberty from this 

bondage when the Church is selected from the 

world, and when as sons of God the great Deliverer 

whom Jehovah raises up to bless all the 

families of the earth is manifested in power. 

(Verses 19-21.) He then passes from the groanings 

of the world to the present condition of 

the Church, in which we groan: "Ourselves also, 

which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even 

we groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption." 

—Verse 23. 

Our renewed, transformed mind or spirit, 
once worldly, is now holy and spiritual, but 
our bodies are still human, and have the Adamic 
imperfections. Hence we, as new creatures, 
are burdened by the flesh, and groan for the 
promised deliverance into Christ's likeness. 
Paul explains how we may, by faith, reckon the 
earthly body dead, and think of ourselves as 
new creatures perfected, and thus realize ourselves 
saved now— "Saved by hope." (Verse 24.) 
Then, having seen how we may view ourselves, 
he tells us how the matter is viewed from God's 
standpoint— God reckons us "new" and "holy" 
—"spiritual" beings— and he recognizes as 
ours only those deeds of the flesh to which our 
minds consent. God knows when your holy 
spirit (new mind) is willing and your flesh weak. 

As the receiving of the new mind brought us 
into a new relationship to God, and into new 
hopes, so "likewise the spirit [our new holy 
mind] also helpeth [maketh up for] our [bodily] 
infirmities. For we know not [even] what 
we should pray for as we ought [much less are 
we always able to do as we would like]; but the 
spirit itself [our holy mind] maketh intercession 
[for us— omitted in old MSS.] with groanings 
which cannot be uttered. And he that searcheth 
the hearts [God] knoweth what is the mind 
[Greek, phronema— inclination] of the [our] 
spirit; because he [it] maketh intercession for 
the saints according to the will of God." It is 
God's will that the heart-desires of his children 
be accepted, in both prayer and service, 
notwithstanding the imperfections of their 
vessels. 

O, how comforting is this thought! How 
often you have experienced it. You were perhaps 
overtaken in a fault, entrapped by some 
weakness of the human nature, and, almost disheartened, 

R1410 :page 176 

you went to your Father in prayer. 

You had no words for utterance, but you groaned 

in spirit to God— "being burdened." God heard 



you and blessed you, answering your unuttered 
prayer and giving strength. Paul's conclusion 
is ours: we have every cause for rejoicing. 
What shall we say then? God is for us, evidently, 
and disposed to accept our heart-intentions 
rather than our imperfect prayers and 
deeds. "If God be for us, who can be against 
us?"— Verse 31. 

(s) "The Spirit itself beareth witness with 
our spirit that we are the children of God."— 
Rom. 8:16. 

Nothing in this text teaches that the holy 
Spirit is a person, but the contrary: it indicates 
that as each man has a spirit or mind, so God 
has a spirit. Read this text in the light of 
1 Cor. 2:11,12, and it will be seen that it does 
not teach of a personal holy Spirit. 

THE WITNESS OF THE SPIRIT. 



On few subjects have Christians in general 
felt more disturbed than on this. Not knowing 
what the witness of the spirit is, they know 
not surely whether they have it or not. And 
some, more full of assurance than of knowledge, 
claim that they have it, and refer to their own 
changeable feelings as evidence. The Calvinist, 
repudiating the idea of positive knowledge 
of sonship, sings, 

"Tis a point I long to know- 
Oft it causes anxious thought: 
Do I love the Lord or no? 
Am I his, or am I not?" 

This comes from a misapprehension of the 
doctrine of Election. Other Christians, equally 
misunderstanding the subject, claim that when 
they feel good these feelings are the witness of 
sonship. Because the Scriptures say, "Thou 
wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is 
stayed on thee," they judge of their sonship 
solely by their peace, and often by their prosperity. 
They lose sight of the words of Jesus 
—"In the world ye shall have tribulation, but 
in me ye shall have peace." 

When things move smoothly they feel good, 
and consider this the witness of the Spirit. 
But when they look at the heathen and at the 
worldly, and see that many of them apparently 
have peace of mind too, their supposed witness 
proves insufficient. Then the dark hour comes, 
and they say, How easy a matter to be deceived, 
and they sing— 

"Where is the peace I once enjoyed, 
When first I found the Lord?" 



They are in torment lest they have grieved 
the Spirit— for "fear hath torment." This is all 
because of the unscriptural view taken of the 
Spirit and its dealings and witnessings. Let 
us take the Bible view of the witness of the 
Spirit (mind) of God with our spirit (mind), 
and the song of God's children shall be— 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word." 

As we would know of a man's mind or spirit 
by his words and dealings, so we are to know 
of God's mind or spirit by his words and dealings. 
God's Word is, that whosoever cometh 
unto him by Jesus (consecrates himself) is accepted. 
(Heb. 7:25.) Then, the first question 
to ask yourself is, Did I ever, during the acceptable 
time, fully consecrate myself— my life, 
time, talents, influence, my all— to God? If 
you can candidly answer before God— Yes, I 
gave myself wholly to him, then be assured, 
on the authority, not of your feelings, but of 
God's Word, which, unlike your feelings, is 
unchangeable, that you then and there instantly 
became a child of God— a probationary 
member of the true Church, a branch of the 
true vine. (John 15:1.) This is a witness that 
you have joined the true Church, which is 
Christ's body: it is a witness given to your 
mind or spirit, by the testimony of God's spirit 
through his Word. 

Whether or not you are abiding in him now, 
depends on whether you have grown as a branch, 
and are bearing fruit: "Every branch in me 
that beareth not fruit he taketh away, and every 
branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth [pruneth] 
it, that it may bring forth more fruit." 
Here is stated the rule in our Father's family 
—chastisements, pruning, taking away of dross, 
and a development of fruit-bearing qualities. 
If you lack these indications of parental care 
and personal growth in grace you lack one evidence 
or witness that you are a child. "Whom 

R1410 :page 177 

the Lord loveth, he chasteneth, and scourgeth 

every son whom he receiveth. If ye be without 

chastisement, then are ye bastards and not 

sons." (Heb. 12:8.) Afflictions and troubles 

come upon the world as well as upon the Lord's 

saints, but they are not marks of sonship except 

to those fully consecrated to his service. 

Nor is the pruning and chastising in the divine 

family always the same. As with earthly children, 

so with God's children: to some, a look 

of disapproval, to others, a word of rebuke, is 



an all-sufficient reproof, while others must be 

scourged repeatedly. An earthly parent rejoices 

most in the child so obedient and submissive 

that a look or word is sufficient to prune off 

evil; and so does our Father in heaven. Such 

are those who judge themselves, and who therefore 

need less of the chastising of the Lord. 

(1 Cor. 1 1 :3 1 .) To be of this class requires 

a full consecration; and these are the overcomers 

deemed worthy of being joint-heirs 

with Jesus Christ their Lord, whose footsteps 

they thus follow. To this obedient, watchful 

class the Lord says, "I will guide thee with 

mine eye." Those who can be guided only by 

the scourge are not the overcoming class, destined 

to be the Lord's bride. 

The chastening, however, is not always suffering 
for our faults, but with the saints it is 
often the suffering which strict adherence to 
their covenant of sacrifice involves. Even so 
our Lord was chastened for our transgressions, 
not his own, because he bore the sins of many. 
And so we must suffer as joint-sacrifices with 
him. 

Here is one testimony of the Spirit, then— 
that every true child or branch needs and will 
have continual pruning. Are you being pruned? 
If so, that is an evidence of your being a 
branch; in this pruning the Spirit of truth bears 
witness with your spirit that you are God's child. 

Again the Spirit witnesseth that "whosoever 
is born [begotten] of God sinneth not." (1 John 5:18.) 
Such may be overtaken in a fault, may 
err in judgment, may be overpowered by the old 
nature not yet under control, but will never 
wilfully transgress God's will. Now can your 
mind answer that you delight to do God's will 
and would not willingly violate or in any way 
oppose it, but would rather have his will done, 
his plan carried out, even though it should 
dash your former hopes and break every tender 
tie? If so, the witness of your spirit or mind 
agrees with the spirit of truth, indicating that 
you are a child of God, acceptable to him. 

The witness of the Spirit is, that the true 
branches of the vine, like the vine Christ Jesus, 
are not of the world— "If ye were of the 
world, the world would love his own; but because 
ye are not of the world, therefore the 
world hateth you." "Yea, and all that will 
live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." 
(2 Tim. 3:12.) Does your mind testify 
that it is thus in your experience? If so, 
then the Spirit of God again witnesseth with 
your spirit that you are his child. Remember 
that the world spoken of by Jesus included all 



worldly-minded ones, all in whom the spirit of 
the world has a footing. In Jesus' day, this was 
true of the nominal Jewish Church. In fact, 
all of his persecution came from professors of 
religion. Marvel not if you should have a 
similar experience. It was the chief religionists 
of his day that called Jesus Beelzebub, a 
prince of devils; and he tells us, "If they have 
called the master of the house Beelzebub, how 
much more shall they call them of his household." 
(Matt. 10:25.) If Jesus had joined 
hands with them he would not have had "hatred" 
and "persecution." Even had he kept 
quiet and let their hypocrisies, shams, long 
prayers and false teachings alone, he would 
have been let alone and would not have suffered. 
So it is with us: it is from a similar class that 
the truth and those who have the spirit of the 
truth, and who let their light shine, now incur 
hatred and persecution. If we have this witness 
it is another testimony of the Spirit that 
we are overcoming the spirit of the world— 
therefore the worldly-spirited hate us. 

The Spirit witnesseth that whosoever is 
ashamed of Jesus and his words, of him shall 
he be ashamed. (Mark 8:38.) Does your spirit 
witness that you are one whom he here promises 
to confess? If so, rejoice: this is another 
good witness of the Spirit that your present 
standing is that of a child and heir. 

The Spirit witnesseth that "Whosoever is 

R1410 :page 178 

born [begotten] of God overcometh the world: 

and this is the victory that overcometh the 

world, even our faith." (1 John 5:4.) Is this 

your experience? To be an overcomer signifies 

that you are not in harmony with the spirit 

—the aims, hopes and ambitions— of the world. 

Have you this witness that you are overcoming 

the world? Wait a moment— you are not to 

overcome the world by flattery, nor by joining 

in its follies, nor are you to overcome the 

world by teaching a Sunday class, or joining a 

sectarian church; no, but by your faith. To 

be an overcomer, you must walk by faith, not 

by sight. Looking not at things that are seen 

—popularity, worldly show, numbers, denominational 

greatness, etc., but looking at the 

things which are not seen— the spiritual and 

eternal things.— 2 Cor. 4:18. 

Again, the Spirit witnesseth that if you are 
a child of God, you will not be ignorant of 
his Word, and will not only be in the light 
as to present truth, but will know something 



about "things to come." The maturing 
child will grow in grace, knowledge and love, 
adding daily the graces of the Spirit— faith, 
virtue, knowledge, charity, etc. And surely 
"If these things be in you and abound, they 
make you that ye shall neither be barren nor 
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. But he that lacketh these things is 
blind and cannot see afar off.... For if ye do 
these things ye shall never fall; for so an entrance 
shall be ministered unto you abundantly, 
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ." (2 Pet. 1:5-11. Compare 
John 16:12-15.) Ask yourself whether 
you have this witness of growth, and the sort 
of fruit mentioned. Remember, too, that you 
cannot grow in love faster than you grow in 
knowledge; and you cannot grow in favor except 
by complying with God's instructions. 
This instruction, this knowledge, is found in 
his Word. Hence we are exhorted to "search 
the Scriptures," that we may be thoroughly 
furnished unto every good work.— 2 Tim. 3:17. 

These are the witnesses of the Spirit by which 
we may know just how we stand. You may be 
a young sprout in the vine; then, of course, 
God does not expect ripe fruit instantly; but 
there should be budding at once, and soon the 
fruits. And if you are a developed and advanced 
Christian, every testimony of the Spirit above 
cited should witness with your spirit. If in 
any of these testimonies of the Spirit you find 
yourself lacking, give diligence, give earnest 
heed, that you may possess every experience 
described. Then you will no longer sing— 

"Tis a point I long to know," etc., 
but will know, and be rooted and grounded, 
built up and established in the faith. In this 
divinely arranged way, we escape from fear and 
from what Bunyan called "Doubting Castle," 
for our trust rests securely on God's promises. 

"When darkness seems to vail his face, 
You'll rest in his unchanging grace; 

His oath, his covenant and his blood 

Supporting 'neath the whelming flood." 

JUSTIFIED AND SANCTIFIED BY THE SPIRIT. 



"But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, 
but ye are justified, in the name of our Lord 
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.— 
1 Cor. 6:11. 

Sanctification means a setting apart or separating. 
Those who are sanctified, set apart, 



fully consecrated to God, must first be justified 
or cleansed from Adamic sin by accepting in 
faith the testimony of God, that "Christ died 
for our sins according to the Scriptures." Being 
then justified by faith, we have peace with God, 
and can approach him and begin to do works 
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. The evidence 
which we have of our justification and 
sanctification is the testimony of the spirit of 
truth in the Word, and the "seal" and "witness" 
in ourselves— our transformed mind. 

The power which enables us to live up to our 
consecration vows is the Spirit or mind of our 
God of which we receive. The Spirit of truth 
received by the study and obedience of our 
Father's words gives the needed strength for 
the overcoming of the human nature and the 
spirit of the world. 

To this agree other scriptures. Paul prayed: 
"The very God of peace sanctify you wholly." 
Peter says: Ye are "elect [chosen], through 
sanctification [setting apart] of the Spirit, unto 
obedience." Again, that the sanctifying 

R1410 :page 179 

power or spirit in us is the spirit of truth is 

shown by Paul's statement, that Christ sanctifies 

and cleanses the Church by the Word. (Eph. 5:26.) 

Our Lord Jesus prayed: "Sanctify 

them through thy truth: thy Word is truth." 

(John 17:17.) So, then, these scriptures taken 

together teach, as the foregoing, that our sanctification 

is accomplished by the spirit of truth 

freely imparted to the consecrated followers of 

the Redeemer through the Word of God, which 

he has provided for this purpose. 

All thus sanctified are reckoned new creatures 
in Christ, and are addressed as "them 
that are sanctified in Christ." (1 Cor. 1:2.) 
That it is by reason of our sanctification of 
spirit that we are one with Christ, is shown by 
the statement: "Both he that sanctifieth and 
they who are sanctified are all of one, for which 
cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren." 
(Heb. 2:11.) Thus it is that we are "washed, 
sanctified, justified, in the name of our Lord 
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God"— the 
spirit of the truth, communicated to us through 
his Word. 

THE SPIRIT WILL REPROVE THE WORLD. 



"When he ['the Spirit of truth'] is come 



he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, 
and of judgement."— John 16:8-11. 

Many gather from this text that the holy 
Spirit operates in sinners for their reformation. 
This is not the right view. The spirit of God 
is not in the children of this world. Theirs is 
"the spirit of the world." The "spirit of the 
world," or "the carnal mind, is enmity against 
God." The Spirit or mind of God is in believers 
only. Hence, wherever we find it, it is 
a seal or mark of sonship— "By whom also 
ye were sealed after that ye had believed the 
gospel of your salvation." (Eph. 1:13.) "If 
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is 
none of his." The Spirit of God, by means of 
its fruits, and its witness through the Word, is 
the evidence of our begetting to the family of 
God; it is "the spirit of adoption whereby we 
cry, Abba, Father." (Rom. 8:15.) It must be 
evident to all, then, that the Spirit in us is not 
the spirit which is in the worldly, and that the 
Spirit of God is in no sense in the worldly. 

In what sense, we inquire, does the Spirit of 
truth, the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Christ, 
reprove the world? We reply that this spirit 
in the true Church is the light of the world. 
It is the light which shines from the true 
Christian, which reproves or condemns and opposes 
the darkness of this world. Jesus, when 
anointed by the Spirit of God, declared, "I am 
the light of the world." And again, "As long 
as I am in the world, I am the light of the 
world." (John 8:12; 9:5.) Addressing his 
Church of this age, sanctified by the same holy 
Spirit, he says, "Ye are the light of the world. 
...Let your light shine before men." (Matt. 5:14-16.) 
Paul, addressing the same body of 
Christ, says, "Ye were at one time darkness, 
but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children 
of light." (Eph. 5:8; 1 Thes. 5:5.) "For 
God [the spirit of God, the spirit of truth] 
...hath shined in our hearts to give the light 
of the knowledge of the glory of God." (2 Cor. 4:6.) 
Thus we see that it is the light of 
God's truth, his spirit or mind shining in our 
hearts, which shines out upon the world; and 
we are to "do all things without murmurings 
and disputings, that ye may be blameless and 
harmless, the sons of God without rebuke, in 
the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, 
among whom ye shine as lights in the world, 
holding forth the word of life."— Phil. 2:15. 

It is, thus, not directly, but by a reflex light, 
through those who possess it, that the Spirit 
operates upon (but not in) the world; for the 
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit 



of God, neither can he know them. (1 Cor. 2:14.) 
The Apostle thus explains the reproving of the 
world by the Spirit in the saints, saying, 
"Walk as children of light.. .and have no 
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, 
but rather reprove them. ...All things that 
are reproved are made manifest [shown to be 
wrong] by the light." (Eph. 5:8-13.) The 
light of God's truth, which is the expression 
of his mind or spirit, as it shines through a 
sanctified life, is the holy Spirit reproving 
the darkness of the world, showing those 
who see it, what is sin, and what is righteousness, 
from which they will reason of a coming 
judgment, when righteousness will receive some 

R1410 :page 180 

reward and sin some punishment. Thus a godly 
life is always a reproof to the ungodly, even 
where no word of reproof may be possible, or 
proper. The spirit in you reproves them; for 
if sanctified ye are "living epistles known and 
read of all men." 

The true Church has always been a light in 
the world; but, as with its Head, the light has 
shined in the darkness; and though the darkness 
recognizes the reproof of its presence, it 
comprehends it not. Therefore they have always 
persecuted the light-bringers, because 
they knew not our Father, nor our Lord, nor 
his body. (John 16:3.) It has always been a 
part of the Church's mission to let the truth shine 
through it to reprove evil. And this reproof 
has always been chiefly to nominal systems and 
nominal professors, as were our Lord's reproofs. 
But "if the light that is in thee be [become] 
darkness, how great is that darkness!"— both 
to the individual soul in whom the light has 
gone out, and to the world from whom the light 
is thus obscured. Satan achieves no greater 
triumph than when he seduces a soul which was 
once enlightened and sanctified by the truth; 
and the influence of such a one for evil is more 
than doubled. "Let him that thinketh he 
standeth take heed lest he fall." 

BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 



A common error among God's children today, 
arising also from an improper conception 
of the holy Spirit, is the supposed necessity for 
frequent baptisms of the Spirit. We are told, 
"Be ye filled with the Spirit;" and we would 



urge the necessity of constantly receiving supplies 

of grace to help our infirmities. We all 

need constantly to go to the fountain to replenish, 

because our "earthen vessels" are 

very defective and the spirit of Christ easily 

slips out, being under constant pressure from 

the spirit of the world. But to be filled with 

the Spirit is something totally different from 

the baptism of the Spirit. 

So far as we are informed, there have been 
but three baptisms of the Spirit in all: first, 
Jesus was so baptized: second, the disciples at 
Pentecost were similarly baptized; third, Cornelius 
and his family were so baptized. These 
three baptisms were in reality but one, as already 
shown from the Levitical type. The 
holy anointing oil was poured upon the head 
and ran down over the body of the typical 
priest; and so the spirit of anointing given to 
our Head, Jesus, descended on the Church at 
Pentecost, and has since been running down 
over and anointing all that are members of his 
body. In the three cases mentioned above, 
then, it was an outward manifestation which 
witnessed specially that God recognized the 
baptized as his. To convince the natural man, 
this acceptance was accompanied by various 
"gifts." (1 Cor. 14:22.) To them these 
gifts were the evidences of the possession of 
the Spirit and of acceptance with God. 

The spirit or mind of God is now received 
without the gifts and without outward manifestation, 
those manifestations and gifts being 
now recorded in the Word of God, and not 
(or with few exceptions) in the persons and 
deeds of his children. Paul testified that he 
might have gifts, or be acted upon by the Spirit, 
and yet be almost destitute of the spirit of love 
and sacrifice itself— and thus be but a "tinkling 
cymbal." (1 Cor. 13:1.) Thus we see 
that the gifts were not a mark of special favor 
toward those exercised by them. What we 
may have of the "witness" of the Spirit is a 
far better criterion of our spiritual condition 
than if possessed of the mountain-moving, 
tongue-speaking and miracle-working power, 
without the internal witness of harmony with 
God's Word. 

Since Cornelius, there have been no such 
baptisms or outward manifestations of God's 
favor; but instead, the inward, unseen witness 
of the Spirit of Truth with our spirit, that we 
are children and heirs of God. 

Nor should we wonder at this: the Church 
was like two rooms, hitherto unopened— locked 
up. The one room represents the Jewish believers 



in Jesus; the other the Gentile believers. 
Both were to be henceforth thrown open 
and used. There must be an opening and 
demonstration, after which the doors, standing 
open, needed not a further re-opening. Peter 
unlocked or opened both of these doors. At 
Pentecost he did the opening work to the Jews 

R1410 :page 181 

who had believed. (Acts 2:14-41.) And 
when, about three and one-half years after, it 
became God's due time to receive Gentile believers 
into the same privileges of sonship, 
Peter was again used to open that door— being 
sent to Cornelius, the first Gentile convert. 
(Acts 10.) Thus he used the "keys of the 
kingdom of heaven" (the Church), and opened 
the way, as Jesus had foretold. (Matt. 16:19.) 
Keys represent power and authority. 
He needed more than one, because hitherto 
Jews and Gentiles had been recognized as totally 
distinct, and the Gentiles were not fellow-heirs, 
and of the same body. 

If the acceptance of Jewish-born believers 
was indicated once for all at Pentecost, why 
should God repeat it to others now? If the 
acceptance of Gentile-born believers was clearly 
shown in Cornelius' case, why should a repetition 
be asked? There is nothing in the 
Scriptures to indicate that these baptisms were 
ever repeated. 

Some now meet and pray for a Pentecostal 
baptism of the holy Spirit. They look back 
to that with special longings, thinking that it 
was something not now possessed by the saints, 
whereas the things not now possessed are merely 
the gifts of the Spirit. This is wrong— it is 
looking from the standpoint of the natural 
mind. It is looking at the things that are seen, 
and not at the things unseen and eternal, for a 
basis of faith. When just coming out of the 
fleshly into the spiritual dispensation, it was 
very necessary to have something which the 
natural man might recognize to mark the new 
era. The gifts were in the Church, not to convince 
the saints of their acceptance with God, 
but to convince others of the divine authority 
of Christianity. (See 1 Cor. 14:22.) The 
witness of the Spirit was for the saints. 

The Church in general had the gifts, but 
they did not all receive those gifts at Pentecost, 
nor by a baptism of the Spirit. The eleven 
apostles, with Paul, the Lord's choice for the 
place of Judas, possessed the special power of 
communicating those gifts by laying on of 



hands (Compare Acts 8:13,14,17-19); but 
those who received the gifts from their hands 
could not re-communicate them to others. 

Though entirely out of harmony with God's 
Word to pray for another baptism of the holy 
Spirit, it is right to pray to be kept filled with 
the holy Spirit. The Father in heaven is more 
willing to give the Spirit to those that ask him 
than earthly parents are to give good gifts to 
their children. (Luke 11:13.) When we 
ask for anything, it implies that we want it; 
and if wholly consecrated we should want to 
receive the holy Spirit in the way God wishes 
to give it. We pray for daily food, and properly, 
but we must do more than pray. God 
puts within our reach the needful means of procuring 
the food, and thus the food comes from 
him from whom cometh every good gift. When 
we pray for the Spirit, and desire to "be filled 
with the Spirit," it is well. God has already 
provided all the means necessary to the fulfilment 
of our request. The "Spirit of truth" 
will give the very filling we desire, but we must 
partake of, must eat the feast, or we will not 
be filled. He who will not eat of a full table 
will be empty and starve, as truly as though 
there were no food. The asking of a blessing 
on food will not fill us; we must eat it; so 
the possession of a Bible and a petition for spiritual 
food will not do: we must eat the Word 
of God if we would derive his spirit from it. 

The Spirit of truth speaks to us through the 
Word, and by obedience to the Word we shall 
be filled with the Spirit. Our Lord said, "The 
words that I speak unto you, they are spirit 
and they are life." (John 6:63.) And of 
those who are filled with the Spirit it is true as 
spoken by the prophet, "Thy words were 
found and I did eat them." (Jer. 15:16.) It 
is useless, then, for us to pray, Lord, Lord, give 
us the Spirit, if we neglect the Word of truth 
from which that Spirit is supplied. It is for 
this reason that many who meet often and pray 
much for the holy Spirit are still but "babes 
in Christ;" and many seek the outward signs 
as proof of relationship, instead of the inward 
witness through the Word of truth. 

As we have just seen, it is because we have 
something to do if we would be filled with the 
Spirit, as surely as we have something to do if 
we would have natural food, that the Apostle 
addresses us— "Be ye filled with the Spirit" 

R1410 :page 182 

(Eph. 5:18), indicating that it rests entirely 



with us, since the doors were opened wide at 
Pentecost and at Cornelius' house. 

"He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost 
and with fire." (Matt. 3:10-12.) These words 
were spoken to the Jews as a nation, and our Lord 
was the one who would do the baptizing. As 
many of that nation as received him were baptized 
of the holy Spirit at Pentecost, and the 
remainder were afterward baptized with fire- 
trouble. The time of trouble which finally, in 
A.D. 70, destroyed their national existence 
was the fiery baptism foretold by the Prophets, 
and here by John. The three verses here connected 
(10-12) refer to the same fire. The 
unfruitful tree cast into the fire and the chaff 
burned represent those of that nation who 
"knew not the time of their visitation." 

R1411 :page 182 

I WILL POUR OUT MY SPIRIT UPON ALL FLESH. 



There is a remarkable prophecy in Joel (2:28-32,) 
which clearly distinguishes between 
the present age in which the possession of 
God's spirit is by the few, and the Millennial 
age in which the truth will be generally diffused 
among men, and its spirit generally accepted 
by men. The prophecy is stated in a manner 
likely to be misunderstood, in that the 
blessing upon the many is mentioned first, and 
the blessing upon the little flock, which comes 
first, is mentioned last. Even so, many of 
God's testimonies are so arranged and stated 
as not to be clearly seen until fully due— as 
meat in due season to the household of faith. 

Joel says [transposing his words to the order 
of their fulfilment]: "In those days I will 
pour out my spirit upon my servants and upon 
my handmaids: And it shall come to pass 
after those days, that I will pour out my spirit 
upon all flesh." (Joel 2:29,28.) Peter at 
Pentecost referred to this prophecy (Acts 2:16-21), 
saying, "This [outpouring of the spirit 
of God which you see— upon his servants and 
handmaids] is that which was spoken by the 
prophet Joel." All that Joel had prophesied 
was not fulfilled before their eyes, but what 
they saw was all foretold by Joel in that 
prophecy, and more too. Joel foretold the 
blessing of Pentecost upon the servants and 
handmaids, and also the blessing of all flesh in 
the "great day of the Lord," the Millennial 
day; and he also foretold the day of trouble 



preceding that Millennial day of blessing, referring 
to it under the symbolic statement of 
"wonders in the heavens above and signs in 
the earth beneath, blood, and fire, and vapor 
of smoke," etc. 

The coming of the spirit upon all flesh (i.e., 
in general, upon all mankind) in the next age 
will be in much the same manner that it comes 
now to the special servants of God. Then, as 
now, it will be the spirit of truth, and cannot 
be received without the recipients first coming 
to a knowledge of at least the first principles of 
THE TRUTH, and being consecrated to God's 
service. 

There will be no difference between the 
spirit received by the Church in this Gospel 
age and by the human family in general in the 
next age: it is the same spirit; and, as we 
have just seen, it will be received in the same 
way, from the same source (God), and through 
the same channel— his Word of truth. But 

R1412:page 182 

the sealing and witnessing of the Spirit of God 
then to the converted world will be very different 
from the sealing and witness which it now 
gives to the Church. Some may not at once 
see how the same spirit could in the same way 
testify, witness and seal differently in the two 
ages, but we trust we shall be able to make this 
abundantly clear. 

Note clearly the dissimilarity of the two 
ages. In the Gospel age evil predominates, 
Satan rules, gross darkness covers the people, 
and the god of this world takes advantage in 
thousands of ways of the weakness of fallen 
men, misrepresents the truth and clothes error 
in the garb of truth. In the Millennial age 
evil will be restrained, Christ will rule and 
bless and the light of truth shall penetrate 
every dark corner. Mankind will be helped 
out of the weakness of the fall, and right and 
truth on every subject shall triumph. 

All this, God saw beforehand; and he saw 
that the trial or testing of any who possess and 
who would be led by his Spirit would be seven-fold 
as severe in this Gospel age as in the Millennial 
age. Yet he designed to have it so, in 

R1412:page 183 

order that thus he might select the "little 
flock" of peculiarly zealous ones for the work 
of blessing others, as well as for illustrations of 
the exceeding riches of his favor toward those 



willing to serve him at the cost of self-sacrifice. 

God knew beforehand that whosoever would 
live godly in this present world [age]— whoever 
would receive the Spirit of the truth and 
be led of it— would suffer persecution and present 
loss; that whoever would have and obey 
the leadings of his holy Spirit, among those 
having the opposing "spirit of the world," 
would do it only at the cost of self-sacrifice. 
And God had a perfect right to promise such 
sacrificers, of whom our Lord Jesus is the head 
and exemplar, a special "prize," a "high calling," 
exceeding great and precious, and a 
change from the human to the divine nature if 
he chose; and he did choose to do this very 
thing. "This is the promise which he hath 
promised us." The promises to be like Christ 
our Lord, and to live with him, and to reign 
with him, and to be his joint-heirs, are not 
made to all who will receive the holy Spirit of 
the truth, but to those who suffer for righteousness 
sake, who hazard and lay down their lives 
for the truth, who suffer with Christ and become 
dead with him, filling up that which is 
behind of the afflictions of Christ in the earnest 
desire to serve his body, which is the Church. 

Just so surely as the "sufferings of Christ" 
are completely filled up and end with this age, 
and the glories to follow enter with the next 
age, just so surely it will be impossible for those 
who in the next age have the spirit of truth to 
suffer and sacrifice themselves in obeying it. 
Consequently they could never have the witness 
of the Spirit that they are joint-heirs with 
Christ, nor that they shall be made new creatures, 
partakers of the divine nature. 

The Spirit's testimony is that they for whom 
those exceeding great things were prepared of 
the Father were sacrificers, who through much 
opposition, tribulation and gainsaying should 
be recognized as "overcomers," members of 
"the body of Christ." 

But those who receive the Spirit of the truth 
in the Millennial age will have in it a witness 
also. It will witness to them their acceptance 
with God through faith in Christ their Redeemer. 
And it will witness then almost the 
reverse of what it now witnesses, so far as tribulation 
is concerned. He who then suffers 
tribulation will have it as a witness of wrong 
doing and of the King's displeasure; while he 
who flourishes well in his affairs will have that 
as a witness of his well doing and of the King's 
good pleasure toward him, as it is written: 
"In his day [the Millennial Day] the righteous 
shall flourish," and the evil doers shall be cut 



off; and again, "He shall visit tribulation and 
anguish upon every soul of man that doeth 
evil, to the Jew first and also to the Gentile." 
(Psa. 72:7; Rom. 2:9.) And under that 
blessing the well doers will progress toward 
human perfection. Be it remembered, MAN is 
an earthly image of God, and hence the spirit 
or mind of a perfect man would be in harmony 
with God's spirit or mind. Especially will this 
be the case with restored men, who, during the 
fall and rising again, will have well learned to 
rely upon and obey implicitly the divine 
Spirit's leadings, and thus be led by the Spirit 
of the truth. 

The opening work for the world may furnish 
some marked evidence of divine acceptance, as 
at Pentecost a special manifestation of divine 
acceptance was given; but not necessarily so. 
The Word of truth and its witness may be all 
that will be given; and if so, it will be quite 
sufficient evidence for faith. 

The Spirit of truth would be, to them, a spirit 
of begetting also, begetting again as human 
sons of God; for such was Adam before he 
sinned, since whose fall all his posterity are 
counted as cut off, dead, except as brought 
back to perfection through redemption and 
restitution. And though begotten by the Spirit 
of truth, such must prove themselves worthy of 
being restored to full sonship (born), until the 
end of that age, when, being made complete 
through Christ, they can be presented to the 
Father as sons.— 1 Cor. 15:24. 



As we thus bring the light of one scripture 
to bear upon another we see how God brushes 
away the mists of traditional error, revealing 
his own glorious character, and making us better 

R1412:page 184 

acquainted with himself and with his dear 

Son, through whom he accomplished our redemption. 

With a clear understanding of the 

distinct personality of each comes a clearer 

understanding of much more truth. We are 

able to appreciate more intelligently what both 

our heavenly Father and our Lord Jesus have 

done for us, and to give to each the honor due. 

And as we observe the beautiful harmony of 

parental and filial affection, and study it in all 

its workings as revealed in the great plan of 

God, we have a theme for our praise and imitation 

throughout eternity. 



"Hear, O Israel! Jehovah our God is one- 
Jehovah. And thou shall love the Lord thy 
God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, 
and with all thy might;" for he is worthy. 
Study his character, behold his glory— of wisdom, 
love and power— and when you fully apprehend 
him, and recognize him as the fountain 
of every virtue and of every blessing, no 
creature in heaven or in earth will be able to 
take his first and rightful place in your heart's 
affections. 

Even our blessed Lord Jesus is no rival with 
Jehovah for that first, chief place. He himself 
said, "My Father is greater than I," and his 
highest ambition was to honor him at any cost 
to himself; at the cost of abasement and humiliation 
even unto death. And yet the Father 
hath so highly honored him as to place him at 
his own right hand of power and glory, and 
bid all his creatures honor the Son, even as 
they honor the Father. And being in character 
and glory the express image of the Father, and 
so intimately associated with all his plans, the 
love of our hearts that goes out toward one 
naturally falls upon both, and the only distinction 
we can see or feel in our love toward them 
is that the one is the eternal fountain and the 
other the perennial stream of unalloyed goodness 
and glory and blessing. 

But before leaving this important subject let 
us pursue it a little further, and consider what 
the Apostle Paul meant by 

THE SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND- 

a spirit so necessary both to a clear understanding 

and to obedience of the truth; and may 

God grant that through the careful and prayerful 

study of this whole subject his children may 

be more and more filled with his holy Spirit 

and adorned with its precious fruits. The 

Apostle says: "For God hath not given us 

the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and 

of a sound mind."— 2 Tim. 1:7. 

The word spirit is here used in the sense of 
mental disposition. Thus we sometimes speak 
of a bad spirit, meaning an evil disposition; or 
of a good, true spirit, meaning a pure, noble 
and amiable disposition. So the Apostle here 
refers to the disposition of a sound mind. 

A sound mind is a mind in a sound, healthy 
condition, and in full possession of all its faculties. 
Its perceptive faculties gather up various 
data and store them away in memory's garner; 
and its reasoning faculties arrange and 
compare them, and thus arrive at conclusions 



that otherwise could not be gained. However, 

if the mind is not in a sound, healthy condition, 

reason will not act properly. It will receive 

memory's store of facts, and, by misapplying 

and misappropriating them, arrive at erroneous 

conclusions. If the mind is disturbed 

by undue fear and dread, or by superstition or 

prejudice, or hate, or revenge, or undue ambition, 

or pride, or self-conceit, or avarice, or any 

depraved passion, reason will be so influenced 

by such dispositions as to render its conclusions, 

or judgment, untrustworthy. The mind is sound 

only when in the full possession of all its faculties, 

and when it is entirely free, in the use of 

those faculties, from prejudice or bias in any direction. 

Those among men who are freest from 

prejudice in the use of reason we sometimes, 

and very properly, speak of as cool-headed, while 

those of the opposite disposition are called 

hot-headed. 

Strictly speaking, there is not a perfectly 
sound mind in the world. The mind could not 
be perfectly sound unless the body were so. 
Both mind and body are sadly bruised by the 
fall; and in the fallen race we see all shades and 
grades of mental as well as physical derangement. 
Mark the varieties of physical derangement: 
Here is one with a deranged stomach— 
a dyspeptic; and that derangement affects the 
whole body to a greater or less extent. Another 
is afflicted with an improper action of the 

R1413 :page 185 

heart; and the whole body is therefore in trouble. 

The same is true if the lungs do not fill 

their appointed office, or if the liver will not do 

its duty, or if the nervous system be unstrung. 

In such cases the mind is always more or less unfavorably 

affected. If the body is burning with 

fever, or racked with pain, or agitated by an excited 

nervous system, or oppressed by the distresses 

of a dyspeptic stomach, or excited by a 

palpitating heart, or enfeebled by inactive and 

diseased lungs, the mind is correspondingly 

weak and diseased: it is unsound, fettered in 

the use of its powers, and unable fully to govern 

and rightly use them. 

The curse of sin and its penalty has laid its 
heavy hand on the entire man— mind and body. 
If one member of the body suffer, the whole 
body, and no less the mind, suffers with it. 
And in addition to those sufferings of the mind 
which come directly from physical disabilities 
are many others which come from its own derangement, 
from the undue cultivation of its inferior 



instincts and the dwarfing of its nobler 

faculties through sin and the necessities of painful 

toil— the labor and sweat of face which are 

parts of sin's penalty. Truly, as the prophet expresses 

it, There is none perfect (sound, either 

in mind or body), no, not one. (Psa. 14:3.) 

All are covered with wounds and bruises and putrefying 

sores— both mentally and physically, 

though there are various degrees of unsoundness. 

Oh! says one, I do not see that the world is 
so much out of gear mentally. Men are considerably 
out of sorts physically, greatly out of 
order morally, but it seems to me that mentally 
they are pretty straight. What evidence is 
there of such general mental derangement? 

Well, let us see. If we go into an insane 
asylum we find people who are so far unbalanced 
mentally as to be incapable of managing their 
own affairs, and often in danger of damaging 
the interests of others as well, because unable 
to exercise even moderate judgment. But we 
all know that we have neighbors on every side 
whose judgments, as well as our own, are very 
imperfect. And not infrequently many give 
evidence of inability to manage their own affairs 
creditably, who are a great annoyance in 
attempting to manage the affairs of others. 
Through self-conceit they are gossips and busybodies 
in other men's matters, though incapable 
of managing their own. This is one evidence 
of an unsound mind— a measure of 
insanity. 

What business man will not admit that, over 
and over again, when he has used his very best 
judgment, he has actually done the wrong 
thing when he should have known better? 
The large number of failures in business, and 
ill-successes generally, attest that the majority 
of people are very unsound in judgment. And 
likewise the numbers of badly raised families, 
of mismatches in matrimony, of ungoverned 
tempers, and of miserly, or extravagant, or 
foolish habits, etc., etc., all bear witness to 
the same fact. The great trouble in every case 
is an unsound mind. And no one knows better 
than the man who has precipitated financial 
disaster, or who has made a bad mistake in 
choosing a wife, or the woman who accepted a 
worthless man for a husband, that bad judgment, 
unsoundness of mind, was the cause of 
the trouble. And so avarice, selfishness, and 
other bad habits are evidences of mental as 
well as of moral and physical unbalance. 
Sometimes a man has average soundness of 
mind on most subjects, but is greatly astray on 
some one. He can reason intelligently on 



other subjects, but on this one he cannot: he 
reasons absurdly and draws false conclusions. 
There are some subjects on which so many are 
astray that mankind in general do not regard 
the wrong course as wrong, and are ready to 
pronounce those unbalanced who do not run 
with them to the same excesses. 

Suppose a man down on the river bank with 
a long rake, raking up old corks, and sticks, 
and rubbish out of the water, and having them 
at considerable expense carted off and stored 
in a barn somewhere. You see him day after 
day toiling away to no reasonable purpose, and 
you say, the man is insane. Why do you think 
so? Because he is spending his time and effort 
at that which, when looked at from a reasonable 
standpoint, is foolish. Now while all are 
not so bad as the illustration, there is a disposition 
of the same kind running through the 
whole race with reference to some subjects: 

R1413 :page 186 

for instance, that of accumulating money. 
That is an evidence of an unsound mind, but 
the popular opinion does not so regard it. 
There are thousands of men who have plenty 
of money, more than they know what to do 
with. It gives them great care and anxiety to 
take care of it, and great labor and weariness 
in one way or another to accumulate it. And 
yet, notwithstanding their superabundance, 
they will lie, and cheat, and steal, and defraud 
their best friends, to get more— only to add 
greater burdens to their already heavy load, 
and to heap upon themselves the calumnies and 
hatred of those whom they have defrauded. 
What is the natural inference? The man who 
acts so has an unsound mind. But it is on a 
popular subject; and others of similar disposition, 
though not always so successful, say, That 
is a great man; his aim is the grand acme of 
life; go on, become a ten times ten-millionaire 
(unless I should succeed in out-witting you). 

How should a really sound mind regard such 
proceedings? How does God view it, as he 
looks down upon men cheating and fighting 
and stealing from one another to get money, or 
wheat, or corn, into a "corner" from other 
men, and then guarding it, and keeping it, and 
fighting for it, as if it were very life itself. 

He sees it as the result of an unsound mind, 
as the mental and moral unbalance brought 
about through sin. If the mind were well balanced 
its energies would be divided between 
accumulating and using; and good and noble 



uses would be thought out whereby he and his 
fellow-men might receive some real advantage. 
But the common practice of all the world is to 
lay it up for posterity, and posterity receives it 
with mean ingratitude and generally uses it to 
its own injury.— Psa. 49:10,13. 

Another subject upon which the masses of 
men are unsound of mind, but which is not 
popularly so regarded, is the reckless propagation 
of the race without due regard to means 
of support, or health, or the Lord's special 
service to which some have consecrated their 
all, and often regardless of the barest necessities 
of life, overburdening wives whom they 
profess to love, and covenanted to support and 
defend, with weights of care which they are 
mentally and physically unable to endure, and 
from which they often gladly find refuge in the 
silent tomb; while the mentally and physically 
diseased offspring, which she was thus unfitted 
to rear, and which the father is incapable of 
supporting, are left to add their burden of misery, 
and mental and moral and physical depravity, 
to the world's long moan of distress 
and sorrow. 

True, the command was given, increase and 
multiply and fill the earth, but human fatherhood 
should be after the likeness of the divine 
fatherhood, which provides for every son— "If 
a son, then an heir." If a sound mind were in 
control, a man would not incur the responsibilities 
of a husband, or of fatherhood to a numerous 
family, with known inability to produce a 
healthy offspring, or to provide for them the 
necessities of life until able to do for themselves. 
The unsoundness of mind thus displayed 
has raised the wail of distress from thousands 
of homes, and nipped in the bud the tender 
plants of love and peace; and the struggle for 
bare existence has driven out every element of 
harmony and right-mindedness. 

If the spirit of a sound mind were in control 
here, love and harmony would prevail to a 
vastly greater extent, and a healthy, happy and 
welcomed offspring would rise up to bless a 
mother's training hand of care, to honor a 
father's kindly providence, and to walk in their 
honorable footprints. 

Is it not true, too, that such as have consecrated 
all to the Lord's service have little 
enough to give at best without tying their 
hands with more than indispensable earthly 
burdens and cares? Is it not, rather, the mission 
and privilege of such to feed and clothe, 
spiritually, God's little ones? 

But there are many other evidences of unsoundness 



of mind not so general among men, 
and yet very numerous in one form or another. 
For instance, one is a miser: he clutches a 
penny with almost a death grip; he would bargain 
and contend with a poorer man to induce 
him to undersell his little stock of goods on 
which he depends for the support of his family; 
he would deprive his own family of the necessary 
comforts of life, which he and they know 

R1413 :page 187 

he is able to supply, but will not, and thus introduce 

an element of discord into what might 

be a happy and prosperous home. Hugging 

his hoarded dollars he goes to his grave, and 

his children gather to quarrel over them and to 

hate his very memory. O, what a mistake! 

Another man is a spendthrift: self-gratification 
he will have, in every possible direction, 
regardless of consequences for the future. This 
is better than the miserly extreme, yet it is 
founded on the same mean principle of selfishness, 
regardless of the interests of others, and 
even of self-interest beyond the present moment. 
Neither of these extremes of unsoundness 
is realized by those thus afflicted. The 
miser congratulates himself that he is not a 
spendthrift, and the spendthrift that he is not 
a miser, and neither ever dreams that he has 
gone to the opposite extreme. 

O, that all the world might be blessed with a 
sound mind! What a renovation it would 

R1414:page 187 

make! What a transformation of all things! 
This is just what men will have when the great 
restitution work is all complete. 

But, notice that the Apostle in the above 
text speaks of the saints as now having the spirit 
of a sound mind. They are not actually sound, 
either in mind or body; they have mental and 
physical and moral weaknesses like other men; 
but they have received from God the spirit, the 
disposition, of a sound mind, which, under 
God's direction, is able to a very great extent 
to correct, control and direct the whole man. 
To have a sound mind, then, is the thing to be 
desired above all others, and all who realize 
their unsound condition should apply at once 
to the great Physician, who says, "Come unto 
me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and 
I will give you rest." And those who have 
come to this great Physician can testify to his 
power; for lo, under the magic of his healing 



touch, old things— the old disposition of fear 
and superstition, and evil inclinations, and 
weakness, and imbecility— have passed away, 
and all things have become new. The spirit 
of love and of a sound mind has taken its place, 
giving increasing power to govern the whole 
being as we grow up toward the stature of the 
fulness of Christ— complete in him. 

In line with these suggestions is the Apostle's 
advice, that those who have received the 
new mind— the spirit of a sound mind— we are 
not to know after the flesh, as men, but according 
to their real spirit or intention— as 
God knows or recognizes them. (2 Cor. 5:16.) 
And the Apostle Peter declares (1 Pet. 4:6) 
that "For this purpose the gospel is preached 
to them that are dead [those reckoned dead to 
sin, but alive toward God and righteousness]: 
that they might be judged of God in spirit 
[according to their real motives and intentions], 
although judged by men merely according to 
[the outward deeds] the flesh." (The Greek 
text supports this rendering, while the common 
version shrouds this text in mystery.) 

In coming to our Lord, his first requirement 
is, that we submit our minds entirely to his 
control, setting aside our ideas and plans entirely, 
to be guided henceforth by his sound 
mind. And only those thus consecrated to the 
doing of his will have the spirit, or disposition, 
of a sound mind. 

As soon as this spirit of a sound mind comes 
in, it begins at once, under the divine guidance, 
to set the whole man in order. And it begins 
in the right place: it commands the will to 
assert its power and hold its commanding place 
over body and mind; it puts reason at the 
helm with the divine Word as its guide book; 
it searches the heart with the lamp of divine 
truth lighted by the Holy Spirit, to see what 
form the malady of sin has taken; and then, 
looking to the divine healer by faith and the 
energy of resistance, the transforming work begins 
and progresses, bringing the mind into a 
more and more sound and healthy condition, 
notwithstanding the infirmities of the body 
may tend in an opposite direction. Thus the 
children of God are "transformed, by the renewing 
of their minds." And it is only these 
who have the transformed mind, who can know 
or prove what is the holy and perfect will of God. 

Sometimes the children of God get cold and 
listless and almost cease to aspire to and seek 
this soundness of mind, but let such remember 
that this is the lukewarm condition of which 
the Master declares his abhorrence. (Rev. 3:16.) 



Let the consecrated ones who look for 

R1414:page 188 

the reward of our high calling remember that 
ceaseless vigilance and earnest striving against 
the dispositions of the old unsound mind, and 
a constant submission to the divine will in the 
smallest affairs of every -day life, are the most 
thorough proofs of our faithfulness to God. It 
is all-important that while we endeavor to 
serve the Lord faithfully by bearing the good 
tidings of his truth to others, we should not 
fail in this most important work of self-discipline 
and self-culture under the divine direction. 
The every-day life of faithful saints will preach 
a sermon to all who know them, which their 
lips could never speak. And if it does not so 
do; if avarice, or penuriousness, or pride, or 
selfishness, or bad tempers, or slovenly habits 
in conversation still continue, our lips had best 
keep silence regarding godly matters, except 
before God in our closets. There we may 
speak freely, and ask largely for fresh supplies 
of grace to help us overcome the dispositions 
of the old unsound mind, that our daily life 
may speak a volume to our Redeemer's praise. 
Our children, our neighbors, our friends, and 
all who know us as exponents of divine truth, 
are looking for its fruits in our daily life, and 
judging of it accordingly, whether they tell us 
so or not. Let us endeavor to let our light 
shine in this way. We should never be too 
busy to let those about us see that our mind is 
under control of the divine mind— to let them 
see what carefulness the spirit of a sound mind 
hath wrought in us. 

As the divine mind takes the control of our 
minds, it cultivates the nobler qualities; it 
nourishes them with divine truth and bids them 
expand and take possession of the man; it 
subdues the lower propensities and appoints 
their definite and proper place in the service of 
the new higher nature. It also lifts the mind 
out of the narrow sphere of self, and sets the 
man to work in the Lord's benevolent service 
of blessing others; it shows him the divine 
plan and tells him he may have a share in it— 
not only in its benefits, but also in its great 
work as a co-laborer together with God. Thus 
the saint approaches the divine likeness and 
enjoys communion and fellowship with God. 

Well, says one, while we criticise some who 
spend their lives in gathering dollars, and 
others who spend it otherwise, they also criticise 
us, and say that we are unsound in mind, 



"peculiar," because our view of life is turned 
so much from the ordinary channel. What 
shall we say to this? 

We cannot help that: we once thought much 
as they do, but now have received the mind of 
Christ. We cannot expect any but those governed 
by the same heaven-directed view of 
matters to agree with us, or to commend our 
mind and course. The only way we could 
please all the insane people in an asylum would 
be to agree with their ideas and do as they do. 
And just so, the only way we can please the 
unsound world is to agree with their erroneous 
ideas and do as they do; but when we receive 
our ideas from God's Word, and recognize the 
world's ideas as contrary to that Word, then 
we know, on God's authority, that we have the 
spirit, the disposition, of a sound mind, though 
we are constantly reminded of the unsoundness 
of our natural mind by the effort which it costs 
us to keep it in subjection to the divine ruling. 
Often, the children of God are no better than 
average men of the world; and sometimes they 
are more imperfect naturally than many of the 
world. Among them, as natural men and women, 
there are all sorts of imperfections, but 
when the spirit of a sound mind, under God's 
direction, takes hold of them, it transforms 
and beautifies them in deed and in truth. 
And, dearly beloved, if this transforming work 
is not going on within us, we are either dead 
or dying branches that must sooner or later be 
severed from the vine. "Every branch in me 
that beareth not fruit [fruit of the spirit] he 
taketh away."— John 15:2. 

We must then let the transforming work go 
on within our own hearts, while we do all in 
our power to inspire and cultivate the same 
spirit in others. God hath not given to us the 
spirit of fear and superstitious dread of him, 
but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind. 
And when we have discarded our own unsound 
mind, and taken God's mind as expressed in 
his Word, we know that we have the disposition 
of a sound mind, no matter how other 
men regard it. 



page 189 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 



READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1414:page 189 
MESSIAH'S REIGN. 



II. QUAR., LESSON XIII., JUNE 26, PSALM 72:1-19. 

Golden Text— "All kings shall fall down before him: 
all nations shall serve him."— Psa. 72:11. 

In Acts 3:19-21 we read that "Times of refreshing 
shall come from the presence [Greek, 
prosopon— face or countenance] of the Lord 
[Jehovah— from his favor, as indicated by the 
figure of his face turned toward us]; and [at this 
appointed time of refreshing] he shall send 
Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto 
you; whom the heaven must retain until the 
times of restitution of all things which God 
hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets, 
since the world began." 

This is a very sweeping declaration of God's 
benevolent purpose toward the whole world, 
whom he so loved that he gave his only begotten 
Son to accomplish their redemption. Having 
thus at great cost redeemed them from the 
power of the grave, he here tells of a fixed, appointed 
time wherein it is his purpose to give 
to men the blessings thus legally secured for 
them through Christ, and bids us note the fact 
that this glorious time of blessing is the inspiring 
theme of every one of his true prophets. 

The psalm chosen for this lesson is one of 
those blessed prophecies which tells us of the 
glorious reign of the risen and "highly exalted" 
Son of God, whose coming presence shall 
be "like rain upon the mown grass, and as 
showers that water the earth"— "times of refreshing," 
truly. 

How wide shall be his dominion? Oh, says 
the Psalmist, "He shall have dominion from 

R1415 :page 189 

sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of 
the earth." (Verse 8.) Yes, "As truly as I 
live," saith the Lord, "the whole earth shall 
be filled with the glory of the Lord." [Mark! 



this earth: it is not heaven that is here spoken 
of, though the heavens too, are, and shall be 
yet more, filled with his glory.] 

What shall become of the present kings and 
potentates of earth when the Lord thus begins 
his reign? And how will the nations receive 
him? The Psalmist answers (verse 11) that 
"all kings shall fall down before him, and all 
nations shall serve him." 

But will none oppose him, or endeavor to 
withstand his power? Oh! yes: he will have enemies 
and meet with the determined opposition 
of the present ruling powers, but it is written 
again (verses 4,9) that he shall break in pieces 
the oppressor (that he will destroy all oppressive 
systems and institutions), and that "his 
enemies [those who after full knowledge oppose 
Christ's Kingdom and laws] shall lick the dust" 
—be destroyed. And as evidence of his glorious 
triumph and his conquest of even the 
hearts of his subjects, it is written that the kings 
(the prominent and influential among men) 
will bring presents and offer gifts to manifest 
their loyalty to the new government; that 
eventually "all nations shall call him blessed;" 
and that even "they that dwell in the wilderness 
[the nations beyond the pale of Christendom 
and all the half-civilized and savage tribes] 
shall bow before him."— Verses 10,17. 

What will be the characteristics of his reign 
which will thus captivate the hearts of men and 
bind them in loving loyalty to the new king? 
The chief characteristic of his reign will be that 
justice will be established in the earth— that by 
strong and severe measures it will at first be 
secured, and that afterward it will be maintained 
and exercised with vigor and abundant 
success. Although the "iron rod" of justice 
will at first dash the nations to pieces as a potter's 
vessel and break in pieces every system 
and device of oppression (verse 4)— civil, social, 
financial and religious— yet, like a magnet, it 
will afterward gather up the broken fragments 
(the individuals that composed those nations 
and systems) and bind them together in a 
stronger, firmer bond of righteousness and 
peace which shall never be broken. 

Thus it is written (verse 2), "He shall judge 
for thy people with righteousness, and for thy 
afflicted with justice;" (verse 3), "The mountains 
[new ruling powers of Christ's kingdom] 
shall bring peace to the people, and the little 
hills [—the tributary powers under the main 
government— shall also be agencies of blessing 
and peace] through righteousness." 

Verse 4— "He shall judge the afflicted of 



the people, he shall give help to the children 
of the needy; but he shall crush the oppressor." 

Verse 7— "In his days shall the righteous 
flourish, and abundance of peace (shall be) so 
long as the moon endureth." 

Verses 12-14— "He will deliver the needy 
when he crieth; the afflicted also who hath no 
helper. He will spare the poor and needy; 

R1415 :page 190 

and the souls of the needy will he assist. From 
wrong and violence will he deliver their soul; 
and precious shall their blood [lives] be in his 
sight. 

As a result of this blessed reign of righteousness, 
not only will justice and peace be established 
in the earth, but a great abundance of 
blessings from the King shall follow as the rewards 
of righteousness, as it is written (verse 16): 
"There shall be an abundance of corn in 
the land; upon the top of the mountains [as a 
blessing from the King] its fruit shall shake 
like [the trees of] Lebanon: and they of the 
city [the subjects of this government— a city being 
a symbol of a government] shall flourish 
like grass of the earth." 

When men come to realize these blessings 
and to recognize the righteous authority by 
which they are secured to them, what wonder 
if many of their hearts are won, and their loyalty 
evinced by hearty co-operation, as indicated 
by verses 10,11,17! Truly, in view of 
all that the prophets have to say of the blessed 
times of refreshing under the reign of Christ, 
we see the force of the Psalmist's joyful expression: 
"He shall come down like rain upon 
the mown grass, as showers that water the 
earth."— Verse 6. "His name shall be as of 
a son continuing his father's name forever; it 
shall increase as the sun [as the sun's brightness 
increases to full noon-day glory, so shall 
the honor of Messiah grow brighter and brighter 
as the mists and gloom of sin are driven away]. 
Men shall bless themselves through him [they 
shall wash their robes, but it will be in and by 
the blood of the Lamb that this opportunity 
for cleansing shall come to them] and all people 
shall honor him." 

The general blessed results of the Millennial 
age are portrayed in this prophecy— those who 
shall "lick the dust" being treated as exceptions. 
And surely the grand outcome of God's 
plan, when Christ shall have put all enemies under 
his feet and shall have fully restored all the 
willing and obedient, is cause enough for every 



one who realizes it to join with the Prophet in 
the glad shout with which he closes this prophecy 
in verses 18,19, "Blessed be Jehovah God, 
the God of Israel, who alone doeth wondrous 
things [whose wisdom alone deviseth the wondrous 
plan, and none hath been his counselor]; 
and blessed be his glorious name forever; and 
let the whole earth be filled with his glory. 
Amen and Amen." And in view of the glorious 
character and record of him whom Jehovah 
hath appointed to be king over all the earth in 
that day (Zech. 14:9), we, with the Psalmist, 
would express our recognition of his wisdom 
and grace, and say (verse 1), "Give the king 
[this king whom thou hast appointed] thy 
judgments and thy righteousness unto the 
King's [Jehovah's] son"— Entrust him with 
the execution of the grand designs: we have 
full confidence in his ability and in his willingness 
to bring forth judgment unto victory and 
to fill the world with thy peace and thy praise. 



R1415 :page 190 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



OUR LORD'S ASCENSION. 



III. QUARTER, LESSON I., JULY 3, ACTS 1:1-12. 

Golden Text— "When he had spoken these things, 
while they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud received 
him out of their sight."— Acts 1:9. 

VERSES 1,2. The writer of the account of the 
Acts of the Apostles was Luke; and the "former 
treatise" was that called the Gospel by Luke. 

VERSE 3. Although the previous account 
had covered many of the incidents of the forty 
days following our Lord's resurrection (See 
Luke 24), it had by no means told all; and 
this further account, explanatory of the opening 
work of the Gospel dispensation, properly 
linked with the other, tells us that the special 
theme of our Master in the instructions of those 
forty days was— "the things pertaining to the 
Kingdom of God." 

Luke does not give us the particulars; but 
we are safe in assuming that they required considerable 
instruction, as they not only had the 



hopes common to all Jews, that God would, 
under Messiah, exalt Israel to be the chief nation 
of earth (and use that nation as his channel 
for communicating his laws to the world, 
and thus bless all the families of the earth in 
the seed of Abraham), but they had in mind, 
too, the special promises which the Lord had 
made to them before his death: that they 
should sit on thrones in Israel in his Kingdom. 
So great a power had these promises of the 
Kingdom in their minds that they had willingly 
left business prospects and endured the scorn 
of their fellows that they might become joint-heirs 
with Christ in his Kingdom. And the 
Master had invariably encouraged these hopes 
and ambitions. His reproofs were merely 
against their strifes as to which should be greatest 
and sit the one on his right and the other 
on his left in that Kingdom. --Matt. 18:1-4; 
Mark 9:33-37; Luke 22:24-26. 

R1415 :page 191 

They had seen all these hopes and prospects 
dashed when the Lord was crucified. Naturally, 
therefore, after they realized their Lord's 
resurrection, their thoughts and questions, and 
consequently his teaching, would be of the 
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. It 
was needful to explain to them that the nation 
of Israel had been rejected from join t-heirship 
in his Kingdom because, although naturally 
Abraham's seed, they did not have Abraham's 
faith, and hence could not be recognized as heirs 
with Christ of the promise made to Abraham. 
It was necessary to tell the little handful of 
faithful disciples ("about five hundred brethren") 
that they had not been rejected with the 
nation, but were still recognized as heirs of 
the Kingdom, although the time for setting up 
the Kingdom was necessarily deferred until the 
full number (predestinated) should be selected. 
But they would speedily be recognized of 
the Father and granted blessings of the Spirit 
as sons of God and prospective joint-heirs with 
Christ, even though their exaltation to the 
honor and glory of kingdom power would be 
deferred. Accordingly we read, in 

VERSES 4,5, that he instructed them to tarry 
at Jerusalem, to expect and wait for the begetting 
of the spirit of God as sons and heirs- 
pointing out that so it had already been foretold 
them by himself and by John the baptizer. 

R1416 :page 191 



VERSES 6-8. But having been thus assured 
of their divine recognition as prospective joint-heirs 
with Christ in his kingdom "not many 
days hence" (verse 5), they put the question 
still close to their hearts— How about the 
kingdom in the full sense of the word? will it 
come at the same time? Will it, too, come 
not many days hence? 

The Master's answer was not a reproof, nor 
even a correction or contradiction of their expectations 
in general. He merely told them 
that the times and seasons for the full establishment 
of the Kingdom God had in his own 
power, and that it was not then proper for 
them to know; but that they should receive 
power [ability to understand the deep things of 
God— 1 Cor. 2:10— and be guided (gradually, 
as it would be due) into all truth, and shown 
"things to come"— John 16:13] after the 
holy Spirit had come upon them— the spirit of 
adoption, of sealing, as no longer servants but 
sons (John 15:15); and then they should be 
his witnesses everywhere— witnessing to the 
truths which he had taught them: that he is to 
be the King of the world— Jehovah's Anointed 
representative, whose kingdom is to be under 
the whole heavens; and all nations and kingdoms 
shall serve and obey him. They were to 
witness that God's promises concerning the 
establishment of his kingdom to bless the 
world are all true; that our Lord's death was 
merely a means toward that great end; that it 
was needful that Messiah should die for the 
sins of the world before those sins and their 
penalties could be remitted, and before those 
sinners could be blessed and restored to divine 
communion and favor. They were to tell believers 
to keep on praying as the Master had 
instructed, saying: Thy Kingdom come, thy 
will be done on earth as it is done in heaven. 
They were to witness that none of his words or 
promises were false, but that all things promised 
should be fulfilled "in due time." 

VERSES 9-12. Our Lord's ascension might 
have taken place without being seen by any; 
for since his resurrection he is a spirit being, 
and "a spirit hath not flesh and bones." He 
was indeed put to death in the flesh, but he 
was quickened or made alive in spirit. He was 
there born of the spirit, "the first-born from 
the dead;" and as that which is born of the 
flesh is flesh, so that which is born of the spirit 
is spirit, and can go and come as the wind, 
without being seen of men. (John 3:8.) 
But as our risen Lord, a spirit being, in order 
to prove his resurrection, appeared at various 



times and in various forms or bodies (some of 
which resembled the body of flesh which had 
been crucified), so he showed himself in a 
body of flesh when he ascended, to prove this 
fact to his disciples. 

We must remember that he was present with 
the disciples for forty days before he ascended, 
yet was visible to them at most only seven times, 
and for only a few moments each time, during 
all those days; and to the world he was always 
invisible, as he had said before, "Yet a little 
while and the world seeth me no more." The 
Apostle Paul, enumerating these manifestations 
of our Lord after his resurrection, says, "He 
was seen of above five hundred brethren," 
"and, last of all, by me also." It was the 
same Jesus who appeared in flesh and as a 
gardener to Mary, who appeared in another 
form as a stranger to the two disciples going 
to Emmaus, and who appeared in the midst of 
the disciples while the doors were shut and 
showed them a body of flesh and bones pierced 
by nails and a spear as an evidence or proof of 
his resurrection, but who the next instant 
showed them that he was now highly exalted 
and different from flesh and blood, by dissolving 
the flesh and bones and clothes before their 
eyes and vanishing out of their sight. It was 
this same Jesus, no longer flesh and bones but 
"a quickening spirit," who appeared also to 
Saul of Tarsus, but without any vailing of the 
spirit body under a fleshly one, and gave him a 

R1416 :page 192 

glimpse of the glory of a spirit being which 
felled him to the earth and cost him his sight. 
(Acts 26:13,14; 9:8.) This is the glorified 
Jesus, who was raised from death a spirit being 
(1 Cor. 15:40-44), but who vailed the glories 
of that spirit-body from his disciples, under 
bodies of flesh, in order that he might teach 
them the things pertaining to the Kingdom, 
who is to come again as the angels declared. 

Many stumble over the statement of the 
eleventh verse— especially our dear brethren 
who call themselves Second Adventists. They 
think of the passage as reading— Ye shall see 
him come in like manner as ye have seen him 
go. But it does not so read. Those disciples 
who saw him go are long since dead, and if 
others even should see him come they would 
not. But the angels do not say that any one 
will see him come: they merely affirm that the 
manner of his coming will be like the manner 
in which they had seen him go. 



Now what was the manner of his going? 
What was there peculiar about the manner of 
his ascension? Whatever it was, that is the 
peculiarity to be expected as marking his coming 
again. Let us note again that the manner 
of his going was quiet, unseen by the world, 
unknown to the world, unbelieved by the world. 
It was known, however, by the "brethren," 
it was manifested to the "brethren," and it 
was believed in by the "brethren." So his 
second coming is as a thief— secretly— without 
outward demonstration— unknown to the world 
—known only to the brethren who are not in 
darkness, but who as children of the light are 
walking in the light. (1 Thes. 5:1-5.) For 
a fuller explanation of the Manner of our 
Lord's Second Coming, see Millennial Dawn, 
Vol. II., chapter 5. 

R1416 :page 192 

THE SPIRIT OF ADOPTION SHED FORTH. 



III. QUARTER, LESSON II., JULY 10, ACTS 2:1-12. 

Golden Text— "When he, the Spirit of truth, is come, 
he will guide you into all truth,. ..and he will 
show you things to come."— John 16:13. 

VERSES 1-4. The most notable day in the 
history of the Church is the day of Pentecostal 
blessing which followed our Lord's ascension. 
It marks definitely the beginning of Church 
history by marking the beginning of the 
Church. For although the disciples were 
called, and followed the great Teacher during 
the three and a half years of his ministry and 
sacrifice, they were not recognized by God as 
his sons until Pentecost, when the spirit of adoption 
was given. 

True, they had consecrated themselves; they 
had even left all to follow Christ; but yet they 
were under condemnation as sinners and could 
not be recognized or treated as sons until their 
sins had been atoned for by the great sin-offering 
of "the Lamb of God which taketh away 
the sin of the world." For this they must 
wait. And even after the Redeemer had 
"poured out his soul unto death" as our sin-offering, 
and after he had been raised from the 
dead by the glory of the Father, they must still 
wait until by the gift of the spirit of adoption 
God should recognize them as sons and empower 
them to teach in his name the forgiveness 



of sins: they must wait until he who gave our 
redemption price should ascend on high and 
there appear in the presence of God and offer to 
justice that sin-offering on our behalf— making 
it applicable to all those who believe in and obey 
him. The Pentecostal blessing was of the Father, 
but by the Son (Acts 2:33). It was the Father's 
recognition of the merit of the sin-offering. 

True, the Master had sent them out to declare 
the Kingdom at hand, etc., and they returned 
rejoicing, saying, "Lord, even the devils 
are subject unto us in thy name;" but the 
power by which they did their miracles then, 
while it was holy spirit or holy power, was not 
their own, but the Lord's. He sent them forth 
in his name and gave them power over all manner 
of diseases, etc., but they received no 
power, no other recognition, direct from God, 
until Pentecost. Our Lord Jesus had the holy 
spirit or holy power, and that without limit, 
because he was a holy, harmless, undefiled son 
(John 3:34), but all others were debarred 
from this, because they were sinners until he 
had made reconciliation for iniquity. The 
disciples, then, had merely imputed or delegated 
holy power or holy spirit until the sacrifice was 
made and offered and until the Pentecostal 
blessing gave evidence to them and to us and 
to all that God accepted of Christ's sacrifice— 
"the just for the unjust."— 1 Pet. 3:18. 

To this agrees the statement that "the holy 
spirit was not yet given, because Jesus was not 
yet glorified" (John 7:39); and that other 
statement that to "as many [of the house of 
servants] as received him, to them gave he 
liberty [ability, power, privilege] to become 
SONS OF GOD. "-John 1:12. 

VERSES 4-12. Concerning the gifts of the 
spirit which followed the begetting by the spirit 
in the early Church, for the purpose of attesting 
God's favor to the newly begotten "sons," as 
well as for manifesting them as teachers to 
those without, and the distinction between those 
gifts and the fruit-gifts of the spirit which 
now give evidence of divine favor and begetting, 
the student is referred to the leading 
article of this issue of this journal. 



page 194 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



MORE LABORERS IN THE VINEYARD. 



All interested in the Colporteur work will be 
glad to learn that the change of the price of 
DAWNS, when sold by Colporteurs, to 35 cents 
has, as was hoped, made it possible for others 
to enter this most fruitful field of service for 
our Redeemer. Several new laborers have 
started and others are preparing to start soon. 
(For particulars of price see our last issue.) 

As for the old Colporteurs, some who were 
behind are now getting caught up and will be 
able to keep ahead; while others who were able 
to more than meet expenses at the 25 cent rate 



are now enabled to contribute to the general 
work. The first letter of this kind received 
was from Sister Erlenmyer, May 29th. While 
saying that the wet season had hindered her 
greatly, she adds, "I have sold only a little 
over 300 DAWNS since the Anniversary Meeting, 
having lost so much time by reason of my 
present route being amongst small towns, and 
the weather so wet; but I have made expenses, 
and am able to send in to the general Tract 
Fund work the extra ten cents now charged, 
and accordingly enclose a Money Order for 
$30.00. Use it according to your judgment 
for the Master's glory. With much love to you 
and Sister Russell, I am yours in the glorious 
service!" 

Surely there are many other brethren and 
sisters so situated that they could, with some 
effort, enter this specially useful and fruitful 
service. While every service, great or small, 
done from love for the Redeemer is owned and 
blessed, this one yields specially large results 
both to the "reapers" and to those whom they 
reach with the sickle of truth. 

"THE WONDERFUL STORY ILLUSTRATED," 
AND "TABERNACLE SHADOWS." 



These two neat pamphlets, bound in Leatherette 
(the former of 64 pages, specially for children, 
and the latter of 108 pages, specially for 
developed Christians) are well adapted for use 
by Colporteurs. Not that we would have any 
stop selling DAWN to sell these; but there are 
some who cannot go away from home, and 
who have already canvassed their home city for 
DAWN, who could now make a success and do 
a good work for the great Master in seeking his 
sheep with this food. The Wonderful Story, 
even, although a child's booklet, most assuredly 
is reaching also the older folks, who read it 
to and with the children. Our price is 10 cents 
each; Colporteurs' price, 15 cents each— the 
two booklets, 25 cents. Special price to Colporteurs, 
seventy-five cents per dozen. 

LETTERS CROWDED OUT OF LATE. 



The following extract from Brother J. H. 
Brown's letter, just at hand, represents many of 
the encouraging letters recently received. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-! drop a line to 



tell you how much I have enjoyed reading from 
first to last, perhaps especially that under the 
last heading, the long article in last TOWER. 

To one weighed down, as I have been from 
birth, with that spirit of fear, such words come 
as a cool, refreshing draught from the waters of 
life. But Oh! that I might come into the full 
stature of a man in Christ Jesus. 

In love, Your brother, J. H. BROWN. 

R1425 : page 194 

TRACTS IN SWEDISH AND NORWEGIAN. 



Tract No. 1, "Do the Scriptures Teach that 
Eternal Torment is the Wages of Sin?" has 
been translated into Swedish, which is Tract 
No. 9; and into Norwegian, which is Tract 
No. 13. We do not send these out except when 
specially ordered. Any who can use these 
judiciously are welcome to order them— freely. 
These, as well as Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10 and 
14, are supplied in quantities without charge- 
out of the Tract Fund. 



R1417 :page 195 
