We Can Cope With Any Trial!
ARE you presently facing a trial in your life? Do you feel at a loss, unable to cope with it? Do you even at times fear that your problem is unique and that there is no solution to it? If so, take heart! Whatever trials we may face, the Bible assures us that God can enable us to deal with them.
The Bible acknowledges that God’s servants will “meet with various trials.” (James 1:2) Note the word “various” (Greek poi·kiʹlos). According to ancient usage, the original word means “manifold” or “many-tinted” and emphasizes “the diversity of the trials.” In fact, in everyday speech, that basically means “many-colored.” Thus, “various trials” are trials that come in many colors, so to speak. Nevertheless, Jehovah supports us so that we can cope with each one of them. Why can we be sure of that?
“God’s Undeserved Kindness Expressed in Various Ways”
The apostle Peter notes that Christians are “grieved by various trials.” (1 Peter 1:6) Later in his inspired letter, he states that “God’s undeserved kindness” is “expressed in various ways.” (1 Peter 4:10) The phrase “in various ways” contains a form of the same original Greek word. In commenting on this expression, one Bible scholar notes: “This is a tremendous thought. . . . To speak of the grace [or, undeserved kindness] of God as poikilos means that there is no colour in the human situation which the grace of God cannot match.” He further notes: “There is no possible set of circumstances, no possible crisis, emergency or demand through which the grace of God cannot find a way, and which the grace of God cannot triumphantly deal with and overcome. There is nothing in life with which the grace of God cannot cope. This vivid word poikilos leads our thoughts straight to that many-coloured grace of God which is indeed sufficient for all things.”
Trials Matched by Kindness
According to Peter, one way that God’s undeserved kindness is expressed is through the various ones who make up the Christian congregation. (1 Peter 4:11) Each servant of God has spiritual gifts, or abilities, that may serve as a source of encouragement to those facing trials. (Romans 12:6-8) For instance, some members of the congregation are outstanding Bible teachers. Their insightful words inspire and motivate others to endure. (Nehemiah 8:1-4, 8, 12) Others make regular shepherding visits at the homes of those in need of support. Such visits are occasions for encouragement, a ‘comforting of hearts.’ (Colossians 2:2) When overseers make such faith-strengthening visits, they impart a spiritual gift. (John 21:16) Still others in the congregation are known for warmth, compassion, and tenderness in dealing with fellow believers who are saddened by trials. (Acts 4:36; Romans 12:10; Colossians 3:10) The empathy and active assistance shown by such loving brothers and sisters is a significant expression, or “color,” of God’s undeserved kindness.​—Proverbs 12:25; 17:17.
“The God of All Comfort”
Above all, Jehovah provides comfort. He is “the God of all comfort, who comforts us in all our tribulation.” (2 Corinthians 1:3, 4) The wisdom found in God’s inspired Word and the strength provided by his holy spirit are principal means by which Jehovah answers our prayers for help. (Isaiah 30:18, 21; Luke 11:13; John 14:16) We can be heartened by the inspired promise made by the apostle Paul. He said: “God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear, but along with the temptation he will also make the way out in order for you to be able to endure it.”​—1 Corinthians 10:13.
Yes, whatever is the “color,” or nature, of our trial, there will always be a “color,” or expression, of God’s undeserved kindness that will match it. (James 1:17) Jehovah’s timely and appropriate support provided for his servants​—no matter how diverse their temptations or challenges may be—​is but one evidence of “the greatly diversified wisdom of God.” (Ephesians 3:10) Do you not agree?
[Pictures on page 31]
Jehovah helps us to cope with our trials

