





A Lasting Cure




Millions of people have applied the principles outlined in the preceding articles and have made great progress in rooting out prejudice from their hearts. Realistically, though, we cannot completely remove all prejudice on our own. So is the situation hopeless?



An Ideal Government

Human governments have a poor record of changing people’s prejudiced attitudes. But does that mean that no government is capable of removing prejudice?
A government that could cure prejudice would need to
1. Motivate people to want to change the way they think and feel toward others.

2. Heal the wounds that make it difficult to treat others fairly.

3. Have leaders of unbreakable integrity who value each citizen equally.

4. Unify people of all nations.


The Bible assures us that God has created such a government. It is called “the Kingdom of God.”​—Luke 4:43.
Consider what that government will provide.



1. Superior Teaching

“The inhabitants of the land [will] learn about righteousness.”​—ISAIAH 26:9.
“The result of true righteousness will be peace, and the fruitage of true righteousness will be lasting tranquillity and security.”​—ISAIAH 32:17.
What does this mean? God’s Kingdom will teach people what is right. When people learn right from wrong​—justice from injustice—​their attitudes toward one another change. All will recognize that the right thing to do is to love all kinds of people.



2. Healing

God “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—REVELATION 21:4.
What does this mean? God’s Kingdom will end all the pain caused by injustice. Former victims of mistreatment will no longer have a reason to feel animosity.



3. Good Leadership

“He will not judge by what appears to his eyes, nor reprove simply according to what his ears hear. He will judge the lowly with fairness, and with uprightness he will give reproof in behalf of the meek ones of the earth.”​—ISAIAH 11:3, 4.
What does this mean? Jesus Christ, the King of God’s heavenly Kingdom, will rule fairly and impartially over the earth. Jesus does not favor one nation over another, and he can ensure that his righteous laws are upheld worldwide.



4. Unity

God’s Kingdom teaches people to be “of the same mind and [to have] the same love, being completely united, having the one thought in mind.”​—PHILIPPIANS 2:2.
What does this mean? The unity among the citizens of God’s Kingdom will be more than just a veneer. They will be “completely united” because they will truly love one another.



Is it reasonable for a person to believe that such a government is possible?
Only if he or she first examines the evidence. We invite you to do so in three ways:
  Ask one of Jehovah’s Witnesses for proof that God’s Kingdom will soon fulfill the promises described in the Bible.

  Visit jw.org, and go to BIBLE TEACHINGS > BIBLE QUESTIONS ANSWERED > GOD’S KINGDOM.

  Attend a meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and see love and unity in action.




