





Show Love



The Problem

Feelings of prejudice do not disappear quickly. Just as it takes time and effort to get rid of a virus, it takes time and effort to get rid of prejudice. What can you do to remove prejudice from within you?



Bible Principle






“Clothe yourselves with love, for it is a perfect bond of union.”​—COLOSSIANS 3:14.
What does it mean? Doing kind things for others brings people together. The more you show your love for others, the less prejudiced you become. The more love you feel, the less room you leave in your heart for hatred or contempt.



What You Can Do






Think of specific ways that you can show love for people who are from a group that you may have viewed negatively. These actions do not have to be elaborate. Try to do one or more of the following:
With each small act of love, you will move further away from prejudice

  Show good manners to members of that group by holding the door open or by giving up your seat on public transportation for one of them.

  Try to engage in small talk, even if they do not speak your language fluently.

  Be patient when they act in a way that you do not understand.

  Be sympathetic if they talk about their problems.





Real-Life Example: Nazaré (Guinea-Bissau)
“I once felt prejudice toward immigrants. I was told that many immigrants fraudulently lived off social benefits and that they were more prone to criminal behavior. This made it difficult for me to accept them. However, I did not characterize my feelings as prejudice, because this was how the majority of people viewed immigrants.
“In time, however, I realized that my negative attitude toward immigrants was in fact prejudicial. The practical wisdom of the Bible has helped me to be more loving toward them. Now I do not avoid them. On the contrary, I greet them and speak with them. I try to get to know each of them as a person. Now my feelings toward them are positive, and I feel very comfortable with them.”



“I wanted to fight injustice”





Rafika had joined a revolutionary group to fight racial injustice. But when she attended a convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses, she finally found the unity she was looking for.
Watch the video Rafika Morris: I Wanted to Fight Injustice. Search for the video title on jw.org.


