“Come to Me, . . . and I Will Refresh You”
“Let Us Work What Is Good Toward All”
TO PREACH and teach the good news of God’s Kingdom was Jesus’ primary activity. (Mark 1:14; Luke 8:1) Since Christ’s followers desire to imitate him, they view the work of teaching the Bible’s message about God’s Kingdom to be their foremost activity in life. (Luke 6:40) It is indeed heartwarming for Jehovah’s Witnesses to see how the Kingdom message brings lasting refreshment to those who accept it​—just as it did when Jesus was on earth.​—Matthew 11:28-30.
Besides teaching God’s Word, Jesus performed other good works, such as healing the sick and feeding the hungry. (Matthew 14:14-21) Similarly, Jehovah’s Witnesses supplement their Bible teaching work with deeds that help people in need. After all, the Scriptures equip Christians “for every good work” and urge them to do “what is good toward all.”​—2 Timothy 3:16, 17; Galatians 6:10.
“Our Brothers Were There”
In September 1999, Taiwan was rocked by a devastating earthquake. A few months later, torrential rains and avalanches caused one of the worst natural disasters in Venezuela’s history. More recently, severe floods ravaged the country of Mozambique. In all three instances, Jehovah’s Witnesses quickly arrived on the scene with supplies of food, water, medicine, clothing, tents, and cooking equipment for victims. Volunteers with medical skills set up makeshift infirmaries to treat the injured, and volunteer construction workers built new houses for ones left homeless.
Victims were touched by the timely help they received. “When we were most desperate, our brothers were there,” says Malyori, whose home was razed by an avalanche in Venezuela. After volunteers constructed a brand-new home for her family, Malyori exclaimed: “We can never thank Jehovah enough for all that he has done for us!” And when flood victims in Mozambique received the keys to their newly built homes, the entire group burst out singing the Kingdom song “Jehovah Is Our Refuge.”a
Helping needy ones was refreshing for the volunteers as well. “It felt good to be of use to these brothers who had suffered so much,” remarked Marcelo, who served as a nurse in a refugee camp in Mozambique. Huang, a volunteer in Taiwan, remarked: “It was a great joy to share in delivering food and tents to the brothers in need. It was faith strengthening.”
A Volunteer Program That Works
Voluntary work has also brought spiritual refreshment to tens of thousands of prisoners worldwide. How? In recent years, Jehovah’s Witnesses have provided Bible literature for over 30,000 individuals detained in some 4,000 prisons in the United States alone. In addition, where possible, Witnesses personally visit prisons to study the Bible with inmates and to conduct Christian meetings. Do the inmates benefit?
Some prisoners studying the Bible begin to share the refreshing teachings of God’s Word with fellow inmates. As a result, in a number of prisons throughout the world there are now groups of inmates who worship Jehovah together. “Our group is thriving,” reported a prison inmate in Oregon, U.S.A., in 2001. “We have 7 Kingdom publishers and are conducting 38 Bible studies. More than 25 people attend the public talk and Watchtower Study, and we had 39 in attendance at the Memorial [of Christ’s death]. Three more persons will be baptized shortly!”
Benefits and Joys
Prison officials have noticed that this volunteer program works. What impresses officials most is the long-lasting benefit of this volunteer program. One report notes: “In the ten years that this program has been in operation, not one released inmate who was baptized in prison as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses has returned to prison​—in contrast with the 50-60 percent return rate of other groups.” Moved by the results attained by Witness volunteers, a prison chaplain in Idaho said in a letter to the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses: “While I personally do not agree with your theology, I am very impressed with your organization.”
Helping those in prison also proves to be rewarding for the volunteers. After conducting a meeting with a group of inmates who sang a Kingdom song for the first time, a volunteer wrote: “It was encouraging to observe 28 men joining in singing praises to Jehovah. And they sang out loudly! What a privilege to be present on such an occasion!” A volunteer visiting prisons in Arizona said: “What a blessing it has been to share in this special work!”
Witness volunteers around the world readily agree with Jesus, who said: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.” (Acts 20:35) They also confirm that following the Bible’s admonition to do good toward all is refreshing indeed.​—Proverbs 11:25.
[Footnote]
See song number 85 in the book Sing Praises to Jehovah, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Picture on page 8]
Venezuela
[Picture on page 8]
Taiwan
[Picture on page 8]
Mozambique

