Announcements
“PRINCES’ JUST RULE” WITNESSING PERIOD
“Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in justice.” (Isa. 32:1, AS) These heartening words point to the administration of a righteous government, now at hand. Without here questioning the motives of many who have held public office in an effort to benefit their fellow men, all will acknowledge that such have been in the minority, and their efforts have brought no permanent blessings. How thrilling, then, to point to God’s kingdom and its servants, the “princes”, whose rule is for the honor of God and the blessing of all its subjects! The just rule of these “princes”, under the King of righteousness, Christ Jesus, is now being announced. As a means of informing persons of good will, Awake! magazine is being offered during October on a subscription basis ($1 a year, 24 issues) together with a premium of three inspiring booklets on Bible themes. Join in passing the good news on to others, taking subscriptions wherever you can, and forwarding them, together with your report, to the Society.
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY ANNUAL MEETING
The regular annual meeting of the members of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society (Pennsylvania Corporation) will be held on Wednesday, October 1, 1952, at ten o’clock in the forenoon at the Society’s Pittsburgh office in the Wabash Building, 410 Liberty Avenue, Pittsburgh 22, Pennsylvania. The usual notice by letter will be mailed to all the members of the corporation advising them of the meeting, and the letters will be accompanied by proxy forms. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not. The notices and proxies are mailed out September 1, 1952, and the proxies should be returned by the 15th of the month.
KEEP YOURSELF ALERT!
This is no time to be unconscious of world events and their significance! Times of crisis such as these demand alertness, awareness not only of what is happening, but of what it means, and especially of how it affects one’s eternal interests. No reasonable person ignores such important matters or limits himself to merely the petty things of passing worth. Alertness is a must if you want to make the best of life’s possibilities. So be awake! Alert yourself by reading Awake! magazine. You will appreciate its broad scope, its lively interest in worth-while questions of all kinds in every field of knowledge, and particularly those that relate to the meaning of world events and how they affect that which is of greatest importance to you and yours, life. Issues twice monthly. Only $1 a year. Subscribe today.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 12: Why Maturity of Discernment Vital; also, Maturity Essential to Increase, ¶1-6.
Week of October 19: Maturity Essential to Increase, ¶7-29.

