Part 2—Benefit From the Theocratic Ministry School for 1996
1 Shortly after the inauguration of the Theocratic Ministry School in 1943, one of the Society’s branches reported: “This very fine arrangement succeeded in a short while in helping many brothers who had imagined they would never be public speakers to become very efficient on the platform and more effective in the field.” The school continues to provide excellent training, which all of us need.
2 Bible Reading: Those who are given speaking parts are not the only ones who benefit from the school. Actually, all of us have an assignment—the weekly Bible reading. The school schedule shows which chapters of the Bible are to be read each week. There are many Scriptural reminders that stress the importance of reading the Bible daily. (Josh. 1:8; Ps. 1:2; Acts 17:11) Bible reading is essential to good spiritual health; it nourishes the mind and heart. If we read the Bible for at least five minutes a day, we will be able to keep up. At the end of the year, we will have read over 150 chapters of God’s Word. If we keep a Bible handy, we should be able to read some of it every day.
3 Instruction Talk: In order to move the brothers to loyal, zealous service, the speaker who gives the instruction talk needs to use good teaching methods, to convey understanding, and to build appreciation for Jehovah, his Word, and his organization. Elders and ministerial servants can accomplish this by preparing well, building their talk around the theme, speaking with conviction, and making the material live. (Heb. 4:12) It is important that the speaker keep within his allotted time. The “All Scripture” book is replete with Bible texts and presents an array of exciting Scriptural material that can benefit us spiritually. The Proclaimers book contains the modern-day history of Jehovah’s visible organization and relates events in the lives of real people who demonstrated faith, zeal, devotion, and love. There is much to be learned about our theocratic heritage and the way in which Jehovah has blessed his people in modern times.
4 Bible Highlights: Brothers given this assignment should select specific verses that can be applied in a practical way for the benefit of the congregation. This requires reading the chapters assigned, meditating on them, and researching selected verses to find points that will clarify the meaning of those scriptures. In the back of the Watch Tower Publications Index, there is the “Scripture Index,” which can be helpful in locating information about specific Bible verses. Brothers handling this part should exercise good judgment and avoid bringing in irrelevant material. They should not prepare more material than can reasonably be covered in six minutes.
5 All of us can benefit from the Theocratic Ministry School. It can help us improve in our speaking and teaching ability. Taking full advantage of this provision will surely help us make our ‘advancement manifest to all persons.’—1 Tim. 4:15.

