Proclaiming the Truth Daily in Imitation of Jesus
1 Jesus had a specific work to accomplish when he came to the earth. It was remarkably simple: ‘To bear witness to the truth.’ (John 18:37) He proclaimed the truth about his Father’s marvelous qualities and purposes. This work was like food to him; his whole life revolved around it. (John 4:34) Luke reported that Jesus kept “teaching daily in the temple.” (Luke 19:47) Jesus made full use of the time that was available. (John 9:4) Shortly before his death, he was able to declare to his Father: “I have glorified you on the earth, having finished the work you have given me to do.”—John 17:4.
2 When our hearts are filled with appreciation for all that Jehovah has done, we likewise feel compelled to speak about him on a daily basis. We become just like Jesus’ disciples who boldly declared: “We cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.” (Acts 4:20) Their speaking about Jehovah was continuous, for the record states that “every day . . . they continued without letup.” (Acts 5:42) We should ask ourselves, ‘Am I an imitator of my Teacher, Jesus?’
3 Preaching With Urgency: Jesus foretold that when the Kingdom message has been declared in all the earth, “then the end will come.” (Matt. 24:14) This should impress on us the importance and urgency of our work. With the lives of literally millions at stake, we can find nothing more important or beneficial to do. Since this system of things is nearing its end, the time left to complete this work is reduced!
4 Reports show that Jehovah is speeding up the ingathering of sheeplike ones. (Isa. 60:22) In many parts of the world, people are literally flocking to the truth, joyfully declaring, in effect: “We will go with you people, for we have heard that God is with you”! (Zech. 8:23) More so than at any time in the past, Jesus’ words are true: “The harvest is great, but the workers are few. . . . Beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.” (Matt. 9:37, 38) Does that not inspire us to be zealous like Jesus’ disciples who “were continually in the temple blessing God”?—Luke 24:53.
5 Make the Truth Known Daily: Every day, we should be looking for ways to impart the truth to others. Opportunities are readily available. Could you take a few minutes to phone a friend or an acquaintance who you feel might be receptive? Or how about writing a letter to someone you were unable to find at home? Have you thought about offering a tract to the storekeeper when you do your shopping? Likely, you can think of many other opportunities you have each day to share your hope with others. If you make the effort and demonstrate a little boldness, Jehovah will help you.—1 Thess. 2:2.
6 So, as we begin each day’s activities, we should ask ourselves, ‘Will I take the initiative to share my hope with someone if an opportunity opens up today?’ Imitate the attitude of Jesus, who explained why he was sent to earth: “I must declare the good news of the kingdom of God.” (Luke 4:43) If we want to be like our Teacher, we will do the same.—Luke 6:40.

