Service Meetings for February
Week Starting February 5
Song 96
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Theocratic News.
15 min: “Proclaiming the Truth Daily in Imitation of Jesus.” Questions and answers. Read paragraph 5.
20 min: “Revelation—A Key to True Happiness.” Discuss suggested presentations, and have one or two demonstrations. Remind publishers to explain how a donation can be made toward the worldwide work.
Song 14 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 12
Song 191
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Announce special field service arrangements for February 19.
13 min: “Prepare for Magazine Activity in April.” Highlight value of The Watchtower and Awake! in making the good news known. Read the two-paragraph article, and outline what local congregation will do to make April a special month for magazine distribution.
22 min: “How Can I Get a Listening Ear?” Questions and answers. Have two publishers discuss how they will try to demonstrate more warmth when speaking at the doors, using some of the suggestions given in the School Guidebook, pages 165-7, paragraphs 10-21.
Song 133 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 19
Song 72
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Benefit From the Theocratic Ministry School for 1996—Part 2.” Talk by school overseer. Stress the need to read God’s Word daily.
20 min: “Help Them Understand.” Review suggested presentations for making return visits. Elder discusses with two or three publishers features of the Revelation Climax book and how these may be highlighted. Demonstrate one or two presentations. Offer suggestions on how to develop interest to the point where a Bible study can be started in the book Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life.
Song 53 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 26
Song 28
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Preparing Appealing Presentations. Service overseer or other elder discusses with two or three publishers the benefits in having door-to-door presentations that feature something that has local appeal. For example, local news reports about current efforts to improve standard of living; growing trend of marital problems, delinquent children, or difficulties in finding employment; or news items that show why people are becoming more and more skeptical about remedies offered by politicians and clergymen. Mention some current news items in your community, and discuss how they might be used to start conversations.
20 min: Offering the Book Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life During March. Point out some of the book’s interesting features that can be used to start conversations. (1) Draw attention to striking illustrations, such as the ones shown on pages 4-5, 86, 124-5, 188-9. (2) Show how each chapter ends with a list of review questions, and explain how these could be used as the basis for presentations. Householder could be asked if he would like to know the answers. Pick out some questions among those listed on pages 11, 22, 61, 149. (3) Refer to box on page 102, and give suggestions showing how “Some Features of the Last Days” could be used to stimulate interest. (4) Stress how the book is especially designed for conducting progressive studies. Chapters are short, the material is easy to understand, powerful scriptures are cited, and probing questions focus on key points. Urge all to offer the book with the goal of starting studies.
Song 151 and concluding prayer.

