Announcements
“STRONG REFUGE” WITNESSING PERIOD
“God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.” (Ps. 46:1) So spoke a God-fearing man some two thousand years ago at a time of great crisis. So, too, may God-fearing persons express themselves today, when there is “anguish of nations, not knowing the way out”. God, “whose name alone is Jehovah,” has proved himself again and again a secure refuge in times of stress. His watchful eyes scan the earth and take note of those who are devoted to him, in order that he may show his strength in their behalf. Such ones, knowing that his special purpose for these days is to make known his name, are anxious to let others hear of this great and powerful refuge. During the “Strong Refuge” Witnessing Period, occupying all of the month of June, there will be hundreds of thousands telling others about and seeking to aid them to find this refuge, by presenting the books What Has Religion Done for Mankind? “This Means Everlasting Life”, and any other bound book, on a contribution of $1.50. You, too, are invited to have a share in this blessed work.
THE COMMON VERSION BIBLE
A popular version of the Holy Scriptures, known to the majority of our readers, is the widely used King James or Common Version of 1611. The Watchtower edition of this Bible is well worth having in your home. In addition to the familiar text, it contains an excellent array of marginal references; an index of proper names, expressions and their meanings; a concordance; and a collection of selected Bible references on vital subjects grouped under appropriate headings. As an aid to the reader in his research and his study of the treasures of the Word of the almighty Creator of the universe, Jehovah God, it is unique. Bound in attractive maroon leatherette and with a gold-embossed title, it measures 7 1/4ʺ x 5ʺ x 1 1⁄8ʺ. Sent postpaid for a contribution of only $1.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of June 22: Dedication to God and Consecration, ¶ 1-24.
Week of June 29: Dedication to God and Consecration, ¶ 25-32; also, Dedication for Life in the New World.

