Questions From Readers
● Paragraph 3, page 269 of the May 1, 1951, Watchtower says: “They are to pray over him, so that he can hear what they pray and can show he agrees, with his ‘Amen!’” Does this mean that after one has prayed at a meeting or meal table all those listening should say “Amen” to show their agreement?—A. B., Gold Coast.
No, that would be an unwarranted lifting of the statement from its setting. The Watchtower was discussing a spiritually sick one over whom the older men of the congregation were to pray. Their prayer would be for the purpose of building up and strengthening the ailing one, presenting his problems and offering Scriptural counsels and procedures for coping with them, and petitioning the help of Jehovah on behalf of the spiritually sick one. But would the afflicted one permit himself to be helped? Would he acknowledge his failures, the causes for his spiritual distress, the wisdom of the counsels given, the necessity of following the suggested procedures for recovery? Or had he strayed so far from the right path and become so weakened spiritually that he would not respond to the prayerful assistance? In such a case there would be some question as to the individual’s reaction to the prayer and its contents. So a definite expression from him would be in order, and an “Amen” audible or in the heart would be the way to show agreement with the prayer.
The situation is different in the case of prayers at meetings or mealtimes. There is no reason to question the agreement of all listeners. Proper prayer on such occasions will not stir disagreement, and no expression of agreement is required. However, there is no objection to listeners’ adding an audible “Amen” to the conclusion if they desire to do so. The people voiced their “Amen” at the close of one of David’s psalms of thanksgiving, and on other occasions the Israelites showed agreement by use of the expression. (Deut. 27:14-26; 1 Chron. 16:7-36; Rev. 5:14) When discussing prayer in an unknown tongue Paul said: “How will the man occupying the seat of the ordinary person say Amen to your giving of thanks, since he does not know what you are saying?” (1 Cor. 14:16, NW) We do not speak in unknown tongues today, but some who pray do not always show consideration for their human listeners by speaking out clearly and with sufficient volume to be easily heard. Such praying does not edify or build up the listeners, and they cannot join in the prayerful spirit of the utterances or indicate agreement by either silent or audible “Amens”.
The expression “Amen” also indicates to listeners that a conclusion has been reached. (Ps. 41:13; 72:19, 20; 89:52; Rom. 16:27; Gal. 6:18; Jude 25) For this reason it is proper for the one praying aloud to always conclude with a clearly audible “Amen”. In that way he will indicate that he has finished, and the listeners with bowed heads can resume their normal postures. So then the one praying aloud should say “Amen” at the end; and the listeners may or may not do so, as they wish.
● Is it proper to propose or to drink toasts to God or Christ or the Kingdom?—J. S., Pennsylvania.
Sometimes toasts are proposed, and members of the group feel obliged to join in. This practice is rooted far back in paganism. The Babylonians drank toasts to their gods, and ended up drunk. The Bible gives an account of one such instance. In 539 B.C. Belshazzar ordered the holy vessels of the Hebrews’ temple service brought out, and from them he and his party of revelers “drank wine, and praised the gods”. (Dan. 5:1-4) Such toast-drinking is in no way comparable with the drink offerings Jehovah God prescribed for his temple service. When the Greeks gave entertainments and got tipsy thereat, it was for pious reasons: they were drinking deeply in honor of their pagan gods. After the Greeks, the Romans followed similar pagan religious customs of drinking toasts to the gods. Of course, they had so many gods that everyone was drunk before the ritual ended. Also, human heroes were toasted as well.
The Scandinavians before conversion to Christ gathered for drinking bouts, and toasted Odin, Njord and Frey. Christian missionaries were unable to abolish these customs, but the toasts were shifted to “honor” God and Christ and various patron saints, and to gain salvation for their souls. The future state of bliss was associated with constant drinking and much intoxication. Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are not honored by having pagan customs of toasting switched to them, or to humans. God’s Word the Bible instructs us in the way to honor him, and we do not add to his Word on this point, and especially not when the addition comes from pagan customs. In shunning this custom of toasting, along with many other objectionable customs, we may appear narrow-minded to worldlings. So we are. But never forget for a moment that our Christian narrowness is our salvation, just as the world’s broadness is its destruction.—Matt. 7:13, 14.
● Does the Society approve of well-meant showers held preceding weddings or childbirths? Should the gifts be displayed along with an identification of the givers?—M. F., New York.
The Society does not disapprove of properly conducted showers. But it is not good to get shower-minded, and involve the Lord’s people in a spree of them. It is easy for one or two to touch off a series that can become an endless circle of showers. It can burden the brothers, take their time, and their money for gifts they cannot always afford. You may say no gifts are necessary, but the custom calls for gifts and the majority will bring them, and it would be embarrassing to come empty-handed. Now there is certainly nothing wrong with giving gifts. Done spontaneously, it is commendable brotherly kindness and sometimes shows real Christian concern. There is some Scriptural obligation to note those of our brothers who are in need and to help them. We may use a shower as an occasion to help, but we do not have to wait for such occasions, we do not have to fit our giving into such customary times and seasons. Help is sometimes needed at other times. We should give when the need arises, and to those for whom the need is acute, and do so spontaneously, unsolicited by shower invitations that obligate us to give, whether the recipient is in need or not.
Should the givers be identified with their gifts? Why should they? Surely those giving the more expensive gifts do not seek public acclamation. It might embarrass the poorer brothers who must give more modest gifts, and perhaps cause them to spend more than they can really afford. So why magnify the rich and humble the poor, even if it is unintentionally done? (Jas. 2:1-4) It is not Scriptural, this publicity to gift and giver. “When you start making gifts of mercy, do not blow a trumpet ahead of you, just as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may be glorified by men. Truly I say to you, They are having their reward in full. But you, when making gifts of mercy, do not let your left hand know what your right is doing.” (Matt. 6:2, 3, NW) If anonymous giving were practiced, would the gifts be as expensive? Would the giver spend beyond his means, if he were not identified with the gift? That would truly measure the unselfishness behind the gift. Such giving pleases God.
One final point of utmost importance, whether it is a shower or wedding or reception or just a friendly gathering of witnesses. Control the activities so that some edifying results. Silly games are for babyish people; mature Christians have advanced beyond them, left them behind. Sexually suggestive or passionate dancing to blaring jazz is not for Christians, though proper dancing and music cannot be condemned. When Jesus attended a wedding feast he used the occasion to glorify God, performing his first miracle, the turning of water into wine. (John 2:1-11) And we can be sure that he did not get in any line to kiss the bride either—so we leave such woman-exalting practices back in the creature-worshiping world, where they belong. Instead of any such looseness of conduct or excessive use of food or drink, we should control activities and regulate entertainment into profitable channels, such as the singing of Kingdom songs, playing Scriptural quiz games, relating field experiences, and so forth. Not only will such things be a proper relaxation for us and get us better acquainted with one another, but they will be helpful to persons of good will that may be present and impress them favorably with Jehovah’s people.
So we say that there is nothing wrong in properly planned showers, and those who attend should not be criticized by those who stay away, and vice versa. Be moderate in the number held, the giving, the enjoyment of material food and drink while there, and make them spiritually upbuilding. Always remember Christ is our model. (1 Pet. 2:21) He did not consume too much time on such things, did not make a showy display of giving, did not become gluttonous or drunk on such occasions, or at any other time. When at social gatherings he used the occasions to God’s glory, but he did not book up his evenings with parties and exhaust himself socializing. It was his zeal for Jehovah and the preaching work that consumed his time and energy. So it should be with us, balancing our various activities proportionate to their importance.

