VOL. XXV. AUGUST 15, 1904. No. 16. 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 243 

Disbelief in Future Life 
Dangerous 243 

Church and State in France 244 

Antagonism Against Socialism 244 

The Stability of Zionism 245 

A Word to our Dear Colporteurs 246 

Elijah Instructed and Encouraged 248 

The Harvest and Gentile Times 250 

Elijah Taken in a Whirlwind 251 

Justified and Called 255 

page 242 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, BOSTON, MASS., AUG. 19,20,21 



FOR PARTICULARS REGARDING CONVENTION ARRANGEMENTS, 
SEE LAST PAGE, THIS ISSUE. 

NOTE THE DATES BELOW. 

This Convention takes place in connection with the 
G.A.R. Encampment, for which the railroads have made 
very low excursion rates. For rates and routes inquire 
of your nearest Railroad agents. Tickets will be on sale 
as follows:— 

In "Central Passenger Association" territory— west of 
Pittsburg, Buffalo, Parkersburg and Wheeling, to Chicago 
and St. Louis, etc.— from Aug. 12 to 14. 

In "Trunk Line Passenger Association" territory— east 
of Pittsburg, Buffalo, etc., to New York City, Albany, 
etc.— from Aug. 13 to 15. 

In "New England Passenger Association" territory- 
east of Albany, New York City, etc.— from Aug. 13 to 16, 
except from points within 150 miles of Boston; from the 
latter places the purchasing dates are Aug. 15 to 18. 

In each case journey must begin before midnight of last 
date named. 

Anyone residing within the "New England Passenger 
Association's" territory unable to take the "G.A.R. Excursion" 
above mentioned at the dates named, should ask 
for an "Excursion Certificate to the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society's Convention at Boston, Mass." He will 
pay full (one way) fare for the certificate but will be entitled 
to a return ticket at a reduction, provided 100 such 
tickets can be shown. So, then, get the cheaper "G.A.R. 
Excursion" tickets if possible; but otherwise get the "Certificate" 
mentioned, and thus help others as well as yourself 
to lower rates than regular fare. 

UNUSED "WATCH TOWER BIBLES." 



Any of our readers having copies of the Linear Bibles 



with wide margins containing references to DAWNS and 
TOWERS, in good condition and not being used, which 
they desire to sell, will please advise us. There were only 
5,000 of these Bibles published and since then many new 
readers have become interested in the "Berean Bible Studies, 
mentioned in the front part of those Bibles who 
would be glad to have the helps which those Bibles afford. 
We have constant requests and would have more if it were 
known that the Bibles were obtainable. The printing 
of a small new edition would be too expensive to be 
considered, and we doubt if there would be sufficient 
demand for another edition of 5,000. 

VOLUNTEER AMMUNITION. 



The Volunteer distribution of tracts this year has been 
immense, and only now have we succeeded in filling all 
your orders. We have a reserve in stock now: if any of 
you find yourselves short, order all you can judiciously use. 



R3410 : page 243 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
DISBELIEF IN A FUTURE LIFE DANGEROUS. 



PROFESSOR GOLDWIN SMITH notes the 
fact that the tendency of our times is to 
destroy faith in a future life, or, as the 
Professor states it, faith in immortality. (We need 
not quarrel over terms, especially when the Professor's 
use of the word immortality, though less exact 
than our own, is the usual, the customary one in 
our day. In his use of this word, he is in accord 
with the teachings of the Scripture,— that God has 
provided a future life, through a resurrection, for 
every member of Adam's race.) We give extracts 
from his article, which was published in The North 
American Review, as follows:— 

"It would seem that we have come practically to 
a point at which— evolution and the higher criticism 
having between them done the work of demolition, 
and the work of reconstruction, if it is ever to be 
done, being still in the future— no small part of educated 
mankind has renounced or is gradually renouncing 
the hope of a future life and acting on the belief 
that death ends all. 

"A general contraction of views to the man's 
own life must apparently be the consequence of the 
conviction that this life is all. A man of sense will 



probably be inclined to let reforms alone, and to consider 

how he may best go through the brief journey 

of life with comfort, if possible with enjoyment to 

himself and in pleasant intercourse with his fellowmen. 

High social or political aspirations, or high aspirations 

of any kind, will hardly survive the 

disillusion. 

"We have an interest in our own children. But 
otherwise what interest have we in the generations 
that are to come after us on which a religion of humanity 
can be founded? It is not a very lively interest 
that we feel even in the remoter members of the 
human race, to say nothing of those in the next 
street. Yet these exist; and of their existence we are 
conscious, and are reminded by the electric cable. Of 
the existence of future generations, supposing there 
is no future life, we shall not be conscious, and, therefore, 
for us they will not exist. We cannot even say 
with absolute certainty that they will exist at all. 
The end of man's dwelling-place and, therefore, of 
all human progress, science tells us, will be a physical 
catastrophe; and there are even those who seem to 
think that this catastrophe may be forestalled by a 
recurrence of the glacial era. Natural law, which 
science bids us venerate, departs, it must be remembered, 
with the lawgiver. Nothing remains but physical 
forces without a guiding mind, the play of which 
it is impossible to forecast. As to posthumous fame, 
it would be an arrant delusion, even if one man in a 
million could hope to obtain it. 

"Whatever conduces to the enjoyment and prolongation 
of this life will probably be sought more 
energetically than before. Material progress, therefore, 
may quicken its pace. Nor is it likely that men 
will be quite so ready as they are now to throw away 
their lives in war. At present the soldier in facing 

R3411 : page 243 

death is probably sustained by a notion, however dim 
and vague, of a reward for the performance of his 
duty. 

"It can hardly be doubted that hope of compensation 
in a future state, for a short measure of happiness 
here, though it may have been somewhat dim, 
has materially helped to reconcile the less favored 
members of the community to the inequalities of the 
existing order of things. The vanishing of that hope 
can scarcely fail to be followed in the future by an 
increased impatience of inequality, and a growing determination 
not to put off the indemnity to another 
world. In fact, this is already visible in the spirit 
and language of labor agitation. Serious problems of 
this kind seem to wait the coming generation. 

"It would not be surprising if in this dissolution 
of the ancient faith and failure of familiar supports, 



there were to be a partial reaction in favor of churches 
which, like the Roman Catholic or the Eastern 
Church, can pretend to offer the assurance of authority 
and to still the disquieting voice of reason while 
they lap the disturbed soul in the soothing element of 

R3411 : page 244 

religious esthetics. A tendency of this kind is already 
seen in ritualism, which bids the doubting take refuge 
in the sacerdotalism and sacramentalism of the 
Middle Ages. But such a back-stream of opinion and 
sentiment would, of course, not be lasting." 

He concludes, "After all, great is our ignorance, 
and there may be something yet behind the veil." 



The Professor is an astute thinker and reasoner. 
He sees the trend of our times; he sees the advancing 
wave of unbelief which as a flood is even now increasingly 
sweeping over Christendom. 

The Lord's Word has forewarned us of present 
conditions (Isa. 28:14-20; 29:9-16; Psa. 91:7) and 
has cautioned us to "put on the whole armor of God 
that we may be able to stand in this evil day" (Eph. 6:11); 
and now, as predicted, the "fire" of this day 
is trying every man's work. (I Cor. 3:13.) Alas! how 
many have been building up in themselves and others 
faith in human traditions and creeds which now are 
"wood, hay and stubble" in the devouring flame of 
"higher criticism." Alas! how few have built up 
their own faith and that of others with the "gold, 
silver and precious stones" of divine Truth. 

However, in this also "we sorrow not as others 
who have no hope." As we behold many falling away 
from a position they occupied only nominally anyway, 
and from a faith that was never more than superficial, 
and from a worship in which they drew near the 
Lord in lip service without the heart, we rejoice that 
for such the present "shaking" (Heb. 12:26) means 
not eternal torment nor even "Second Death," but 
an awful experience in this life which, under divine 
Providence, may work out for them a blessing during 
the Millennium. 

Prof. Smith sees what the Scriptures so clearly 
show,— that the loss of faith at the end of this age 
will have much to do with the precipitation of the 
great time of trouble and anarchy with which this 
age is to finish. He sees this selfishness already manifesting 
itself as the Scriptures foretold it would do.— 
I Tim. 3:1-5. 

CHURCH AND STATE IN FRANCE. 



Under the "Concordat," of long standing between 
the French government and the Papacy, France out 
of revenues and taxes has paid salaries to the Roman 
Catholic priests, bishops, etc. It is generally conceded 
that this arrangement will be dissolved about the first 
of next year. If so the support of religion will probably 
depend on voluntary contributions, as in this 
country. Roman Catholics assume that this will be 
a great blow to religious institutions: they seem to 
have little confidence in voluntary religion. 

Nor are the Roman Catholics alone in their fears 
for the future; for as Protestants and Jews received 
like treatment in France the cancelation of the Papal 
"Concordat" is expected to mean a similar cutting off 
of Jews and Protestants from financial support. The 
twelve Jewish consistories of France and Algeria receive 
220,000 francs ($44,000), or from 1800 to 5000 
francs to each rabbi or minister. The Hebrews are, 
of course, somewhat agitated respecting this loss, and 
as to how fully it would be compensated for in voluntary 
donations. 

The various Protestant ministers are perturbed 
even more than the rabbis and are calling for some 
kind of federative union among themselves, and the 
"Fraternal Committee" has been appealed to— to see 
that the interests of the Reformed churches be taken 
care of in the parliamentary action on the proposed 
separation. France has been paying annually to Protestant 
ministers 1,500,000 francs ($300,000). 

A few Protestants seem to take the proper view 
of the matter— that such support from the world is 
contrary to the best interests of true religion. Thus, 
gradually, France is getting ready for the great wave 
of "trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation." 

THE ANTAGONISM BETWEEN CHRISTIANITY AND 
SOCIALISM. 



"M. Anatole Le Roy-Beaulieu, in a recent lecture 
delivered at Harvard, one of a series dealing with religion 
and democracy, commented on the antagonism 
between Christianity and socialism. Socialism, he 
admitted, is founded upon a love of humanity, and 
many of its elements are to be found in Christianity. 
Their ideals have much in common. 'The aspiration 
of the socialist is the renovation of society: that is 
also the Christian ideal. Montesquieu, in the eighteenth 
century, marveled at the fact that Christianity, 
preoccupied as it is with the affairs of the other 
world, has contributed so evidently and so much to 
the improvement of the life upon earth.' Yet, in spite 
of these analogies, M. Leroy-Beaulieu discovers differences 



so radical between the spirit of Christianity 

and the spirit of socialism that he believes their conflict 

to be vital. On this subject he said further, according 

to the report of his lecture in the Boston 

Evening Transcript:— 

'"Christians and religious men in general have 
as their object the improvement of conditions. Communist 
ideas are indeed found in the Church— as we 
have seen in an earlier lecture. But until the present 
collectivist ideas have succeeded in the Church only 
in monasteries, in convents, in sects which are founded 
upon contempt for the world. So Saint Francis of 
Assisi, for example, might be cited as a kind of socialist 
or democrat. But what was his ideal? The 
conquest of riches? On the contrary, poverty was the 
first article of his profession and the virtue that he 
chiefly preached. This is far indeed from the idea 
of modern socialism. What the socialist of to-day 

R3411 : page 245 

wants— if not for himself, then to divide among others 
—is the world's money. 

'"Again, there is a vast difference in the methods 
as well as in the ideas of socialism and Christianity. 
We mean, of course, the general spirit of 
Christianity. We do not include all Christians in our 
generalization. The spirit of Christianity's method 
is one of love toward God and man. Charity is the 
great idea— did not some one say the only innovation? 
—of Christianity. Christ's words were, 'Peace be 
with you.' This was no working formula, no catch-word. 
It was genuine. Christ toiled for peace. Not 
so the modern socialist. Peace may be their ultimate 
object, but it is a peace which can be attained only by 
means of war. In the modern socialist's conception 
of the word, Napoleon himself fought for peace. None 
of the socialists tend to any other method. French, 
Italians, Germans, Russians— so they be socialists- 
are unanimous that the only way to establish the 
peace they aim at is through a war of classes. M. 
Jaures, the poet-politician, is a type of the class. 

"It follows that socialists as a body oppose the 
doctrines of love and of long suffering that characterize 
men of religion. The calming of class strife, the 
appeasing of civic tempests by the oil of charity does 
not appeal to them. Religion, according to Jaures, is 
'une vieille chanson'— the cradle song that lulled the 
restlessness of old. It is not the martial music which 
is needed for the battles civilization has to fight 
today. 

"Far deeper than appears at first sight lies the 
gulf that separates Christianity and socialism. The 
socialist has his religion, but it is neither Judaism 
nor Christianity. These faiths place their ideal in 
another world— to turn men's eyes to the treasures in 



heaven was the object of their teaching. Socialism— 

the religion of positivism and materialism— pins its 

faith to the treasures of earth. It is not hard to appreciate 

the reasons why a man who regards his life 

on earth as a brief trial is willing to submit with 

patience to injustice. For the socialist it is different; 

for him this world is everything. It is manifestly incumbent 

upon the socialist leaders, then, to snatch 

from the masses every semblance of belief in a world 

to come. There is but one expedient for them: if 

they are to remove the hope of a heavenly paradise, 

they must compensate, they must offer an earthly paradise 

in its place.' 

"The religious plan, the lecturer continued, is 
to develop not war, but love among men, and by 
means of that love for the fraternity, which is the proposed 
aim of the socialists themselves. 'Christianity, 
then, has the better methods for attaining the socialistic 
ideals; and thus, after all, socialism, if it means 
what it professes, makes a serious mistake in its warfare 
upon Christianity."— Literary Digest. 

THE CONFLICT BETWEEN CATHOLICISM AND SOCIALISM. 



"It is an indubitable fact that, notwithstanding 
appearances to the contrary, Europe is now decatholicizing 
herself. One might even go further with safety 
and say that she is dechristianizing herself. Slowly 
but surely, with the irresistible movement of a geological 
subsidence, faith is waning among the industrial 
workers, and even among the peasants. In Belgium, 

R3412 : page 245 

in France, in Germany, the workmen who follow no 
particular creed number hundreds of thousands— yes, 
millions— and as their hopes of any heavenly kingdom 
dissolve other hopes assert themselves with a 
growing intensity. Wherever free thought penetrates 
Socialism enters also. 

"Frightened by the socio-industrial consequences 
of free thought, an increasing section of the rich class 
leans toward the church, and especially toward the 
Roman Catholic Church, which is regarded by all as the 
strongest bulwark of the capitalists' interest. The apparent 
clerical reaction is thus shown to be in fact a corollary 
of the decline of faith amongst the masses. But 
it is nevertheless true that the alliance of priest and 
capitalist, the coalition of spiritual and temporal 
power, against Socialism and free thought, furnishes 
the conservative and reactionary parties with formidable 
means of action and constitutes the most redoubtable 
threat against the immediate future of European 
civilization. It is a contest between the Black International 



and the Red International. On the one hand 

are all those who hold that authority should descend 

from above, and who find in the Roman Catholic 

Church the most perfect expression of their ideal, the 

most inflexible guardian of their class privileges; on 

the other hand are those who insist that authority shall 

come from the people, and who, by the logic of circumstances, 

can found their hopes on nothing but Social 

Democracy."— New York Independent. 

THE STABILITY OF ZIONISM. 



The death of Dr. T. Herzl, the principal leader 
of the "Zionist" movement among the Jews, is seemingly 
a serious loss— calculated to hinder the progress 
of the movement for the reestablishment in Palestine 
of a Jewish State under the protection or suzerainty 
of Turkey or the great powers of the world. However, 
from another standpoint it may do good— teaching 
those interested that they must trust not in man 
but in God. The time for regathering of faithful 
Jews to Palestine is due, according to the Scriptures, 
and it will not be long until the "door" of opportunity 
opens to them. The Lord is the real leader of the 
movement and he will guide in his own way. It is 
understood that Dr. Herzl looked with considerable 
favor upon the British Government's offer of all that 
the Jews at present desire, in a location far south of 
Palestine, in Africa. Dr. Herzl's continuance at the 
head of the movement might have proved inimical to 
the interests of the divine arrangement centered in 
Palestine. "Behold I will gather them out of all 
countries whither I have driven them.... Like as 
I have brought all this great evil upon this people, so 
will I bring upon them all the good that I have promised 
them."-Jer. 32:37-42; 31:27-40. 



R3412 : page 246 

A WORD TO OUR DEAR COLPORTEURS. 

WE want you each and all to realize that you are continually, 

daily, in our thoughts and prayers. 

We know exactly what your general experiences 

are, and are anxious to assist you in every possible manner. 

Firms that prosper in the subscription book business 

—in expensive books yielding large profits— drill their 

new agents for about a week on just the words to say and just 

the tone and emphasis to give them to make the best impression. 

We regret that this is impossible with us; but 

neither is it as necessary as with "book agents." Our 

Colporteurs are in the work "for the love of it"— for the 



love of the Truth— and the animation and emphasis of 
their presentation are not "put on," but are the spontaneous 
utterances of their hearts. Over three hundred are 
now actively engaged in this blessed service in this country 
alone, and not one of them follows it as a businessm- 
an recognize it as a ministry of the Truth and themselves 
as "ambassadors for God" to his true children. 

But zeal requires knowledge to make it the more effective. 
Knowledge on the subject of colporteuring comes 
from experience, and our experience covers years and is 
world wide. Hence it is both our duty and our pleasure 
to assist the dear devoted Brethren and Sisters engaged in 
the Colporteur service. 

We perceive that some full of zeal and enthusiasm on 
entering the work soon become discouraged from lack of 
success, while others, who start timidly and fearfully, do 
well. The reason for these peculiar conditions evidently 
is that the latter give the more careful heed to the printed 
instructions, while the former, too self-reliant, fail to profit 
by the experiences of others thus supplied. None should 
attempt a "method of his own" until he has been in the 
work at least three months, using one of the successful 
methods presented in Hints to Colporteurs. 

We have found that some Colporteurs get poorer results 
with larger experience; and we have learned to attribute 
such a retrogression to a gradual change of "method" 
to a poorer one, often unconsciously. All these 
reasons lead us to present below four of the most successful 
methods now in use amongst our dear Colporteurs. 
They are all alike in that they are brief, and do not discuss 
or even mention the doctrines, nor attempt to prove 
or argue Scripture. Many of the dear friends err in not 
observing this point. To attempt to tell the plan of God 
in a few words is to spoil matters and neither you nor 
your auditors have time for a lengthy discussion. The 
six volumes of DAWN treat the plan in the proper order 
and as briefly, we believe, as it can be clearly expressed. 

Make note of the interested ones and call back to see 
them after they have had time to read. Then you can 
talk as far as they have read, but if "wise as a serpent," 
you will not talk much beyond that point, but deepen 
their interest in their reading by continually referring 
their questions to the books which they then will have. 

When referring to the price, usually say, "Only thirty-five 
cents;" in contrasting say that "books on such topics 
usually sell for a dollar and a half each." But when referring 
to the price of a set say "only two and a quarter," 
making no mention of "dollars" this time because, unconsciously 
to the person, the price appears more trifling 
than if the word "dollars" be used. 

The fourth method mentioned below is intended specially 
for use in a new edition of these books which will 
have the general title, "Studies in the Scriptures." instead 
of "MILLENNIAL DAWN." Some sets of these will 
be ready (for trial by Colporteurs to test whether or not 
the new name will help in effecting sales) about October 



1st. Whether or not the new name will later 

be abandoned, or ultimately supersede MILLENNIAL 

DAWN we leave to the Lord's providence to determine. 

METHOD A. 

Good morning ! I am doing a little Christian work 
in this neighborhood; may I have a moment of your time? 
[If an opportunity is given enter the house.] 

The Bible and Tract Society of Allegheny, Pa., which 
I am representing has prepared some systematic studies of 
the Bible, which have been a great blessing to many of 
the Lord's people, and we are endeavoring to place them in 
the hands of all who will appreciate them. I have a copy of 
the book, which I would like to show you. [Show book, 
preferably in your own hands.] It is a "Helping Hand" 
for Bible students, entitled, "The Divine Plan of the 
Ages." 

This, the first volume of the work, takes up sixteen 
very interesting studies, all "meat in due season" for 
thinking Christians. The object of the work is to teach 
the study of the Bible systematically. All know that in 
studying the Bible a great many things are found that are 
hard to understand; this work takes up those difficult 
parts. For instance [pointing to the seventh chapter], 
"The Permission of Evil." We all have often wondered 
and asked why God permits evil, sin, sickness, suffering, 
death, and these awful and terrible disasters, etc., and 
why he does not prevent them when he has the power to 
do so. All this is beautifully explained and answered from 
the Scriptures, in this seventh chapter. It shows just 
why God has permitted sin and evil for now six thousand 
years, since the fall of our first parents in the Garden of 
Eden. It also points out God's promises for the final 
overthrow of evil in his own due time; when Satan will 
be bound, and the knowledge of the Lord will fill the earth 
as the waters cover the great deep. 

The sixth chapter treats of our Lord's return, and 
shows the object of his second coming— his work at that 
time,— that it will be a restoring of all that was lost in the 
Garden of Eden. In proof of this it gives the testimony 
of "all the holy prophets since the world began." 

[I do not always bring in the next paragraph.] 

The fifteenth chapter treats on "The Day of Jehovah" 
—the time in which we are living, and shows that 
the ever-growing conflict between Capital and Labor is 
clearly foretold in the Scriptures, and what the final outcome 
will be. 

Chapters two and three I must tell you about; they 
are so helpful, especially if you have young friends inclined 
to be skeptical. The one gives evidences, aside 
from the Bible, that there is an all-wise Creator; the 
other thoroughly answers "higher criticism" and infidelity 
by the internal proofs that the Bible is inspired. These 
chapters alone are worth many times the cost of the entire 
set of books. As one reader has well said, "These helping 



hands to Bible study are worth more dollars than they cost 
in cents." 

We have six volumes of this work, beautifully bound 
in cloth, similar to this first volume I am showing you, 
but averaging 500 pages. We sell them all for the very 
low price of $2.25, the usual price of one volume on such 
a topic. The title of the second volume is, "The Time 
is at Hand;" the third, "Thy Kingdom Come;" the 
fourth, "The Day of Vengeance;" the fifth, "The Atonement 
Between God and Man;" the sixth, "The New 
Creation." 

I am only taking orders today, and will deliver 
next Monday [or whatever day you decide on]. 

[If this does not secure the order, give a brief outline 
of the Chart; and refer them to the Apostle's statement 
(2 Tim. 2:15), "Study to show thyself approved unto 
God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly 

R3413 : page 247 

dividing the Word of truth." Show them from the Chart 
how to apply and rightly divide the Word of truth:—] 

This Chart shows the past dealings of God as related 
in the Scriptures, and also the future development of his 
plan; and it shows us just where we are on the stream of 
time. It is fully explained in the twelfth chapter. 

[If an order for the set of six volumes cannot be obtained, 
urge that the first volume at least be taken and 
read— over a million and a quarter of them already issued.] 

METHOD B. 

Pardon me. I represent the Bible and Tract Society. 
I thought you might be interested in the "Plan of the 
Ages." It explains why evil is permitted— sickness, wars, 
crimes, etc.,— something we are all interested in, and want 
to know more about. It shows that the Bible, when rightly 
understood, is in perfect harmony with itself and with 
reason, from Genesis to Revelation. More than a million 
copies of this book are now in circulation. It is unsectarian. 
The book is extremely interesting and makes plain 
so many points that have troubled us all our lives. It is 
truly wonderful how it opens up the Scriptures ! 

Aside from this it treats satisfactorily the important 
subjects and questions of the day, such as, What is the 
world coming to, into what are we drifting, religiously and 
socially. 

This Chart is fully explained in the book, and shows 
how to "rightly divide" the Scriptures, in order to have 
perfect harmony from first to last. It awakens an absorbing 
interest in the Bible, and develops reverence and love 
for the Creator. Every presentation is abundantly substantiated 
by Scripture. I am sure you will enjoy reading 
it. The type is large, the chapters short. It has good 
paper and contains 380 pages. A cloth-bound book for 
thirty five cents! Think of it! Such books usually sell 



for a dollar and twenty-five cents. 

If you prefer the entire set of six volumes, the cost is 
just two twenty-five for the lot. I am merely taking orders 

today; my delivery will be on day. You can pay 

then. Let me see— What are the initials? How do you 
spell your last name? Now,— Shall I bring you the complete 
set; six volumes for two twenty-five? Very well. 
I thank you, and you will thank me. I bid you good day. 

METHOD C. 

Good morning! Excuse me, please, for troubling you. 
I am representing the Bible and Tract Society of Allegheny, 
Pa., and think you will be interested in our work. 
This Society sends us out to call the attention of Christian 
people to the MILLENNIAL DAWN, or PLAN OF THE AGES. 
Perhaps you have heard of it. There are already over a 
million in circulation, and the exceedingly low price of 
thirty-five cents per volume places it within the reach of 
all. The object of this book is to teach us to study the 
Bible systematically, so that we can understand it. No doubt 
you have noticed in studying the Bible that you often come 
to passages you cannot understand. This has been my 
experience, and I have often felt discouraged in trying to 
study the Bible without a system. However, I have found 
a great blessing through carefully studying the Bible in 
connection with this book. The author takes up matters 
that have never before been satisfactorily explained or understood; 
for instance, "THE PERMISSION OF EVIL AND ITS 
RELATION TO GOD'S PLAN." We have all wondered why 
God permits evil— sickness, death, calamities, murders, 
wars, etc. This book explains why these things are permitted, 
and does it from the Bible standpoint. The book 
also explains "THE OBJECT OF OUR LORD'S RETURN," "THE 
RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS," and "THE DAY OF JUDGMENT, 
subjects in which we are all interested, but which 
very few understand to their satisfaction. In this work 
the Scripture texts are given, so that you can refer to 
them as you read, and all can understand if they will. 

There are in this volume sixteen chapters on the most 
interesting and important subjects in the world;— 380 
pages; nice paper; large, clear type; ALL FOR THIRTY-FIVE 
CENTS ! There are six volumes of the work, averaging 
500 pages each, all for $2.25, about the usual price of 
one volume on such subjects. I am merely taking orders 

today, for delivery next day. May I enter your name 

for a set? 

[If purchase is declined proceed to show Chart.] 

This Chart gives an outline of the whole plan of God, 
as revealed in the Bible, from Genesis to Revelation. Beginning 
with the creation of man, it shows us just where 
we stand on the stream of time, and the progressive steps 
each one must take to become like our Lord. It gives 
the Divine Plan in order, and makes the Bible so plain 
that even a child can understand it. [Have memorandum 
book ready, with pencil in hand.] I am only taking orders 



today, and will deliver next day; you pay for 

the book when delivered. [Whether the other volumes 
should be further mentioned or not, depends upon interest 
and circumstances.] 

Vol. II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner 
of our Lord's SECOND ADVENT; it also gives a complete 
Bible chronology, which is very important in order to help 
us to understand something of the times in which we are 
now living. It has a long chapter on The Anti-Christ. 

Vol. III., "Thy Kingdom Come," treats on various 
important themes also. It has one long chapter on The 
Great Pyramid in Egypt, with seven full-page illustrations 
of it. It shows that it is mentioned in the Bible, and is 
truly called "The Stone Bible." 

Vol. IV., "The Day of Vengeance," takes up the affairs 
of the Church and the world in general; shows us 
the meaning of all the trouble and confusion around us, 
as explained in the Bible,— that the times we live in are a 
fulfilment of the Word of God. It shows what the outcome 
of the impending trouble will be, and also gives the only 
remedy, set forth IN THE SCRIPTURES! One chapter is an 
itemized explanation of our Lord's great prophecy, in the 
twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew, and is worth more than 
the price of the set of books. 

Vol. V., "The At-one-ment Between God and Man," 
explains everything connected with the ransom— why it 
was necessary; how it was accomplished; the separate 
and related works of the Father, Son and holy Spirit in 
connection with our salvation— with the Scriptures bearing 
upon these interesting themes. One chapter on "The 
Undefiled One" deserves special mention. It shows how 
Jesus was born of a woman without partaking of her sins 
or weaknesses as a member of the fallen race. 

Vol. VI., "The New Creation," deals with everything 
pertaining to life and godliness affecting the Lord's consecrated 
people from start to finish— Church duties, home 
duties, family duties— everything. It has also one chapter 
on the natural creation, showing the harmony of the 
Genesis accounts with the facts of nature. 

It is the most wonderful work that has ever been published 
on these subjects, and you get the complete work— 
SIX VOLUMES— for only two twenty-five, the usual price 
of one such volume. These six volumes are a whole 
Christian library in themselves, and all for only $2.25, 
payable on delivery. May I take your order? This 
is the noblest cause in the world, and we all want to have 
a share in it. 

R3413 : page 247 

METHOD D. 

Pardon me if I intrude. May I ask, Is this a Catholic 
or a Protestant home? [After answer proceed.] Very 
well then. I am doing a little Christian work, in which 
I believe you will be interested. 



Christian people are becoming more and more awake 
to the fact that a great tidal wave of unbelief is sweeping 
over Christendom;— not the blasphemous atheism 
voiced by Thomas Paine and Robert Ingersoll, but the 
cultured kind represented in the scholarship of our 
day, which makes the danger all the more insidious. 

Not only are the great Colleges and Seminaries 
undermining the faith of the better educated, but the 
Common School books, and especially those used in 
the High Schools, are similarly inculcating a distrust 
in the Scriptures, a contradiction of its teachings. For a 
college graduate of to-day to declare his faith in the 
inspiration of the Scriptures would bring upon him the 
scorn of his companions— a scorn which few would 
court, or could endure. At very best, a few will be 
found to claim that they believe that Jesus and his 
Apostles were sincere, though they blundered in quoting 
from the Old Testament as inspired. 

Such a belief in Jesus and his Apostles is no belief 
at all; for if present-day "higher critics" are wise 
enough to know when and where our Lord and his 
Apostles erred in their quotations from the Old Testament, 
then these wise men of our day are our proper 
guides,— more inspired than Jesus and his Apostles. 

Our Society, realizing the need, is seeking to do all 
in its power to stem the tide and lift up the Lord's 
"standard for the people." It has prepared six sets 
of Scripture Studies (of which this volume is one) for 
the Lord's people of all denominations to use in lending 
a helping hand to all perplexed inquirers with whom 
they may, by God's providence, come in contact. 
These are supplied at bare cost, and can be had direct 
from the Society's warerooms or of its colporteurs, 
who are gradually reaching forth these helping hands 
far and near. These valuable "studies" are supplied 
at little more than two cents each;— 16 of them well 

R3414 : page 248 

bound in a cloth case, embossed in silver, for 35 cents. 

The thought is this: As a Christian man or woman 
you have children or relatives or neighbors or friends 
open to your influence— perhaps, indeed, seeking your 
counsel— asking, "How do we know that there is a 
God?" or, "What proofs have we that the Holy Scriptures 
are inspired?" It is no longer wise to call these 
silly questions, nor to ask, "Are you an infidel?" 

However competent you might be to prepare answers 
to these and a score of other questions, you may 
not have the needed time and opportunity to do so. 
How convenient then to step to your book-case, take 
down the proper study on the subject, and to say to 
the inquirer, Sit down and read that short study, 
and the whole matter of your question will be fully 
and satisfactorily settled; and if your doubts ever 
again arise come over and read the same again. 



Possibly you may be a member of an Epworth 
League or Christian Endeavor Society, or of a Baptist 
Young People's Union, and may be called on for an 
essay on some Scripture topic. How convenient to 
select one among these numerous studies (covering 
almost every topic) and to find therein the appropriate 
Scriptures cited. Ministers use them thus when composing 
special sermons and addresses. 

Ministers who have large libraries touching every 
conceivable religious topic— many volumes costing $6 
to $8 per volume— may not feel their need of these 
"Scripture Studies" but to others they are almost indispensable. 
Indeed, in addition to the price feature, which 
brings them within the reach of everybody— six volumes 
of over 3,000 pages for $2.25— the usual price 
of one such volume— they are written in pure, but 
simple English, whereas the "scholarly works" are 
replete with technical terms and only for the few. 

We invite Christian people of all denominations to 
join us in our work of extending these "helping hands" 
to the rising generation. A single friend or relative 
helped— rescued from doubt or unbelief— would repay 
the cost of these studies a thousand times. 

[Note.— Catholics seem to prefer the term Scriptures to 
Bible.! 



R3414 : page 248 

ELIJAH INSTRUCTED AND ENCOURAGED. 

-I KINGS 19:9-18. -SEPTEMBER 4.- 

Golden Text:— "Fear thou not, 
for I am with thee."— Gen. 26:24. 

ON Mount Horeb, Mount Sinai, is a cave called 
the cave of Moses, and it was toward this apparently 
that Elijah bent his steps, still heart-sore 
and discouraged, as he fled from Jezebel. It was 
here that the Lord appeared to him inquiring why he 
was there. His answer was that he was there because 
of his zeal for the Lord, because he was discouraged 
that the true worship in Israel had been set aside, that 
his reformation work had apparently been a failure, 
and, after all the miracles that the Lord had wrought 
through him, the people were seeking his life. In 
answer the Lord gave him illustrations of different 
ways of accomplishing results: First he caused a fierce 
wind to tear the mountains and break the rocks, but 
Elijah recognized that the wind was not the Lord but 
a manifestation of his power. Then an earthquake 
came, shaking the foundations of the mountains; but 
similarly the earthquake was not the Lord but merely 
a part of his power. Then came a fire; but the fire 



was not the Lord. Then a still small voice, and this 
voice, when Elijah heard it, he recognized as being 
the Lord, and in humility and fear he covered his 
face. 

"NOT BY MIGHT NOR BY POWER, BUT BY MY SPIRIT. 

The antitypical Elijah, the saints, as they look 
about them and see the world in general in idolatry, 
and even the Lord's professed people largely given up 

R3414 : page 249 

to the worship of fashion and the idolatry of wealth 

and fame, are very apt to feel discouraged— to feel as 

Elijah did, that they are quite alone. They are very 

apt to wonder why God seems so indifferent to the 

matter which so greatly concerns them. Why does 

he not overthrow all the altars of Baal? Why does 

he not overthrow Mammon? Why does he not bring 

in by his supreme power the great Kingdom of righteousness, 

which he has taught us as his people to expect? 

Why should we be more jealous for the Lord 

than he seems to be for his own name and cause? 

We need a lesson such as Elijah got, and we are getting 

that lesson. 

We are learning that while God could have spoken 
to the world with force and power, as represented 
by the wind and earthquake and the fire, yet all of 
these would not have expressed to the world the Lord's 
real character. To know the Lord they must be permitted 
to hear the still small voice— the voice of truth, 
the voice of love, the voice of wisdom. Moreover, 
we see that the Lord is about to bring upon the world 
of mankind just such experiences as might be symbolized 
by these matters displayed to Elijah. The strong 
winds of war are to be let loose upon the world— indeed 
quite probably they are already being let loose. 
The effect will be the rending and tearing of earth, 
society, the nations. Then will follow a great earthquake, 
symbolical— a revolution— referred to in Revelation 
as so mighty an earthquake as had never before 
been known amongst men. (Rev. 16:18.) It will 
be a revolution which will affect all the governments 
of the world, socially, politically, financially and 
ecclesiastically. Following this will come the fire- 
symbolical fire that will symbolically consume the 
earth, consume society. "The elements [society] 
shall melt with fervent heat, the earth [society] also 
and the works that are therein shall be burned up." 
Such is the symbolical description given by the Apostle 
Peter. 

The same symbol of fire is used by the Prophet 
Zephaniah and is located at the end of this age in the 
words, "Wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the 
day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination 



is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the 
kingdoms, that I may pour upon them my indignation, 
even my fierce anger: for the earth shall be 
devoured with the fire of my jealousy." The very 
next sentence shows us that the fire of God's jealousy 
is a symbolical fire, and other Scriptures show us that 
it is anarchy that is thus figuratively brought to our 
attention; for it is to be followed by a time of blessing 
as the Prophet says, "Then [following the fire 
—the anarchy] will I turn unto the people a pure 
language, and they shall all call upon the name of the 
Lord, to serve him with one consent."— Zeph. 3:9. 
This "pure language" or pure message of God's 
Word, which the Prophet shows as following the fire 
of anarchy, is the still small voice of our lesson. Elijah 
recognized this to be the power of God for bringing 
blessings and fulfilling his promises to the seed of 
Abraham, and through it to all the families of the 
earth in due time. And so the Lord's people today, 
as the antitypical Elijah class, are learning that God 
will do his great work through the still small voice of 
the Truth in due time, and that the due time for it 
will not be until the storm, the earthquake and the 
fire shall have passed. "When the judgments of the 
Lord are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the 
world will learn righteousness."— Isa. 26:9. 

"BE STILL AND KNOW THAT I AM GOD." 

These same thoughts are brought to our attention 
in the 46th Psalm, in which the Lord, through 
the Prophet David, sets forth a picture of the time of 
trouble which belongs to the day of the Lord into 
which we have already entered— the day of trouble 
which will prepare the world for the great day of 
blessing, the Millennial day. In this Psalm the Lord 
represents the earth being moved, the mountains being 
carried to the midst of the sea, its waters roaring, 
its mountains shaking, etc. These things picture the 
commotions that are about to take place in the social, 
political and religious systems of the world. The 
Lord's people, the Elijah class, are represented in the 
Psalm as not fearing these things, because they constitute 
the Lord's holy city or holy Kingdom. Then 
in verses 6 to 10 the Lord gives an interpretation of 
the shaking and melting mountains, etc., as signifying 
the raging of the people, anarchy, the unsettling 
of the kingdoms, the melting or disintegration of society. 
As a result there will be great desolations in 
the earth: as another result all wars are to cease unto 
the ends of the earth, and then (vs. 10) comes the 
message which will be enforced throughout the Millennial 
age, "Be still and know that I am God: I 
will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth." 

This command, Be still, corresponds to the still 



small voice which Elijah heard— to what we as the 
an ti typical Elijah are now hearing from the Word of 
God, namely, that not by earthly might nor by earthly 
power will the Lord establish his rule, but that in the 
coming time his King shall reign in Zion and execute 
judgments in the earth, rewarding the righteous and 
punishing the evil doer, with the result that all shall 
come to a knowledge of the Lord from the least to the 
greatest; that the knowledge of the Lord shall fill 
the whole earth as the waters cover the sea; and with 
the further result that the Spirit of the Lord shall be 

R3415 : page 250 

poured upon all flesh, as the mouth of the Lord has 
promised. This is the glorious message which the 
Prophet declares results from the great atonement 
sacrifice made by our Lord; his statement is that 
the Lord gave himself a ransom for all— "to be testified 
in due time."— I Tim. 2:6. 

After Elijah learned this lesson respecting the 
Lord's methods of bringing about the blessing, he was 
quite ready to follow the divine direction and to return 
to the land of Israel to make ready for (1) his own 
departure; (2) to appoint Elisha his successor as 
prophet and to instruct him for the service; (3) to 
outline the changes soon to come in the governments 
of Israel and Syria. He was further consoled and 
doubtless surprised by the Lord's declaration that he 
had yet 7,000 in Israel who had not bowed the knee 
to Baal nor kissed the image— which was the custom. 
Similarly the Elijah class has been encouraged of the 
Lord by an unfolding of the divine Word, that the 
blessings and reformation of the world will all come 
about in God's due time and manner— through the 
establishment of the Millennial Kingdom. Similarly 
the Elijah class has come to understand that there is 
an important work yet to be accomplished by it in the 
world: that there are thousands in the nominal systems 
who are not in sympathy with the errors there 
taught, who are merely confused and blinded by the 
misrepresentation of the divine character. 

"BE OF GOOD COURAGE." 

Elijah returned to the land of Israel, and apparently 
paid no attention whatever thereafter to Jezebel 
and her threats, but prosecuted a work of arousing 
true faith in the true God and obedience to his Law. 
He not only called Elisha, as directed of the Lord, 
but following out further directions or the spirit of 
the directions, he re-established what were called 
"schools of the prophets"— gatherings of young men 
desirous of studying the Law and appreciating the 
divine will. Thus we see that the awakening at 
Mount Carmel, witnessed by the heads of all the ten 



tribes of Israel, bore its fruit— that idolatry was at a 
discount thereafter, that Jezebel and Ahab evidently 
did not have it in their power to oppose or destroy 
these schools of the prophets, and, in general, the 
reformation work which Elijah was prosecuting. 
He is supposed to have continued this reformation 
work for some ten years or more after his return from 
Mount Sinai before he was taken up in the 
whirlwind. 

The Golden Text of the lesson fits well to the 
antitypical Elijah class. These should realize that 
one with the Lord is a majority, and should not fear 
the words nor the deeds of humanity so long as they 
can realize themselves the Lord's servants, cooperating, 
serving, active in the line of his direction. The 
message to these is, "Fear not their fear, nor be 
afraid;" "Let not your hearts be troubled; ye believe 
in God, believe also in Christ"— the Head of the 
body— and trust to his guidance and overruling according 
to his promise, which assures us that all 
things shall work together for good to them that 
love him. Why should we fear? What should we 
fear? "If God be for us who can prevail against us?" 
True, evil doers do seem to prevail at times— do 
really prevail against us— as, for instance, the Jewish 
Sanhedrin prevailed against our Lord to his crucifixion; 
but such prevailing is only seemingly against 
us. In reality, as the Apostle declares, it is working 
out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory. We are to view matters from this standpoint, 
and to rejoice in whatever tribulation divine 
wisdom may see fit to permit to come against us, 
anxious only that our union and relationship with 
the Lord may be maintained. 



R3415 : page 250 

THE HARVEST AND GENTILE TIMES. 

QUESTION.-If the "Times of the Gentiles" 

can be changed as suggested in the July 

TOWER, so that the anarchy will follow 

1914 A.D., instead of preceding it, might not similar 

changes be made in respect to all the various lines of 

prophetic time-proof set forth in MILLENNIAL DAWN, 

Vols. II. and III? 

Answer.— You are entirely in error. Not a 
figure, not a date, not a prophecy is in any sense or 
degree affected by the article to which you refer. Indeed 
the harmony and unity of the whole is the more 
fully demonstrated. Read again the article you refer 
to, "Universal Anarchy, etc." (July 1 issue), and 
you surely will see this. If it is not apparent to you 
upon a further study let us know the particular point 



of your difficulty and we will endeavor to make it 
plain. 

The harmony of the prophetic periods is one of 
the strongest proofs of the correctness of our Bible 
chronology. They fit together like the cog-wheels of 
a perfect machine. To change the chronology even 
one year would destroy all this harmony,— so accurately 
are the various proofs drawn together in the 
parallels between the Jewish and Gospel ages. It 
would affect the ending of the Jubilee Cycles, the 1335 
days, the 2300 days and the Times of the Gentiles, 
throwing out of gear all the wonderful harmonies of 
these in the "Parallel Dispensations." 

R3415 : page 251 

We commend to you a fresh and careful study of 
the presentations of DAWNS, Vols. II. and III., on 
these points. Evidently the time features of Present 
Truth all stand or all fall together, and we see no 
weakness or signs of their falling: on the contrary 
everything throughout the world is confirmatory of 
them. 

And while it is true that the great mass of Present 
Truth is in many respects entirely independent of 
our "times and seasons," nevertheless they are so related 
that the latter are almost necessary to explain 
the former. For instance, without recognizing that 
we are now living in the "harvest" of the Gospel 
Age and in the parousia of the Son of Man, how 
could we account for our great increase in knowledge 
respecting the various features of the divine plan? 

The easiest and best explanation of the "feast" 
now spread before us as the Lord's "household of 
faith" (indeed the only reasonable one) is that the 
Lord is now fulfilling his promise recorded in Luke 12:37: 
"Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord 
when he cometh shall find watching: verily I say 
unto you, that he shall gird himself [as their servant] 
and make them to sit down to meat, and will come 
forth and serve them." While these "things new and 
old" are handed from one servant to another and to 
the entire household, can any of us doubt that the 
Master himself is dispensing the delicious viands 
which so refresh us? 

And if this be so it is a proof that we are in the 
"harvest" or end of this age just as surely as similar 
blessings marked the "harvest" of the Jewish age. 
And the times when these blessings have reached us 
corroborate the prophetic testimonies respecting when 
the harvest began (Oct., 1874 A.D.) and when it will 
end (Oct., 1914 A.D.), a period of 40 years, just as 
was the Jewish harvest. Unlike error, these things 
stand investigation and the more searching the investigation 
the more satisfactory will the results be, we believe, 
to those who are in the right attitude of heart 



—to those who seek not to cavil, but to know the 
mind of the Lord. To the "Israelites indeed" it is 
now "given to know" these things which are still 
mysteries to the world. Only "the pure in heart," 
the thoroughly sincere, the honest, are in the position 
to have the "ear to hear" this "knock" of the 
heavenly One (Rev. 3:20); only those who have the 
eyes of their understanding opened can discern the 
presence of our King; only those who hunger and 
thirst for the Truth can properly relish things new 
and old, now so bountifully provided. These privileges 
are now restricted to the "meek and lowly of 
heart," and these conditions must be maintained or 
else this special hearing, sight and taste will be lost. 
Such loss in the Scriptures is styled "outer darkness" 
—the darkness and confusion in which we see 
the whole world now to be; but from which, thank 
God, there will be a rescue "in the morning"— when 
the Sun of Righteousness shall shine clearly forth, 
turning the outer-darkness into outer-light. But for 
such, meantime, there is necessarily a great "shaking" 
and "horror of great darkness" and trouble. 



R3415 : page 251 

ELIJAH TAKEN IN A WHIRLWIND. 

-2 KINGS 2:1-11. -SEPT. 11.- 

Golden Text:— "He was not, 
for God took him."— Gen. 5:24. 

THE words, "When the Lord would take up Elijah," 
suggest that Elijah had a specially protected 
life— that it was not subject to the power 
of his enemies— that he was wholly under divine control. 
And this is true also of the an ti typical Elijah 
class of this Gospel age. It was true, we remember, 
of the great Head of this class, Jesus in the flesh. 
The scribes and Pharisees made many attempts at his 
life before the successful one, but could not harm him 
previously because "his hour was not yet come." So 
with every member of his body in the flesh, every 
member of the Elijah class— not even a hair of their 
heads could fall without divine notice and permission. 
These are not to esteem that any of their affairs are 
accidental, for being fully consecrated to the Lord 
and fully accepted by him, all of their affairs, great 
and small, are under divine supervision— their health 
or sickness, their rights or privileges, their joys or 
sorrows. 

We are not in this wishing to intimate fatalism, 
but rather a divine supervision. If trials and disciplines 
and corrections, either of poverty or sorrow or 



ill health, be necessary for the correction of these they 
will surely have them; and some or all of these may 

R3416 : page 251 

come to them even though not as chastisements, but 
as lessons of experience necessary for their development 
for places in the Kingdom or for their usefulness 
in the Lord's service in the present time— as was 
the case with our Lord. Those who are of the Elijah 
class, fully consecrated to the Lord, will be glad to 
have this divine supervision of their affairs and will 
rejoice in it. This, however, would not mean that 
they may not and should not do whatever would appeal 
to them as being wise and reasonable for the 
maintenance of their health or its recovery, for the 
satisfying of their hunger or thirst, or for the betterment 
of their temporal interests. But while using 
what to them may appear to be reasonable means, 

R3416 : page 252 

they will consider that these also are all in the hands 

of the Lord, and, if successful, that they are his provision, 

to be accepted with thankfulness; while, if unsuccessful, 

they will be willing to accept the results 

without murmuring— with full assurance of faith that 

God is able to make all things work together for their 

good. 

AT THE SCHOOLS OF THE PROPHETS. 

Elijah and Elisha were at Gilgal, one of the cities 
at which was located a "school of the prophets," 
where piously inclined young men sought instruction 
respecting the divine Law under the supervision of 
those who were recognized as prophets, and with a 
view to become doctors or expounders of the Law of 
God in the various cities in which they lived. Elijah 
and Elisha had been at this place for some time, and 
now Elijah proposed a journey, suggesting that Elisha 
go not with him. The latter, however, would 
not forsake the older prophet, whom he styled 
his master, and toward whom he performed the duties 
of a body-servant. So they went together to Bethel, 
at which was located another "school of the prophets." 
We are not told how long was the stay at Bethel, nor 
what the prophets did or said at the school, but we do 
know that the pupils, known as the sons of the prophets, 
came privately to Elisha and in confidential whispers 
asked him if he was aware that the Lord was 
about to take from him his master Elijah. 

Elisha's answer was that he did know it, but did 
not wish to discuss the matter. Evidently he was 
filled with sorrow at the thought of the loss he was 
about to sustain, for everything indicates that 



during the ten years or more that he had been 
Elijah's servant and co-laborer in the prophetic office, 
a deep personal attachment had sprang up between 
the two men, who in some respects were very dissimilar. 
Again Elijah suggested that Elisha should tarry 
while he would go on to the city of Jericho; but again, 
with strong vociferations of his earnestness, Elisha 
declined to leave his master. When they arrived at 
Jericho Elisha had a similar experience, the sons of 
the prophets again asking him whether or not he had 
heard of the Lord's intention to take up the prophet, 
and again he refused to discuss the matter. For the 
third time Elijah suggested to him that he tarry while 
he would go farther under the Lord's direction, not 
to a city but to the river Jordan, but Elisha would 
not tarry and they went on. 

These visits to the schools of the prophets before 
Elijah was taken away doubtless had a beneficial 
effect upon these students of the Lord's Word, who well 
knew the aged prophet and his allegiance to God and 
God's power manifested through him. This last visit 
would be impressed upon their minds and go with 
them to the various cities of Israel in due time. Meanwhile 
the revelation which had been made to them, 
that God intended to take Elijah by a whirlwind, 
would prepare them for this final miracle and attestation 
of him as a servant of the Almighty. Apparently 
the prophets of this last school, fifty in number, while 
modestly refraining from following with Elijah and 
Elisha, nevertheless were deeply interested in the 
event they knew was about to take place. They went 
to a prominent point near Jericho, high above the 
river Jordan and overlooking it, and there witnessed 
what transpired. In the distance they beheld Elijah 
take off his mantle and roll it into the form of a club, 
and therewith smite the waters of the river Jordan, 
dividing them so that the two passed over as the Israelites 
had previously done by the miracle which the 
Lord wrought through Joshua at very nearly the 
same point. On the prophets went, up the steep hillside 
beyond Jordan— quite possible Mount Nebo, 
where Moses died.-Deut. 32:49,50. 

HARVEST SITTINGS TYPIFIED. 

There has been considerable speculation respecting 
this account of the three times and places at which 
Elijah invited Elisha to part company with him: 
that Elijah was too modest to desire many witnesses 
of the final manifestation of God's favor toward him, 
or that he wished to spare Elisha the sadness of the 
later parting; but these suggestions are not satisfactory 
to us. To our mind these were a feature of 
the type whose antitype must be expected in this 
present time. As Elijah represented the consecrated 
ones who will as overcomers constitute the 



body of Christ and become participants with our Lord 
in the glories of the Kingdom in the first resurrection, 
so apparently Elisha would represent a consecrated 
class of this time, in some respects inferior. These 
will have an acquaintance with the Elijah class, will 
minister to them in various ways, yet not be identified 
with them as members of the same death-devoted 
company. 

In harmony with this illustration or type we shall 
expect that, as the present age draws to its close 
and the Elijah class passes away entirely, there will 
come various sittings or testings to this class of 
inferior consecration to separate them from the company 
and fellowship of the Elijah class. Whoever 
will fall away in this sifting will cease to belong to 
the Elisha class. Those who endure the sittings and 
testings will thus maintain their position in the Elisha 
class, and some will thus continue according to the type 
down to the very close of Elisha's experience, and 
will then in consequence of this faithfulness receive a 
great blessing— a double portion of the Elijah spirit. 

As the two prophets went on Elijah said to Elisha, 

R3416 : page 252 

Make request what I shall give thee, as I go from 
thee shortly. Elisha's request for a double portion 
of the spirit of Elijah is not to be understood as meaning 
twice as much of God's power as Elijah possessed, 
for this would have constituted Elisha a prophet of 
double the power of Elijah. Besides, how unreasonable 
a request would it have been for him to make- 
that Elijah should give more than he himself possessed. 
We must understand him, therefore, to mean 
that if Elijah's spirit or power would in any wise be 
remaining with any prophets in the earth who would 
represent the Lord, that Elisha desired that he might 
have twice as much as any other one— not selfishly, 
we may assume, but that he appreciated Elijah's disposition 
and position as a servant of God, and desired 
that as far as possible he might enter into a similar 
work of service. His request was granted conditionally, 
but he was told that it would be dependent upon 
his own watchfulness. 

The lesson which we draw from this request of 
Elisha and the conditions of its fulfilment is that the 
consecrated class whom he represents in the end of 
this age will need to be on the alert if they would discern 
the passing away of the Elijah class, and that 
only in proportion as they do discern the completion 
of the Elijah class and its passing into glory will they 
become the recipients of a proportionately large measure 
of the spirit and zeal of the Elijah class. From 
the Scriptures we get the thought that after the Elijah 
class shall have been completed, tested, proven 
and glorified, there will still remain a period of time 



before the full ending of the "present evil world" or 
dispensation— before the full inauguration of the Millennial 
glories. During that period the class which 
we believe Elisha represented— namely, a consecrated 
class, but lacking in some measure the full spirit of 
devotion exhibited by the Elijah class— will be quickened 
and energised by the change of dispensation and 
the evidences of the fulfilling of the divine plan, so 
that thereafter they will be practically as devoted and 
self-sacrificing and zealous every way as the Elijah 
class had been. 

The receiving by Elisha of power from the departed 
Elijah seems to correspond in considerable 
measure to the "foolish virgins" getting their oil and 
being able to trim their lamps after the "wise virgins" 
have gone in to the wedding and the door is shut. 
As the foolish virgins were not evil but good— "virgins" 
—so Elisha was not an evil man but a good man 
and a prophet: as the foolish virgins lacked something 
that the wise virgins possessed, so Elisha lacked 
something of what Elijah possessed, and that lack, 
which was supplied to the foolish virgins in the oil, is 
represented in Elisha's case in the mantle and blessing. 

As the Parable of the Virgins does not go on to 
show what happened to the foolish virgins except that 
they failed to enter into the marriage because the door 
was shut, so the Elisha picture merely shows that Elisha 
did not accompany Elijah, but on receiving his benediction 
and power he continued for a while the work 
that Elijah had been doing. So it is our thought 
that during the great time of trouble there will be a 
consecrated class who had not a sufficiency of zeal in 
self-sacrifice to be counted of the Lord as members of 
the Elijah class or body of Christ, who nevertheless 
will experience a great time of refreshing and become 
thoroughly devoted after they realize that the Church 
has been glorified— after they begin to see also the 
fulfilment of various Scriptures respecting Babylon. 
This class, whom we understand to be represented in 
the Scriptures as the "great company," whose number 
no man knows, who wash their robes and make 
them white in the blood of the Lamb, and eventually 
come up to spirit conditions, though not to be of the 
Royal Priesthood in the throne (Rev. 7:9-17)— 
these are represented as recognizing by and by that 
the little flock, the Bride class, the Elijah class, have 

R3417 : page 253 

passed beyond the vail and they are shown to rejoice 
accordingly, saying, "Let us be glad and rejoice and 
give glory to God, for the marriage of the Lamb is 
come and his wife hath made herself ready!" This 
class in turn, though not worthy to be the Bride, the 
wife, is invited to participate in the great marriage 
feast which is to take place shortly after the glorification 



of the Church.-Rev. 19:7-9. 

ELISHA, IF A TYPE, A DOUBLE ONE. 

We might here remark that although we are treating 
Elisha as a part of the type as well as Elijah, yet 
there is nothing in the Scriptures that positively intimates 
that this is the case— it is a mere inference. 
In Elijah's case, as we have already pointed out in a 
previous lesson, there is no doubt; beyond peradventure 
Elijah was a type of the elect Church in the flesh. 
But if Elisha was a type, we believe that we are justified 
in considering him a type of two classes. First, 
of the class already suggested, who are with the Elijah 
class and who maintain relationship to the close 
of Elijah's period and who then become partakers of 
his spirit. And this type would seem to extend as far 
as Elisha's re-crossing the Jordan, smiting it with the 
mantle of Elijah. If the crossing of Jordan into the 
land of Canaan be taken to represent death, then the 
picture should be read as indicating that this "great 
company" will all pass through death, which is just 
what the Scriptures elsewhere seem clearly to show- 
that in order to be on the spirit plane at all it will be 
necessary for them to "all die as men." 

In this view of the matter we assume that Elisha, 

R3417 : page 254 

after crossing the Jordan and entering Canaan, would 
represent another, a different class, namely, the earthly 
phase of the Kingdom— Abraham, Isaac and Jacob 
and all the prophets, the beginning of the restitution 
class. Elisha's work after crossing Jordan was restitution 
work in many respects, and in this particular 
would well correspond to what we may expect of the 
earthly phase of the Kingdom after its establishment 
—after the great time of trouble. But again we remind 
the reader that the typical character of Elisha is 
not beyond question, as it is nowhere affirmed in the 
Scriptures, but merely inferred by us because of his 
association with Elijah. 

CHARIOTS OF FIRE AND HORSES OF FIRE. 

The record is that Elijah and Elisha were separated 
by chariots of fire, but that Elijah was taken up 
not by these but by a whirlwind into heaven (margin). 
We might draw different inferences from this, but feel 
safer to adhere closely to the wording of the text. 
The fiery chariots and horses we infer to be a part of 
the type, and shall not be at all surprised to find the 
fulfilment in severe persecutions which will come 
upon the last members of the Elijah class— persecutions 
unto death possibly. If this be the correct interpretation 
of the type there would be a special significance 



attaching to Elisha's seeing the departure of 

Elijah. It would seem to signify close personal friendship 

and loyalty between them down to the very close, 

and that the effect of these fiery trials would be to 

energize those who had previously been less energetic 

in the carrying out of their consecration. 

The whirlwind in the type should be interpreted, 
in harmony with general Scripture usage, as signifying 
a fierce trouble— a trouble, too, which would agitate the 
heavens or ecclesiastical powers as an earthquake 
would represent disturbances of the social conditions. 
Thus read in advance of the fulfilment 
the type seems to imply that the end of the 
Elijah class will occur amidst great ecclesiastical commotions, 
accompanied by fiery trials— thus we think 
probably the change will come to the last members 
of the elect "body." 

"HE WAS NOT, FOR GOD TOOK HIM." 

Our Golden Text relates to Enoch, but is not 
inappropriately applied by the Lesson Committee to 
Elijah, for what was true of one was apparently true 
of the other also. Enoch, the faithful prophet of old, 
whose only prophecy recorded is his announcement 
of the second coming of the Lord to execute righteousness 
in the earth and to convince the gainsayers 
(Jude 14,15), suddenly disappeared from amongst 
men, and the inspired record is that he was not found 
because God had taken him; and so likewise Elijah, 
having served his mission, disappeared from amongst 
men for God took him. True, the sons of the prophets 
suggested to Elisha afterward that perhaps the 
Spirit of the Lord, which had taken him up, would 
drop him down to some other portion of the world, 
but there is nothing to confirm such a supposition. 
"He was not found, for God took him." 

The question arises, Where did God take these 
two prophets of old? and there is no answer to the 
question. True, in Elijah's case it is stated that the 
whirlwind took him up into heaven, but the word heaven 
here is used to represent the sky, the circumambient 
air, and has no reference whatever to the heaven which 
is God's dwelling place. That neither of these prophets 
went to the latter place we have the very best evidence 
in our Lord's words, "No man has ascended 
into heaven save he which came down from heaven, 
even the Son of man."— John 3:13. 

We can only conjecture respecting these two 
prophets, and our conjecture is that they were not 
only taken away in order that their disappearance 
from the earth might be typical, but that possibly the 
Lord has taken them to some other suitable habitation, 
perhaps some other world, that in due time he might 
bring them back to earth and possibly thereby impress 
upon mankind some lessons which could not otherwise 



be so forcefully taught. For instance, he 
might thereby give the lesson of his abundant ability 
to fulfil any and every promise ever made to mankind. 
We have no thought, however, that Elijah has ever 
yet returned to this earth— we have no thought that 
he was present on the Mount of Transfiguration with 
the Lord and the apostles as already shown; we accept 
the Lord's testimony respecting the spectacle on 
the Mount— that it was a vision merely.— See our 
issue of April 1, 1904. 

"DEATH PASSED UPON ALL MEN." 

Some may be inclined to argue that Enoch and 
Elijah must have died, because the penalty of death 
was against them as well as against all the other members 
of our race, and because the Apostle reiterates 
this penalty, saying, "By one man's disobedience sin 
entered the world and death by sin, and so death 
passed upon all for all are sinners." (Rom. 5:12.) 
We reply that nothing in our view, in our judgment, 
is in discord with this sentiment of the Apostle. The 
death sentence passed against Enoch and against 
Elijah as well as against the remainder of Adam's 
children, and wherever they are they must still be 
under that death sentence; they cannot be released 
from it until the full close of the antitypical atonement 
day— which will close synchronously with this 
Gospel age, which is its antitype. Wherever these 
two venerable prophets may be they are not perfected 

R3417 : page 255 

because, as the Apostle points out (Heb. 1 1:38,40), 
God has provided for us— the Gospel Church, the 
body of Christ,— some better thing than he provided 
for any of the ancient worthies, and they without us 
shall not be made perfect. We are confident, therefore, 
that Enoch and Elijah, wherever they may be, 
are not yet made perfect— they have not yet escaped 
from the bondage of corruption. They are still under 
the sentence of death and will be until that "curse" 
shall be lifted in the dawn of the new dispensation. 

From the divine standpoint every one is dead 
who is either under the sentence or whose life to any 
extent has been impaired as a result of the curse. 
The whole world in this sense of the word is dead, 
and Enoch or Elijah can only be thought of or spoken 
of as alive from the standpoint of faith, even as we 
speak of ourselves who are accepted of the Lord as 
members of the body of Christ and as having passed 
from death unto life— namely, by faith, by hope. As 
we speak of ourselves and each other as alive toward 
God through faith in Christ, so we may speak of 
Enoch and Elijah as alive through the merit of the 
great sacrifice at Calvary, of which they shall partake 



actually in due time, becoming actually alive and being 
made actually perfect. 

"CHANGED IN A MOMENT, IN THE TWINKLING OF AN 
EYE." 

As for the change of the Church, the Elijah class 
in the flesh— precursors or forerunners thus of the 
anointed body in the Spirit— the change of these members 
at this time the Scriptures clearly indicate to be 
one which the world will not recognize. As the 
Scriptures declare, although we are sons of God, sons 
of the Highest, nevertheless we must die like men— 
we must go down like the great Prince, Jesus, into 
death, and must be raised to the newness of life, to 
spirit conditions, to the divine nature. The Apostle 
assures us that those living in the end of this age, 
during the parousia of the Son of man, will not need 
to sleep— to tarry in the death condition— for the moment 
of their death will be the moment of their change 
to glory, honor and immortality, the divine nature. 



R3417 : page 255 

JUSTIFIED AND CALLED. 

QUESTION.— Can any one be justified and yet 
not be called? or are all the justified ones 
called? 

Answer.— It is possible for one to be justified and 
yet not be called. All justified persons are not called. 

Abraham and others of the past were "justified 
by faith," but living before the ransom was given, before 
the Captain had been perfected, before the Gospel 
age "call" began, before the new and living way 
(or new way of life) had been opened up, those grand 

R3418 : page 255 

ancient worthies were not called to be members of the 
Bride class. 

"Justification by faith" throughout this Gospel 
age is merely the first step in the ways of the Lord, 
now opened to whosoever hath an ear to hear. The 
second step is consecration, a full surrender of our all 
to the Lord. We may safely conclude that all who 
took the first step were welcome to take the second 
one, and that it would appear the "reasonable service" 
to all sincere ones who properly appreciated God's 
mercy in forgiving their sins. Those not thus influenced 
usually found their faith grow as cold and lifeless 
as their love, and thus losing their faith were without 
justification again— part of the unjustified world. 

Whoever of the justified were of the right spirit 



and made consecration of their all during the period of 
the call, were of the "called ones" mentioned by the 
Apostle and urged to make their calling and election 
sure by obedience to their covenant. This same class 
now, since the end of the "call," are not thus called, 
but are in a waiting attitude. Knowing from the 
Scriptures that "many are called but few chosen," 
they are waiting for an opportunity to take places 
amongst the "called" as substitutes for some not found 
worthy. 

It would not be unreasonable to suppose that 
there are hundreds in just such a waiting condition, 
although the present-day preaching is not very favorable 
to either justification or consecration: justification 
through faith in the ransom-sacrifice of Jesus, 
the only kind, is little understood or taught. 

On the other hand there are doubtless thousands 
in all the denominations of Christendom who have 
taken both steps (justification and consecration) who 
are overcharged with cares of this life and whose periods 
of opportunity gradually expiring leave places for 
those who seek and pray and hunger to enter into the 
favor of the "called" class. We have no positive 
means of knowing who are thus accepted as substitutes, 
but we think it reasonable to consider three 
conditions as indicative of such acceptance. (1) A 
growth in the fruits of the spirit. (2) Activity in 
serving the Truth to the extent of talents and opportunities. 
(3) An ability to grasp prominent features 
of the Truth with considerable clearness. 

The question then arises, What about justified 
believers who have consecrated and who may never 
find a chance as substitutes? We incline to consider 
these to be few,— that the Lord will give the hearing 
ear to comparatively few except as there may be an 
opening for them. However, if any of said class do 
fail of an opportunity to become substitutes we would 
be sure that divine love and care would be over them 
just as surely, and that failing a place in the elect 
Church through no fault of theirs, these would be 
given some good portion which would much more 
than reward and satisfy them. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 