Insight on the News
Interest in the Occult
● A strong wave of interest in the occult is sweeping over much of the world. Books, TV shows and movies about occult practices have soared in popularity. To see one such film that shows priests exorcising, or casting out, a demon, people have lined up for hours in rain and sleet. Once inside, there are reports of fainting, nausea, vomiting, even heart attack. But the crowds keep coming.
Interestingly, Catholic priests say that they have had an unusual number of pleas for help from those who, after seeing the film, claim they are demon possessed. Is it possible?
The Bible gives documented cases of demon possession. The first step toward that condition is often an undue curiosity about the occult. In the actual case on which the movie is said to be based, a child became demon possessed after its relatives used a Ouija board.
Viewing such practices, not as fascinating entertainment, but as “detestable,” as God does, is definitely a protection.​—Deut. 18:12.
The Religion Business
● Business is business even when it operates behind a religious front. The U.S. Catholic Church has suffered a 50-percent drop in seminary enrollment since 1967. Obviously, that does not reflect good business. So, now they are sending “recruitment directors” to the American Management Association for business training.
But the Bible says that priests of God are ‘called out of darkness’ to do God’s work. (1 Pet. 2:9) If these truly were His priests, would not God back them up? Would they need to turn to the darkness of the world to learn how to do God’s work? As to how they feel about trusting God, the New York “Post” noted that a priest associated with the program said: “A few years ago we would trust in God and hope that the budget would somehow be properly managed. Well, that just doesn’t work.”
In contrast, Jesus Christ assured his followers that if they would ‘seek first God’s kingdom and his righteousness,’ the necessary material things would be provided. (Matt. 6:25-33) If the clergy feel that God is not looking after them, might it be because they are too occupied with their own business, and failing to do God’s work?
Clergy in Politics
● Finding clergymen in politics is becoming commonplace. They are often seen in New York’s City Hall and are consulted by city councilmen. “Priests, rabbis and ministers mingle easily in the political clubhouses,” reports the York “Times.” And a priest appointed by his bishop to organize Catholic voters says: “I don’t have a hobby of politics. It is my job.”
Current reports from Brazil, Korea, Spain, Ireland and the Philippines reveal clergy involvement in politics there too. Why politics? Why not stick to religion? A politically prominent New York clergyman answers: “Politics is the only base on which people respect a clergyman today.” Why is that?
Well, how can they be respected from a religious viewpoint? They have publicly discredited the Bible. And their political meddling proves that they really do not believe in God’s kingdom, his government. But they have a reputation for interest in politics. They are like the Jewish clergy of the first century who said: “We have no king but Caesar.”​—John 19:15.
Forced Transfusions
● Recently, an Oregon court tried to force a pregnant mother, one of Jehovah’s witnesses, to take a blood transfusion. Essentially the court claimed that the parents should not attempt to ‘impose religious faith’ on an unborn child.
On hearing about this, one bewildered woman wrote to the Seattle “Times.” While not agreeing with the Witnesses as regards blood transfusions, she said: “On January 22, 1973, the highest court in this land handed down a decision that this same child could be murdered if its mother chose to have an abortion. Unbelievable!”
It is, indeed, a warped viewpoint that takes the position that snuffing out a life is ethical, but caring for that life according to Godly principles is contrary to the interests of society.
The Witness mother, incidentally, did not have the transfusion. She went to another state and delivered a healthy baby without blood.

