R1012:pagel 

VOL. LX. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., MARCH, 1888. 

NO. 7. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. C. 
T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :-FIFTY CENTS A YEAR, POSTAGE FREE. 
Including special number (Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., paper 
bound) seventy five cents. Remit by draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Including "Special Number," four 
shillings. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 



money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "-ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

PLEASE NOTE that our address is ALLEGHENY, PA. Do not 
address letters for us, to Pittsburgh, Pa. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN VOL. I. in German soon ready-order 
now. Cloth bound one dollar. 



ARP'S JOY TRACTS in plenty. Order all you can and will use, 
free. State quantity desired. 



ARE YOU using the Missionary Envelopes as extensively as 
possible? All can preach thus. Do what you can. Price 35 cents 
per hundred, 300 for $1.00, including postage on them to you. 



DAWN VOL. II. will not be ready for several months. It will be 
duly mentioned in these columns. We hope that at least one 
hundred thousand copies of Vol. I. will be in the hands of the 
people by the time Vol. II. is ready. 



BUSINESS ORDERS should be separate from balance of your 
letter. Write very plainly and give full address in each letter. By 
wording your orders very exactly our time is saved from hunting 
and guessing, and thus the general cause is forwarded by such 
care. 



PRAY without ceasing— in every thing give thanks! 



R1012:pagel 



DAWN IN ITS SEVENTIETH THOUSAND. 

You will be pleased to learn that the seventieth thousand is now 
in the binder's hands. The sixty thousand already in circulation 
are nearly all out as the result of personal efforts on the part of 
those who love the truth and delight to serve it. The influence of 



many is exerted to hinder and oppose the book, and is sufficient 
to keep it out of book stores generally. As always, such are 
"grieved that we teach the people. " Thus, and in every 
conceivable way, professed servants of truth oppose and hinder 
its spread and endeavor to keep the truth hungry of the flock 
from the green pastures, from the "meat in due season. " But 
praise God, it is shining more and more; and every consecrated 
one who sees the light lets it shine as the Chief-Shepherd 
instructed. Each seems to realize himself a minister (servant) of 
the truth, and each looks up his Christian friends, writes to them, 
and sends them DAWN and TOWERS. And thus God is having 
the truth, the "good tidings," preached to every "Israelite indeed 
in whom is no guile," notwithstanding the opposition of the 
clergy, who, from their office and profession, should be the very 
ones to sound the Jubilee trump to our dear brethren and sisters. 
God's blessing is with you; greater is he that is on our side than 
all that be against us. The Chief Reaper in this harvest is with us, 
and every true grain of wheat will soon be separated from the 
chaff and tares- then all the faithful shall shine forth as the Sun 
in the Kingdom of our Father (Matt. 13:43), and the great work 
of blessing and healing and enlightening the world will begin. 
That will be our glorious triumph, for which we can well afford 
to wait and to endure hardness now as good soldiers. It will 
consist in blessing and informing many who now oppose us and 
the truth. 



R1012:pagel 

A WORD FROM BROTHER TACKABURY. 

The following at our request is from our dear Brother 
Tackabury, whom old readers of the TOWER remember as 
formerly a Methodist minister, who was made free from 
sectarian bondage by the blessed harvest truth. Subsequently he 
was engaged with us in the important, though personally 
obscure field of labor of Z.W.T., where he did efficient service 
in preaching the blessed gospel by letter and otherwise to many 
of the scattered saints, holding up Christ as the one altogether 
lovely while self was kept in the background. 

While we sympathize with our dear Brother in his present 
affliction, we rejoice with him in the prospect of an early 
fruition of our glorious hope. 

TO THE FAITHFUL IN CHRIST JESUS. 

Dear Brethren and Sisters-readers of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER:-It has been my privilege to enjoy Christian 
fellowship with some of you by personal association, and I 
believe that to all of you I am united by that tie (love) that binds 
together the children of God everywhere, in one family. 



I am comforted with the thought that many of you with whom I 
have personal acquaintance, show your sympathy and interest by 
making inquiry after my welfare. 

To know that my dear brethren and sisters thus kindly think of 
me alleviates my sufferings and enables me the more cheerfully 
to endure affliction. It is now more than two years since I was 
attacked with a difficulty of the throat and lungs, and though I 
was quite thorough in its treatment, none of the remedies used 
gave more than temporary relief; and from the first, my 
physicians held out but little hope for my recovery. 

At times during this period I have been very much prostrated, 
and it seemed that my change could not be far off, but to the 
surprise of all who know my condition, I have as often rallied 
and nearly recovered the strength in which the attack found me. 

At present I am comfortable except the severe spells of 
coughing which, however, are only occasional. 

During the whole of may sickness the Lord has been present to 
sustain me, and I have been enabled at all times to say from the 
heart, "Thy will, not mine, be done. " At times the thought of 
being "forever with the Lord," makes me long for the end of the 
warfare and the union with Jesus our head, and all the "elect" - 
members of his body. 

How glorious thus to be permitted to enter on the work for 
which he has called and is perfecting his Church! On the other 
hand, when I know that error is being preached so persistently 
from almost every pulpit in this land, and throughout 
Christendom, and that great efforts are being made to spread 
these errors among the heathen nations, I long for strength to 
raise my voice for the truth. But the decree has gone forth that 
the darkness of error shall give place to the light of truth, and 
whoever may fail, the work will go on till all God's promises 
shall be fulfilled. 

That each one of the saints may be faithful and lay hold on the 
grace that is sufficient, is the prayer of your fellow-traveler in 
the narrow way. 

S. T. TACKABURY. 



R993 : page 1 



POOR SLAVE! 



It is surprising in this day of comparatively independent 
thought, how willingly and stupidly some submit themselves to 
the yokes of sectarian bondage. But the following is a sample of 
how some do so. Had the apostles and early disciples acted so, 
they could not have believed or followed Christ. No more can 
such follow him to-day. The blind, and the leaders of the blind, 



shall together fall into the ditch, into the "great tribulation" 
shortly to overtake them. 

The harvest of the age is upon us; but the blind guides of 
Babylon are utterly indifferent, even when their attention is 
called to it, and the stupid indifference of those whom they have 
effectually rocked to sleep is utterly unworthy of the knowledge. 
Surely the thunder-bolts of His wrath will be necessary to 
awaken them. 



Augusta, Ga. 

DEAR FRIEND:-It is now some months since you were kind 
enough to forward to my address the Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., 
Plan of the Ages. Immediately on its receipt I placed it in the 
hands of my spiritual adviser, Rev. T. M. Lowry, (I am a 
Presbyterian in faith.) to know if I could place it in the hands of 
my wife and children. He only returned it to me yesterday, and 
advised me not to do so. Consequently I now return it to you, 
with many thanks. Very truly yours, 

J. G. B. 

How strongly in contrast with the above is the following, which 
came in the same mail. It reminds us forcibly of Acts 17:11,12 - 
"These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they 
received the word with all readiness of mind and searched the 
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Therefore many 
of them believed." (Compare with verses 2-6 and 13.) 



Osceola, Mo. 

DEAR FRIEND:-I have not yet fully read the entire volume 
(Millennial Dawn Vol. I.) but the spiritual benefit already 
received is untellable. The gates of the eternal kingdom have 
been opened wide to me, whereas before, the gates were but 
"ajar." I shall feel blessed indeed, if I have no other mission than 
utilizing the columns of my magazine to spread abroad the "glad 
tidings" of this "new revelation," and "Plan of the Ages." With 
deep respect, Yours fraternally, 

V. B. W. 



page 1 

BROTHER ADAMSON'S PLEDGE. 

FOUR HUNDRED GERMAN DAWN. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Being busy all good weather have 
not had time to read "Sons of God," but only the letters and the 
forcible View in the February TOWER. 



The thought of the height of Babylon's self-exaltation adding 
force to the fall is borne out by Rev. 18:7- "How much she hath 
glorified herself and lived deliciously so much torment and 
sorrow give her, for she saith in her heart I sit a queen and am 
no widow and shall see no sorrow" (such as we see predicted 
and threatened here and elsewhere). I think all should read Isa. 
45, 46 and 47, and Jer. 50 and 51, with Rev. 17th and 18th 
chapters. 

A word about German DAWN. I think it right to pledge myself 
for 400 copies, or one fifth of the 2000 needing to be pledged 
and one twenty-fifth of the whole 10,000. 1 do not know how 
soon I can pay for the 400, but not before last of March and you 
must store them and send as I order. Hope I shall sell thousands 
of German DAWN. 

In the Master's name I most heartily thank Bro. Zech for his 
patient toil of a consecrated spirit shown in his persevering labor 
on DAWN translating it into German. "My reward is with me," 
shows that Christ's reward to our dear brother is not only sure 
but will follow speedily. 

The interesting letters of this month's TOWER much refreshed 
the saints here as elsewhere no doubt. J. B. ADAMSON. 



page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Farrville, Indiana. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Your letter in answer to "Physical 
Functions," at hand. 

I must thank you for your kindness and promptness in helping 
me out of a difficulty. 

Now I don't want to bother you, but I have completely "faced 
about" in the last year, and I want to tell you how it happened. 
Eight years ago, I began to practice medicine, and the study of 
medicine I believe has a tendency to infidelity, if the study of 
the Bible be neglected. I depended on the preachers for spiritual 
food, and they mixed it up so, it disgusted me, and I came near 
starving, and presume I would, if my wife had not come to the 
rescue. All through the "dark nights," my wife was on her knees, 
begging for bread for me. My confidence in my wife as a true 
and noble woman is replete, and biting my lips, I would yield to 
her request, and go down on my knees with her, sympathizing 
with, and pitying her delusion. But the crisis came. Hypocrisy in 
the churches, clashing of creeds, etc., all claiming a Bible basis, 
"boiled me over," and I said, what I pleased, even to the 
detriment of my profession. I affirmed this question in a debate, 



"That man is the author of God, and a spiritual future. " But you 
know what I want to tell, so I will not bother relating all. I 
commenced the study of the Bible last October a year ago. First 
dismissing all creeds and notions of men, as well as prejudice, 
and with my wife on her knees asking divine guidance, I 
commenced the study of the New Testament. When I finished, 
the result was: I admired the pluck and tact and intelligence of 
Paul; but when I went to Genesis, all was dark, and like the 
"sow and dog, " I was about to return, when I struck the 
prophets. This gave me a key to the whole thing. It was the hind 
site on the gospel gun, the New was the fore site, and Christ the 
mark, and before winter closed, I looked upon the Bible as a 
great store-house-an ocean, the springs of which are hid in the 
mountains of God's eternal love. I came to this conclusion: If I 
want to build a house, I take the tree and use it as I find it, for if 
I should wait to learn the origin of the first oak, or acorn, I might 
freeze before I build my house. So, with the Bible, I accept the 
material at hand, and use it. 

After I was convinced, I wanted to be about my father's 
business, but not being willing to take passage on any of the 
boats, concluded I would swim over, and have been swimming 
around, doing all the good I can. 

The "Dawn" came into my library just when I needed it. Since 
then I am giving to my patrons the "Plan of the Ages;" but I am 
not as popular as when I was an infidel, for they will not endure 
sound doctrine. I don't belong to any church, therefore could not 
get a hearing, if I undertake to preach, nor a house either, but I 
am going to lecture at a schoolhouse, and continue Christian 
work. But I must say it is a great comfort to know my Methodist 
wife who has suffered and agonized for me at a throne of mercy, 
joins heart and hand in helping me to promulgate the "Plan of 
the Ages." 

LATER. -I have just been telling the good news to a 
Universalist, who wants DAWN. He is anxious to know more. 

I rejoice to know that there is a thirst for knowledge, and the 
world is clamoring for more light. I sometimes feel like 
launching out in the world, giving up my profession, and doing 
my little in lifting from the slough and cesspool of ignorance 
those over whom I have an influence. I never was an enthusiast 
in anything, and always aimed to take a stand, after reaching it 
by intelligence. But all the faculties of my soul are enlisted in 
this enterprise. I never experienced such a longing to go forth 
and "gather in the sheaves." 

I was an orphan thrown upon a cold world early in life, and have 
fought the battles of life alone, but God has blessed me, and I 
am coming out on the tidal wave all right, I hope. 



If I can hold up a beacon of light, or point to some friendly star 
that will guide some poor shipwrecked soul safely to shore, 
gladly will I do it. 

Excuse me for writing so much. I have unbosomed myself to 
you in a way that my pride almost condemns, but I can write to 
you feeling that our hearts beat in unison. May God bless and 
prosper you in all your efforts to do good. 

Your brother, 

G. P. M. 

Milwaukee, Wis. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL. DEAR BRO.:- I write to inform you, I 
have not yet received this January number of the TOWER, but 
as I did not send the number of my residence, that may account 
for it. I find it so precious, I can not afford to lose one number. 

I have been a member of M.E. church for nearly a quarter of a 
century, sometimes rejoicing, but more of the time doubting. 
But blessed be the name of Christ, I have received some of the 
light that will erelong, I trust, shine to the perfect day. Through 
the kindness of Bro. P., I received a copy of Millennial Dawn, 
and I treasure it more than I ever did my Bible before receiving 
it, and my Bible is now more precious than ever before. May the 
blessed Father help you to spread the glad tidings, is my prayer. 

S.T. B. 

R1012 : page 2 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Recent experiences have made 
exceedingly precious the word of the Lord through Peter- 
"Rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings... [and] if ye be reproached for the name of Christ, 
happy are ye, for the spirit of glory resteth on you. " 

On last Sunday forenoon I took my stand in front of Grace M.E. 
church, Harrisburg, Pa., and proceeded at once to give out the 
Arp tracts. This had the effect of making the rulers of the high 
places angry, two of them going so far as to threaten to have me 
arrested, and when I would not obey and go away, one caught 
me by the collar to hustle me off. Whereupon I told him to take 
his hand off me, or I could have him arrested. Then he stood 
between me and the people and told them not to take them, but 
they took them anyhow. His next move was to send in hot haste 
to the mayor's office for a policeman to arrest a man who, he 
said, was hindering the people from going into church. The 
officer came, and on their charge arrested me and brought me to 
the mayor's office, but by this time I had the entire congregation 
supplied with slips. Without any hearing or trial they were 
preparing, they said, to send me to jail; when I told them, I was 
well known by a number of prominent business men in their 
city, with whom I had done business as a traveling man for a 



New York house for years, and requested them to send for one 
gentleman near by who, I thought, would go my bail. They did 
so and the gentleman soon made his appearance and with a look 
of astonishment shook hands with me in the prisoners' box, 
inquiring, Why, how is this? The matter was soon explained and 
he immediately became my bail for $100. 

At the hearing next day, they appeared against me. They well 
knew, however, that to charge me with giving out tracts that 
taught the people that an orthodox hell was a delusion, and that 
there was hope for all mankind, would be regarded as bigotry. 
That this was their real grievance, there can be no doubt. But 
they trumped up another charge that would take better and not 
expose them to ridicule, charging me with advertising a book 
and hindering the people from going into church. 

The strange decision was, that I was the offending party, but 
should go free this time, upon paying the costs, which amounted 

R1013 : page 2 

to $1.50. Of course such a decision on such pretences could 
soon be proven unjust if brought into court, and I could claim 
heavy damages as against my personal rights and business 
interests, for being escorted through the streets as a common 
criminal, when I was violating no law of either God or man; but 
being a traveling man I have no time to attend to it. How it 
reminds me of the experience of Peter and John recorded in Acts 
4:1-21. And how like them we feel like relating these 
experiences to each other for mutual sympathy, as we thus have 
fellowship with Christ in his sufferings -yet "light afflictions" 
indeed in consideration of the glory to follow. (See verses 
23,29.) I expect to see you soon and tell you more, and how I 
expect this circumstance will redound to the glory of God. 
Blessed be God. My joy is indeed great in the Lord, and I realize 
my oneness with Christ as partaker of his suffering. 

I remain yours in the one hope in Christ, 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 

P.S. In consequence of this affair, I have had a number of 
opportunities which I could not otherwise have had, for 
explaining my position and preaching the glad tidings to 
interested hearers— in the mayor's office, several newspaper 
offices, and among business men of my acquaintance. And it has 
created quite a little stir and talk both among these and members 
of that church, some saying they must get that book and learn 
further of this matter. The Lord be praised. 

page 2 



Columbiana, Ala. 

DEAR FRIEND:-I have read the book Millennial Dawn. It is 
grandly beautiful, yet so different from the interpretations of the 
various churches, to which I have been so long accustomed, that 
it almost frightens me to think of accepting it as God's 
interpretation of his own word, notwithstanding the fact that it 
does present a perfect chain of evidence more in harmony with 
the divine character than anything I ever read before. 

I say to myself, What if this should be one of those "teaching 
new and strange doctrines?" But then, I reflect, it comes hand in 
hand with the Word, and is fighting against the errors that have 
crept into the church, and not against God. 

From early childhood I have been a Bible reader, and often 
wondered that ministers of the gospel almost entirely ignored 
the prophecies of both Testaments relating to the Millennial age, 
and confined their remarks to the doctrines of repentance, 
baptisms, etc., when it seemed so plain to me that such did not 
cover the whole ground of prophecy. The doctrine of Christ 
embraces so much more than they attempted to explain. I never 
could bear the idea of setting the Old Testament aside just as 
though it had already performed all its part in the great plan, 
seeing, as I thought, so many grand prophecies pointing to a 
time beyond the Gospel Age. I could not tell when, where, nor 
how they would be fulfilled; but still clung to the belief that they 
must come in somewhere, because of the divine declaration that 
God's word shall not return unto him void, but shall accomplish 
all that he hath purposed. But, as I now begin to see, what more 
fitting time than the Millennial Age could there be for finishing 
all things pertaining to the Plan of the Ages? Now, the words of 
the prophets and apostles seem to stand out, like real living 
things. By faith I can see holiness to the Lord written upon the 
bells of the horses, the desert blossoming as the rose, the Lamb 
that was slain opening the sealed book, and everything that hath 
breath praising the Lord. I can see it all as if in a grand 
panorama passing before my eyes. 

Please send a copy to my sister, and oblige Your sincere friend, 
M. F. L. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Please send me 120 copies paper bound 
Dawn, and find enclosed money order for eighteen dollars- 
amount less ten cents each expense allowance. 

About three weeks ago, I distributed a few of the "Arp Tracts," 
in a car bound for Chicago. A man of Buchanan found one of 
them, while on his way to Chicago, and it so interested him in 
DAWN, that he inquired at nearly all the book stores there, and 
also at "Y.M.C.A." headquarters, without success. On his return 
home, not finding any trace of the book, he sent to you for two 
copies. 



On Friday I sold about 40 copies of Dawn, in Buchanan, 
Michigan, a village near here, where a great many isms are 
doing their evil work. Yours, 

S. D. RODGERS. 

[Brother Rodgers is doing a great work in the vineyard. You 
will recognize him as an able minister (servant) of the truth, 
when you learn that during January he sold 620 copies of 
DAWN. Reckon each chapter of DAWN a sermon, and suppose 
that each book will be read by at least two persons, and you will 
see that his is a noble service to our Redeemer and King. 

While we all rejoice at the success of those who have many 
talents, and do great exploits in the battle for truth, let none of 
the humble, less talented, feel discouraged. The measure of 
every man's approval before the Lord, is in proportion as he hath 
DONE what he could. Some whose opportunities permit less 
service and less success, will be just as sure to hear the Master's 
"Well done, good and faithful servant," if they do with their 
might, what their hands find to do. The grace and blessing of our 
Lord Jesus be upon all the faithful in Christ.- EDITOR.] 



Loogootee, Ind. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-An hour ago I took from P.O. 
box a copy of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and within the past 
month having finished reading the "Millennial Dawn," and 
having become so completely engulfed by its wonderful but 
simplified explanation of the Bible with its hitherto (to me) dark 
sayings, I had but to glance over the pages of the WATCH 
TOWER to become at once fascinated with its peculiar beauty. I 
herewith hand you the sum required for a subscription. Send it 
along. I may well add that my feet had well nigh slipped into 
infidelity, but I now thank God that I feel quite free, and well 
assured of the plan; and I attribute my conclusions to reading 
your book. It occupies, in my estimation, a position on the apex 
of all Christian literature, and I hope and trust that its interesting 
and valuable pages will be carefully and thoughtfully read by 
additional thousands. Wishing you and your co-workers in the 
Master's cause abundant success, I will ask to be remembered as 
your true, though stranger friend, 

C. M. M. 

R1013 : page 2 



Joliet Prison, 111. 

DEAR FRIEND:-I do not know but that you will be a little 
surprised at receiving another letter from me, yet I thought it 
would be proper for me to write to you again, if only to 
acknowledge your kindness in sending me the book, Millennial 



Dawn, as I requested. I must confess that I was not quite sure 
that you would pay any attention to my first letter, as I imagined 
that most people on the outside would be apt to regard with 
doubt and suspicion any pretension on the part of a man in such 
a place as this, to being interested in religious matters, or 
desiring information or light on such subjects. You may be sure 
it gave me much pleasure to find that you were not of that way 
of thinking. 

Several other men besides myself and cell-mate are interested, 
and pretty much to the same extent. I can honestly assure you 
that no book that I have ever read has impressed me so much, or 
caused me to do so much serious thinking as Millennial Dawn. 
It is altogether different in its treatment of the subject of 
religion, and in the view it gives of the Bible and its 
interpretation, from anything I have ever read. 

However unfavorable my early surroundings, and however evil 
my early associations, I think I have cause for thankfulness that 
I have at last reached a point where I can see the right way 
ahead, and turn my back on the dark and wretched past. I am 
determined to pursue that way for the remainder of my life. I 
have been five years in this place, and have still three years and 
three months to serve. For the last four years I have honestly 
tried to improve my mind and prepare myself, as far as what 
facilities I have had would permit, to lead an honest and useful 
life when I get out. I wish to acknowledge the receipt of two 
copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and the pleasure and 
instruction the reading of them has given. I am much interested 
in them as well as the "Plan of the Ages," and nothing would 
give me more pleasure than to have an opportunity to follow up 
a course of reading, the beginning of which, has been of so 
much real benefit to me. Hoping that you will not be annoyed at 
my having written so much, and again thanking you earnestly 
for your kindness, I remain, 

Yours gratefully, 



R1013:page3 



WHOM WILL YE SERVE? 

"If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend; whosoever 
maketh himself a king, speaketh against Caesar. When Pilate 
therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth. "-John 
19:12,13. 

"Ye are My friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. "-John 
15:14. 



CAESAR'S friends? or friends of Jesus? 
Solemn question for to-day! 
Friends of Caesar! Friends of Jesus! 
Take your sides without delay. 

If ye pause for man's forbidding, 
Caesar's friendship ye secure; 
If ye do the Father's bidding, 
Scorn, reproach, ye shall endure. 

Friends of Caesar! Friends of Jesus! 
Stand revealed! your choice declare! 
Who in truth two masters pleases? 
Who may rival banners bear? 

Jesus' friends account Him precious, 
Lose for Him all other gain: 
Dearer far the smile of Jesus 
Than the praise of worldly men. 

Free from Caesar, friends of Jesus! 
Stand in phalanx! never fear! 
Love, severely tried, increases; 
Courage yet! the Lord is near! 

Onward still, His name confessing, 
Weaving crowns to grace His brow; 
Lo ! His hands are full of blessing, 
Lifted for your succor now. 

Caesar's friends were we, but Jesus 
Owns us for His friends to-day! 
What! shall rival friendship please us, 
While the Bridegroom is away? 

No ! through grace would we surrender 
Caesar's things to Caesar's care, 
Whilst to God, our God, we render 
Filial homage, praise, and prayer. 



-Sel. 



R1013:page3 

"THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME." 

"Then came the day of unleavened bread when the Passover 
[lamb] must be killed... and the chief priests and the scribes 
sought how they might kill him. ...And Jesus sent Peter and 
John, saying, Go and prepare us the Passover that we may 
eat... And when the hour was come he sat down, and the twelve 
apostles with him. And he said unto them, With desire I have 
desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer: for I say 
unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in 



the kingdom of God. And he took the cup and gave thanks, and 
said, Take this and divide it among yourselves: for I say unto 
you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of 
God shall come. And he took the bread and gave thanks, and 
brake it and gave unto them, saying, This is my body which is 
given for you: this do in remembrance of me. Likewise also the 
cup after supper, saying, This cup is the new testament in my 
blood which is shed for you. "--Luke 21:7,2,8-20. 

Such is the simple account of the institution of the Lord's 
Supper, as recorded by Luke; and again as the appointed time 
draws near we call to mind the words, "This do in remembrance 
of me. " And in compliance with that request, we will again 
commemorate our Passover by the repetition of the simple 
ceremony thus instituted by our Lord. 

Monday afternoon, March 26th, 1888, will be the anniversary of 
our Lord's death at Calvary-the 14th day of the first month, 
Jewish time, which begins at sunset of the previous evening. 
Sunday evening, March 25th, will therefore be the anniversary 
of our Lord's Supper, instituted in commemoration of his death, 
as the antitypical paschal lamb- "the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world. " 

On that occasion the church at this place will meet at our usual 
upper room, No. 101, Federal street, Allegheny, (side entrance), 
at 7:30 o'clock, P.M., and we most cordially invite to meet with 
us all who love our Redeemer, and who appreciate the ransom 
sacrifice which we meet to celebrate. Provision will be made for 
the entertainment of those from a distance. Let as many as can, 
meet with us. A number of meetings will be arranged for several 
days following which will afford a favorable opportunity for 
inquiry regarding the plan of the ages. Since all the consecrated 
are ministers of the truth, it behooves all who can to avail 
themselves of the opportunities which these conferences afford, 
for the more thoroughly equipping themselves for their 
respective fields of usefulness. 

But we are aware of the fact that only a few can assemble here: 
nevertheless, let all the faithful in Christ Jesus, in every place, 
"Do this in remembrance" of God's Lamb who redeemed us by 
the sacrifice of himself. Such, in every place should assemble 
together, even if there RIO 14 : page 3 

be but two or three of like precious faith. And even the solitary 
ones may break the bread and partake of the wine, in heart 
communion with the Lord and with the scattered fellow 
members of the one body yet in the flesh. 

Christians in this matter, as on many other points, have left the 
teachings of the Word and the example of the early church, and 
follow various customs as to the time of its observance. Few 
observe it as a "supper" at all, Protestants in general selecting 
for convenience the noon hour instead of the evening. Some 



commemorate the Lord's death every Sunday, some once a 
month, and some once in three months. They seem to regard the 
time and frequency as a matter of indifference, and they might 
reason, If it is a good thing to do, why not do it often— even 
daily. To this, others would reply, and truly: It would lose much 
of its solemnity and force. And so it does as they now celebrate 
it. Those who celebrate every Sunday, mistake the record in 
Acts 2:42,46 and 20:7,11. They surely err in supposing these 
occasions to be the Lord's Supper. They undoubtedly refer to a 
common usage in the early church, of eating a plain meal 
together when they gathered every first day of the week from 
distant places, just as it is the custom now in country places, 
except that they all ate together, and made it more of a "love 
feast." These "feasts of charity," or love feasts, are referred to by 
Jude (verse 12), in which he shows that all who partook were 
not brethren indeed. The institution of these love-feasts was not 
by any command of our Lord, or of the apostles, but like the 
celebration of the first day of the week, seems to have been the 
spontaneous prompting of grateful hearts. The early church thus 
celebrated the resurrection of our Lord (not his death) every 
week, and the breaking of bread in their love-feast was probably 
a pleasant reminder of the fact that the Lord was made known to 
the disciples at Emmaus and on other occasions after his 
resurrection in the breaking of bread— at their ordinary lunch. 
(Luke 24:29,30,42; John 21:12,13.) They thus celebrated both 
his resurrection and the opening of their eyes to know him. But 
they neither used wine (no less important than the bread in the 
celebration of the Lord's Supper), nor did they call it the Lord's 
Supper, nor observe it with special solemnity, but rather with 
thankfulness and joy. "They did eat their meat with gladness and 
singleness of heart" "breaking bread from house to house," (Acts 
2:46,) and, for a time, daily. 

Those who celebrate the "supper" at noon on Sunday once a 
month, or once a quarter, have no plea for their custom except 
that St. Paul said, "As oft as ye do this," etc. (1 Cor. 11:23,25), 
which they think gives liberty for doing it when they please. On 
the contrary the apostle uses the word "As oft," in the sense of 
whenever. "Whenever ye do this," carries the mind to the 
context to see what is referred to. We find Paul in the context 
referring to the "same night in which he [our Lord] was 
betrayed," and the bread and wine there and then instituted by 
our Lord as his remembrancers, to take the place of the typical 
Passover eaten by the Jews. Paul wrote to those who well knew 
the Jewish custom and how often it was celebrated, so that "as 
oft," or whenever, to them signified each time, each anniversary. 

The Lord's Supper was designed to supplant the annual 
commemoration of the typical passing over of Israel's first-born, 
whose lives were saved through the blood of the typical lamb. 
Such an event could only be properly celebrated on its 
anniversary, which our Lord and his disciples and all the Jews 



strictly observed. They no more thought of celebrating it at any 
other time, than Americans think of celebrating the signing of 
their Declaration of Independence on any other day than the 
fourth of July. 

It was the custom of the early church to celebrate it, as we do, 
on the fourteenth day of the first month, Jewish time, as the 
Lord indicated; and though there was a great falling away from 
the original purity of faith, which commenced even in the days 
of the Apostles, this custom was still retained by some 
Christians down to the fourth century, when it was peremptorily 
abolished by the Council of Nice, when the great falling-away, 
predicted by the Apostles, had partially developed the great 
system of error afterward known as the Papacy. 

On this point we quote the following from Mosheim's Church 
History (see page 523). He says, "There arose toward the close 
of this [the second] century, between the Christians of Asia 
Minor and those of other parts, particularly such as were of the 
Roman church, a violent contention. ...The Asiatic Christians 
were accustomed to celebrate... the institution of the Lord's 
Supper and the subsequent death of the Redeemer, on the 
fourteenth day of the first Jewish month. ...This custom they 
stated themselves to have derived from the Apostles Philip and 
John." 

But let no one misunderstand us to teach, that those who have 
commemorated the Redeemer's death at inappropriate seasons 
are therefore condemned of our Lord. No, thank God, the 
Gospel church is not placed under Law, but under grace, in this 
as in every matter. And those who in heart sincerity have so 
partaken of the emblems of our Lord's body and blood, while 
they may suffer loss in the sense that the occasion by its too 
frequent remembrance has lost some of the power it was 
designed to have on their hearts, have nevertheless not been 
spurned by him whose sacrifice for sins they thus confessed. But 
surely, when the intent of our Lord's words is grasped, all the 
fully consecrated will gladly comply with his arrangement, 
assured that it is best and most appropriate; as well as most 
acceptable to him of whom it is a remembrancer. 

THE SYMBOLS CONSIDERED. 

Not only has the proper time been lost sight of, but the true 
meaning of the symbols, wine and unleavened bread, has also 
been obscured by the spiritual darkness of the "dark ages." 
Trinitarian errors, which in the third century were introduced 
into Christianity from heathen philosophy, have done much to 
warp and twist the minds of God's children, and to hinder clear 
views of the sacrifice which our Redeemer gave as our ransom 
price. (See Nov. '87 TOWER, on this point.) 



The typical lamb by which the Children of Israel foreshadowed 
Christ and the coming deliverance, (except the blood which was 
sprinkled upon the house as a protection,— an atonement) was 
eaten by all. So with the emblems by which we are instructed to 
remember the real lamb. The bread is to be eaten by all; the 
wine may only be partaken of by a few. The bread and wine 
symbolize the body and blood of our Lord. Our Lord as a man 
was the living bread [literally, bread of life] which came down 
from heaven to give life to the world. The illustration is perfect: 
Mankind is dying for want of life and needs some food so full of 
life-producing quality that it will arrest the wasting of death, and 
repair and restore to the original perfection lost in Adam. Men 
have sought panaceas, elixirs, life restorers, in every quarter,— in 
animal and vegetable food, in minerals, and in chemistry; but all 
in vain; no such "bread of life" has ever been found. But when 
men had for four thousand years sought in vain, the true bread of 
life came from heaven, of which, if a man eat (partake or 
appropriate to his use, as it is his privilege to do) he shall live 
forever. That is, If by faith in the means which God has 
provided to accomplish his redemption, he accepts the favor of 
life, he can have it on those terms, and those only. This our Lord 
symbolically termed eating his flesh. 

Notice how perfect is the illustration. The Son of God as a 
heavenly or spiritual being, as he was at first, was not bread for 
man, and had he given his spiritual body as bread, we of a 
different nature (human), could not have appropriated it, just as 
that which would nourish and perfect a tree (viz., air, moisture, 
and earth) would not perfect men because of a different nature. 
Man is of human or flesh nature; hence if the spiritual Son of 
God would give to dying men the bread of life, it must be flesh, 
full of life-giving nutriment. 

The preparation for this was the change of the Son of God from 
spirit to flesh. To this end he humbled himself, when he was 
"made flesh and dwelt among us." (John 1:14.) The flesh was to 
be the life-giving bread; and since he who had been in the 
heavenly or spirit state had become earthly or human, being 
made flesh, it is truly said that this bread came down from 
heaven, from the heavenly or spirit condition to the earthly or 
human nature. This is the bread of life of which a man may eat 
and not die.— John 6:50. 

We have now found the bread of life, but how shall we eat him? 
We cannot eat anything that is alive, nor would anything that 
dieth of itself [by disease] be fit for food. So if our Lord had 
died what is called a natural* death, it would have proved that 
he was a sinner like other men; for death is the penalty of sin, 
and hence to partake of him would have given no new life. So 
then we see that there was no way to give us this life-food or 
"bread of life" except by the sacrifice of the man Christ Jesus, 
who did not die because his life, like 



R1014:page4 

ours, was forfeited, but who gave himself a ransom, a 
corresponding price, a substitute for all- for Adam and all who 
lost 

R1015 : page 4 

life through him. His life in the flesh— his example and counsel, 
teachings, etc., could not give life any more than music would 
keep alive a starving man. We may study and try to follow his 
perfect example, but we cannot do it perfectly because we are 
dying and lack strength. We need life, life-producing food, and 
he became flesh, for the very purpose of providing us this life 
supply which we could get in no other way. 

So when speaking on the subject to his disciples, he told them 
that the killing of the lamb was needful, so that they could eat of 
him, saying, "It behooveth the son of man to suffer. " Had he 
remained with them in the flesh, their teacher, they would 
indeed have been greatly blessed, but could never have gotten 
life. Hence he said, "The Son of man goeth as it is written of 
him," and "It is expedient FOR YOU;" "for if I go not away (If I 
remain flesh, if I do not submit myself in sacrifice and thus carry 
out the Father's plan for your redemption), the Comforter will 
not come. " You cannot in any other way than by my sacrifice, 
and by partaking of me, escape from condemnation and come 
into harmony and acceptance with God, so as to be recognized 
of him as sons, and as such be granted life. 

So, then, it is a mistake to suppose that truth is the bread of life, 
and that the eating of truth will justify us, or give us a right to 
life. It is a mistake to suppose that to believe the sermon on the 
mount and other of our Lord's sayings would give life. Truths 
they were, and good for food after and with the Lamb, but 
INDIGESTIBLE without it. Those very truths were indigestible 
to many, and acted as emetics rather than as nourishing food, 
and "many went back and walked no more with the Lord." Even 
the twelve got little nourishment from our Lord's teachings until 
after the Lamb was slain, and they by faith had eaten of that life- 
giving food. Then, under the strength and vigor of the life, they 
were able to find sweetness and strength in all things whatsoever 
the Master had spoken unto them. The eating of the Lamb, by 
the new life which it brought, restored them again to fellowship 
with God; and receiving the adoption and spirit of sonship, they 
were thereby enabled to appreciate and appropriate to their 
strengthening, truths in general, as "meat in due season. " 

Our Lamb was slain for us, on our behalf, because he was the 
bread of which all must eat, to have life, and because we could 
not eat him until he gave himself. Now, what did he give, and 
what do we eat? We answer, his flesh. But what is meant by 
this, his flesh? We showed above, that he "became flesh," (John 
1:14) i.e., he became human. So then, to give his flesh, means to 



give himself, at that time a human being. Whatever he possessed 
therefore in the way of human rights and privileges, under God's 
law, he there resigned in our interest— that the human family 
which has no rights or privileges, having lost all those in Adam 
its representative, might receive back all of these rights and 
privileges and liberties. Adam's family was all in him when he 
sinned and lost life, and every right and privilege of sonship, and 
so we all are sharers in that one loss. So now corresponding full 
and sufficient rights belong to the new man, "the man Christ 
Jesus," who as a perfect and uncondemned being exchanged his 
higher rights for men's lower rights which Adam had forfeited. 
And when this one then gives himself and lays down all that he 
has (Matt. 13:44) in the interest and for the use of the 
condemned race, we see that the giving of his flesh for the life 
of the world (John 6:5 1) means the handing back to dying men 
of the life, liberties, and privileges lost. And the eating of his 
flesh would consequently mean, the appropriating to his own 
use by the eater, of all the rights, liberties, and life which the 
perfect sinless "man Christ Jesus" possessed,-no more, and no 
less. 

What he gave up when he died, is ours- it is free to every child 
of Adam. But it will give life, etc., only to such as eat, i.e., by 
faith appropriate, those rights and privileges, freely given unto 
us of God, through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. 

If a man becomes leprous, not only he, but all in him, i.e., all his 
unborn posterity are affected. So it was with Adam and his 
children: we were "born in sin" and under its penalty, death, as 
the natural law of our being. Now consider that if a medicine or 
bread of life, a sure cure for leprosy were provided, to do good, 
it must be received into the system and appropriated, else no 
cure would result. So it is with Christ and the condemned and 
dying sinner. Not only must the bread contain the elements he 
needs, and be made accessible to him, but he must eat, or by 
faith appropriate it, if he would be freed from his malady of sin 
and its curse of condemnation to death. And as each child born a 
leper would need to eat for himself, and the family could not all 
be cured by any one of them taking the medicine or life food, so 
it is with sinners, each must eat for himself of the life-giving 
flesh of the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the 
world. It is for every man; hence every sinner must have an 
opportunity to eat and live, and none can be cured and brought 
to life (perfection) without eating this bread of life. None can eat 
it ignorantly (though many eat its symbol ignorantly); hence 
none of the heathen have yet had a chance to eat and live, and 
since all must come to the knowledge of this truth, this of itself 
would be a proof of the judgment (trial) to come, in the great 
Millennial Day; for it must be testified to all IN DUE TIME (1 
Tim. 2:4-6) in order that all, if they will, may eat and live 
forever. Since only the few come to even an imperfect 
knowledge of the truth, in this age, it is evident that God's "due 



time" for spreading this great feast before the world, is "in the 
morning," in the Age of Restitution, the Millennium, when the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. -Hab. 2:14; Isa. 
25:6. 

In the Millennial age, men as they shall accept of Christ as 
God's lamb and their ransom price, will be permitted to partake 
of his perfections, physical, mental and moral; and as they do so, 
and conform to his teachings, they will gradually return to 
perfection, to all that was lost in Adam, attaining full perfection 
at the close of that age, or else for willful disobedience be 
entirely and forever cut off from life in the second death, for 
which there is no antidote, no bread of life, no cure. 

We, the church, who receive this bread of life now, and eat or 
appropriate it, do not experience a gradual restitution of our 
human powers to perfection, nor in any measure our restitution 
to human rights and privileges, etc. Ours is only reckoned, and 
not actual. By faith only, we can and do eat of the flesh of our 
Redeemer, accepting by faith (contrary to sight) human rights 
and liberties and life from the sacrifice made by our Lord. 
Mankind who will live in the next age will have sight as an aid 
to their faith; for they will feel their gradual physical 
improvement as they take the steps of faith and obedience. But 
none can walk by sight now, hence fewer and most select is the 
"little flock" now being chosen out from the world, to be the 
Bride and joint-heir of Christ in the Kingship and Priesthood of 
the age to come. To eat the Lamb we must realize his purity, his 
perfection, his spotlessness, and his RIGHT to all God's favors 
prepared for man. We must see, too, that he has sacrificed, 
surrendered up, all these human rights and privileges in order 
that all these blessings might be restored to the fallen and 
condemned race, and thus permit all to come back to a standing 
and fellowship with God, which he does not grant to condemned 
creatures. 

But why should any be permitted to eat thus of his flesh (his 
human perfections, rights, etc.) beforehand-before the general 
time for spreading the feast for all? Ah! there is a very precious 
truth there; there lies covered from view of the world "the 
exceeding riches of his grace, toward us who are in Christ 
Jesus." Let us look at it. 

The blood, symbolized by the wine, represents death; "the blood 
is the life" of anything; and when it is "shed," or taken from it, it 
implies the death of the creature. So the shed blood of Christ 
signifies the death of Christ-the life given up for the sins of the 
world. In the typical Passover, the Lamb was eaten, but the 
blood was not. No Israelite was allowed to eat blood. This was 
symbolic of how all are to eat the flesh of the Son of man but all 
are not to drink or partake of his death. Those to whom our Lord 
gave the wine as representative of his blood, were invited to 
partake of and share in his death, which was proper, because 



they were to be members of his body; and not only he, the Head, 
should taste death for every man, but we his body should be 
"made conformable to his death" (Phil. 3:10), and become dead 
with him. (Rom. 6:8.) The "cup" then is the symbol of death-by 
partaking of it (intelligently) we pledge our lives even unto 
death in the service of our Lord and Redeemer. Whether or not 
we shall be found worthy of restitution and lasting life depends 
on our eating (accepting and appropriating) his flesh; but 
whether we shall be found acceptable as members of his body, 
his bride and joint-heir, depends upon whether after eating his 
flesh by faith in the present age, we shall drink of his "cup," 
consecrate ourselves entirely to his service— unto death. 

This being true, how appropriate that the giving of the wine was 
after the eating of the bread, and to those only who had eaten it. 
This teaches, in harmony with all the Scriptures, that only those 
who are justified from all sin by faith in the merit and sacrifice 
of the Lamb of God (and no others) are invited to crucify their 
(justified) humanity and share in the afflictions of Christ in this 
age, and in his glory which shall follow in the 

R1016:page4 

Millennial age and the eternity beyond. 

Only those who both eat his flesh (appropriate his merits- 
justification) and drink his blood (share with him in his sacrifice 
by rendering their justified humanity a sacrifice to his service) 
dwell in him, as members of the one "body of Christ," as 
members of the "true vine." (John 6:56) Only such (verse 53) 
can have inherent life: that is, life independent of all conditions- 
Immortality. (See MILL. DAWN, VOL. I., Chap. X.) 

The balance of mankind, by eating (appropriating) the sacrificed 
rights of the "man Christ Jesus," obtain a dependent life, which 
will be supplied to the willing and obedient everlastingly. 

These must all be first brought to a knowledge of the Lord, of 
the sacrifice which he gave, and of the justification and 
restitution provided in it, and may then partake of it freely and 
live. Of such, it is written, "He that eateth of this bread (without 
sharing "the cup") shall live for ever," and "He that eateth me, 
even he shall live by me"-a dependent life, supplied to all who 
rely upon Christ, the life-giver, for it. The distinction is, that the 
Gospel church now being selected -the body of Christ-will, 
with the Head, have immortality, inherent life, and will be the 
source of supply to the world, who will come to this fountain for 
life, and live thereby. 

We notice also the statement of the apostle that "He that eateth 
and drinketh unworthily-not discerning the Lord's body-eateth 
and drinketh condemnation to himself." (1 Cor. 11:27-29.) The 
import of this is, that to all who fail to recognize Christ's 
sacrifice for their sins, the eating of those emblems implies their 



guilt as his murderers, in the same sense that the Jews cried out, 
"His blood be upon us and on our children. " As the Jews made 
themselves guilty of innocent blood (death), so do all who now 
by eating the emblems say, his blood is upon us— unless they 
discern the Lord's body and blood as their ransom. To all who 
do not recognize it as their ransom— it signifies condemnation as 
sharers of the guilt of the breaking of his body and shedding of 
his blood, seeing that to them it speaks no forgiveness— no 
remission of sins. 

The common translation improperly renders the above 
damnation, whereas it should be condemnation. Yet to the great 
mass of those who ignorantly do this unworthily, i.e., without 
properly recognizing the meaning of the emblems and the value 
of the Lord's death which they symbolize, there is no actual 
blood-guiltiness but merely a symbolic guilt. In symbol or figure 
they break the Lord's body and take his blood upon them. The 
symbol rightly understood speaks peace and forgiveness of sins, 
and fellowship with the Lamb, but not understood it could only 
be interpreted, under the Law, as a symbolic confession of 
murder. But as it is all symbolic, the condemnation could only 
be symbolic condemnation. Only such as come first to a 
knowledge of the ransom effected by the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world, can really come under the 
actual condemnation which the improper use of this symbol 
signifies. 

The drinking of the cup of suffering and death, for his sake-the 
sacrificing-must all be done in the present age. When the age of 
glory opens, all the sufferings of Christ will be in the past, both 
those of the Head and those of every member of his body. When 
the prophets spake of the sufferings of Christ and the glory that 
should follow (1 Pet. 1:11), they spake truly, of the entire Christ 
including the smallest and last member. When the glory ushers 
in, the drinking of the blood will be at an end, as well as all 
opportunity to share in that "high calling" as joint-heirs with 
Christ. Then the entire Christ of which our Lord is head, and we 
the members in particular, will have been broken and sacrificed, 
and the feeding of the multitude of earth will begin to be an 
actual fact. Restitution will then begin to be realized by 
mankind. We now have it imputed to us by faith, in order that in 

R1016:page5 

this time for sacrificing we may do so; for none can give himself 
a sacrifice with Christ, who has no right to life to surrender. 
Therefore we are first granted to partake of Christ's merits by 
faith, and by faith to find access to the Father, and acceptance in 
the Beloved, in order that we might receive the "high calling"; 
an invitation to become joint-sacrificers with Christ, and to 
drink of his cup, that we may also be joint-heirs of the glory to 
be revealed when the "body" is completed and the sacrificing 
over. 



To the consecrated, therefore, the emblems (bread and wine) are 
not only remembrancers of the Lord's sacrifice, but also of their 
own covenant to share the sacrifice with him, if by any means 
they might fulfill the conditions and be accounted worthy to be 
"made partakers of the divine nature," and to be with our Lord 
and Redeemer, his "joint-heirs" and co-workers in blessing all 
people. 

Paul calls our attention to this feature of the commemoration, 
saying: "The loaf which we break, is it not the communion 
[fellowship] of the body of Christ [the "little flock," the Church, 
of which our Lord is the head]? The cup of blessing which we 
bless, is it not the communion [fellowship] of the blood of 
Christ [the entire anointed company]? For we, though many 
[members], are one loaf and one body, for we all share in that 
one loaf."- 1 Cor. 10:15-17. 

All must eat of the flesh of our Lord Jesus: i.e., they must 
partake of those human rights and privileges which his sacrifice 
secured for all, either in this age by faith, or in the next age 
actually, else they will have no life-rights, either to make 
sacrifice of now, or to enjoy (without the privilege of sacrificing 
them) hereafter. So then we urge all believers to "DO THIS"; 
and to do it intelligently. While using the emblems, accept and 
apply and appropriate fully the justification from all sin and the 
right to life which God holds out through the Lamb of God, and 
in no other name or way. And especially let all believers who 
have been immersed with Christ into his death, and thus into 
membership in his "body" (Rom. 6:3,4), do this, remembering 
their justification through his blood and renewing their covenant 
to be dead with him as partakers of the new, the divine nature. 

So far as possible meet with such as you can recognize as 
fellow-members of the same body, and exclude no believer in 
the ransom. Arrange for the meeting long enough beforehand. It 
matters not which of your number shall pass the emblems, even 
Judas may have assisted at the first celebration. Remember that 
"all ye are brethren" and privileged to serve one another in any 
matter as you have ability and opportunity. In honor prefer one 
another; but do not allow false modesty to prefer tares above 
wheat among you. 

The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you all. May the occasion 
be one of great blessing and profit. 



*Really there is no such thing as natural death. In God's 
arrangement life is the natural condition and death comes as a 
violation of natural life,— as a consequence or penalty for 
disobedience, sin. However, natural death, may be considered an 
allowable expression when referring to the fallen, condemned 
race, because it is the natural result of sin, common to all human 
sinners. So our Lord could not have died by disease, etc., unless 



he had sinned, in which case his flesh would have been far from 
life-giving. Nor could his life be taken, except as he chose to 
give it as our ransom price, and that his flesh might impart life 
to us. 



R1020:page5 

"OUR lives should be like the days, more beautiful in the 
evening; or like the seasons, aglow with promise, and the 
autumn rich with golden sheaves, where good words and deeds 
have ripened on the field." 



R1020:page5 



As some rare perfume in a vase of clay 

Pervades it with a fragrance not its own, 

So when Thou dwellest in a mortal soul, 

All heaven's own sweetness seems around it thrown. 

The soul alone, like a neglected harp, 
Grows out of tune, and needs the hand Divine; 
Dwell Thou within it, tune and touch its chords, 
Till every note and string shall answer Thine. 

-Harriet Beecher Stowe. 



R1016:page5 

ABOUT HELL-CONTINUED. 



HELL IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

Having in our two previous issues examined the word sheol, the 
original and only word for hell in the Old Testament, and the 
word hades, most frequently rendered hell in the New 
Testament, we now complete this study by noticing every 
remaining instance in Scripture where the English word hell 
occurs. There are but two other words than hades, rendered hell 
in the New Testament, namely gehenna and tartaroo, which we 
will now consider in the order named. 

GEHENNA. 

This word occurs twelve times. It is the Grecian mode of 
spelling the Hebrew words which are translated "the valley of 
Hinnom. " This valley lay just outside the city of Jerusalem, and 
served the purposes of sewer and garbage burner to that city. 



The offal, garbage, etc., were emptied there and fires were kept 
continually burning there to consume utterly all things deposited 
therein, brimstone being added to assist combustion and insure 
complete destruction. But a living thing was never allowed to be 
cast into gehenna. The Jews were not permitted to torture any 
creature. 

When we consider that in the people Israel, God was giving us 
object lessons illustrating his dealings and plans, present and 
future, we should expect that this valley of Hinnom, or gehenna, 
would play its part, too in illustrating things future. We know 
that Israel's priesthood and temple illustrated the Royal 
Priesthood— the Christian church as it will be, the true temple of 
God— and we know that their city was a figure of the New 
Jerusalem, the seat of kingdom power, and center of authority— 
the city [government] of the Great King, Immanuel. We 
remember, too, that Christ's government is represented in the 
book of Revelation (Rev. 21:24-27), under the figure of a city- 
The New Jerusalem. There, after describing the class permitted 
to enter the privileges and blessings of that kingdom —the 
honorable and glorious, and all who have right to the trees of 
life,- we find it also declared that there shall not enter into it 
anything that defileth, or that worketh abomination, or lies; but 
only such as the Lamb shall write as worthy of life. This city 
full, representing the redeemed world in the end of the 
Millennium, was typified or represented in the earthly city, and 
the defiling, and abominable, etc., the class unworthy of life, 
which do not enter in, are represented by the refuse and the 
filthy lifeless carcasses cast into gehenna outside Jerusalem for 
utter destruction. Accordingly, we find it stated that those not 
found worthy of life, are to be cast into the fire (Rev. 20:15), fire 
here, as everywhere, being used as a symbol of destruction. 

Thus we see that while gehenna served a useful purpose to the 
city of Jerusalem as a place of garbage burning, it, like the city, 
illustrated the future dealing of God, when the refuse and impure 
elements will be forever destroyed and prevented from 
contaminating the holy and pure, after that age of judgment, or 
trial, has proved which are sheep and which are goats. 

Gehenna then was a type or illustration of the SECOND 
DEATH-final and complete destruction. Strictly speaking, none 
could be in any danger of the second death while as yet under 
the first, or Adamic death, and while as yet no ransom from it 
had been given. Consequently no one could have been liable to 
the second death before the coming of our Lord, who brought to 
light the plan of God (to be accomplished through Christ,) for 
the resurrection of all from the first death, and a second trial of 
all men individually for the eternal continuance of that life, by 
obedience to the law of Christ, the penalty of failure to comply 
with those just and righteous conditions being the second death- 
condemnation a second time to death, for failure the second 



time, and this time individually. Nor is the world in general now 
liable to this penalty: none but consecrated believers could 
possibly incur it yet; because no others have escaped (even 
reckonedly) the condemnation that is on the world-the first 
death, for Adam's sin. The consecrated have escaped it 
reckonedly, the sin of Adam being no longer imputed to them. 
(Rom. 8:1; 4:6-8.) 

But remember that Israel, though they were not, and could not 
be actually ahead of other men in this matter, yet for the purpose 
of being used as types of the future of God's dealing, they were 
treated typically as though the ransom had been given before 
they left Egypt, though only a typical lamb had been slain. 
When Jerusalem was built, and the temple, representative of the 
true temple, the church, and the true kingdom as it will be 
established by Christ in the Millennium, that people typified the 
world in the next age. Their priests represented the glorified 
Royal Priesthood, and their Law and its demands of perfect 
obedience, represented the Law and conditions under the New 
Covenant, to be brought into operation for the blessing of all the 
obedient, and for the condemnation of all who, when granted 
fullest opportunity, will not submit to the righteous ruling and 
laws of the Great King. 

Seeing then that Israel's condition, etc., was a figure of the 
world's condition in the coming age, how appropriate that we 
should find the valley or abyss, gehenna, a figure of the second 
death, the utter destruction during the coming age of all that is 
unworthy of preservation, and how aptly, too, is the symbol, 
"lake of fire burning with brimstone," (Rev. 19:20) drawn from 
this same gehenna, or valley of Hinnom, burning continually 
with brimstone, the deadliness of brimstone adding to the force 
of the symbol fire, to express the utter and irrevocable 
destruction of the second death. How reasonable, too, to expect 
that Israel would have courts and judges resembling or 
prefiguring such courts and judges in the next age; and that the 
sentences of those (figurative) courts of that (figurative) people 
under those (figurative) laws, to that (figurative) abyss, outside 
that (figurative) city, would largely correspond to the real 
sentences of the real courts and judges in the next age. If these 
points are kept in mind, they will greatly assist us in 
understanding the words of our Lord in reference to gehenna; 
for though the literal valley just at hand was named and referred 
to, yet his words carry with them lessons concerning the future 
age, and the antitypical gehenna— the second death. 

MATT. 5:21, 22. 

"Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, 'Thou shalt 
not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be amenable to the 
judges:' but I say unto you, that whosoever is ANGRY with his 
brother [without a cause] shall [future-under the regulations of 



the real kingdom] be amenable to the judges: and whosoever 
shall say to his brother Raca [villain] shall be in danger of the 
High Council: but whosoever shall say 'Thou fool' shall be in 
danger of hell [gehenna] fire. " 

To understand these references to council and judges and 
gehenna, all should know something of Jewish regulations. The 
"Court of Judges" consisted of seven men [or twenty-three, -the 
number is in dispute] which had power to judge for some classes 
of crimes. The High Council, or Sanhedrin, consisted of 
seventy-one men of presumed learning and ability. This 
constituted the highest court of the Jews, and its supervision was 
over the gravest offences. The most serious punishment was 
death, but certain very obnoxious criminals were subjected to an 
indignity after death, being refused burial and cast with the 
carcasses of dogs, the city refuse, etc., into gehenna, to be 
consumed there. The object of this burning in gehenna was to 
make the crime and the criminal detestable in the eyes of the 
people, and signified that the culprit was a hopeless case. It must 
be remembered that Israel hoped for a resurrection from the 
tomb, and hence they were particular in caring for the corpses of 
their dead. Not realizing the fullness of God's power, they 
thought he needed their assistance to that extent. (Exod. 13:19; 
Heb. 11:22; Acts 7:15,16.) Hence the destruction of the body in 
gehenna after death implied to them the loss of hope of future 
life by a resurrection. Thus it represented the second death in the 
same figurative way that they as a people represented, or 
illustrated, a future order of things under the new covenant. 

Now notice that our Lord in the above words pointed out to 
them, that their construction of the Law, severe though it was, 
was far below the real import of that Law, as it "shall be" 
interpreted under the real kingdom and judges which theirs only 
typified. He shows that the command of their Law, "Thou shalt 
not kill," reached much farther than they supposed, and that 
malicious anger and vituperation "shall be" considered a 
violation of that Law, under the "new covenant," and that such 
as under the favorable conditions of that new age shall not 
reform so thoroughly as to fully observe this law, would be 
counted worthy of that which the gehenna near them typified, - 
the second death. However, the force and severity of that Law 
will be enforced only in proportion as the discipline, advantages, 
and assistance of that age shall enable each to comply with it. 

The same thought is continued in 

MATT. 5:27-30. 

Here again the operation of the Law under the New Covenant is 
contrasted with its operation under the old, or Jewish covenant, 
and the lesson of self-control is urged by the statement that it is 
far more profitable that men should refuse to gratify depraved 
desires (though they were dear to us as a right eye, and as 



convenient and almost indispensable as a right hand,) than that 
they should gratify these, and lose, in the second death, the 
future life provided through the atonement, for all who will 
return to perfection, holiness, and God. 

These expressions of our Lord not only serve to show us the 
perfection (Rom. 7:12,) of the Law, and how fully it will be 
enforced and defined in the Millennium, but they served as a 
lesson also to the Jews, who previously saw, through Moses' 
commands, only the crude exterior of the law of God. If they 
had found it difficult in their fallen state to keep inviolate even 
the surface significance of the Law, they must now see the 
impossibility of their keeping the finer meaning of the Law, 
revealed by Christ. Had they understood and received his 
teaching fully, they would have cried out, Alas ! if God judges us 
thus, by the very thoughts and intents of the heart, we are all 
unclean, 

R1016 : page 6 

all undone, and can hope for naught but condemnation to 
gehenna (to utter destruction, as brute beasts). They would have 
cried, Show us a greater priesthood than that of Aaron, a priest 
and teacher able to fully appreciate the Law, and fully able to 
appreciate and sympathize with our fallen state and inherited 
weaknesses, and let Him offer for us "better sacrifices," and 
apply to us the needed greater forgiveness of sin, and let him as 
a great physician heal us and restore us, so that we can obey the 
perfect Law of God from our hearts. Then they would have 
found all their needs in Christ. 

But this lesson they did not learn, for the ears of their 
understanding were "dull of hearing;" hence they knew not that 
God had already prepared the very priest, and sacrifice, and 
teacher, and physician they needed,— who in due time redeemed 
those under the typical law, as well as all not under it, and who 
also "in due time," shortly, will begin his restoring work - 
restoring sight to the blind eyes of their understanding, and 
hearing to their deaf ears. Then the "vail shall be taken away"- 
that vail of ignorance, pride and human wisdom, which Satan 
now uses to blind the world to God's true law and true plan of 
salvation in Christ. 

And not only did our Lord's teaching here show the Law of the 
new covenant, and teach the Jew a lesson, but it is of benefit to 
the Gospel church, his body, also. For though we are not under 
the Law as a covenant (as the Jews were typically, and as the 
world in the next age will be actually,) but under grace [special 
favor], yet our favor is more clearly seen by reason of our Lord's 
words here. In proportion as we learn the exactness of God's 
Law, and what would constitute perfection under its 
requirements, we see that our Redeemer was perfect, and that 
we, totally unable to commend ourselves to God as keepers of 



that law, can find acceptance with the Father only under the 
merit of our Redeemer, while none can be of that "body," 
covered by the robes of his righteousness, except the 
consecrated who endeavor to do only those things well pleasing 
to God, which includes the avoiding of sin to the extent of 
ability. Yet their acceptability with God rests not on their 
perfection, but upon the perfection of Christ, so long as they 
abide in him. These, nevertheless, are benefited by a clear 
insight into the perfect law of God, even though they are not 
dependent on the perfect keeping of it. They delight to do God's 
will to the extent of their ability, and the better they know his 
perfect law, the better they are able to rule and conform 
themselves in harmony with it. So, then, to us also the Lord's 
words have a lesson of value. 

The point, however, to be noticed clearly, is the mistake 
commonly made, of supposing the gehenna which the Jews 
knew, and of which our Lord spoke to them, to be a lake of fire 
to be kept burning to all eternity, into which all would be cast 
who get "angry with a brother" and call him a fool, or who "look 
upon a woman to lust. " Nay, the point is that "gehenna" 
symbolizes the second death —utter, complete and everlasting 
destruction. This is clearly shown by its being contrasted with 
life as its opposite. "It is better for thee to enter into life, halt, or 
maimed, than otherwise be cast into gehenna. " It is better that 
you should deny yourself sinful gratifications, than that you 
should completely lose all future life, and perish in the second 
death. 

MATT. 10:28, AND LUKE 12:5. 

"Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the 
soul: but rather fear him which is able to DESTROY both soul 
and body in hell" [gehenna]. See also another account of the 
same discourse by Luke— 12:4,5. 

Here our Lord points out to his followers the great cause they 
have for bravery and courage under the most trying 
circumstances. They were to expect persecution, and to have all 
manner of evil spoken against them falsely, for his sake, and the 
sake of the "good tidings" of which he made them the ministers 
and heralds; yea, the time would come, that whosoever would 
kill them would think that he did God a service. Their 
consolation and reward for this, was to come not in the present 
life, but in a life to come. They were assured, and they believed, 
that he had come to give his life a ransom for many, and that all 
in their graves must in consequence, in due time, hear the 
Deliverer's voice and come forth, either to reward, if their trial 
was passed in this life successfully, or to trial, as it must be, to 
the great majority who had not yet come to the necessary 
knowledge and opportunity constituting the new trial, secured 
for all by the ransom-sacrifice. 



Our Lord here speaks of the present life and the life to come 
(which he was about to secure for all by the ransom-sacrifice he 
was giving); he calls that future condition the real soul or being 
[soul signifies being], while the present life [which is really a 
dying, rather than a living state,] he designates or indicates by 
the word "body." His bidding then, is, fear not them which can 
terminate the present [dying] life in these poor dying bodies, 
which, full of frailties and weaknesses and aches, you got from 
dying Adam. Care little for it, its food, its clothing, its pleasures, 
in comparison with that future existence or being which God has 
provided for you, and which, if secured, may be your portion 
forever. Fear not the threats, or looks, or acts of men, whose 
power can extend no farther than the present being, who can 
harm and kill these bodies, but can do no more. Rather have 
respect and deference to God, with whom are the issues of life 
everlasting— fear him who is able to DESTROY both the present 
dying existence and the future everlasting existence, in gehenna- 
-the second death. 

Here it is conclusively shown that gehenna, as a figure, 
represented the second death— the utter destruction which must 
ensue in the case of all who, after having received fully the 
opportunities of a future being or existence through our Lord's 
sacrifice, prove themselves unworthy of God's gift, and refuse to 
accept it, by refusing obedience to God's just requirements. For 
it does not say that God will preserve soul or body in gehenna, 
but that he can and will destroy both in it. Thus we are taught 
that any who are condemned to the second death, are hopelessly 
and forever blotted out of existence. 

MATT. 18:9; MARK 9:43-47. 

[Since these two refer to the same discourse, we quote from 
Mark; remarking that verses 44, and 46, and part of 45 are not 
found in the oldest Greek MSS. though verse 48, which reads 
the same, is in all manuscripts. We quote only what is in the 
ancient MS.] "If thy hand offend thee cut it off: it is better for 
thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into 
gehenna, into the fire that never shall be quenched. And if thy 
foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter halt into 
life than having two feet to be cast into gehenna. And if thine 
eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter into the 
kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast 
into gehenna, where the worm dies not and the fire is not 
quenched. " 

All must agree with the prophet, after reading the above, that our 
Lord opened his mouth in figures and obscure sayings. (Psa. 
78:2; Matt. 13:35.) No one for a moment supposes that our Lord 
advised the people to mutilate their bodies by cutting off their 
limbs, or gouging out their eyes. Nor does he mean us to 
understand that the injuries and disfigurements of the present 



life will continue beyond the grave, when we shall "enter into 
life. " The Jews whom he addressed must have understood him 
better than many to-day; because at that time the Jews had no 
conception of a place of everlasting torment, and knew the word 
gehenna to refer to the valley outside their city, which was not a 
place of torment, (nor a place where any living thing was cast,) 
but a place for the utter destruction of whatever might be cast 
into it; so that when they saw the Lord's expression regarding 
limbs and eyes to be figurative, they knew that the gehenna 
mentioned was not their valley of destruction, but a destruction 
which it prefigured or illustrated. 

The Lord meant simply this: The future life which God has 
provided for sin-cursed, defiled and condemned man, is of 
inestimable value. It will richly pay you to make any sacrifice to 
receive and enjoy that life. Should it even cost an eye, a hand or 
a foot, so that to all eternity you should be obliged to endure the 
loss of these, yet it would be cheap at even that great cost. That 
would be better far than to retain your members and lose all in 
gehenna. Doubtless, too, the hearers drew the lesson as 
applicable to all the affairs of life, and understood the Master to 
mean that it would richly repay them to deny themselves many 
comforts and pleasures and tastes, dear as a right hand, precious 
as an eye, and serviceable as a foot, rather than by gratification 
to forfeit the life to come and be utterly destroyed in gehenna- 
the second death. 

But now what about the worms and unquenchable fire? 

We answer, In the literal gehenna, which is the basis of our 
Lord's illustration, the bodies of animals, etc., frequently fell 
upon ledges of rocks and not into the fire kept burning below; 
thus exposed, these would breed worms and be destroyed, as 
completely and as surely as those which burned. No one was 
allowed to disturb this valley's contents, hence the worm and the 
fire between them completed the work of destruction-the fire 
was not quenched and the worms died not. This would not imply 
a never-ending fire, nor immortal worms-the thought is that the 
worms do not die off and leave the carcasses there, but continue 
and complete the work of destruction. So with the fire also-if 
not quenched, it will burn on until all is consumed, just as we 
might say if a house were on fire which could not be controlled 
or quenched, but burned until the building was destroyed -it 
would be an "unquenchable fire. " 

Our Lord wished to impress the thought of the completeness and 
finality of the second death. All who go into the second death 
will be thoroughly and completely and forever destroyed; no 
ransom will ever be given again; there will be no occasion for 
any, for none worthy of life will be cast therein-but only those 
who love unrighteousness after coming to the knowledge of the 
truth. 



Not only in the above instances is the second death pointedly 
illustrated by gehenna, but it is evident that the same Teacher 
used the same figure to represent the same thing, in the symbols 
of Revelation, though there it is not called gehenna, but a "lake 
of fire." Its use in Revelation shows that the time when the 
destruction, or second death, symbolized by the fire, will 
"consume the adversaries," will be during the Millennial age, 
and chiefly toward its close, when the sheep [the meek and good 
class,] will be separated from the goats [the froward and 
intractable class of mankind]. Then the goat class- with their 
"father, the devil," whose image of sin, pride and rebellion they 
retain and love, in spite of every favor and knowledge and 
opportunity granted them- will be cast into the "lake of fire"- 
the "second death," "everlasting destruction," the reality 
prefigured in gehenna. 

The same valley was once before used as the basis of a 
discourse, by the Prophet Isaiah (Isa. 66:24). Though he gives it 
no name, he describes it, and all should notice that he speaks, 
not as some with false ideas might expect, of billions in flames 
and torture, but of the carcasses of those who transgressed 
against the Lord, who are thus represented as utterly destroyed 
in the second death. 

The two verses preceding show the time, and it is in perfect 
harmony with the symbols of Revelation: it is in the new 
dispensation of the Millennium, in the "new heavens and new 
earth" condition of things. 

GEHENNA OCCURS BUT ONCE MORE 

-JAMES 3:6. 

"So [important] is the tongue among our members, that it 
defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course of nature 
when it is set on fire of gehenna. " 

Here, in strong symbolic language, the apostle points out the 
great and bad influence of an evil tongue— a tongue set on fire 
[figuratively] by gehenna [figurative]. For a tongue to be set on 
fire of gehenna, signifies that a tongue may be set going in evil 
by a perverse disposition, self-willed, selfish, hateful, malicious, 
the sort of dispositions which, in spite of knowledge and 
opportunity, are like those which, unless controlled and 
reformed, will be counted worthy to be destroyed— the class for 
whom "second death," the real "lake of fire," the real "gehenna," 
is intended. One in that attitude may by his tongue kindle a great 
fire, a destructive disturbance, which, wherever it has contact, 
will work evil in the entire course of nature. 



TARTAROO RENDERED HELL. 

The Greek word tartaroo occurs but once in the New 
Testament, and is translated hell. It is found in 2 Pet. 2:4, which 
reads thus:— 

"God spared not the angels who sinned, but cast [them] down to 
hell [tartaroo] and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be 
reserved unto judgement. " 

Having examined every other word rendered hell in the Bible, 
and all the texts in which they occur, we conclude the subject 
with this, which is the only instance in which the word tartaroo 
occurs in the Scriptures. In the above text, all the words shown 
in italic type are translated from the one Greek word tartaroo. 
Evidently the translators were at a loss how to translate the 
word, but concluded they knew all about where the evil angels 
must be, according to "orthodoxy," and so they made bold to put 
them into hell, though it took six words to twist the idea into the 
shape they had predetermined it must take. 

The word tartaroo, used by Peter, very closely resembles 
tartarus, a word used in Grecian mythology as the name for a 
dark abyss or prison. But the word tartaroo 

R1016:page7 

seems to refer more to an act, than to a place. The fall of the 
angels which sinned was from honor and dignity, into 
condemnation and dishonor. Hence we prefer to translate the 
sentence thus: "God spared not the angels who sinned but 
degraded them and delivered them into chains of darkness. "—2 
Pet. 2:4. 

This certainly agrees with the facts known to us through the 
Scriptures; for these fallen spirits frequented the earth in the 
days of our Lord and the apostles at least. Hence they were not 
down in some place, but down in the sense of being degraded 
from former honor and liberty, and restrained under darkness, as 
by a chain. Whenever these fallen spirits, in spiritualistic 
seances, manifest their powers through Mediums, pretending to 
be dead human beings whom they simulate, they must always do 
their work in the dark, because darkness is the chain by which 
they are bound UNTIL the great Millennial day of judgment. 
Whether this implies that in the immediate future they shall be 
able to materialize, etc., in daylight, is difficult to determine. If 
so, it would greatly increase Satan's power to blind and deceive 
for a short season-until the Sun of Righteousness has fully 
risen. 

Thus we close our investigation of the Bible's use of the word 
hell. Thank God, we find no such place of everlasting torture as 
the creeds and hymn45ooks, and many pulpits, erroneously 
teach. Yet we have found a hell, sheol, hades, to which all were 
condemned through Adam's sin, and from which all are 



redeemed by our Lord's death; and that hell is the tomb-the 
death condition. And we find another hell [gehenna-the second 
death— utter destruction] brought to our attention as the final 
penalty upon all, who after being redeemed and brought to the 
full knowledge of the truth, and to full ability to obey it, shall 
yet choose death by choosing a course of opposition to God and 
righteousness. And our hearts say Amen. 

True and righteous are thy ways, thou King of nations. Who 
shall not venerate thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? For thou 
art entirely holy. And all nations shall come and worship before 
thee, because thy righteous dealings are made manifest. 



R1016:page7 



HOW SHALL WE BURY OUR DEAD? 

DEAR SISTER RUSSELL:-I hope you will find time to look 
over and answer this suggestion which mother and I have been 
talking over. My mother is old, will be 80 years of age in 
February, is feeble, and is liable to be taken from us any time. 
God seems to have spared her all these years to be called out of 
Babylon, and to see his glorious light shine. It was so plain to 
her, when the truth was presented to her; it was of a truth meat 
in due season. 

All of our kinsmen are strictly orthodox, and at my mother's 
funeral they will have some one of the shepherds of Babylon, to 
preach her funeral sermon, and I will not have it that way, if I 
can get you to comply with my mother's wish. I want to have 
this all fixed while my mother is here with me. I want you to 
write her funeral sermon, just as if she had written it herself. 

We would write it ourselves, but we are only babes in Christ. I 
know if you will do it, it will be all right. So when the preacher 
comes I will present this written sermon to him, and request him 
to read this— my mother's request, and to have no other services. 

I do not want to delay having it done, for mother wishes to see 
and read it, and to sign it with her own hand. Will you comply 
with this my wish and mother's? Although there are but few of 
the nominal church people who come to see us of late— for they 
think we are crazy or something worse— nevertheless they will 
come to mother's funeral, and I think by so doing I will let them 
know what my mother did believe and also give them some truth 
they never heard before. I leave it to you to select the text. 
Hoping you will not deny us this favor, I close with love from 
mother and self. 

R1017:page7 

In reply to this letter and other inquiries of a similar character 
we submit the following suggestions. 



Death, under whatever circumstances it makes its approach, is a 
grim monster from which we instinctively shrink. Yet to those 
instructed out of the word of God, it loses much of its terror. The 
nominal church, and the world under its influence, have one 
common hope and fear concerning death. They dread it, not only 
because it is the severing of cherished earthly ties, but because 
of their fear of eternal misery, which they have been taught to 
believe may follow it. But while they believe that eternal 
torment is the portion of the large majority of mankind, in 
almost every individual case their human sympathies and 
reasonings get the better of their theology and their fears, and a 
little ray of hope is kindled, based not upon the knowledge of 
our Heavenly Father's gracious provisions for all, but merely 
upon their own human sympathies. 

Yet such a hope is so uncertain that often great distress of mind 
is experienced. They have really no hope, as a sure, steadfast 
anchor to the soul in such an hour. 

But with those who know our Father's plans, how different is the 
feeling with which they look upon the faces of their dead! There 
is, of course, the pang of severed ties, which leaves the 
heartache and wrings our tears, even though we know, like 
Martha, that they shall rise again; and the sympathizing tears of 
Jesus on that occasion show that such grief is not to be 
condemned. But at such times we sorrow not as those who have 
no hope, nor even as those whose hope is vague and indefinite. 
We know that already we are in the early hours of the glorious 
day which is shortly to bring release to the groaning creation; 
that the Life-Giver is already present; and that preparations are 
now being made to bring the dead ones back under more 
favorable conditions. And we would not, if we could, have them 
brought back one day sooner than our Father sees best. 

We see that natural men who die are simply being hidden in the 
grave until the wrath upon the nations be overpast (Job 14:13), 
that they are waiting for the dawn of the great Lord's Day-the 
Millennium, and that the saints who now die in the Lord do not 
sleep for a moment, but are changed instantly, to the likeness of 
their Lord, and made ready for the great work of restitution just 
before them. Surely then WE should not sorrow as others who 
have no such assurance. We may rejoice even in the midst of 
tribulation, and in everything give thanks. 

How shall we bury our dead? is a question asked by some who 
have come out of the various sects, and who feel that the old 
ceremonies on such occasions are not consistent with God's 
truth. 

As to how the dead body shall be disposed of, is a matter of no 
consequence to the dead, but the proper disposal of the remains 
of our departed friends is a mark of our respect and affection. 
The prevailing customs among various people have much to do 



with individual ideas of propriety on such occasions; and these 
are largely influenced by the prevailing religious beliefs and the 
hopes which they inspire for the future. 

The modern Jews believe that the resurrection will take place in 
Canaan, and hence the desire of many of them is to die there, 
and often some of the sacred soil is strewn about the body of the 
deceased. The Romanist, believing in purgatory, and in the 
power of the Priest to ameliorate the condition of the dead, 
thought to be conscious in purgatory, thinks it necessary to have 
masses for the dead, to have the dead body sprinkled with holy 
water, and to bury in consecrated ground. And Protestants, 
believing as they do in the doctrine of eternal torment for all 
who are not Christians, look anxiously to Protestant clergymen 
to console them with the thought that there is some hope in the 
case of their departed friends, whether or not their faithfulness to 
God appeared in their lives. And even the world, under the 
influence of these teachings, would not consider their friends 
decently buried if a minister did not come to preach a funeral 
sermon, and to give the idea to those assembled, that the virtues 
of the deceased would sufficiently overbalance his sins, so as to 
secure for him an escape from eternal woe, especially if his 
name happened to be on a church roll. 

The church nominal has a strong hold upon the people, in this 
and other public sentiments, created by the claims of the class 
which styles itself The Clergy. Many say, if we leave the sects 
to which we now are joined and recognize only the one, true 
church, "whose names are written in heaven," who will bury our 
dead? who will administer the ordinances of baptism? who will 
administer the elements of the Lord's Supper? etc. 

To such we would say, that the clergy of the nominal church is a 
self-appointed class, claiming authority and power not 
scripturally vested in them more than in all the saints. The 
commission to preach the gospel is given to every consecrated 
child of God. -See Isaiah 61:1. The humblest are preachers 
divinely authorized now, as in the early church. No priest is 
needed to do for the brethren those simple offices which any one 
of them may perform for another. We have shown through the 
TOWER that their services are not needed either in the case of 
Baptism, or the celebrating of the Lord's Supper. Neither are 
they necessary for the burial of our dead. Nowhere in the 
writings of the apostles is there the least intimation that any of 
these services must or should be performed by a "clerical" class. 
On the contrary, "all ye are brethren" and may serve one 
another, except in marrying, which by civil law is taken out of 
your hands. Why, we ask, should any of those who recognize 
the errors of Babylon, call in her self-constituted "clergy" to 
serve them, when a brother or sister can be had to serve them 
better. Especially in the burying of your dead, how inconsistent 
and foolish it would be to call in those who are strangers to our 



grander hopes, to offer to us at such an hour the poor 
consolations of ignorance, or at least of doubt and uncertainty, 
or the vague fancies of their own imaginations? Rather be 
guided in such matters by reason, in view of the teaching of 
God's Word. 

Remembering that the dead are past our doing for them, let such 
opportunities as funeral occasions furnish be improved for the 
advantage of the living. Friends come together on such 
occasions to express their sympathy with the bereaved, and to 
show their respect for the dead, and they are generally in a more 
impressible frame of mind than usual. Here is a most favorable 
opportunity to impress the truth, an opportunity which should 
never be lost where we have the privilege of controlling or 
influencing the arrangements. 

We would suggest here a simple line of thought which any 
brother or sister might present on such an occasion. From 
whatever standpoint we speak, the object should be to briefly 
make clear, First-the reality of death— that it is not life in any 
sense, but the cessation of life; and that it is not a blessing, but a 
curse pronounced against the race, as the penalty for sin; 
Secondly-that the only hope of the race is in a resurrection, in 
being created again, by the same power that first called us into 
existence; Thirdly— that an awakening from death, and an 
individual opportunity of retaining life, is secured for every 
human being by the death of Christ; Fourthly-that the restored 
life may be eternal, on the original conditions of perfect 
obedience, when perfect obedience is made possible to all. 

And if the deceased is one of the consecrated, whom you have 
reason to believe has been "faithful unto death," it may be 
shown that such are now— since 1878— promised an immediate 
entrance into the reward of our high calling, since it is written, 
"Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from 
HENCEFORTH." 

For example, let us take for the text of such a discourse, which 
must necessarily be brief, the story of Lazarus' death and 
resurrection. 

Read John 11:1-14 slowly, giving special emphasis to verses 11- 
14. Then comment somewhat as follows: Here we have the 
unmistakable fact of death, and our Lord's authority for calling it 
a sleep. It is actually death, but it was likened to a sleep in view 
of the resurrection. But what is actual death? Let Job tell us. He 
says, "Now shall I sleep in the dust, and thou shalt seek me in 
the morning [The Millennial morning when the night of death 
and weeping is past] and I shall not be;" that is, I shall not exist, 
having been destroyed. (Job 7:21.) Nevertheless, although he 
thus realized death to be destruction, he expresses his hope of a 
resurrection, saying, "All the days of my appointed time will I 



wait till my change come. Thou shalt call and I will answer thee. 
Thou wilt have a desire to the work of thine hands. "-14:14-15. 

If Job is not in existence, yet answers to the Lord's call, the call 
must signify a re-creation— a call into being again— a 
resurrection. No other meaning could reasonably attach to such 
language. The Psalmist adds his testimony to the same thought, 
saying, "Thou turnest man to destruction [to death] and sayest, 
Return, ye children of men. For a thousand years in thy sight are 
but as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the night. 
[The lapse of time between death and the awakening is nothing 
to the dead when it is past, since they are entirely unconscious of 
it.] Thou earnest them away as with a flood; they are as asleep. 
In the morning they are like grass which groweth up. In the 
evening it is cut down and withered." (Psa. 90:3-6.) So brief is 
his present existence. Thus Job and David agree: the one says, 
when dead, "I shall 

R1018:page7 

not be:" the other says death is "destruction:" and both, like 
Jesus, liken it to a sleep, because there is to be an awakening, a 
resurrection. 

God meant no pleasant, agreeable thing when he pronounced 
death as a curse, a penalty for sin. The Scriptures, throughout, 
represent it as an enemy (1 Cor. 15:26.) but, thank God, as an 
enemy from which there is at an appointed time to be a grand 
release, a resurrection, accomplished by him who redeemed us. 

The faith of some seems to stagger at this promise of God when 
they come to view death in its true character. If death 

R1018:page8 

means non-existence, destruction, as the Scriptures affirm, then 
how, say they, is a resurrection possible? But Paul asks, "Why 
should it be thought a thing incredible with you that God should 
raise the dead?" (Acts 26:8). And he shows clearly that he 
understood death to be destruction, saying, that if there were no 
resurrection those who had fallen asleep in Christ were perished, 
and the hope of the church was vain.-l Cor. 15:15-18. 

When God makes a promise there is no room for doubt. And 
those who have the faith of John (Matt. 3:9), who believed that 
God could of the stones raise up children unto Abraham, are 
also able to believe that he can resurrect, or create again, that 
which was once destroyed. 

A single thoughtful glance at the plan of redemption assures us 
beyond a doubt of a resurrection- "both of the just and the 
unjust," as our Lord declared. (Acts 24:15; John 5:28,29.) For 
we read that "As in Adam all die, even so in [or, by] Christ shall 
all be made alive," (1 Cor. 15:22,) and He "gave himself a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due time. " 



But when will this due time come? Peter answers (Acts 3:21,) 
that it will be at the second advent of Christ- "whom the heaven 
must receive UNTIL the times of restitution of all things." The 
restitution, or restoring of all things, is the object of his coming. 
While in God's arrangement it will require a thousand years to 
restore the race to its original perfection, the awakening from 
death is necessarily a first part of this restitution work. 

Although the race was redeemed nearly nineteen centuries ago, 
and Christ has not yet taken his purchased possession, this does 
not argue against the promise; for it is to be fulfilled at the time 
appointed -when Christ takes his great power and begins his 
reign, and the present powers of earth have passed away. 

Job says, "O that thou wouldst hide me in the grave, that thou 
wouldst keep me secret until thy wrath be past, that thou 
wouldst appoint me a set time and remember me. " And again he 
says, "So man lieth down and riseth not till the heavens be no 
more: They shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep." 
(14:12.) The present order of things, or dominion of earth, is 
symbolically termed the heavens. The order of things that now 
obtains in the world must give place to the kingdom of Christ, 
the "new heavens." And under the glorious privileges and 
opportunities of the Millennial reign of Christ, the dead shall be 
awakened and brought forth to share its advantages, which, if 
properly improved, will lead to life eternal. The restored life will 
be eternal on the original condition of perfect obedience to God. 
And perfect obedience will be possible to all when fully 
restored. 



If we have reason to believe that the deceased was one of the 
"elect," "little flock," we might refer to his hopes and their 
realization somewhat as follows: 

But we are taught, also, that there are to be various orders in the 
resurrection— a first or chief resurrection, as well as a general 
resurrection. And it is written, "Blessed and holy is he that hath 
part in the first resurrection. " Such are those believers only, who 
are entirely consecrated to God, and faithful unto death. Such 
are to be joint-heirs with Christ, kings and priests unto God, and 
shall reign with Christ a thousand years, sharing with him in the 
great work of restoring all things. The resurrection of this class 
is first, not only in point of time, but also in point of importance. 
Such was the hope for which our (brother or sister) lived for the 
last-years and such the hope in which he died. 

It is no vain thing to serve the Lord with the whole heart. Such 
shall reap a glorious reward with which the light afflictions of 
the present time are not worthy of comparison. Lukewarm 
service is an abomination in the sight of Him who readeth the 
heart; while even the imperfect service of those whose hearts are 
fully set to do his will, is well pleasing unto God. And the Lord, 



who discerneth the thoughts and intents of the heart, will make 
no mistake, nor will he be slack concerning his promises. 
Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it. (1 Thes. 
5:24.) Let each lay well to heart the solemn lessons of God's 
Word and rest in implicit faith in its sure fulfillment. 



It would be appropriate also, if the circumstances should 
warrant it, to refer briefly to the general lesson taught by such an 
occasion to all. How that this life is the time in which our love 
for God, for his truth, and for our fellow men, can take an active 
form and display itself in deeds of self-sacrifice, whose sweet 
incense will endure when life is gone and precede us into the life 
to come. Appropriate words of sympathy for the bereaved ones, 
reminding them of God's care and love and protection, will 
suggest themselves according to the varying circumstances. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R1018:page8 

DYING TESTIMONIES. 

Some have inquired if we know of any of the saints now dying 
in hope of an immediate awakening in our Lord's likeness. 

In reply we would say yes, though it has not been our habit to 
make any special point of such cases, for the reason that too 
much stress is generally laid upon a dying testimony. It should 
be remembered that though the instant of death is now the 
instant of change to those accounted worthy of the first 
resurrection, the change is not to be realized until that instant, 
and consequently, no testimony of the fact could be given. The 
dying testimony of the saints, therefore, can be nothing beyond 
their life testimony-a testimony of their full assurance of faith 
in the sure promises of God, based upon his approval or 
disapproval of their walk since the time of their consecration. 

In proportion as the covenant of consecration has been 
scrupulously kept, may the final assurance of acceptance be 
strong. And as in Paul's case, it may amount to positive 
assurance, because of positive and continuous faithfulness. He 
declared "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, 
and henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness 
which the Lord the righteous judge will give me at that day; and 
not to me only but unto all them also who love his appearing. " 
But had Paul given no such expression of his latest confidence 
that he had run successfully, his faithful course was a sufficient 
proof of it. This testimony of Paul however was not a dying 
testimony, but the expression of his confidence in view of the 
fact that he was about to be offered. 



We have no account in Scripture of any visions of any of the 
saints when dying. What is generally regarded as a dying vision 
of Stephen (Acts 7:55,56,) was not a dying vision; for it was 
because of his statement, that he saw the heavens opened etc., 
that they ran upon him with one accord and cast him out of the 
city, and stoned him to death. And there is nothing in this 
expression of Stephen, which leads us to believe that he saw this 
vision otherwise than by the eye of faith- "being full of faith and 
the holy Spirit." 

Consider the few accounts of the death of saints mentioned in 
the Scriptures- Jesus, Paul, Stephen, also the Prophets. None 
gave any dying message concerning that which is beyond. No 
favor of this kind is granted in dying. The dying words of our 
Lord— My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?— if uttered 
by any of the saints now, would awaken doubts and fears for 
their future well-being, because of the general belief in ecstatic 
visions granted to the faithful in dying. But the fact is, all the 
saints who share in the sufferings of the sin-bearer must do so 
unto the very end, and like him must be left to die as parts of the 
sin-sacrifice. It is only when this sacrifice is accomplished, 
when the dissolution is complete, that the blessedness of the 
dead can be realized. In this blessed time of his presence it shall 
be instantly realized by this faithful class- "in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye. " 

How then shall we regard the dying words of some of our 
friends who thought they were going to heaven at once, and that, 
before this specially favored time ("from henceforth")? We must 
regard their mistaken dying expressions in precisely the same 
way that we regard their erroneous views previous to their dying 
hours, remembering that those errors influenced them to the end. 
The fact that the powers of mind and body are failing and almost 
exhausted, is certainly no reasonable guarantee that in that hour 
they possess any increased knowledge, or that they are granted 
any supernatural insight into the future. Such things are nowhere 
promised in the Scriptures, and are nowhere recorded in the 
Scriptures of the dying saints, nor even of the Lord. God does 
not communicate with the living through the saints either after 
their death, or in their dying. His method of communicating his 
truth to them is through his Word; and those who would follow 
his leading must walk by faith in that Word, down to the very 
end of the dark valley of death. 

Methodists place great stress upon the dying words of one of 
their bishops- "I am sweeping through the gates of the New 
Jerusalem, washed in the blood of the Lamb. " This, we can only 
regard as the outgrowth of his erroneous theology. The New 
Jerusalem was not yet in existence, but in due time he will be 
awakened when it will be gloriously established. Other 
Christians of the various denominations have similar ideas, and 
often base their hopes on similar errors, while passing by the 



sure and only foundation of hope given in the Scriptures. The 
truth gives a confidence in God which cannot be shaken, and 
which is an anchor to the soul both sure and steadfast, even amid 
the surges of Jordan. MRS. C. T. R. 



R1020 : page 8 

A SINGULAR COINCIDENCE. 

In the course of conversation with the Rev. W. C. Van Meter, 
who is now on a visit to this country, in a brief interval of his 
mission work in Italy, he informed us that he had been enabled 
to print a large number of copies of the Gospel according to 
John in Italian for use in the Sunday Schools of Rome. The 
children there are following the International Course, the 
subjects of which just now are in that gospel. A singular 
coincidence, which shows the changes which God has worked, 
is that the gospel was actually printed in the room formerly used 
as the torture-chamber of the Inquisition. The printer who had 
undertaken the work was obliged to leave his former business 
premises, and looking around for a new location, selected rooms 
in an ancient edifice that appeared suitable. There he set up his 
presses and compositors' cases. A strange-looking iron ring in 
the ceiling arrested his attention, and on making inquiries about 
it he learned that he was actually in the old Inquisition, and that 
the room he occupied had served as a torture-chamber. There 
within the walls that have resounded with the cries of men and 
women suffering for conscience' sake, he set up and printed the 
gospel of John. -Dawn of Morning. 



R962 : page 8 



THE LARGER HOPE." 



Scene at the rooms of the American Board of Foreign Missions. 
Application by a missionary to go abroad and preach the gospel 
of the Son of God. Examination follows: 

Dr. Alden-"What is your name?" 

Paul- "My name is Paul." 

Dr. Alden-"How old are you?" 

Paul-" About 1887 years old." 

Dr. Alden— "Your age is in your favor, but what do you believe 
about the future state of the heathen?" 

Paul-"As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made 
alive." 



Dr. Alden— "I am sorry to say, sir, that, though you may be a 
good man and a good preacher, you are afflicted with too much 
hope to be a suitable missionary for the American Board. "-- 
Christian Register. 



R1020 : page 8 

THE zeal and enthusiasm of sinners in the service of the devil 
should put to shame the indifference and sloth of Christians in 
the service of God. 


