From Our Readers
Schools in Crisis  I was waiting at a bus stop when someone handed me the issue “Schools in Crisis.” (December 22, 1995) It has proved to be more beneficial than an entire book I recently read on the subject. I would be very thankful if a subscription to Awake! could be sent to my home.
V. C., United States
The section about the Theocratic Ministry School reminded me of when I was in school. I had to give an oral report but was very limited in my English at the time. When I finished my presentation, my teacher said that he was very impressed and that I had been the only one who had good posture and eye contact with the audience. I was able to do this because of the excellent training we receive in the Theocratic Ministry School at the Kingdom Hall.
G. A., United States
I didn’t realize that these articles would evoke such a strong emotional response in me. When I was in school, my parents were too preoccupied with their own problems to be my advocate. As a result, I had some very lonely times while in school. Because of articles like these, I realize that Jehovah loves young people and doesn’t want them to feel all alone in this world.
M. M., United States
Mali  The article “A First for Mali” (December 22, 1995) was magnificent. I’ve read it three times. How I wish my circumstances would allow me to become a missionary! The article also made me realize that there are many people who do not have the conveniences we enjoy and yet they are happy. What a wake-up call!
D. L., United States
Flying Rocks  Just a few days ago, I wondered about the difference between a shooting star and a meteorite. Imagine my surprise when I read the article “Rocks That Fly” (December 8, 1995), which explained this very point. Thank you for publishing articles that familiarize us with Jehovah’s creation.
R. P., Switzerland
Learning From Andrew  I have just read the article about the young man with Down’s syndrome, “What We Learned From Andrew.” (December 8, 1995) We also have a child with a mental disability, and many of the comments from Andrew’s parents reflect how we ourselves feel. It is often difficult for our Christian brothers to appreciate the special difficulties that having a mentally disabled child brings and the emotional pressures that are placed on the family. So thanks for the article.
J. B., England
I feel this was one of the most beautiful and sensitive articles that you have published. In just three pages, a whole treatise on how we should view those with impediments was presented. It conveyed a profound lesson about human relations.
M. L., Spain
Earlier this year my wife gave birth to a boy with Down’s syndrome. As with Andrew’s parents, we experienced what many parents have felt on learning that their baby is disabled—anguish and sorrow as well as questions about the present and the future. For our part, we have managed to accept our baby’s disability. He will soon be six months old, and he is progressing well. The day after he was born, my wife was literally overwhelmed by the many visits of our Christian brothers and sisters. We truly felt what it means to have a spiritual family. And besides the love of our brothers and sisters, there is Jehovah. Thank you for this article.
G. C., France

