The “New World Order”—Off to a Shaky Start
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN GERMANY
AS 1991 dawned, people were optimistic. The Cold War was over. True, there was the problem of Kuwait, which had been invaded by Iraq the previous August. But the United Nations had flexed its muscles and ordered Iraq to withdraw by January 15. The demand was being backed up by a 28-nation UN military coalition that had quickly been organized and that was poised to force Iraq into submission. Hopes were running high that the tough stand taken by the world community signaled the beginning of a new era.
George Bush, then U.S. president, spoke about “the possibility, for ourselves and for generations to come, of forging a new world order, a world in which the rule of law, and not the law of the jungle, governs international behaviour.”
Iraq subsequently ignored the January 15 deadline, and massive air and missile strikes against Iraqi military targets resulted. Clearly, the world community meant business. Less than three months later, on April 11, the UN declared the Gulf War over. The promise of a peaceful, economically and politically stable new world order seemed to be acquiring real substance.
Wars Distressingly Stable
In mid-1991 two republics, Slovenia and Croatia, declared independence from the Yugoslavia of that time, setting off a civil war that eventually led to the formation of several separate nations. Less than a year later, French political analyst Pierre Hassner said: “Like pre-1914 Europe, the new world order of George Bush died in Sarajevo.” Nevertheless, the outlook for peace brightened when talks opened in Dayton, Ohio, U.S.A., in November 1995 and a peace agreement was signed in Paris on December 14. As 1995 drew to a close, hope was revived that the new world order was perhaps not dead after all.
The republics of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics were inching away from one another. In 1991, Lithuania, Estonia, and Latvia were the first to go, quickly followed by others. A loose grouping known as the Commonwealth of Independent States was established in December, although some former members of the Soviet Union refused to join. Then, on December 25, Gorbachev resigned as Soviet president.
However, even the individual republics began unraveling. For example, Chechnya, a small Muslim enclave in the northern Caucasus region of Russia, was striving for independence. Its attempt at secession at the end of 1994 sparked a controversial attack by Russian troops. Even though some 30,000 lives have been lost since the crisis began in the early 1990’s, the warfare has continued on into this year.
As of October 1995, between 27 and 46 conflicts—depending on how they are classified—were raging throughout the world.
On the Verge of Bankruptcy
At the start of the 1990’s, the new world order was turning out to be not only politically shaky but economically shaky as well.
In 1991, Nicaragua devalued its currency, but even then, 25 million cordobas was worth only one U.S. dollar. Meanwhile, Zaire was experiencing an inflation rate of 850 percent, forcing its citizens to endure one of the lowest living standards in the world. The Russian economy was also suffering. Inflation was running at 2,200 percent a year in 1992, making money almost worthless. Though things subsequently improved, in 1995 economic problems were far from over.
The financial scandal of the century occurred in 1991, when the Bank of Credit & Commerce International collapsed, brought down by fraud and criminal activities. Depositors in 62 lands suffered losses amounting to billions of U.S. dollars.
Not just economically weak nations were reeling; mighty Germany was weighed down by the costs of unification. Unemployment rose as workers demanded longer vacations and better health care. High absenteeism and widespread abuses of the welfare system put additional strains on the economy.
In the United States, a string of severe disasters caused havoc among insurance companies, who found themselves hard-pressed to pay insurance claims. And in 1993 the book Bankruptcy 1995: The Coming Collapse of America and How to Stop It warned of the dangers of a skyrocketing national debt and budget deficit. Even the Rock-of-Gibraltar stability of British insurer Lloyd’s of London was called into question. Battered by losses, it was being forced to think about the unthinkable—possible bankruptcy.
Religion, a Stabilizing Force?
In 1991 the German daily Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung remarked: “This vision of a new world order comes in a long tradition of American global views all of which have had a religious kernel and have been couched in Christian terms.”
This religious background, one would think, should have added stability to the new world order. But in actuality religious intolerance and strife led to widespread instability. Algeria and Egypt were only two of several governments at odds with Islamic fundamentalists. A wave of religiously motivated terrorism struck both countries. Religious riots in India included a nine-day period of sectarian violence in Bombay during 1993 that took more than 550 lives.
Religious disunity slowed ecumenical progress in 1994 when the Anglican Church ordained 32 women as priests. Pope John Paul II called this “a profound obstacle to every hope of reunion between the Catholic Church and the Anglican communion.”
On April 19, 1993, tension between the U.S. government and members of a religious cult, the Branch Davidians—which had already resulted in a standoff at the cult compound in Waco, Texas, and the killing of four federal agents—claimed the lives of at least 75 cult members. Two years later investigations were being made into the possibility that the terrorist bombing that killed 168 persons at a federal building in Oklahoma City might be in retaliation for the Waco attack.
The world was shocked in early 1995 to hear of a terrorist poison-gas attack in the Tokyo subway system. Ten persons died, and thousands more were sickened. The world was even more shocked when responsibility was laid at the doorstep of the apocalyptic sect called Aum Shinrikyo, or Aum Supreme Truth.
Significant Anniversaries With Little to Celebrate
In 1492, Columbus stumbled upon the Western Hemisphere. The 1992 celebration of the 500th anniversary of this event was shrouded in controversy. Some 40 million descendants of American Indians bristled at the implication that a European “discovered” lands where their ancestors had lived and flourished long before he was even born. Some called the explorer “a precursor of exploitation and conquest.” And for a fact, Columbus’ arrival in the Western Hemisphere was more a disaster than a blessing for its indigenous inhabitants. So-called Christian conquerers robbed them of their land, sovereignty, dignity, and lives.
In September 1995, Israel began a 16-month-long celebration to commemorate the 3,000th anniversary of King David’s conquest of Jerusalem. But the anniversary got off to a tragic start when Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was struck down on November 4 by an assassin’s bullets minutes after addressing a peace rally. This cast a shadow on the Middle East peace process, demonstrating that serious religious differences exist not only between Jews and Palestinians but even among Jews themselves.
Several 50-year anniversaries were celebrated between 1991 and 1995 in connection with World War II—the Pearl Harbor attack, which led to the entry of the United States into the war; the invasion of Europe by the Allies; the liberation of Nazi concentration camps; the Allied victory in Europe; and the dropping of the first atom bomb on Japan. In view of the blood and tears associated with these events, some people asked if they were really worth celebrating.
This led up to the anniversary of another significant event, the founding of the United Nations organization in October 1945. Hopes then ran high that the key to achieving world peace had at last been found.
The United Nations, as Boutros Boutros-Ghali, its secretary-general, recently said in its defense, has scored many triumphs. But it has not succeeded in fulfilling its charter purpose, namely “to maintain international peace and security.” Often its troops have tried to maintain peace in places where there was no peace to maintain. As of 1995, it had failed to breathe life into a shaky new world order.
As the New World Order Floundered, True Theocracy Flourished!
In view of the political, economic, and religious instability that caused their vision of a new world order to disintegrate before their very eyes, some people began speaking of a new world disorder. In this development Jehovah’s Witnesses saw further proof that only a new world of God’s making will enjoy stability in human society.
In some countries the end of the Cold War meant greater freedom for Jehovah’s Witnesses, allowing them to hold outstanding international conventions in Budapest, Kiev, Moscow, Prague, St. Petersburg, Warsaw, and elsewhere. These strengthened the worldwide congregational arrangement of Jehovah’s Witnesses and helped speed up their preaching work. Thus, it is not surprising that the number of active Witnesses in just one of these areas grew from 49,171 in 1991 to 153,361 in 1995. During the same four years, the number of Witnesses in the entire world grew from 4,278,820 to 5,199,895. True theocracy is flourishing as never before!
Yes, millions of people now base their hopes for the future upon Jehovah God’s promise of “new heavens and a new earth” in which “righteousness is to dwell.” (2 Peter 3:10, 13) How much wiser than looking to a human new world order, which, off to a shaky start, will shortly be shaken into nonexistence!—Daniel 2:44.

