Fulfilling Our Declaration as Peacemakers
What disclaimers did Jehovah’s witnesses make in the Declaration they adopted last year at the “Peace on Earth” Assemblies?
They disclaimed having any connection or part whatever with the professedly Christian sects of Christendom. These sects have proved themselves to be fomenters of religious and other wars and have not promoted the interests of God’s kingdom. Jehovah’s witnesses also disclaimed having any share in the political and ideological controversies that are dividing the peoples of the world.
In favor of what did Jehovah’s people declare themselves in this Declaration?
They declared themselves in favor of the long-promised kingdom of Jehovah God by his Son, the Messiah. It alone will bring enduring peace for all the world of mankind. By supporting that kingdom they are at peace with God.
In this Declaration what did Jehovah’s witnesses resolve to do?
They resolved to be peacemakers. (Matt. 5:9) They also declared their purpose to continue to serve as the “light of the world” by preaching and teaching the Word of God. (Rom. 10:10)a In keeping with the example set by Jesus Christ they cannot hold back from pointing out to the trusting people of Christendom the delinquency of their clergy and other religious leaders before God. (Matt. 23:13-36) In obedience to God’s Word the Witnesses confessed themselves to be under orders to reveal to the people that there is no possibility for spiritual life now and everlasting life in the future by means of Christendom.
The Witnesses further stated that they publicly thanked God that he has taken his great power and begun his everlasting reign by his Son. And confidently the Witnesses stated that they will not fear the wrath of the political nations, but will loyally, to the end, give their unqualified allegiance to God’s kingdom by preaching its good news.
How can Jehovah’s witnesses fulfill their Declaration as peacemakers?
First of all, by continuing at peace with their Creator, Jehovah God. This, in turn, requires them to fulfill their vows of dedication. They will do all they can to live at peace with one another so that Christian congregations can be dwelling places of peace. (Jas. 3:18) They will also, ‘so far as it depends upon them, be peaceable with all men,’ yet never compromising when issues of neutrality are faced.​—Rom. 12:18.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, December 1, 1969.

