Do You Remember?
Have you found the recent issues of The Watchtower to be of practical value to you? Then why not test your memory with the following:
▫ What was a major purpose of Jesus’ healings?
They portrayed, for the encouragement of the great crowd of sheeplike people today, that Armageddon survivors will be healed relatively soon after Armageddon. (Isaiah 33:24; 35:5, 6)​—12/15, page 12.
▫ Why do we need the constant reminder: “Persevere in prayer”? (Romans 12:12)
Life’s pressures and responsibilities may weigh so heavily on us at times that we could forget to pray. Or problems may overwhelm us, causing us to stop rejoicing in the Kingdom hope, even to cease praying. Thus, we need reminders that encourage us to pray and in this way draw ever nearer to Jehovah.​—12/15, page 14.
▫ What proves that the Flood of Noah’s day left an indelible impression on the human race?
It has been estimated that over 500 Flood legends are told by more than 250 tribes and peoples. Some basic similarities are to be found in all these legends.​—1/15, page 5.
▫ How are false prophets today like those in Jeremiah’s time?
Today’s false prophets claim to represent God, but they steal God’s words by preaching things that distract people from what the Bible really says. Especially is this true in regard to the teaching of the Kingdom. (Jeremiah 23:30)​—2/1, page 4.
▫ What is implied when one is baptized in the name of the holy spirit?
This implies that the one being baptized is determined to cooperate with the spirit, doing nothing to hinder its operation among Jehovah’s people. Hence, that one must cooperate with the faithful and discreet slave and with the elder arrangement in the congregation. (Hebrews 13:7, 17; 1 Peter 5:1-4)​—2/1, page 18.
▫ Why is image worship so damaging to the worshiper?
The Bible shows that images are detestable to Jehovah God and useless in helping their devotees to get closer to God. (Deuteronomy 7:25; Psalm 115:4-8) Satan the Devil “has blinded the minds” of people so that the truth does “not shine through.” (2 Corinthians 4:4) So when venerating an image, one is actually serving the interests of the demons. (1 Corinthians 10:19, 20)​—2/15, pages 6-7.
▫ Why were sheep considered a valuable asset in Bible times?
The wool was a renewing asset and could be used to make clothing for the family or could be sold. The horns of rams were used to signal the Jubilee or could be used to sound alarm or direct war maneuvers. Since sheep were one of the clean animals that Israelites could eat, a flock of sheep ensured a supply of food, and it provided a regular milk supply for drinking or for making cheese.​—3/1, pages 24-5.
▫ What are lovers of God requesting when they pray for God’s Kingdom to come? (Matthew 6:10)
They are asking that God’s heavenly Kingdom take decisive action by destroying man-made governmental systems, which have failed to live up to their promise to bring peace and security. (Daniel 2:44)​—3/15, page 6.
▫ Who were the Apologists, and did they teach the Trinity?
The Apologists were churchmen who lived in the latter part of the second century. They wrote to defend the Christianity they knew against hostile philosophies prevailing in the Roman world. None of them taught the Trinity.​—4/1, pages 24-9.
▫ Was Zechariah, the father of John the Baptizer, made deaf and mute, as Luke 1:62 seems to indicate?
Gabriel said that Zechariah’s speech would be affected, not his hearing. (Luke 1:18-20) Luke 1:64 states: “Instantly his [Zechariah’s] mouth was opened and his tongue loosed and he began to speak.” Notice, no mention is made here about his hearing having been affected in any way. The mention of “signs” at Luke 1:62 may mean that some gesture was made to elicit Zechariah’s decision.​—4/1, page 31.

