A Letter From the Governing Body
Dear Brothers and Sisters:
“MAY you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.” (1 Cor. 1:3) How we yearn for the time when every breathing thing will give Jehovah the glory that he deserves! (Ps. 150:6) As we await that grand day, we continue proclaiming the good news of God’s Kingdom and making disciples.
The evangelizing ministry is the present focus of Jehovah’s works in the earth. (Mark 13:10) Because we are keenly aware of Jehovah’s interest in this work, we approach it prayerfully, realizing that each human has the opportunity to benefit from the ransom provision. (Rev. 14:6, 7, 14, 15) True, we face challenges, but how grateful we are to be “clothed with power from on high” to accomplish this ministry!​—Luke 24:49.
It is satisfying to look back over the past service year and contemplate what Jehovah has accomplished through his loyal servants. Empowered by holy spirit, God’s people have displayed Christlike love, overcoming hatred worldwide. Such love was evident at our conventions. From June through December 2003, delegates from more than a hundred lands traveled to 32 international conventions held on six continents. Missionaries, international servants, and Bethelites in foreign service were interviewed at district and international conventions.
At these conventions, we received the publications “See the Good Land” and Learn From the Great Teacher. Additionally, it was announced that a revised Pioneer Service School textbook is scheduled for introduction toward the end of the 2004 service year. Progressively, long-time pioneers who have attended the school will join classes comprising newer pioneers.
Divine support and human generosity have made possible the construction of many more Kingdom Halls, especially in lands with limited resources. Because of the growing worldwide need for spiritual food, branch expansion projects are under way in many lands. The brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! now appears in 299 languages, with a total printing of 139 million copies; Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life has surpassed 93 million copies in 161 languages; and over 200 million copies of the brochure What Does God Require of Us? have been printed in 267 languages.
We extend a warm welcome to the 258,845 who symbolized their dedication by water baptism during the past service year! Although your support of God’s Kingdom has made you special targets of Satan’s hatred, it has also made you special recipients of Jehovah’s blessing and spiritual protection as you run the race that is set before you. (Heb. 12:1, 2; Rev. 12:17) Yes, be assured that “the One guarding you cannot possibly be drowsy.”​—Ps. 121:3.
The 2004 yeartext, “Keep on the watch . . . Prove yourselves ready,” is most timely. (Matt. 24:42, 44) Christians are described in God’s Word as temporary residents in this dying system of things. (1 Pet. 2:11; 4:7) Hence, we need to stay focused, to keep our lives simple, and to examine our hearts carefully. “The great dragon” wants to devour us, assimilating us into his system of things.​—Rev. 12:9.
Essential to maintaining our vigilance is daily Bible reading. It can help us to ‘let our Yes mean Yes’ regarding our dedication and to “make fast our hold on the confidence we had at the beginning firm to the end.” (Jas. 5:12; Heb. 3:14) Daily Bible reading can help us remember how far the world has deviated from God’s unchangeable standards. (Mal. 3:6; 2 Tim. 3:1, 13) Bible knowledge can help us to shun “artfully contrived false stories” and to remain faithful to Jehovah.​—2 Pet. 1:16; 3:11.
Parents, as you bring up your children in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah, are you helping them to set spiritual goals and to “keep on the watch”? (Eph. 6:4) Are you training them to view their future as the wisest person ever to walk the earth viewed his? Jesus could have been the greatest carpenter, inventor, or physician who ever lived, but instead he pursued the full-time ministry. May his example move you to help your children put Kingdom interests first in their life.
The faithful slave class, represented by the Governing Body, is filled with heartfelt thankfulness to the “great crowd” for helping us fulfill our responsibility to have ‘this good news of the kingdom preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness.’ (Rev. 7:9; Matt. 24:14, 45) You dear ones have Jehovah’s assurance that he remembers “your work and the love you showed for his name, in that you have ministered to the holy ones and continue ministering.” (Heb. 6:10) As you read the exciting experiences and note the results of your united efforts in the pages that follow, know that you have played a vital part in giving this worldwide witness.
May you face the future with courage as you continue to ‘look intently toward the payment of the reward,’ letting no human or demon deprive you of it. (Heb. 11:26; Col. 2:18) Yes, trust in Jehovah, confident that he will help all who love him to attain to the fullness of life.​—John 6:48-54.
Be assured of our joy in serving along with you to the praise of Jehovah’s glory.
Your brothers,
Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

