Moldova
Lying to the east of the great arc of the Carpathian Mountains, Moldova is a fertile land of plains, deep valleys, ravines, and forest-clad slopes. This varied landscape of 13,000 square miles [34,000 sq km] is home to many different animals, including foxes, wolves, hare, badgers, deer, ermines, polecats, and wild boars.
The land’s rich, black soil and generally mild climate contribute to an abundance of fruits, grains, vegetables, and other farm products. Irrigation and drainage are amply provided by 2,200 natural springs and 3,000 rivers and streams, all of which flow south into the Black Sea. The rapidly flowing Dniester is the main artery and is navigable throughout most of the republic. For much of its length, the river either forms or runs parallel to the border of Ukraine, a country that lies to the north, east, and south of Moldova. The Prut River, a tributary of the Danube, is the border shared with Romania on the west.
Moldova’s Stormy Past
The land between the Dniester and the Prut​—known for centuries as Bessarabia and Moldavia—​lay on a main land route into Europe. In the first millennium B.C.E., the region was part of Scythia. Later it came marginally under the control of the Roman Empire. Its stormy history also includes invasion by waves of other peoples, such as Goths, Huns, and Avars. In the 13th and 14th centuries, Moldavia was vassal to the Tatars, and in the 16th century, it became part of the Ottoman Empire. In the 1812 Treaty of Bucharest, the Turks ceded control of Bessarabia and half of Moldavia to Russia, at which time the name Bessarabia was applied to the whole region.
In 1918, Bessarabia became part of greater Romania. However, it reverted to Russia temporarily in 1940 and again in 1944. Under the Soviet Union, the territory was known as the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic (SSR). Finally, with the collapse of Soviet Communism, the Moldavian SSR severed ties with Moscow, becoming the independent Republic of Moldova on August 27, 1991.a Chisinau, previously Kishinev, is the capital city.
In the 1960’s, Moldova saw rapid growth in population, but this has slowed down and steadied since 1970. The present figure stands at about 4.3 million people. Many Moldovans are employed in the country’s primary industry, wine growing, which produces about 3 percent of the world’s wines. Moldovan wines are particularly popular in Russia and Eastern Europe. (See the box on page 71.) But an even greater vineyard has enriched Moldova, one that produces the finest fruitage of all​—sweet praise to Jehovah.
“A Vineyard of Foaming Wine!”
By means of the prophet Isaiah, Jehovah described spiritual Israel as “a vineyard of foaming wine.” As foretold, that figurative vineyard has filled “the surface of the productive land with produce” in the form of nourishing spiritual food. (Isa. 27:2-6) Consequently, anointed Christians have come to be joined by millions of “other sheep.”​—John 10:16.
Jehovah’s people in Moldova have been thrilled to share in the fulfillment of that wonderful prophecy. Thanks to the constant flow of spiritual produce dispensed by Jehovah’s organization, Moldova now has a ratio of 1 publisher to every 229 inhabitants. In fact, in one village every fourth person is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses!
But as we will see, this growth has not come without fiery trials. For nearly 70 years, the Romanian monarchy, the Fascists, and the Communists banned, persecuted, and imprisoned God’s people. Nevertheless, in Moldova, as elsewhere, Jehovah has proved true to his prophetic words concerning his spiritual “vineyard of foaming wine.” Through Isaiah, he said: “I, Jehovah, am safeguarding her. Every moment I shall water her. In order that no one may turn his attention against her, I shall safeguard her even night and day.” (Isa. 27:2, 3) As you reflect on the history of Jehovah’s people in Moldova, may their example of courage and faith fortify you in your resolve to continue bearing precious fruit to Jehovah’s praise, no matter what obstacle the opposer Satan may throw in your path.
Russell Surveys the Field
Fruit-bearing branches on a literal vine start out as tiny shoots. The spiritual growth that started in Moldova was no different. Let us see how Jehovah made that delicate sprout develop into the sturdy fruit-bearing vine that we see in Moldova today. (1 Cor. 3:6) Our investigation takes us back to the late 19th century when Bible Student Charles Taze Russell visited the country during the course of a European trip.
In the September 1891 issue of Zion’s Watch Tower and Herald of Christ’s Presence, Russell wrote that he had visited the home of a Jewish lawyer and Christian named Joseph Rabinowitch. “One of the most interesting of our experiences thus far,” said Russell, “was our visit to Brother Joseph Rabinowitch at his home in Kischenev, Russia [now Chisinau, Moldova]. He welcomed us warmly, as did all the family, all of whom are believers in the Lord Jesus. . . . We found him well acquainted with the teachings of DAWN [the Millennial Dawn series of books] and in deep sympathy with the same.” During their Bible discussions, the men agreed on many Scriptural points, hinted at by Russell’s reference to his Moldovan friend as “Brother Rabinowitch.”
Rabinowitch and his family were actively involved in helping Jews​—of whom there were over 50,000 in Chisinau—​to accept Christ and the Messianic hope. Attached to his home and office was “a new and very neat house of worship, which will seat about one hundred and twenty-five persons,” explained Russell. Rabinowitch also had a new, hand-operated printing press that he used to produce tracts particularly adapted to the Jewish mind. About six years later, in 1897, Rabinowitch wrote to Russell, saying: “My Dear and Beloved Brother Russell: At the close of the year I cannot help thanking you for the spiritual pleasure you are rendering me by your esteemed journal, ZION’S WATCH TOWER, which I receive regularly. It is to me like the merchant’s ship​—bringing spiritual food from afar.” Despite this Jewish man’s love and zeal for Bible truth, however, 30 years would pass before Kingdom seed took firm root in Moldova and began to produce.​—Matt. 13:1-8, 18-23.
World War I Leaves Many Disillusioned
The dramatic political changes that took place in Europe during the first world war created fertile soil for Kingdom seed in Moldova. When the Great War​—as it was then called—​came to an end, Moldova severed her ties with Russia, where the Communists had seized power, and united with Romania. Many Moldovan soldiers, having seen the horrors of war, came home disillusioned. Most had been raised with a strong allegiance to the Orthodox Church, but now they began to question its teachings.
One such man was Ion Andronic, who returned in 1919 to his native village of Corjeuţi. His interest in the Bible was aroused by discussions he had had with Adventists and Baptists while he was a prisoner of war. He brought a Bible home from the prison camp and discussed its message with his family and neighbors, arousing their interest too.
Ilie Groza was one of those neighbors. He had been in the United States during the war years and came home with a copy of the “New Testament,” which he had acquired during his travels. Being close neighbors, the Andronic and Groza families started to discuss God’s Word together. They also obtained literature published by the Bible Students, as Jehovah’s Witnesses were then known.
Ilie Groza’s daughter Ioana recalls: “I must have been only six years old when our family first obtained literature produced by the Bible Students. I am not sure where we obtained the literature, but I recall my parents and older siblings excitedly discussing the clear explanations of the Scriptures found in those publications.”
Ion Andronic later chose not to dedicate his life to Jehovah. But that was not the case with the rest of his family and most of the Groza family. “Our meetings were a family affair at first,” Ioana recalls. “My parents had four girls, and the Andronic family had several boys as well as girls. So it was not long before a romance budded, leading to the marriage of Vasile Andronic to my sister Feodolina.
“Soon our Bible-study group included Tudor and Daria Groza, a married couple distantly related to us. Tudor was a very keen Bible student. He even went to the branch office at Cluj-Napoca, Romania, to obtain literature and to find answers to his many Bible questions. In later years he proved to be a great spiritual support to our small congregation.
“The Iacuboi family, who also lived in our area, joined in the Bible discussions held at our house. Petru Iacuboi, the head of the family, had earlier extended hospitality to a man distributing Bibles. The visitor had stimulated Petru’s interest in the Scriptures. Petru looked into Baptist teachings for a little while before deciding that the truth was to be found elsewhere. That was when he joined our expanding group of Bible Students.
“Impelled by what we were learning, our group zealously shared the good news of the Kingdom with all our friends and relatives, many of whom lived in our village and in neighboring villages.”
Highlighting how quickly the Kingdom message spread in Moldova, a report in the December 15, 1921, issue of The Watch Tower stated: “From Bessarabia [as Moldova was then called] a brother, who was until recently an Advent preacher, writes: ‘About 200 in this place, besides many neighboring places all around, have received the truth.’”
In the early 1920’s in the village of Şirăuţi, a staunch member of the Orthodox Church, Ilarion Bugaian, came to a knowledge of the truth. He served Jehovah faithfully until his death. A Bible Student named Moise Ciobanu returned from Germany to the city of Bălţi. He had learned the truth while imprisoned in Germany during World War I. Before long, a group was formed that later became the first congregation in Bălţi.
Romanian Witnesses Help Out
To help cultivate the field and to strengthen the new ones associating with God’s people, the Romania branch sent qualified brothers to Moldova during the 1920’s. Among those early evangelizers was Vasile Ciucaş of Transylvania. He spoke Romanian and Hungarian. When Vasile visited the fledgling congregation in Corjeuţi, he always stayed with Ilie Groza and his family. Ioana fondly recalls those visits. “I must have been eight years old at the time,” she says, “but I still remember Brother Ciucaş’ visits. He was an exceptionally kind brother, and he always had such interesting stories to tell that no one wanted to go to bed! My sister and I used to vie with each other to sit next to him.”
The Romanian Witnesses, together with enthusiastic local publishers, continued to spread the good news to nearby villages. In the village of Tabani, seven miles [11 km] from Corjeuţi, Cazimir Cislinschii shared with others the good things he had learned from the Bible. Cazimir had heard the Kingdom message while serving in the army in Romania. One of the first people in Tabani to respond to Cazimir’s preaching was Dumitru Gorobeţ, a particularly enthusiastic student. Today, thanks to the zeal of Dumitru and others like him, Tabani’s population of 3,270 includes 475 Witnesses.
Early in the 1920’s, the Kingdom message also found its way into the village of Caracuşeni, between two and three miles [3-4 km] from Corjeuţi. Among the first villagers in Caracuşeni to accept the truth was Vladimir Lungu, baptized in 1927. Vladimir endured much persecution for his Christian beliefs and died faithful to Jehovah in 2002. During his lifetime, he saw so many people in his village accept the truth that now every fourth person in Caracuşeni, which has a population of 4,200, is a Witness!
Alexandru Mikitkov, another faithful brother, first learned the truth in 1929 while visiting the Romanian city of Iasi. His son Ivan says: “When Father returned to our home village, Ţaul, he immediately started preaching the good news, and very soon we had Christian meetings at our house.”
Ivan continues: “Father kept in touch with the branch office in Romania, and from time to time, mature brothers from Romania would visit us. Sadly, in 1931, during one of those visits, my baby sister died. Because our family was well-known, many villagers attended the funeral. Our visitor from Romania, Brother Vănica, conducted the funeral service. He gave an outstanding witness, exposing as a lie the rumor spread by the clergy that the Bible Students do not conduct dignified funerals. What is more, Brother Vănica’s discourse, which clearly explained the hope of the resurrection, planted fine seed in the hearts of some present. Before long, these too would take a firm stand for Bible truth.
“Brother Vănica’s spiritual encouragement also had a profound effect on my family. For example, my older brother, Dumitru, decided to become a colporteur (full-time minister). Keen to help as many people as possible, he soon left home to preach in untouched areas of Moldova. The family supported him wholeheartedly in his decision. But I must admit, I sorely missed my big brother. On the other hand, how joyful we were when he came home to visit, full of exciting experiences from the field!”
Clerical Opposition Mounts
From the start, Orthodox clerics opposed the preaching of the good news. But they became incensed when former members of their church, having learned Bible truth, refused to make the sign of the cross and to have their infants baptized.
When Ioana Groza was about ten years old, the local Orthodox priest pressured her to compromise her beliefs. She recalls: “My father had explained to us children that it was unscriptural to make the sign of the cross. But at school the priest insisted that we cross ourselves. I was scared of that man, but I was also afraid of displeasing Father. So instead of going to school, I would hide in a barn. Several days later, though, Father learned about my absenteeism. Still, he did not scold me but kindly asked for an explanation. When I told him of my fears concerning the priest, Father took me by the hand and we marched straight to the man’s house.
“In a firm tone, Father told the priest: ‘If you were the one who fed, clothed, and housed my daughter, then you might be allowed to tell her what to do religiously. Because you do not do these things, you will not interfere with what I teach my child.’ Well, I am pleased to say that for the rest of my school days, the priest gave me no more trouble.”
Usually, the clergy were the most influential men in the community. Like the religious leaders of Jesus’ day, they used that influence to malign the good name of Jehovah’s servants so that their parishioners would either spurn the brothers or fear talking to them. One of the clergy’s favorite tactics was to exploit political enmities. For instance, people back then feared and mistrusted the Bolshevik “menace” across the border in the Soviet Union. Orthodox priests played on this fear by imputing political motives to the Bible Students’ refusal to make the sign of the cross, saying that they were Communists.
But that was not all that those scheming clerics did. They abused their office even further by inciting government officials to oppose God’s people, just as the scribes and Pharisees did in Jesus’ day.​—John 18:28-30; 19:4-6, 12-16.
From 1918 to 1940, Moldova came under the rule of Romania, which was then a kingdom, or monarchy. The government in Romania appointed a minister of cults, who had jurisdiction over religious matters. Bowing to religious Orthodoxy, this man opposed the work of the Bible Students and sought to have them and their Bible-based publications banned. The charge, as you may have guessed, was that the brothers were in league with the Bolsheviks.
This official contempt for Jehovah’s people resulted in a government directive from the inspector general of Moldova to a certain chief of police, dated April 25, 1925. It stated: “Motivated by the Police Security Directive No. 17274/925, we have the honor to inform you that the Ministry of Internal Affairs decided to prohibit and stop the propaganda of the international ‘Bible Students,’ and we would like you to take the necessary measures to accomplish that purpose.”
The effect that such official opposition had on the brothers is reflected in a report that the Romania office submitted to world headquarters on October 17, 1927. In summary, the report stated that congregation meetings had been stopped and forbidden everywhere and that ‘hundreds of brothers had been arraigned before the military and civil courts.’ It also said: ‘Few meetings could be held during summer, as the congregations were and still are closely watched by the secret service and policemen, especially in villages, where most congregations are. Most meetings were held in the woods, in well-concealed places.’
The report continued: ‘As of March, the work of the traveling overseers was also curtailed. In that same month, the minister of the interior gave strict, confidential orders to find the colporteurs and to arrest all these “propagandists.” Within a short time, almost all the colporteurs were put in jail. And although neither we nor the brothers are frightened, having endured opposition from the beginning of the work in this country, this time the system of routing us is so thorough that we can hardly make a move.’
As the 1920’s drew to a close, courageous individuals and families continued to separate themselves from the Orthodox Church and to take a firm stand for Bible truth. This fact is reflected in a letter that a village priest wrote to his superior in the year 1928. The letter included a list of 43 names of adults and children in the priest’s parish in Şirăuţi. It said: “We have the honor to attach a list of the names of the members of the sect ‘Bible Students.’ Despite their efforts, they have not had any success, nor do they have a prayer house. Rather, they meet in private homes.”
In reality, the priest’s list of names belied his assertion that the Bible Students “have not had any success,” since most of the 43 persons named were former members of the Orthodox Church. One of the children mentioned was Agripina Barbuţă, who is now over 80 years of age and still active in Jehovah’s service.
When it became difficult to preach publicly, the brothers concentrated on informal witnessing, especially to relatives. Back then relatives spent considerable time socializing. The brothers took advantage of this custom to share the good news with others. Naturally, no legislation could stop family members from talking with one another.
Efforts to Legalize the Preaching Work
After the 1925 ban on the preaching work, the brothers at the branch office in Cluj-Napoca, Romania, submitted a 50-page, typewritten report to the minister of cults. Along with a brief statement of our teachings and beliefs, it included an official request to lift the ban. Subsequently, in September 1927, one of the brothers was granted a personal audience with the minister on three separate occasions. He left the final meeting hopeful that the law would be changed to favor freedom of worship. Regrettably, though, the government disregarded the brothers’ appeals. In fact, officials continued to frame trouble by decree, making things worse for Jehovah’s people, not better. (Ps. 94:20; Dan. 6:5-9) In this regard, an official document dated May 29, 1932, stated that “every kind of activity” of the International Bible Students “is totally prohibited.”
Yet, this attack against God’s people did not have the earmarks of a unified, coordinated campaign in Romania and Moldova. To some extent, local governments and officials made their own decisions about the Bible Students. So the brothers approached these officials in order to defend and legally establish the good news, at least in their local areas.​—Phil. 1:7.
In some places these efforts bore fruit. That was the case in Bucharest, Romania, after the branch office moved there from Cluj-Napoca. In 1933, following a protracted struggle, the branch finally obtained legal registration for the Bible and Tract Society of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Bucharest.
Interestingly, even some high-profile judges openly disagreed with the restrictions imposed on God’s people. For instance, on May 8, 1935, the Cluj-Napoca Court of Appeals courageously ruled that the ban imposed on Jehovah’s Witnesses was unconstitutional. The ruling went even further, stating: “The confiscated booklets [produced by Jehovah’s Witnesses] promote love toward one another and belief in God and Christ. For this reason, it is incorrect to state that these booklets have a subversive character; they do not represent a danger to the security of the State.”
The Voice of Reason Goes Unheeded
However, the authorities, by and large, remained opposed to the work of God’s people. For instance, on March 28, 1934, the chief of the Security Office of the town of Soroca, Moldova, wrote to his superior, the regional police inspector in Chisinau, complaining that in 1927 in a certain village near Soroca, there were “only two families who were adherents of this sect, but they have converted . . . another 33 families.” He also wrote that the Witnesses “reject the church” and its “religious traditions and habits” and that “instead of asking for the services of the priest, they do their own worship.” He concluded his letter, saying: “[The Witnesses] continue to make new converts, and this threatens the established order and the security of the State.”
On May 6, 1937, the brothers in that very district wrote to the prefect asking that Jehovah’s Witnesses be removed from the list of illegal sects. The official response was made clear in a letter from the county chief of the district of Soroca to the prefect of that same district. Dated June 15, 1937, it said: “The activity of [Jehovah’s Witnesses] is prohibited by . . . the Ministry of Cults and Arts. Therefore, we cannot satisfy their request to be taken off the list of [illegal] sects, since they continue to work actively for the interests of that sect.”
Affirming that hostile stand, the official government journal, Monitorul Oficial, said, on July 12, 1939, that Jehovah’s Witnesses and any legal entities they might use are “totally prohibited.” As mentioned earlier, Moldova was then under the sovereignty of Romania, which was Eastern Orthodox and ruled by a monarchy. Regrettably, religious bigotry moved many officials to go beyond legal prohibitions in their treatment of Jehovah’s people.
Officials Become Brutal
The experience of Dumitru Gorobeţ and Cazimir Cislinschii shows that the flames of opposition to the preaching work were often fanned by religious hatred on the part of staunchly Orthodox officials. Dumitru and Cazimir first learned Bible truth in the village of Tabani. Because of their fine qualities and their zeal for the ministry, they soon became well-known and loved by the brothers. Then, in 1936, they were arrested and brought to a police station in the town of Khotin (now in Ukraine).
First the police cruelly beat Dumitru and Cazimir. Then they tried to force them to make the sign of the cross. But the two men stood firm, despite continued beatings. Eventually, the police gave up. They even allowed Dumitru and Cazimir to go home. But that was not the end of the trials suffered by these two faithful brothers. Under both Fascist and Communist rule, they endured many more hardships for the sake of the good news. Dumitru passed away early in 1976 in Tomsk, Russia. Cazimir died in November 1990 in Moldova.
In the 1930’s, the Romania branch supervised the work in Moldova. Martin Magyarosi, baptized in 1922, was branch servant at the time. Out of loving concern for the brothers, especially in view of the trials they were going through, he and his son-in-law, Pamfil Albu, visited many congregations in the north of Moldova to fortify and encourage God’s people. How timely those visits would prove to be! Why? Because Europe was soon to become the very epicenter of World War II. And Moldova, seen as a desirable possession, would be wrenched to and fro by her more powerful, opposing neighbors.
Europe Racked by World War II
On August 23, 1939, the Soviet Union and the Nazi government of Germany signed a nonaggression pact. A week later, on September 1, 1939, Germany invaded Poland, igniting World War II. Then, on June 26, 1940, Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov presented the Romanian government with a demand that they unconditionally cede what was then known as Bessarabia to the Soviet Union. Romania gave in to this demand, and on June 28, 1940, Soviet troops marched into Moldova. In August 1940, the Soviets created the Moldavian SSR, with Chisinau as the capital.
However, the Soviet hold on Moldova was short-lived. On June 22, 1941, Germany violated the 1939 nonaggression pact and invaded Russia. Exploiting this turn of events, Romania declared itself to be on Germany’s side and set about wresting the Moldavian SSR back from the Soviets.
The scheme was successful, for by July 26, 1941, the Romanian army had pushed the Russians back to the Dniester River. Thus, after a little over a year of Soviet rule, Moldova again came under Romanian control. This time, however, it was a Romania ruled, as of September 1940, by an extremely nationalistic Fascist government headed by the dictator General Ion Antonescu. His regime would not tolerate those who remained politically neutral because of their loyal support for God’s Kingdom.
The Fascist Crucible
Antonescu’s Fascist government, in league with Hitler and the Axis powers, soon tried to impose its will on Jehovah’s Witnesses. Consider the example of Anton Pântea, born in 1919. Anton learned the truth as a teenager and was zealous in the house-to-house ministry. He came close to being beaten up on a number of occasions, but by boldly asserting his legal right as a Romanian citizen to speak about his faith, he managed to avoid physical abuse for some time. Nevertheless, the police finally caught up with him. Fascist officers dragged him to a police station, beat him all night long and then, surprisingly, set him free. Brother Pântea is now 84 years of age and still determined to remain faithful to Jehovah.
Another integrity keeper, Parfin Palamarciuc, learned Bible truth in Moldova during the 1920’s. He too became a zealous proclaimer of the good news, often staying away from home for weeks to preach in cities and villages from Chernovtsy to Lvov in Ukraine. Because Parfin refused to take up arms, Fascists arrested him in 1942 and court-martialed him in Chernovtsy.
Parfin’s son Nicolae recounted those events, saying: “A total of 100 brothers were condemned to death by this court-martial. The sentence was to be carried out promptly. The officers assembled all the brothers and selected the first ten to be shot. But first these individuals were forced to dig their own graves as the other 90 looked on. Before shooting the brothers, however, the officers gave them one more opportunity to renounce their faith and join the army. Two compromised; the other eight were shot dead. Then ten more were lined up. But before being shot they had to bury the dead.
“While the brothers were filling in the graves, a high-ranking officer arrived. He asked how many Witnesses had changed their minds. When told just two, he stated that if 80 had to die to get 20 into the army, it would be more profitable to consign the remaining 92 to labor camps. As a result, the death sentences were commuted to 25 years of forced labor. However, not quite three years later, advancing Soviet forces liberated the Witnesses from the Romanian camps. My father survived these and many other ordeals. He died faithful to Jehovah in 1984.”
Not Complying With Orthodoxy​—A Crime!
Vasile Gherman was a young married man. His wife had just given birth to a baby girl when Fascists arrested him in December 1942. Vasile was charged with two “crimes”​—refusing to perform military service and failing to have his daughter baptized in the Orthodox Church. He relates what happened: “In February 1943, my case, along with that of 69 other faithful brothers, was to be heard at Chernovtsy before a military court. Before the actual sentencing, the authorities forced us to witness the execution of six criminals. Hence, we felt sure that we were next on the list to receive the death penalty.
“We talked the matter over among ourselves and resolved to stay strong in faith and to make every effort to maintain a joyful disposition right through the trial. With Jehovah’s help, we succeeded. When, as expected, all 70 of us received the death sentence, we really felt that we were suffering for righteousness’ sake. None of us felt discouraged, much to the chagrin of our enemies. Then came a surprise. Instead of having us shot, the authorities changed our sentences to 25 years of forced labor at the camp in Aiud, Romania. But even that sentence was not fully carried out, for just 18 months later, in August 1944, the advancing Soviet army liberated the camp.”
In 1942 the Fascists conscripted about 800 men from the village of Şirăuţi, Moldova, to serve in General Antonescu’s army. Among them were a number of Witnesses, including Nicolae Anischevici. “At the beginning of the proceedings,” said Nicolae, “the police ordered us to participate in a religious ceremony. We Witnesses refused. We also refused to take up weapons. As a result, the police accused us of being Communists and arrested us. Before locking us up, however, they allowed us to explain to all present the reason for our neutral stand.
“The next day we were transferred to Briceni, the judicial center for the district. Here we were stripped and thoroughly searched. A priest of high military rank then questioned us. He was kind, showed understanding toward our conscientious stand, and arranged for us to be fed. What is more, he wrote that the reason for our refusal to bear arms was our belief in Jesus.
“From Briceni we were taken to the police station in Lipcani. There the police beat us mercilessly right into the night. Then they put us in a cell with two other brothers and, surprisingly, a woman, who turned out to be a spy. We were beaten daily for several days. Eventually, I was sent to Chernovtsy to face a court-martial. There I was given a lawyer, who proved to be very helpful. Even so, my health had deteriorated so much from the maltreatment that the military authorities thought I might die. In the end, they decided to send me home without sentencing me.”
Courageous Sisters Maintain Integrity
Sisters also felt the heat of Fascist wrath. One was Maria Gherman (no relation to Vasile Gherman but from the same congregation). Arrested in 1943, Maria was taken to the police station in Balasineşti. She recalls: “The police arrested me because I refused to go to the Orthodox church. First they transferred me to Lipcani, Moldova, and then to Chernovtsy, Ukraine, where I was sentenced.
“The judge asked me why I had refused to go to church. I told him that I worship only Jehovah. For this ‘crime,’ 20 other sisters and I were given 20-year prison sentences. Some of us were packed into a tiny cell with 30 other inmates. During the day, however, I was sent out to do housework at the homes of the rich. These people, I might add, treated me better than the prison officials did​—at least, they gave me enough to eat!
“In time, we made contact with the brothers who were in another wing of the prison complex. This contact proved to be a blessing, for we were able to help the brothers obtain both spiritual and physical food.”
Like many other Moldovan Witnesses, these integrity keepers endured Fascist wrath only to face another assault on their faith. That attack was made by the next regional power, Communist Russia.
The Soviet Ploy​—Deportation
In 1944, toward the end of the war when the tide had turned against Germany, elements within the Romanian government led by King Michael overthrew Antonescu’s regime. Romania then shifted her allegiance from the Axis powers to Russia. In that same year, the advancing Soviet army reasserted Russian control over the region, again integrating Moldova into the Soviet Union as the Moldavian SSR.
At first Moldova’s Communist rulers left Jehovah’s Witnesses alone. But this respite was brief. Christian neutrality, including the Witnesses’ refusal to vote in local party elections, soon became a hot issue again. The Soviet system allowed no room for political neutrality. So the government planned to solve the problem by deporting Jehovah’s Witnesses and other “undesirables,” starting in 1949.
An official document set out “the decision of the politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party” regarding those to be deported from the Moldavian SSR. They would include “former landowners, big traders, active accomplices of German invaders, persons who were cooperating with the German and Romanian police authorities, members of pro-Fascist parties and organizations, members of the White Guard, members of illegal sects, as well as the families of the enumerated categories.” All were to be sent to western Siberia “to time indefinite.”
A second wave of deportations began in 1951, but this time only Jehovah’s Witnesses were targeted. Stalin personally ordered this deportation, which was called Operation North. Over 720 Witness families​—some 2,600 persons—​were sent from Moldova to Tomsk, about 2,800 miles [4,500 km] away in western Siberia.
Official directives stated that individuals were to be given sufficient time to gather personal belongings before being taken to waiting trains. Furthermore, the railway cars were to be “well arranged for human transportation.” The reality was quite different.
In the middle of the night, up to eight soldiers and officials would arrive at a Witness family’s home. They would wake the family and show them the deportation order. Then they would give the family just a few hours to gather what possessions they could before taking the family to waiting trains.
The railway cars turned out to be boxcars. Up to 40 persons of all ages were crammed into each car for the two-week journey. There was no seating and no thermal insulation of any kind. One corner of the boxcar had a hole in the floor that served as a toilet. Before deporting the brothers, local officials were supposed to register each person’s possessions. Often, though, they would list only things of little worth; valuable items simply “disappeared.”
Despite all these injustices and hardships, however, the brothers never lost their Christian joy. Indeed, when the trains carrying the Witnesses converged at railway junctions, Kingdom songs could be heard emanating from other boxcars. Thus, the brothers in each train knew that they were not alone but were being deported along with hundreds of fellow Witnesses. Seeing and hearing one another reflect a joyful spirit in such trying circumstances lifted the hearts of all and fortified them in their resolve to stay faithful to Jehovah, come what may.​—Jas. 1:2.
Faith Worthy of Imitation
Among the Moldovan deportees to Siberia was Ivan Mikitkov. Ivan was first arrested in Moldova in 1951, along with other Witnesses, and was exiled to Tomsk. He was assigned to fell trees in the Siberian taiga. Even though he was not confined to a labor camp, his freedom of movement was restricted, and the secret police kept a close eye on him. Nonetheless, he and his spiritual brothers witnessed to others at every opportunity.
Says Ivan: “We organized ourselves into congregations in this difficult new environment. We even began to produce our own literature. In time, some of those to whom we preached accepted the truth and got baptized. However, the authorities eventually noticed our activities and sentenced some of us to labor camps.
“Along with fellow Witnesses Pavel Dandara, Mina Goraş, and Vasile Şarban, I was sentenced to 12 years of forced labor under strict supervision. The authorities hoped that these stiff sentences would frighten others into silence, but that did not happen. No matter where our brothers were sent, they continued preaching. In 1966, I was released after serving my full sentence. I returned to Tomsk and remained there for three years.
“In 1969, I moved to Donets Basin, where I met Maria, a faithful and zealous sister, whom I married. In 1983, I was arrested again. This time I received a double sentence​—prison for five years and deportation for another five years. Understandably, I found this sentence much harder to deal with than the former one because it meant separation from my wife and child, both of whom also had to endure hardships. Happily, though, I did not have to serve the full term. I was released in 1987 after Mikhail Gorbachev became general secretary of the Soviet Communist Party. I was permitted to return to Ukraine and later to Moldova.
“When I returned to Bălţi, the second-largest city in Moldova, it had 370 publishers and three congregations. Today it has over 1,700 publishers and 16 congregations!”
“Do You Want to End Up Like Vasile?”
Camp administrators and KGB (Soviet State Security Committee) agents devised some sadistic tricks in their efforts to weaken the brothers’ integrity. Constantin Ivanovici Şobe relates what happened to his grandfather, Constantin Şobe: “In 1952, Grandfather was serving his sentence in one of the labor camps in the district of Chita, east of Lake Baikal in Siberia. The camp officials threatened to shoot him and the other Witnesses if they did not renounce their faith.
“Because the brothers refused to compromise, the officials gathered them outside the camp, near the edge of a forest. It was getting dark when they took Grandfather’s best friend, Vasile, a little way off into the forest, announcing that they were going to shoot him. The brothers waited anxiously. Soon, a couple of rifle shots shattered the evening quiet.
“The guards returned and escorted the next Witness, my grandfather, into the forest. After walking a short distance, they stopped at a clearing. Several graves had been dug, and one was filled in. Pointing to that grave, the commanding officer turned to Grandfather and said: ‘Do you want to end up like Vasile, or do you want to go back to your family a free man? You have two minutes to make up your mind.’ Grandfather did not need two minutes. Right away he replied: ‘Vasile, whom you shot, I have known for many years. Now I am looking forward to being reunited with him in the resurrection in the new world. I have every confidence that I will be in the new world, together with Vasile. But will you be there?’
“That reply was not what the officer had expected. He marched Grandfather and the others back to camp. As it turned out, Grandfather did not have to wait until the resurrection to see Vasile. The whole thing was just a cruel hoax designed to break the brothers down.”
Communist Propaganda Backfires
To create hatred and suspicion toward Jehovah’s Witnesses, the Communists produced books, brochures, and films that slandered God’s people. One brochure was entitled Double Bottom​—a term referring to the secret literature compartment that brothers built into the bottoms of suitcases and bags. Nicolai Voloşanovschi recalls how the camp commander tried to use this brochure to humiliate him in front of the other prisoners.
Says Nicolai: “The camp commander gathered all the inmates together in one of the barracks. Then he proceeded to quote passages from Double Bottom, including passages that contained slanderous statements about me personally. When he finished speaking, I requested permission to ask some questions. The commander must have thought that this would provide a chance for him to poke fun at me, for he granted my request.
“Addressing the camp commander, I asked if he recalled the first time he had interviewed me when I was inducted into the labor camp. He remembered the interview. Then I asked him if he recalled the questions he had put to me concerning my country of origin, citizenship, and so on while he was filling out my induction papers. Again, he replied yes. He even told the audience what my answers had been. Then I asked him to relate what he had actually written on the forms. He admitted that what he had written did not harmonize with my answers. I then faced the audience and said: ‘You see, this is the same way that this brochure was written.’ The prisoners applauded, and the commander angrily left the scene.”
The Plot to Divide and Conquer
During the 1960’s, the frustrated Soviet authorities implemented new methods in their efforts to disrupt the unity of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The book The Sword and the Shield, published in 1999, discusses some of the once-secret KGB records contained in government archives. It states: “A conference in March 1959 of senior KGB officers leading ‘the struggle against Jehovists [Jehovah’s Witnesses]’ concluded that the correct strategy was ‘to continue measures of repression with measures of disruption.’ The KGB set out to divide, demoralize and discredit the sectarians, as well as to arrest their most influential leaders on trumped-up charges.”
The “measures of disruption” included a concerted campaign to sow distrust among the brothers throughout the Soviet Union. To that end, the KGB began to spread malicious rumors, claiming that a number of key brothers had started to cooperate with the State security services. The KGB camouflaged their lies so cleverly that many Witnesses began to wonder whom they could trust.
Another KGB ploy was to train special agents to pose as “active” Jehovah’s Witnesses who would then try to obtain responsible positions in the organization. Of course, these spies would keep the KGB well-informed. The KGB also secretly approached genuine Witnesses, trying to bribe them with large sums of money for their cooperation.
Sadly, these devious methods had a measure of success in disrupting the unity of the brothers, including those in Moldova. As a result, an atmosphere of suspicion arose. Some brothers broke away from the organization and formed a splinter group that came to be known as the opposition.
Before these events, the brothers in the Soviet Union referred to Jehovah’s organization, the spiritual food it produced, and the responsible brothers it appointed as the channel. Now confusion and uncertainty about that channel began to mount. How were the brothers able to clear up the confusion? Surprisingly, they did so with the help of the Soviet State. Yes, the schemers themselves helped to resolve the very problems they had created. How so?
They Failed to Take God’s Spirit Into Account
Early in the 1960’s, Soviet authorities put many Witness “leaders” from all over the Soviet Union together in one camp about 95 miles [150 km] from the city of Saransk in the republic of Mordvinia, western Russia. Previously, vast distances separated the brothers, hampering communication and fostering misunderstandings. But now those who belonged to the so-called opposition and those who did not were all together. Hence, they could talk face-to-face and separate fact from fiction. Why did the authorities put all these brothers together? Apparently, they felt that the brothers would clash with one another, thus driving in further the wedge of division. Although clever, the scheme failed to take into account Jehovah’s unifying spirit.​—1 Cor. 14:33.
One of the brothers incarcerated in Mordvinia was Gheorghe Gorobeţ. He recalls: “Not long after I was arrested and sent to prison, a brother who had been associating with the opposition was imprisoned with us. When he saw that the responsible brothers were still incarcerated, he was surprised, for he had been told that we were all as free as birds and living a life of luxury sponsored by the KGB!”
Brother Gorobeţ continues: “During my first year in prison, over 700 persons were incarcerated for religious reasons. The majority were Jehovah’s Witnesses. We all worked together in a factory and had time to talk with those who had joined the splinter group. As a result, many matters were clarified during the years 1960 and 1961. Finally, in 1962, the country committee caring for the Soviet Union wrote a letter from right there in the labor camp. The letter went to all congregations within the Soviet Union and began to undo much of the damage caused by the KGB’s campaign of lies.”
Identifying the True Channel
Brother Gorobeţ was released from the labor camp in June 1964, and he returned to Moldova immediately. When he arrived in Tabani, he discovered that many local Witnesses were still confused about whom Jehovah was using to feed and direct His people. A number of brothers would read only the Bible.
A committee of three spiritually mature brothers was appointed to help clarify matters. One of the first things they did was to visit congregations in the north of Moldova, where most of the Witnesses lived. The continuing faithfulness of these and other Christian overseers, despite their having suffered much persecution, convinced many that Jehovah was still using the same organization that had taught them the truth in the first place.
During the late 1960’s, it became evident to the KGB that the preaching work continued to advance despite persecution and other tactics. Describing the reaction of the KGB, the book The Sword and the Shield states: “The [KGB] Centre was disturbed by reports that, even in labor camps, ‘the Jehovah leaders and authorities did not reject their hostile beliefs and in camp conditions continued to carry out their Jehovah work.’ A conference of KGB officers working on operations against Jehovah’s Witnesses met at [Chisinau] in November 1967 to discuss new measures ‘to prevent the sectarians’ hostile work’ and ‘ideological subversion.’”
Harassed by Former Brothers
Regrettably, some individuals fell for these “new measures” and played right into KGB hands. Some had succumbed to greed or fear of man; others were former brothers who nurtured hatred for the Witnesses. The authorities started using these in an effort to break the integrity of the faithful. Witnesses who had endured imprisonment and labor camps said that being subjected to harassment by former brothers, some of whom were now apostates, was one of the most distressing situations they ever faced.
Many apostates came from the aforementioned opposition. At first, this group included some who were simply confused by KGB misinformation. But those who were still attached to the opposition in the late 1960’s included a number who demonstrated the wicked spirit of the evil slave class. Having disregarded Jesus’ warning, they began “to beat [their] fellow slaves.”​—Matt. 24:48, 49.
Yet, the plot to divide and conquer God’s people failed, despite all the sustained pressure from the KGB and their minions. In the early 1960’s when faithful brothers started the work of reuniting the organization in Moldova, most brothers in that land were attached to the opposition. But by 1972, by far the majority had returned to working loyally along with Jehovah’s organization.
An Appreciative Persecutor
Faithful ones who remained in Moldova during the Communist era carried on with the preaching work as best they could. They witnessed informally to family, friends, schoolmates, and workmates. But they were cautious because many party officials in Moldova were fanatically committed to Communist ideology. However, not all Communists felt contempt for Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Simeon Voloşanovschi recalls: “The police searched our home and confiscated a great deal of literature, which the officer in charge itemized. Later he returned with his list and asked me to verify the items. While checking his entries, I noticed an omission​—a Watchtower that discussed the family and how to make homelife happier. I asked the officer about it. ‘Oh, I took it home, and we read it as a family,’ he replied rather sheepishly. ‘Well, did you like what you read?’ I asked. ‘Oh, absolutely! We loved it!’ he said.”
Opposition Eases, and Growth Continues
During the 1970’s, the Communist authorities abandoned their policy of arresting and exiling Jehovah’s people. Still, individual brothers were apprehended and tried for witnessing or attending Christian meetings. The sentences, though, were milder.
The year 1972 saw the elder arrangement begin in Moldova, as elsewhere. Gheorghe Gorobeţ recalls: “The brotherhood accepted the new arrangement with much joy, seeing in it additional evidence that Jehovah’s spirit was at work. Furthermore, the increase in the number of appointed men helped the congregations in Moldova to grow spiritually and numerically.”
By this time, of course, the brothers had gained considerable experience in organizing the preaching work and in discreetly printing Bible-based literature. When Communist oppression began, literature was prepared at two locations in Moldova, and these operated only at night during the decades of intense persecution. So the workers had to lead two lives​—one in the daytime, when they went about their normal activities like other citizens, and another at night, when they worked till the early hours of the morning producing literature for the congregations.
This situation changed, however, when opposition and surveillance eased. The brothers could now operate the underground printeries more efficiently and assign additional volunteers to care for the work. As a result, production increased.
The brothers also improved their printing techniques. For instance, they used special templates that could be prepared on a typewriter. They also modified the presses to print on both sides of a sheet of paper simultaneously. All these improvements boosted production even further. The days of handwritten copies of Bible study aids now seemed long gone!
Naturally, more literature meant that the brothers could do more personal Bible study. This along with much-improved communications helped to clear up any remaining traces of the earlier confusion. Yet, these improvements were just a foretaste of better things to come for Jehovah’s people in Moldova.
True Worship Thrives
Although a political and military Goliath in its heyday, Soviet Communism failed to stamp out true worship. In fact, by means of their program of deportation, the Soviets inadvertently helped to spread the good news to some of ‘the most distant parts of the earth.’ (Acts 1:8) Jehovah promised through Isaiah: “Any weapon whatever that will be formed against you will have no success . . . This is the hereditary possession of the servants of Jehovah, and their righteousness is from me.” (Isa. 54:17) How true those words have proved to be!
A change in government in 1985 made life much easier for Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Soviet Union. They were no longer followed by the secret police or fined for attending religious gatherings. Although the brothers in Moldova continued to have their regular meetings in small groups of ten or fewer, they started to use special occasions, such as weddings and funerals, to hold small circuit assemblies.
Then in the summer of 1989, the preaching work received a boost when three international conventions were held in the Polish cities of Chorzow (near Katowice), Poznan, and Warsaw. Hundreds of delegates from Moldova attended. What a moving experience it was for these faithful brothers who were used to meeting secretly in small numbers to be among international throngs of joyful Witnesses​—all worshiping Jehovah together!
The brothers in Moldova experienced another spiritual treat when in 1991 they were able to hold circuit assemblies openly for the first time in the history of the work in that country. The year 1992 provided another landmark​—an international convention in St. Petersburg, Russia. An even greater number of Moldovan delegates attended this convention than attended the three in Poland in 1989. Yes, Jehovah had opened the floodgates of heaven and had begun to pour out blessing after blessing upon his loyal, appreciative servants.
Training for Traveling Overseers
More freedom also meant closer contact between the country committee for the Soviet Union and the traveling overseers. In December 1989 these spiritually mature brothers, then numbering 60, gathered for instruction at Lvov, Ukraine. Keeping in mind that all in attendance had endured prisons, labor camps, and other forms of persecution, what a joyful, edifying occasion that class proved to be! Indeed, many had already established close friendships during those difficult former times.
Four of the traveling overseers in that class came from Moldova. Upon their return, they conveyed to the congregations the wise counsel they had received at Lvov, especially in regard to the preaching work. For instance, they exhorted the brothers to continue to preach God’s Word discreetly, despite newfound freedoms. (Matt. 10:16) Why the continuing need for caution? Because technically the work was still under ban.
Pressing Need for Kingdom Halls
From the time the preaching work first got established in Moldova, the brothers were conscious of the need to have their own meeting halls. In fact, in 1922 the Bible Students in the village of Corjeuţi constructed a hall, using their own resources. Called a house for meetings, it served their needs for many years.
In the late 1980’s, when official opposition began to ease off considerably, many towns and villages had congregations with several hundred publishers. These met in small groups in private homes. So had the time arrived to go ahead and build Kingdom Halls? To find out, the brothers approached various village administrators.
Some of these officials proved to be most cooperative. This was the case in Feteşti, a village of 3,150 inhabitants in the north of Moldova. In January 1990, local brothers met with the mayor, who informed them that in his village they could consider their work to be free of official restrictions. The brothers, still wary, found the offer hard to believe. So they asked him for permission to modify the home of a brother so that the congregation could use the house as a small Kingdom Hall, even though the congregation had 185 publishers!
The mayor approved the project, and the brothers went to work. However, they soon encountered a major obstacle. If they removed a particular wall for the project to proceed, the house would probably collapse! So work came to an abrupt stop. What would they do? The brothers decided to approach the mayor again to explain the problem. How thrilled they were when he permitted them to construct a brand new Kingdom Hall! Now the congregation threw themselves into the project, completing it in just 27 days.
So that all could fit into the new Kingdom Hall, the Feteşti Congregation was divided into two. Many new publishers, however, were not yet baptized. So why not incorporate a baptism into the dedication program? The brothers went ahead with this idea. Thus, after the baptism talk, all went down to a nearby river, where 80 persons symbolized their dedication to Jehovah.
Of course, many other congregations were also in urgent need of a Kingdom Hall. Having seen pictures of Kingdom Halls in the literature, some congregations decided that they could build something similar. So they pooled their resources, used loads of initiative, and went to work. And these were not just isolated cases. Between 1990 and 1995, the brothers erected over 30 Kingdom Halls​—all with local labor and finances.
Selected Kingdom Halls were also used for circuit assemblies. However, these were so well attended that many had to listen to the program from outside the hall. Hence, the brothers began to give thought to building an Assembly Hall. Once again, they did not procrastinate. In 1992, in the space of just three months, they constructed the first Assembly Hall in Moldova​—an 800-seat building in Corjeuţi. The following year, again using their own labor and resources, the Witnesses built a 1,500-seat Assembly Hall in Feteşti.
The timing of this construction activity seemed providential, for in the mid-1990’s, political change and an economic downturn contributed to the rapid devaluation of the Moldovan currency. As a result, the money needed to build an entire Kingdom Hall in the early 1990’s would not even pay for the chairs a few years later!
Kingdom Hall Construction in the South
Unlike the congregations in the north of Moldova, those in the south had fewer Kingdom Halls. Hence, as the work rapidly expanded during the 1990’s, many newly formed congregations in the south had problems finding suitable places to meet. Public schools had been used, but these became more difficult to rent.
Once again, Jehovah through his organization came to the brothers’ aid. At just the right time, the Governing Body, by means of the Kingdom Hall Fund arrangement, made funds available for the construction of Kingdom Halls in such lands as Moldova, where congregations have limited finances.
The brothers have used this provision to good effect. Chisinau is a fine example. In 1999, there was not one Kingdom Hall in the capital. But by July 2002, ten halls were serving the needs of 30 of the 37 congregations in the city, and three more were under construction.
Legal Recognition at Last!
On August 27, 1991, Moldova became an independent republic. Because the ban on the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses was of Soviet origin, it was no longer valid. Nevertheless, Jehovah’s Witnesses, then numbering about 4,000, were not yet legally registered as a religious organization.
After receiving helpful direction from the Governing Body, the Moldova office promptly approached the appropriate government agencies to seek legal recognition for Jehovah’s Witnesses. The new administration proved to be favorably disposed toward the request. It took some time for the necessary paperwork to be processed, but finally, on July 27, 1994, the office received the official document of registration.
What a memorable day that was for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Moldova! After enduring some six decades of bans, persecution, and imprisonment, they could now worship Jehovah and preach the good news openly. They could also begin to hold their own district conventions. Indeed, in August 1994, the month after they gained legal recognition, Jehovah’s Witnesses gathered at the largest stadium in Chisinau for the first district convention ever held in Moldova. What a thrilling occasion that proved to be!
Bethel Expansion
By 1995 the number of Kingdom publishers had climbed to over 10,000. A small office in Chisinau cared for certain aspects of the work in Moldova, but the Russia branch office​—some 1,240 miles [2,000 km] away—​had general oversight. The Romania branch, though, was only 300 miles [500 km] away, and most Moldovans spoke Romanian. Indeed, Romanian was made the official language of the republic. So after weighing all the facts, the Governing Body recommended that the Romania branch oversee the work in Moldova.
In the meantime, continuing growth began to tax the office in Chisinau, which was just a little apartment. Clearly, the time had arrived to establish a Bethel family. Among the first members were Ion and Iulia Rusu. Brother Rusu had served as a substitute circuit overseer from 1991 to 1994. Another member of the Bethel family was Gheorghe Gorobeţ, who served as a district overseer until he transferred to this new assignment. He lived off-site and commuted to Bethel daily. Guenther and Rosaria Matzura, graduates of the 67th class of Gilead, arrived on May 1, 1996, after having served for several years in Romania.
As the number of publishers continued to increase, so did the need for more Bethel workers. But space was limited. What is more, by 1998 the Moldova Bethel home was spread across five city apartments! Hence, the search began for a suitable site to build a single Bethel complex. Government authorities in Chisinau kindly offered the brothers a 32,000-square-foot [3,000 sq m] property right in the heart of the city, which they gratefully accepted. With the prospect of even further expansion in mind, the brothers also purchased an adjoining property.
A local firm was contracted to build the shell. International volunteers and local brothers and sisters did the balance of the work. Construction began in September 1998, and just 14 months later, an excited Bethel family moved into their new home, thrilled to be all together at last.
The dedication program for the new Bethel complex was held on September 16, 2000. Guests from 11 countries attended. On the following day, Gerrit Lösch of the Governing Body addressed an audience of over 10,000 at the local sports stadium. All in attendance felt the warm bond of love that unites Jehovah’s people worldwide.
At present, the Moldova Bethel family has 26 members. Some, like David and Miriam Grozescu, came from overseas to serve as Bethelites in foreign service. Others, like Enno Schlenzig, attended the Ministerial Training School in their home country and then accepted a foreign assignment in Moldova. So, what the Bethel family lacks in size, it more than makes up for in nationalities.
Training Harvest Workers
During the decades of bans and persecution, Jehovah’s people in Moldova shared the good news with others discreetly and, of course, informally. But now the time had arrived for them to share openly in the house-to-house work and in street witnessing. Obediently, the brothers applied themselves to these facets of the ministry, street witnessing in particular becoming very popular. As the number of publishers increased, however, balance was needed. Accordingly, the congregations were encouraged to focus on the house-to-house work, which they faithfully did.
Now more than ever, the publishers began to appreciate just how hungry their neighbors were for genuine spiritual food. To help care for that need, Jehovah’s organization provided the congregations with The Watchtower, Awake!, and other Bible study aids in both Romanian and Russian. At the same time, the publishers worked hard to improve the quality of their ministry by applying the suggested presentations outlined in Our Kingdom Ministry. They also made good use of the progressive training provided through the Theocratic Ministry School.
Further assistance, especially on an organizational level, has been given by mature, experienced brothers from other countries. Like trellises supporting fruit-bearing vines, these capable and willing international helpers have provided both support and stability to the congregations.
A Period of Rapid Growth
The rapid growth in the number of disciples in Moldova is clearly evident in the capital city, Chisinau, which has a population of 662,000. In January 1991, prior to Jehovah’s Witnesses’ receiving legal recognition, Chisinau had just two congregations with about 350 publishers. But by January 2003, that number swelled to 37 congregations with over 3,870 publishers! One congregation saw 101 Bible students start out as new publishers in just nine months! With such rapid growth, it is not unusual for congregations in the city to divide after only two years or so.
In August 1993, Moldova as a whole had 6,551 publishers. But by March 2002, that number swelled to 18,425​—a 280-percent increase in nine years! Over that same period, the number of regular pioneers went from 28 to 1,232.
From Vice-Mayor to Pioneer
Among those who have come to a knowledge of Jehovah are many former Communists, some of whom even held political office. One such person is Valeriu Mârza, formerly the vice-mayor of Soroca, a town of about 39,000 people. On special occasions when parades were held, Valeriu was among the dignitaries in the gallery who were saluted by the marchers as they passed by. Hence, he was well-known in the city.
Eventually, however, Valeriu started to study the Bible and was baptized. How did people react when he witnessed to them? “Practically everybody invited me inside,” says Brother Mârza. “What fine opportunities I had for preaching, and what fruitful territory my wife and I found our town to be!” Before long, Brother Mârza was appointed a special pioneer. He and his wife also served at Bethel for a year. Now they have the privilege of sharing in the circuit work.
Pioneers Help Out
The publisher-to-population ratio in Moldova is now one of the best in Europe. Nevertheless, many villages and smaller towns still have no Witnesses. Because of difficult economic conditions, most publishers and pioneers are unable to serve where the need is greater. To help ensure that the good news reaches people in the entire territory, the Romania branch has appointed nearly 50 special pioneers in Moldova. Over 20 of these have also benefited from the training provided by the Ministerial Training School, which has been held in Romania, Russia, and Ukraine.
These hardworking evangelizers are obtaining some excellent results. For example, when special-pioneer couple Serghei and Oxana Zighel were assigned to Căuşeni in 1995, the town had just one group of 15 publishers. The Zighels assisted the local brothers in starting many new Bible studies. They also manifested a joyful pioneer spirit, with the result that many others joined them in full-time service. Now Căuşeni has two congregations with about 155 publishers​—a ten-fold increase in just seven years! In the meantime, the Zighels have taken up the circuit work, which enables them to assist many more congregations.
Freedom but Not Without Difficulties
Human rule, no matter what form it takes, has its problems. Under the Romanian monarchy, the Fascist dictatorship, and the Communist rule, Jehovah’s people in Moldova had to contend with clerical opposition, bans, persecution, and deportation. Nowadays, Jehovah’s Witnesses, like their neighbors, have to cope with economic difficulties, which can push both parents into the work force. Others have trouble just finding a job.
All the while, crime and corruption are on the increase as materialism and moral decay take their toll. Can Jehovah’s people be victorious in the face of these subtle threats to their spirituality? Yes, indeed! They have learned through experience that Jehovah never deserts his loyal ones, who look to him for help when trials and temptations come their way.​—2 Tim. 3:1-5; Jas. 1:2-4.
The present situation calls to mind the 14th chapter of Revelation, which discusses two symbolic harvests. One is the harvest of “the vine of the earth”​—an evil crop that, true to prophecy, is proliferating during these last days. (Rev. 14:17-20; Ps. 92:7) Soon this “vine,” along with all its rotten fruitage, will be uprooted and hurled “into the great winepress of the anger of God.” How Jehovah’s servants yearn for that time!
In the meantime, anointed Christians and their companions rejoice in their spiritual prosperity. Yes, Jehovah’s “vineyard of foaming wine” will continue to produce an abundance of nourishing spiritual food, drawing sheeplike ones to its bounty. Why can God’s people be confident of this? Because Jehovah himself is safeguarding his precious vineyard. (Isa. 27:2-4) How that has been demonstrated in Moldova! True, Satan’s schemes​—whether persecution, deportation, lying propaganda, or false brothers—​have caused God’s people hardships but never spiritual defeat.​—Isa. 54:17.
Yes, “happy is the man that keeps on enduring trial, because on becoming approved he will receive the crown of life, which Jehovah promised to those who continue loving him.” (Jas. 1:12) With those precious words in mind, may you be moved by the history of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Moldova to “continue loving” Jehovah, to ‘keep on enduring trial,’ and to “keep bearing much fruit.”​—John 15:8.
[Footnote]
Unless the context demands otherwise, the name Moldova will be used instead of Bessarabia and Moldavia. Keep in mind, however, that Moldova’s present boundaries are not the same as the borders of old Bessarabia and Moldavia. Part of Bessarabia, for example, is now within Ukraine, and a section of Moldavia is in Romania.
[Box/Picture on page 71]
A Wine Cellar for Russia and Eastern Europe
  Moldova’s long summers and fertile soils make it ideal for wine production​—an industry that goes back thousands of years. At the end of the third century B.C.E., wine production received a boost when the local population established links with the Greeks and later in the second century C.E., with the Romans.
  Today, wine production is Moldova’s agricultural mainstay, with nearly 130 wineries producing up to 37 million gallons [140 million L] per year. Approximately 90 percent of the wine is exported, mainly to Russia and Ukraine, which import about 80 percent and 7 percent respectively.
[Box on page 72]
An Overview of Moldova
The land: Central and northern Moldova is a forest region that includes lush uplands and steppes, or grassy plains. The south is mostly cultivated steppe.
The people: Ethnic Moldovans make up about two thirds of the population. The balance comprises mainly Russians, Ukrainians, Gagauz, Bulgarians, and Jews, in that order. Most Moldovans belong to the Eastern Orthodox Church.
The language: Romanian is the official language. Many people also speak Russian, especially in the cities, making the use of two languages the norm.
The livelihood: Agriculture and food processing are the mainstay of the economy. The manufacturing sector is undergoing development.
The food: Crops include grapes, wheat, corn, sugar beets, and sunflowers. Livestock is primarily beef, dairy cattle, and pigs.
The climate: Temperatures range from about 25 degrees Fahrenheit [-4°C] in January to about 70 degrees [21°C] in July. Overall, the climate is warm with comparatively mild winters. Average annual precipitation is about 20 inches [50 cm].
[Box on page 83-85]
Outstanding Examples of Christian Neutrality
  George Vacarciuc: Brother Vacarciuc was raised as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. In December 1942 the Fascists summoned him for military service. He refused to take up arms and was locked up in a totally dark cell for 16 days with very little to eat. Again the authorities summoned him, promising to cancel his sentence​—which had not yet been read to him—​if he did as previously ordered. Once more he refused.
  For this, George was sentenced to 25 years in prison. But his term was cut short when Soviet forces arrived on September 25, 1944. Less than two months later, however, the Soviets tried to conscript him. Because he would not go against his Bible-trained conscience, he was sentenced to ten years of forced labor at various camps. For 12 months his family lost track of him. After serving five years, Brother Vacarciuc was released on December 5, 1949. He returned to his home in Corjeuţi and remained faithful until his death on March 12, 1980.
  Parfin Goreacioc: Born in 1900, Brother Goreacioc came to a knowledge of Bible truth in the village of Hlina during the years 1925 to 1927. Together with his brothers, Nicolae and Ion, he learned the truth from Damian and Alexandru Roşu, the first Bible Students in the village.
  In 1933, Parfin, along with other Witnesses, was arrested and taken to the town of Khotin, where he was questioned and then fined for preaching. In 1939, at the instigation of the village priest, Parfin was brought to the police station in the neighboring village of Ghilavăţ. Here police tied him face down on a bare plank bed and struck him repeatedly on the soles of his feet.
  When the Fascists came to power, Parfin was again arrested and sent to prison. That same year, however, the Soviets liberated him, only to arrest him for refusing military service. They kept him in prison in Chisinau for several months and then released him.
  In 1947 the Soviets arrested Parfin yet again, this time sentencing him to eight years of exile for preaching God’s Kingdom. In 1951 his children were deported to Siberia. However, they did not join their father. In fact, they never saw him again. Parfin became seriously ill while in exile and died in 1953, faithful to the end.
  Vasile Pădureţ: Born in 1920 in Corjeuţi, Brother Pădureţ learned the truth in 1941 during the Fascist era. Hence, he too suffered at the hands of both the Fascists and the Soviets. To the latter, he courageously said: “I did not shoot Bolsheviks, and I am not going to kill Fascists.”
  For this conscientious, Bible-based stand, Vasile was sentenced to ten years in a Soviet labor camp. However, the sentence was reduced to five years, and he returned home on August 5, 1949. When he was arrested for the third time, Operation North had begun. So on April 1, 1951, Vasile and his family boarded a boxcar for Siberia. After spending about five years there, they were allowed to return to Corjeuţi, Moldova. Vasile died faithful to Jehovah on July 6, 2002, while this report was being prepared.
[Box/Picture on page 89, 90]
‘I Would Not Exchange My Life of Service for Anything’
Ion Sava Ursoi
Born: 1920
Baptized: 1943
Profile: Served as a circuit overseer during the Communist era.
  I was born in Caracuşeni, Moldova, and learned the truth before the outbreak of World War II. My wife died in 1942. At her funeral a mob chased me from the cemetery. Why? Because I had changed my religion. Later that year, the Fascist government attempted to draft me into the military. Because of my desire to remain politically neutral, I refused to serve in the army. I was sentenced to death, but later the sentence was commuted to a 25-year prison term. I was transferred from camp to camp. While I was incarcerated in Craiova, Romania, the Soviet army arrived and set us free.
  I had hardly tasted freedom when the Communists put me back in prison. They sent me to Kalinin, Russia. Two years later, in 1946, they let me go home to my village, where I helped to reorganize the preaching work. Then in 1951, the Soviets arrested me again. This time they deported me, along with many other Witnesses, to Siberia. I didn’t return home again until 1969.
  Looking back on my life, I remember many situations where Jehovah gave me the strength to maintain my integrity. I would not exchange my life of service to my Creator for anything in the world. Now I contend with the limitations of old age and failing health. But the sure hope of life in the new world, when my body will regain its youthful vigor, fortifies me in my resolve not to “give up in doing what is fine.”​—Gal. 6:9.
[Box/Picture on page 100-102]
I Have Much to Sing About
Alexandra Cordon
Born: 1929
Baptized: 1957
Profile: Suffered under the Soviet regime and currently serves as a congregation publisher.
  My love for singing helped me to find the truth and, later, to stay spiritually strong when my faith was tested. My story begins in the 1940’s when, as a teenager, I came in contact with a group of young people in Corjeuţi who enjoyed spending their free time singing Kingdom songs and discussing the Bible. The spiritual truths I learned during those discussions and from the songs made a deep impression on me.
  I soon became a publisher of the good news. This led to my arrest in 1953, along with ten other Witnesses. While awaiting trial, I was incarcerated in a prison in Chisinau. I maintained my spiritual strength by singing Kingdom songs, which evidently angered one of the guards. “You are in prison,” he said. “This is no place to sing!”
  I replied: “All my life I have sung. Why should I stop now? You can lock me up, but you cannot put a lock on my lips. My heart is free, and I love Jehovah. So I have much to sing about.”
  I was sentenced to 25 years in a labor camp in Inta, near the Arctic Circle. During the short summer months, the other Witnesses and I worked in the nearby woods. Again, Kingdom songs, many of which we knew by heart, helped us to stay spiritually strong and to feel free at heart. Moreover, our guards, unlike the one in Chisinau, encouraged us to sing.
  I remained at the Inta camp for three years, three months, and three days. Then, thanks to an amnesty, I was released. Because I was not yet permitted to go home to Moldova, I went to Tomsk, Russia. There I was reunited with my husband, who had also spent time in prison. We had been apart for four years.
  Because of my arrest, I had not yet symbolized my dedication to Jehovah by water baptism. So I asked the brothers in Tomsk about the matter. Since a number of others also wanted to be baptized, the brothers promptly arranged for a baptism. However, because of the ban, they decided to hold it at night at a lake in the nearby forest.
  At the appointed time, we left the outskirts of Tomsk and walked into the forest by twos so as not to arouse suspicion. Each pair was to follow the pair in front of them until all arrived safely at the lake. At least, that was the plan. Unfortunately, the two elderly sisters in front of my partner and me managed to wander off the trail. We followed, and those behind faithfully followed us. Soon about ten of us were stumbling through the dark, soaked to the skin from the wet undergrowth and shivering. Bears and wolves were known to prowl in that area, so visions of them gripped our imagination. We were so tense that every strange noise startled us.
  Realizing how important it was not to panic or lose heart, I suggested that we stand quietly and whistle a Kingdom tune, hoping that the others might hear us. We also prayed earnestly. So imagine our joy when we heard the same tune drifting back toward us through the darkness! Yes, our brothers had heard us! Quickly, they turned on a flashlight so that we could make our way to them. Shortly thereafter, we were immersed in the icy water, hardly aware of the cold because we were so happy.
  I am now 74 years of age and back in Corjeuţi, where I first found the truth. Despite my advancing years, I still have much to sing about, especially in praise of our heavenly Father.
[Box/Pictures on page 104-106]
I Tried to Follow My Parents’ Example
Vasile Ursu
Born: 1927
Baptized: 1941
Profile: Served as congregation servant and worked in underground literature production.
  My parents, Simeon and Maria Ursu, were baptized in 1929. Of their five children, I was the eldest. During the Fascist era, Father and Mother were arrested and sentenced to 25 years of forced labor because of their neutral stand. Spiritual brothers and sisters from the congregation in nearby Corjeuţi looked after us children and cared for our family farm. Hence, we always had enough to eat. Our elderly grandmother, not in the truth, also helped care for us. I was 14 years old at the time.
  Thanks to my parents’ good example, I tried very hard to care for my siblings spiritually. To that end, I would get them up early each day to discuss a portion of our Bible-based literature together. They were not always keen to rise, but I gave them no choice. I realized the importance of good study habits. As a result, when our parents were released early and returned home in 1944, they were delighted to see how spiritually healthy we were. What a joyful reunion that was! Our happiness, though, was short-lived.
  The following year the Soviets arrested Father and imprisoned him in Norilsk, Siberia, above the Arctic Circle. Three years later, I married Emilia, a vivacious, spiritually-minded sister. We had practically grown up together, so I knew her well. However, only a year after our wedding, I was arrested together with my mother. We were sent to Chisinau, where we were sentenced to 25 years of forced labor. Emilia lovingly cared for my siblings, who were now robbed of their parents and their big brother.
  Eventually, I was sent to the coal mines in Vorkuta, an infamous labor camp north of the Arctic Circle. Two years later, in 1951, Emilia and my three brothers and one sister were exiled to Tomsk, in western Siberia. In 1955, Emilia asked to be transferred to Vorkuta to be with me. There she gave birth to the first of our three children, a girl we named Tamara.
  In September 1957 an amnesty was declared, and we were set free. But one month later I was arrested yet again. This time I was sentenced to seven years in a labor camp in Mordvinia, close to Saransk, Russia. Many other brothers were also incarcerated there, and more were to come. When our wives came to visit us, they managed to smuggle in a regular supply of literature, which we deeply appreciated. In December 1957, Emilia moved to Kurgan, western Siberia, to care for our daughter, Tamara, who had been staying with Emilia’s parents. As a result, Emilia and I were apart for seven years. Still, this was the only way that we could prevent Tamara from being sent to a State-run institution.
  In 1964, I was released but not allowed to return home to Moldova. Although my movements were still officially restricted, I was able to join my wife and daughter in Kurgan, where I served as a book study conductor in the congregation. In 1969 we moved to Krasnodar, in the Caucasus. After serving there for eight years, we moved to Chirchik, Uzbekistan. There I worked in the underground printery. Finally, in 1984 we were allowed to return to Moldova. We settled in Tighina, a city of 160,000 people and just 18 publishers. Over the years, this small band has grown to nine congregations comprising nearly 1,000 publishers and pioneers.
  Do I regret the many years I have spent in labor camps and prisons for the Lord’s sake? Not at all! For me the issues were clear, even when I was a newly baptized 14-year-old: either you love God or you love the world! Having decided to serve Jehovah, I gave no thought to compromise.​—Jas. 4:4.
[Pictures]
Left: Vasile Ursu
Far left: Vasile with wife, Emilia, and daughter, Tamara
[Box/Pictures on page 108-110]
A Little Boy With a Flower Reached My Heart
Valentina Cojocaru
Born: 1952
Baptized: 1997
Profile: A teacher under the Soviet regime, she included atheism in her lessons.
  In 1978, I was a kindergarten teacher in Feteşti, Moldova. I was also an atheist. At a staff meeting, we were directed to concentrate on children of Jehovah’s Witnesses with a view to teaching them atheism. This, I thought, was a good idea. So I tried to devise imaginative ways to reach the hearts of my Witness pupils. I came up with what I believed to be a good idea.
  I asked the class to prepare two flower beds. In one, the children were to plant flowers, water them, and remove any weeds. But they were not to touch the other bed. It belonged to God, I told them. He would care for it himself. The class received the project enthusiastically. Of course, as the children planted, watered, and weeded their plot, “God’s little garden” exploded with weeds.
  Then, one bright, sunny day, I assembled the class in front of the two beds. I commended the children for their fine efforts, after which I embarked on my carefully thought-out lines. “Did you notice that God did nothing to his flower bed?” I asked. “See how obvious it is that this bed belongs to nobody?”
  The children agreed that it certainly looked that way. I then presented my punch line: “You see, children, this flower bed looks like that because God exists only in the imagination of people. So if God does not really exist, how could he look after flowers or anything else for that matter?”
  While talking, I observed the children to see how they were responding. I noticed one little boy, whose parents were Witnesses, getting more and more agitated. Finally, he could not contain himself any longer. He ran to a nearby field, picked a dandelion, and presented it to me, saying: “If God does not exist, then who made this flower grow? None of us looked after it.” His logic was a blow to me. Deep inside, I realized that the child had made a powerful point.
  Because of my Communist upbringing, it took years for me to take the next step​—to examine the Bible. However, in 1995, I approached the local Witnesses and asked for a study. Imagine my delight when I learned that one of my former pupils was now one of my teachers!
  To be sure, the Communist system gave me a good secular education. But it failed to teach me the most important lessons in life. Today, thanks to Jehovah and a courageous little boy, I am able to use both my spiritual and my secular knowledge to help others appreciate that there really is a God and that he deeply cares for his human creation.
[Box/Picture on page 113-115]
Born in Exile
Lidia Sevastian
Born: 1954
Baptized: 1995
Profile: After being reared by her Witness mother and unbelieving father, she lost contact with Jehovah’s Witnesses for many years.
  My mother and grandmother became Jehovah’s Witnesses in the early 1940’s. Although a good man, Father did not accept Bible truth at that time. By 1951, Mother had two children and was pregnant with twins. In April of that year, the authorities tried to break up our family. While Father was at work, they put Mother​—who was about to give birth—​and my older siblings on a train bound for Siberia. Before that, however, Mother managed to get a message to Father, who hurried home. Though not a Witness, he boarded the train and went into exile with his family.
  During the trip to Siberia, Mother was allowed a brief stay in the town of Asino to give birth to the twins. The rest of the family had to go on to the district of Tomsk, where Father arranged for accommodations. He was assigned to work alongside the brothers. A few weeks later, Mother and her newborn twins joined the family. Tragically, the infants died because of the inhuman conditions in which the family had to live.
  Nevertheless, four more children were born in exile, including my twin brother and me. Father loyally cared for us all. Finally, in 1957, we were allowed to return to our home village. Mother continued to inculcate Bible principles into our hearts, even though she was shadowed by the secret police.
  Father, on the other hand, was primarily concerned that his children receive a good secular education. So at the age of 16, I went to Chisinau to study at the university. Later, I married and moved to Kazakhstan, where I became isolated not only from my parents but also from Jehovah’s organization. I returned to Chisinau in 1982 and immediately began to look for a congregation of Jehovah’s people, but in vain. For eight years I felt that I was the only person in the city who wanted to worship Jehovah.
  Then while standing at a bus stop one day, I overheard two women talking about Jehovah. I moved closer so that I could hear better. Thinking that I was a KGB agent, the women changed the subject. When they started to walk away, I followed, which obviously alarmed them. So I quickly approached them and, after some discussion, convinced them of my sincerity. At last I saw my dream of associating with Jehovah’s organization fulfilled! Sadly, though, my husband opposed my stand.
  By that time, we had two children. In 1992, I had surgery on my spine and had to lie still for six months in a hospital bed. At that depressing stage in my life, something wonderful happened: My son, Pavel, took a stand for Jehovah and got baptized at the 1993 international convention in Kiev. In time I recovered well enough to be able to walk again. So in 1995, I too symbolized my dedication to Jehovah.
  Today, many members of my family are Witnesses, for which I thank Jehovah and Mother, whose steadfast example always remained with me. As for my wonderfully loyal father, I am thrilled to say that before he died, he too became one of Jehovah’s servants.
[Box/Picture on page 117, 118]
Our Sacrifices Pale in Comparison With Jehovah’s
Mihai Ursoi
Born: 1927
Baptized: 1945
Profile: Persecuted by both the Fascists and the Communists.
  I became a publisher of the good news in 1941. In 1942, when I was 15 years of age, I was supposed to receive military training at the local school. Pictures of Romanian King Michael, General Antonescu, and the Virgin Mary hung in the classroom. When our group entered the room, we were supposed to bow before the pictures and make the sign of the cross. Three of us refused to do so.
  For that the local police cruelly beat us. We spent the night at the school. In the morning we were sent to Corjeuţi, where we were again beaten. From Corjeuţi we were taken to a few other places before being sent, on foot, some 60 miles [100 km] to where we were to be court-martialed. My feet bled from that walk. Finally, I was sent home without being sentenced, likely because of my age.
  When I was 18, I was conscripted by the Soviet authorities. Again I refused to compromise my neutrality and was brutally beaten, as was my friend Gheorghe Nimenco. In fact, he died six weeks later from his injuries. Once again, I was sent home, I assume because of my age. The Soviets rearrested me in 1947, this time threatening to shoot me if I refused military service. However, they put me in solitary confinement for two months instead, after which they sent me to do forced labor on the Volga-Don Canal project. It proved to be very dangerous work, and many were killed. In one accident that cost many lives, I narrowly escaped injury and was sent home to Moldova.
  There I got married. In 1951 my then pregnant wife, Vera, and I were exiled, traveling first by train and then by boat to the Siberian taiga, a huge region of subarctic forest, where I had to cut lumber. Vera and I shared a cabin with 16 other families. Happily, in 1959 we were allowed to return home to Moldova.
  A number of things have fortified me during those difficult years and since then. One was the example of faith set by my brother Ion. (See page 89.) He was sentenced to death, and even though he did not know that his sentence was to be commuted, he refused to compromise. I am also strengthened when I reflect on how Jehovah has always cared for me and, later, my wife during the trials we endured for his name. Still, our sacrifices pale in comparison with what Jehovah did in our behalf by sending his Son to die as a ransom for us. Reflecting on that extraordinary provision helps me to face each day with joy.
[Box/Picture on page 121-123]
I Felt Jehovah’s Tender Care
Mihailina Gheorghiţa
Born: 1930
Baptized: 1947
Profile: Worked as a courier and a translator during the years of ban.
  I learned the truth in 1945 and enjoyed sharing the good news with my neighbors in my home village, Glodeni, and in the nearby village of Petrunea. Because I witnessed at school, the school authorities refused to give me a diploma. Even so, I was delighted to use my education to assist in translating Bible-based publications from Romanian and Ukrainian into Russian.
  Shortly after my baptism, I was caught translating and was sentenced to 25 years of forced labor at Vorkuta, north of the Arctic Circle, where there were many other sisters. Despite the trying conditions, we all kept preaching. We also managed to get literature. In fact, we even produced some for our use right there in the camp.
  One day I met a young woman who had been arrested because the authorities mistakenly thought she was a Witness. I suggested that she look into God’s Word, since Jehovah has the power to liberate his people should it be his purpose to do so. Eventually, she agreed to a Bible study and became one of our sisters. Not long after that, she received an early release from the camp.
  Later, I was transferred to Karaganda, Kazakhstan. Finally, on July 5, 1956, I too was released. I moved to Tomsk, where I met and married Alexandru Gheorghiţa, who had spent six years in prison for his faith. Both of us continued preaching in the vast territory of Siberia, aware that the secret police were still watching us. Next we moved to Irkutsk, which is just a little west of Lake Baikal. There we continued to produce literature secretly. Later we also served in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan. Although cautious when witnessing, Alexandru was caught and given a ten-year sentence.
  The prosecuting attorney said that I could visit Alexandru while he was in jail pending trial. Since this was not normally allowed, I asked him why he was extending this kindness. “You are a young couple,” he said, “and you have a child. Maybe you will reconsider your decision.” I told the prosecutor that long ago Alexandru and I had made our decision to serve Jehovah and that we were determined to remain faithful. He replied: “Even your Bible says that a live dog is better off than a dead lion.” (Eccl. 9:4) “True,” I said, “but the sort of live dog you describe will not inherit God’s new world.”
  Alexandru served his full ten-year prison term and one more year under house arrest. After his release, we moved to Kazakhstan and then to Uzbekistan to help with the work. Finally, in 1983, we returned to Moldova, happy to have had the incomparable privilege of helping honesthearted people in many different places to learn about Jehovah.
  Upon reflection, I readily admit that my life has not always been easy. But the same is true of my non-Witness neighbors. They too have had many problems to cope with. But the difference is that our suffering has been for the sake of the good news. Hence, we have felt Jehovah’s tender protection and care. Furthermore, we can see beyond our trials to a glorious and everlasting future.
[Chart/Graph on page 80, 81]
MOLDOVA​—A TIME LINE
1891: C. T. Russell visits Kishinev, Bessarabia (now Chisinau, Moldova).
1895
1921: Annual report indicates that over 200 have accepted Bible truth.
1922: First “house for meetings” constructed, in Corjeuţi.
1925: Work of Bible Students is prohibited.
1930
1940: Romania cedes Bessarabia to USSR, and it is renamed Moldavian SSR.
1941: Romania retakes Moldova. Fascism and war hysteria result in persecution of the Witnesses.
1944: USSR reoccupies Moldova. Persecution continues.
1949: Soviets start deporting Jehovah’s Witnesses and others.
1951: Stalin begins Operation North.
1960’s: KGB tries to cause disruption and division among God’s people.
1965
1989: Witnesses enjoy greater religious freedom. Moldovan delegates attend conventions in Poland.
1991: Moldavian SSR renamed Republic of Moldova. First circuit assemblies are held. First zone visit is made by a representative from headquarters.
1994: Jehovah’s Witnesses obtain legal registration. First district convention is held in Chisinau.
2000
2000: New Bethel home in Chisinau is dedicated.
2003: 18,473 publishers are active in Moldova.
[Graph]
(See publication)
Total Publishers
Total Pioneers
                                                  20,000
                                                  10,000
1895          1930          1965          2000
[Maps on page 73]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
UKRAINE
MOLDOVA
  Briceni
  Tabani
  Lipcani
  Şirăuţi
  Corjeuţi
  Ţaul
  Feteşti
  Soroca
  Bălţi
  Petrunea
  CHISINAU
  Căuşeni
  Dniester River
  Prut River
ROMANIA
  Iasi
[Full-page picture on page 66]
[Picture on page 74]
Ilie Groza, one of the first Witnesses in Moldova
[Picture on page 75]
Tudor Groza
[Picture on page 78]
Ioana Groza
[Pictures on page 92]
Parfin Palamarciuc and his son Nicolae
[Picture on page 93]
Vasile Gherman
[Picture on page 94]
Nicolae Anischevici
[Picture on page 95]
Maria Gherman
[Pictures on page 96]
Boxcars that were used to transport Witnesses to Siberia
[Picture on page 98]
Ivan Mikitkov
[Picture on page 99]
Constantin Şobe
[Pictures on page 107]
Nicolai Voloşanovschi and the brochure “Double Bottom”
[Picture on page 111]
Gheorghe Gorobeţ
[Picture on page 126]
Assembly Hall in Feteşti
[Picture on page 131]
Moldova country committee, left to right: David Grozescu, Anatolie Cravciuc, and Tiberiu Kovacs

