Republic of Congo (Brazzaville)
The title “The Truth Shall Make You Free” sparkled on the purple book in the opened package. Etienne was puzzled. There was no doubt that the package was meant for him. The address carried his name, Etienne Nkounkou, head draftsman at a government department in Bangui, French Equatorial Africa. However, he had not ordered the book, and the return address, Watch Tower in Switzerland, meant nothing to him. Little did he realize that Bible truth as explained in that book was about to change his life. That truth would also free thousands of his fellow Africans from false religion, tribal prejudices, and illiteracy. It would protect many from being swept along by the impending political euphoria and the disillusionment that followed. It would provide confidence and hope during traumatic events. It would also inspire God-fearing people to risk their lives to aid others. The story of these developments will move you and encourage you. Before we find out what Etienne did next, however, let us consider some background information about the African land that he called home.
A decade before Christopher Columbus made his famous voyage to the Americas in 1492, Portuguese sailors under Diogo Cão arrived at the mouth of the Congo River in central Africa. They did not know that the river water splashing against their ship had traveled thousands of miles before reaching the ocean.
The Portuguese met the local people, inhabitants of the flourishing Kongo kingdom. For several hundred years thereafter, the Portuguese and other European traders bought ivory and slaves from Africans who lived along the coast. It was not until the late 1800’s that Europeans ventured inland. One of the most prominent men to explore this territory was Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza, an officer in the French navy. In 1880, Brazza signed a treaty with a local king, putting the area north of the Congo River under French protection. Later the territory became French Equatorial Africa. Its capital was Brazzaville.
Today, Brazzaville is the capital and the largest city in what is now the Republic of Congo. The city is located on the banks of the Congo River. Downstream, the river rages over boulders and ledges for much of the 250 miles [400 km] toward the sea, where Cão anchored his ship on his voyage of discovery. From Brazzaville you can look across the river at the skyline of Kinshasa, the capital of the Democratic Republic of Congo. Since both countries adopted the name of the river, it is common to call them Congo (Brazzaville) and Congo (Kinshasa).
The rapids and waterfalls downstream of Brazzaville make it impossible to navigate the river to the Atlantic. However, a railway links Brazzaville to the coastal city of Pointe-Noire. Most of the inhabitants of Congo live in and around these two centers. Though some coastal towns and cities lie farther north, most of this hot and densely forested country is sparsely populated.
The Truth Begins to Set Men Free
Let us now return to Etienne’s story. The year that he received the book in the mail was 1947. On the very day that he received it, Etienne read and discussed the first chapters with a neighbor. Both recognized the ring of truth and decided to invite some friends the following Sunday to read the book with them and to check the scriptures. Those who came were pleased with what they learned and decided to meet again the next Sunday. A customs officer named Augustin Bayonne was present at the second meeting. Like Etienne, he was originally from Brazzaville, and he too became zealous in spreading the truth that brings genuine freedom.
The following week, Etienne received two letters. One was from an acquaintance in Cameroon who knew of Etienne’s interest in religion. He wrote that he had sent Etienne’s name to the Switzerland office of the Watch Tower Society. The second was from Switzerland saying that a book was being sent to Etienne and encouraging him to read the book and to share it with his family and friends. It also provided an address in France where he could get more information. Now Etienne knew why the book had come to him. Soon he began regular correspondence with the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in France.
Within a few years, both Etienne and Augustin had returned to Brazzaville. Before that, however, Etienne wrote to an acquaintance in Brazzaville named Timothée Miemounoua, who was the dean of a technical school. His letter began: “I am pleased to inform you that the way that we have been following is not the way of the truth. Jehovah’s Witnesses have the truth.” Etienne went on to explain what he had learned. He also enclosed the book “The Truth Shall Make You Free.” Timothée reacted favorably to the Bible’s message, just as Etienne and Augustin had. These were the first three Congolese to embrace Bible truth, and each of them went on to help many others to do the same.
Timothée invited students who were boarding at the technical school to attend Bible discussions during the evening hours. He also wrote to request additional Bible-based publications. The group began to hold meetings and to preach as best they could. Some students, such as Noé Mikouiza and Simon Mampouya, later enjoyed privileges of oversight in Jehovah’s organization.
In 1950, Eric Cooke, a missionary living in Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe), visited to encourage the small groups of interested people in Bangui and Brazzaville. The problem, however, was that Brother Cooke could not speak French. Etienne recalls: “Using his small English-French dictionary, this humble, sympathetic brother tried his best to explain to us the Kingdom-preaching work and the theocratic organization. Sometimes we really had to guess what he was trying to say.”
Restrictions Imposed
Brother Cooke’s visit had come just in time because on July 24, 1950, the high commissioner of the colonial authorities imposed restrictions on the importation and circulation of all literature published by Jehovah’s Witnesses. During the next year, the publishers in French Equatorial Africa placed only six pieces of literature, though they held 468 public meetings. The 1952 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses expressed understanding and compassion for the brothers. It stated: “Imagine, if you can, being in a vast territory with only 37 publishers of the Kingdom message scattered throughout the entire land. Perhaps you had never seen any other active witnesses except those few in your own home town. The only thing you knew of the truth and the procedure for witnessing was what you had read of the publications and of the few letters that the Society had been able to get to you. [This is what] the brothers in French-controlled Africa are facing.”
Later Jacques Michel came from France to encourage the group and to provide further training. Noé Mikouiza, one of the technical-school students, remembers a question that was on their minds. They asked: “Is it forbidden to drink wine?” All eyes were fixed on Brother Michel as he opened his Bible to Psalm 104:15. After reading that verse, Jacques explained that wine is a gift from God, though Christians should not drink too much of it.
The newly baptized brothers in Brazzaville zealously witnessed to others. On weekends, they regularly ferried across the river to preach in Kinshasa. In 1952 the first Congolese on the south side of the river were baptized. The brothers from Brazzaville did much to aid those in Kinshasa during those early years. Later the roles would be reversed.
In December 1954 the brothers organized an assembly in Brazzaville. Those attending numbered 650, and the number baptized was 70. The truth was freeing more and more people from false religion. Of course, the religious leaders of Christendom were not happy about this and worked to turn governmental authorities against Jehovah’s Witnesses. The police thought that Timothée Miemounoua was the leader of the Witnesses, so they often summoned him to the police station. They threatened and beat him. This did not discourage him, nor did it intimidate the rest of Jehovah’s people in Brazzaville. Interest in Bible truth continued to spread.
The authorities then took further measures. Timothée Miemounoua and Aaron Diamonika, one of the former students at the technical school who accepted the truth, were both employed by the government. In 1955 the government transferred them to distant cities in the interior of the country. Timothée was sent to Djambala, and Aaron, to Impfondo. That attempt to disrupt the preaching activity failed miserably. The brothers in Brazzaville continued their zealous activity while Timothée and Aaron opened up territories and established congregations in their new locations. Though the brothers were zealous, they longed for help from abroad. This was soon to come.
In March 1956 the first four missionaries arrived, from France: Jean and Ida Seignobos along with Claude and Simone Dupont. In January 1957 a branch office responsible for the witnessing work in French Equatorial Africa was established in Brazzaville. Brother Seignobos was appointed branch servant. Shortly after that, tragedy struck when Jean’s wife, Ida, died in a car accident while the couple was visiting congregations in what is now Central African Republic. Jean continued to serve in his assignment.
Into the Interior
By that time Augustin Bayonne was now a circuit overseer. Augustin visited villages in the deep forests as well as encampments of Pygmies in the north and west of the country. Because he walked so often and so far, he became known throughout the area as The One Who Is Walking. Occasionally, Jean Seignobos accompanied Brother Bayonne. Jean was surprised that people deep in the equatorial forest knew that they were coming. Drums had forwarded this message: “The One Who Is Walking is coming with a white man.”
These expeditions accomplished much good. Previously, people claimed that Jehovah’s Witnesses existed only in Congo (Brazzaville). The presence of Brother Seignobos and other missionaries, along with showings of the film The New World Society in Action, proved otherwise.
Bible truth continued making inroads into villages deep in the interior, freeing people from spiritistic practices and tribal differences. Many brothers in these areas were illiterate. Since they did not have watches, they determined when to go to the meetings by the height of the sun. To calculate the time spent in the field ministry, they used small sticks. Every time they witnessed to someone, they folded a stick into a handkerchief. Four sticks meant one hour. Hence, they could complete their field service report at the end of each month. Really, though, the brothers preached much more than they reported, since the truth was the main subject of their conversations with others.
Legal Developments and Political Changes
Recall that in 1950, restrictions were put on the importation of literature produced by Jehovah’s Witnesses. As we have seen, this did not stop the disciple-making work. Dismayed, the clergy of Christendom complained to the government’s administrative authority, falsely alleging that Jehovah’s Witnesses were Communists. Consequently, one Thursday in 1956, ten brothers were arrested at five o’clock in the morning. Word of the arrests spread quickly; religious opposers rejoiced. The trial took place the same day at a courthouse packed with brothers who had come to observe the proceedings.
Noé Mikouiza relates: “During the proceedings, we proved that we were not Communists but Christians, God’s servants, accomplishing what is written at Matthew 24:14. Our lawyer, who had read our publications, told the court that if everyone were like Jehovah’s Witnesses, there would be no lawbreakers. That same afternoon the verdict was delivered: ‘Not guilty.’ Delighted, we all rushed home to change our clothes, since it was a meeting night. News of our arrest had spread through the city, and we wanted everyone to know that we were free. At the meeting we sang Kingdom songs as loud as we could. Many who heard us were shocked. They had expected us to be in prison.”
On August 15, 1960, the Republic of Congo gained independence. Political violence flared up. While the clergy of Christendom was taking an active part in these events, Jehovah’s Witnesses continued in their preaching activity. In 1960 a total of 3,716 attended a circuit assembly in Brazzaville. In the north, people were also flocking to the congregations. For example, in one region where 70 publishers lived, nearly a thousand people attended congregation meetings.
In December 1961 the Witnesses registered a legal entity called Les Témoins de Jéhovah. Legal recognition brought advantages, but the brothers knew that it was folly to depend fully on such things. Brother Seignobos relates what happened not long afterward: “One day I was summoned by a high official of the security office who found fault with our Christian neutrality. He threatened to expel me from the country. I feared he might carry out his threat, since he had the authority to do so. The following day, however, he died of a heart attack.”
Missionary Life in the 1960’s
In February 1963, Fred Lukuc and Max Danyleyko arrived from Haiti. After Fred married, he served as a circuit overseer. Initially, as he visited the congregations, he had difficulty in discerning who were the members of each family. He recalls: “I did not know who the elders’ wives were, and I could not figure out who their children were. The brothers had kept to the custom in central Africa that wives keep their own names upon marrying and that children be named after a relative or a friend of the family.
“The first night of the visit, at the Kingdom Hall, we found the brothers to be quiet and shy toward us. Once the meeting started, we observed something unusual. The brothers and older boys sat on one side of the hall; the smaller children and sisters sat on the other side. The brothers’ side was quite full when the meeting began, but there were few sitting on the sisters’ side. As the meeting progressed, more sisters arrived with little ones in tow and with Bibles and books gracefully balanced on their heads.
“I got up to greet the congregation and to introduce my wife and myself. After giving a warm welcome, I paused, fixed my eyes on the men’s side of the hall, and then said: ‘Brothers, please take ten minutes to find your wife and children. From now on, please sit together as families as all of Jehovah’s people do worldwide.’ They were happy to comply.”
Public transportation also had its challenges. Brother Lukuc’s wife, Leah, recalls: “We would pack up small camp cots, a mosquito net, a water bucket, portable water filters, clothes, books, magazines, and Bible-based films. To show the films meant bringing along electric cords, light bulbs, film reels, the scripts, a small generator, and a jerrican of gasoline. All of this we took with us on local trucks. To get a seat in the cab, we had to be at the truck by 2:00 a.m. Otherwise, we had to sit in the back, in the sun, with animals, baggage, and many other passengers.
“Once, after hours of walking in the heat, we arrived home to find that army ants had invaded the small mud hut where we lodged. They had climbed up a water bucket, made a bridge with their bodies to reach a tiny can of margarine, and cleaned it out. That night for supper, we had dry toast and half a can each of sardines. Though we felt tired and a little sorry for ourselves, we went to bed, leaving the brothers outside softly singing Kingdom songs beside the fire. What a gentle and beautiful way to fall asleep!”
Faithful Missionaries and Local Elders
From 1956 until 1977, over 20 missionaries served in Congo (Brazzaville). Though life was not always easy for them, each made a valuable contribution toward the Kingdom-preaching work. For example, all of those who served as branch servants were also missionaries. When Brother Seignobos returned to France in 1962, Larry Holmes was appointed to oversee the preaching work. After Larry and his wife, Audrey, left missionary service in 1965, Brother Lukuc became branch servant.
Many local brothers also were excellent examples in taking the lead. When the Branch Committee arrangement was introduced in 1976, the Governing Body appointed three brothers: Jack Johansson and Palle Bjerre, who were missionaries, and Marcellin Ngolo, a local brother.
Augustin Bayonne​—The One Who Is Walking—​attended the 37th class of Gilead, in 1962. After graduation he went to the Central African Republic, where, almost 15 years before, he had read the book “The Truth Shall Make You Free.” In time, Augustin married, fathered children, and returned to Brazzaville, where he allowed his home to be used for Christian meetings. Later he donated part of his property for a Kingdom Hall, which has since been built.
Both Augustin Bayonne and Timothée Miemounoua have since passed away. Before his death Timothée wrote down some of his experiences. He ended the account by quoting Hebrews 10:39: “We are not the sort that shrink back to destruction, but the sort that have faith to the preserving alive of the soul.” Etienne Nkounkou, one of the original three to embrace the truth in Congo, is now nearing 90 years of age. What fine examples of faithful service these brothers proved to be!
A Time of Testing
In August 1970 the Republic of Congo adopted a Communist form of government. Recall that in previous years, the authorities harassed the brothers, accusing them of being Communists. Now that the Communists were in charge, the new authorities found fault with the brothers for not being Communists!
For a time, however, the new government did not interfere with the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Conventions and meetings were held openly, and new missionaries were allowed to enter the country. Eventually, though, the brothers began to feel the effects of the Communist regime. First some officials accused the missionaries of being spies. Then on January 3, 1977, the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses was officially banned. One after the other, the missionaries were expelled until only Jack and Linda Johansson were left. Of this time, Jack says: “Those few months alone at the branch office were probably the most faith-testing and faith-strengthening time we have ever experienced in our missionary service. We were suspected of being spies for the American Central Intelligence Agency. Enemies of the government, including religious leaders, were being arrested and killed. Consequently, we knew we were in great danger. However, we saw that Jehovah’s protective hand was with us, and that strengthened our faith.”
Noé Mikouiza appealed to the prime minister, requesting that Jack and Linda be allowed to stay in the country. The request was denied; they had to leave. The branch property and Kingdom Halls were confiscated, and the branch office was closed down. For a short period, the France branch assumed oversight of the preaching work, but later this responsibility was delegated to the branch office in Kinshasa.
Although the brothers were restricted in some ways, they did not experience the severe persecution that Witnesses in other lands had to endure. However, some brothers became fearful, and this was contagious. Though the brothers still held meetings regularly, the house-to-house ministry virtually stopped. In response, the branch office in Kinshasa sent elders across the river to encourage and strengthen the brothers.
One of these elders was André Kitula. In June 1981 he began to visit the 12 congregations in Brazzaville as a circuit overseer. Upon visiting his first congregation in the city, he noted that the brothers supported the Theocratic Ministry School and Service Meeting on Tuesday. However, on Wednesday morning, none of the publishers came to the meeting for field service. As André began to preach alone, one householder exclaimed to him: “Jehovah’s Witnesses were the ones who used to console us, but now they have disappeared!”
As André continued preaching that morning, he met a brother who said: “We have all got out of the habit of preaching from house to house.” This brother then told other publishers about André’s activity. In the afternoon several sisters came to the meeting for service. Soon the house-to-house activity was resumed in all of Brazzaville. In the three years that André and his wife, Clémentine, served there, not one brother was arrested. Brothers outside the capital heard of what was happening. They concluded that if the brothers in Brazzaville were not afraid to go from door to door, there was no reason for them to be afraid either.
David Nawej, who was then working at the Kinshasa branch office, explains why the branch was particularly happy to send help across the river. He says: “It was the brothers from Brazzaville who had established the truth in Kinshasa. Later, when the Communist system there caused the activity to slow down, the Witnesses here went to the brothers’ aid. The wisdom of Ecclesiastes 4:9, 10 was confirmed: ‘Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their hard work. For if one of them should fall, the other one can raise his partner up.’ In our case, the brothers would say: ‘Two Congos are better than one.’”
Pressing Forward Amid Political Change
The year 1991 brought upheavals and changes on the political scene. Congo (Brazzaville) passed from a single-party system to a multiparty system. Though there was euphoria in the streets, the brothers kept in mind the words of caution found at Psalm 146:3, which states: “Do not put your trust in nobles, nor in the son of earthling man, to whom no salvation belongs.” It would not be long before the truth of this statement was demonstrated.
Nevertheless, the political changes brought benefits to Jehovah’s people. On November 12, 1991, the minister of the interior issued a decree lifting the ban on the activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Kingdom Halls that had been confiscated were returned, though not the former branch building, which has continued to be occupied by the Presidential Guard until now. In August 1992, district conventions were organized in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire, the first in 15 years. That year the number of Bible studies rose to 5,675, almost four times the number of publishers!
Meanwhile, the restored legal status reopened the way for the arrival of missionaries. Special pioneers were appointed and sent to the north, where most of those attending the meetings were illiterate. Congregations in the cities had done well in teaching many to read and write. It was now time to intensify efforts to promote literacy throughout the country.
Elections in 1993 caused another change in government. Widespread discontent by the opposition party resulted in a state of emergency for several weeks. Armed confrontations, strikes, curfews, roadblocks, and looting all became part of daily life. People were shocked and disillusioned. Economic difficulties persisted. The euphoria of 1991 had been snuffed out.
Ethnic problems ran parallel to the political turmoil. Tribal strife forced some brothers to move to safer locations. Consequently, a few congregations had to be dissolved. Meanwhile, the brothers repeatedly showed that the truth had freed them from ethnic hatred. During the unrest the brothers helped and protected one another, no matter what their tribal backgrounds were. Many people were beginning to realize that only Jehovah could give them real security.
The branch office in Kinshasa provided direction and encouragement. By the end of 1996, conditions in the country were again peaceful, and the number of publishers reached 3,935. Five missionaries were serving out of a missionary home in Brazzaville. With the arrival of two additional couples, a new missionary home was opened in Pointe-Noire in April 1997.
On the north side of the river, in Congo (Brazzaville), life was peaceful, and the Kingdom-preaching work was progressing well. Meanwhile, conflict raged in neighboring Congo (Kinshasa). As war neared Kinshasa, the missionaries there had to evacuate. So by the end of May, the Kinshasa missionaries were zealously serving alongside their companions in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire. No one envisioned the traumatic events that would follow just a few days later.
Civil War Erupts
Suddenly on June 5, 1997, war erupted in Brazzaville. The conflict was between forces loyal to the president then serving and those supporting the former one. Heavy artillery bombarded and destroyed both city and suburb. Thousands died. Corpses were strewn everywhere. Confusion reigned. It was difficult to define the lines of battle. The stability that Brazzaville had enjoyed was shattered. The ferry service to Kinshasa stopped. Many people fled into the forest, while others paddled their dugouts to small river islands. Still others tried to cross the Congo River to Kinshasa. Though there was fighting near Kinshasa, it was mild in comparison with the violence in Brazzaville.
The war brought problems for the brothers as it did for everybody else, but what a difference the truth made in the minds and hearts of God’s servants! They had full confidence in the words of Psalm 46:1, 2, which says: “God is for us a refuge and strength, a help that is readily to be found during distresses. That is why we shall not fear, though the earth undergo change and though the mountains totter into the heart of the vast sea.”
Many brothers managed to reach Kinshasa, where the Branch Committee arranged for them to be given food, shelter, and medical treatment. Families in Kinshasa were happy to extend love and hospitality to their fellow believers from Brazzaville.
To assist those who found it difficult to flee, some brothers remained in Brazzaville. Jean Théodore Otheni and his wife, Jeanne, a regular pioneer, were among these. In August, a shell smashed into their house, seriously wounding Jeanne. Jean rushed her to Kinshasa, but it was too late. Jean remembers: “Jeanne had a deep love for the ministry, right until the end. She gave me her notebook of addresses and said: ‘You must visit all my Bible students because they mean so much to me.’ I embraced her, and when I looked at her face again, I saw that she was dead.” Jean, like so many others, has continued zealously serving Jehovah, with full confidence in the promise of the resurrection.
Because the regular ferry service between the two capital cities had been interrupted, those with small motorboats offered their services to people wanting to flee Brazzaville. Courageous brothers from Brazzaville, including Louis-Noël Motoula, Jean-Marie Lubaki, and Symphorien Bakeba, volunteered to search for missing brothers and to help those still in Brazzaville. This meant defying the strong currents of the mighty Congo River in a small boat to search the islets and the shores. It meant entering the conflict zone in Brazzaville, where atrocities were continuing. It meant risking their lives for their brothers.
Symphorien, who had much experience in crossing the river, made many trips during the civil war. Sometimes he crossed over to provide support for those remaining in Brazzaville. Once, for example, he crossed with ten sacks of rice for some brothers in Brazzaville who were living in relative security. Of course, it was a challenge to cross the river, but it was a far greater challenge to get the rice to its destination without looters taking it. Among his passengers on that trip was a distinguished-looking man who asked Symphorien where he was going with the rice. Symphorien explained what he was doing, taking advantage of the opportunity to share his Bible-based hope. When the boat landed, the man identified himself as a high-ranking official. He called a couple of soldiers over and had them guard the rice until Symphorien was able to get a car to transport the rice to the brothers.
Usually, Symphorien crossed the river to help brothers flee from Brazzaville. There was one crossing that he will never forget. He recalls: “The currents in the Congo River are very strong, but most people with boats know how to navigate them safely without getting swept downriver toward the treacherous rapids. We left Brazzaville with seven brothers and five others on board. Right in the middle of the river, the boat ran out of fuel. We managed to maneuver to a small island that we were able to hang on to. Much to our relief, a small boat came by, and the skipper promised to buy some fuel for us in Kinshasa and return. We waited a very long and anxious one and a half hours until he returned with the fuel.”
Soon the branch in Kinshasa was caring for about 1,000 brothers and sisters along with their families and interested ones. By October 1997 the hostilities ceased, and the refugees began to return to Brazzaville.
All the missionaries serving in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire had been evacuated because of the war. Some had gone to their home countries of Britain and Germany, while others had gone to Benin and Côte d’Ivoire. When relative calm returned, some went back to their assignments in Congo (Brazzaville). Additionally, three couples and an unmarried brother were scheduled to arrive from France in December 1998. Eddy and Pamela May, experienced missionaries serving at the Kinshasa branch office, were transferred to Brazzaville, and a new missionary home was opened.
Civil War Once Again
The following year, another civil war erupted in Brazzaville. Again thousands died, including several Witnesses. Most of the missionaries, who had just arrived, evacuated to missionary homes in nearby Cameroon. Although rumors persisted that the war would reach Pointe-Noire on the coast, three of the missionaries managed to remain there. Finally, in May 1999, the civil war was over.
Because so many of the Witnesses had had to flee, the number of congregations in the country dropped from 108 to 89. Brazzaville now has 1,903 publishers in 23 congregations. Pointe-Noire has 1,949 publishers in 24 congregations. During both civil wars, Jehovah’s Witnesses elsewhere provided material help for their spiritual brothers and sisters. As usual, such assistance also benefited those who were not Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Despite war, famine, sickness, and many other difficulties, the Witnesses in Congo (Brazzaville) maintained a monthly average of 16.2 hours in field service. During April 1999, as the second civil war was ending, 21 percent of all the publishers were in some form of full-time service.
Rejoicing in the Truth
Wars have ravaged the country, bringing it to its knees. Reconstruction in Brazzaville is taking place, but there is still much to do. Among the most important building projects are Kingdom Halls, where people learn Bible truth. In February 2002, four Kingdom Halls were dedicated, two in Pointe-Noire and two in Brazzaville.
At one of these dedication programs in Brazzaville, an elderly brother described what had happened 15 years previously during the ban. The brothers had planned to hold a one-day assembly on January 1 on a vacant lot. They believed that it could be held without interruption, since people would be celebrating the new year. After the morning program concluded, however, the police arrived and broke up the assembly. The brother said: “We left the assembly site with tears in our eyes. Today we are here again at the same place with our eyes filled with tears. But this time we shed tears of joy because we are here to dedicate the newly built Kingdom Hall.” Yes, this beautiful new hall had been constructed on the same piece of property!
It is now over 50 years since the book “The Truth Shall Make You Free” helped Etienne Nkounkou, Augustin Bayonne, and Timothée Miemounoua to learn the truth. During that time, thousands in Congo (Brazzaville) have followed their example of faith, and many more continue to do so, making future prospects look bright. More than 15,000 Bible studies are being conducted​—three and a half times the number of publishers! The Memorial attendance soared to 21,987 in 2003. At the end of the 2003 service year, 4,536 publishers, including 15 missionaries, were zealously working to help still others to learn the truth that will set them free.​—John 8:31, 32.
[Blurb on page 143]
Drums had forwarded this message: “The One Who Is Walking is coming with a white man”
[Blurb on page 144]
Since they did not have watches, the brothers determined when to go to the meetings by the height of the sun
[Blurb on page 151]
“We went to bed, leaving the brothers outside softly singing Kingdom songs beside the fire. What a gentle and beautiful way to fall asleep!”
[Box on page 140]
An Overview of Congo (Brazzaville)
The land: The Republic of Congo is nestled among Gabon, Cameroon, Central African Republic, and the Democratic Republic of Congo. It is larger than Finland or Italy. A coastal plain extends about 40 miles [60 km] inland and then gives way to plateaus rising to over 2,500 feet [800 m]. Dense forests and large rivers dominate the rest of the country.
The people: The population of over three million is made up of many tribes. Pygmies are found in the densely forested areas.
The language: Although the official language is French, Lingala is widely spoken in the northern parts. Monokutuba is spoken in the south.
The livelihood: Subsistence farming as well as freshwater and saltwater fishing supplies the basic needs. The forests are teeming with wildlife, providing easy game for skilled hunters.
The food: Cassava or rice is preferred at most meals. This is served with fish or chicken seasoned with hot sauces. The many fruits include mangoes, pineapples, papayas, oranges, and avocados.
The climate: Congo is tropical, hot and humid year-round. There are two distinct seasons: a rainy season, which extends from March to June, and a dry season, which lasts from June to October.
[Chart/Graph on page 148, 149]
CONGO (BRAZZAVILLE)​—A TIME LINE
1940
1947: The book “The Truth Shall Make You Free” sparks the first interest.
1950: Missionary Eric Cooke visits Brazzaville. Authorities impose restrictions on literature published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
1956: In March, first missionaries arrive, from France.
1957: Branch office opens in January.
1960
1961: Legal association is registered on December 9, though restrictions on literature continue for another year.
1977: Jehovah’s Witnesses are banned. Branch property is confiscated, and the missionaries are expelled.
1980
1981: André Kitula helps revive the preaching work in Brazzaville.
1991: Minister of the interior lifts the ban. Later, first district conventions in 15 years are organized.
1993: Social and political agitation leads to a state of emergency.
1997: On June 5 civil war breaks out. Missionaries are evacuated. Branch office in Kinshasa arranges for food, shelter, and medical treatment for 1,000 refugees.
1999: Another civil war breaks out. Missionaries are evacuated again.
2000
2002: First four newly constructed Kingdom Halls are dedicated in February.
2003: 4,536 publishers are active in Congo (Brazzaville).
[Graph]
(See publication)
Total Publishers
Total Pioneers
                                                  5,000
                                                  2,500
1940          1960          1980          2000
[Maps on page 141]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
CAMEROON
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
GABON
REPUBLIC OF CONGO
  Impfondo
  Djambala
  BRAZZAVILLE
  Pointe-Noire
Congo River
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO
  KINSHASA
ANGOLA
[Full-page picture on page 134]
[Pictures on page 138]
Members of an early Bible study group in 1949, from left to right: Jean-Seth Mountsamboté, Timothée and Odile Miemounoua, and Noé Mikouiza
[Picture on page 139]
Etienne Nkounkou
[Picture on page 142]
Jean Seignobos traveled in the interior of Congo, crossing rivers on ferries to visit congregations
[Picture on page 147]
Fred and Leah Lukuc (center) with the congregation that met in Augustin Bayonne’s home
[Picture on page 150]
Baptism in the Atlantic Ocean at Pointe-Noire
[Picture on page 152]
Augustin Bayonne​—The One Who Is Walking—​attended the 37th class of Gilead, in 1962
[Picture on page 153]
This building served as the branch office from 1967 to 1977
[Picture on page 155]
Noé Mikouiza
[Pictures on page 158]
Louis-Noël Motoula, Jean-Marie Lubaki, and Symphorien Bakeba

