How Is It Handled?
1 The Society has received many letters asking how to handle matters if an elder or a ministerial servant moves, or if an elder is not able to serve in his appointed capacity for some reason, and how adjustments should be made in the five principal service positions in the congregations.
2 In answer to the first point​—if an elder or ministerial servant moves from the congregation or, because of wrong conduct, is no longer qualified to serve, the governing body should be notified of this in all cases. As to the five principal positions of oversight, the governing body made appointments during August and September of those assigned to serve in these positions during this service year. If one of these brothers moves or is not able to serve further in his assigned capacity, then it is up to the local body of elders to determine who should serve in his place. The governing body will not make new appointments to these positions. They will be handled by the body of older men locally. (or, p. 69)
3 To fill a vacancy in a position of oversight it is not necessary that all those presently serving rotate up to a new position. Any of the elders can be selected by the body of elders to fill out the expiring term of the overseer. Or, a ministerial servant may be used on a substitute basis if there are not enough elders. Again, it is the responsibility of the local body of older men to decide how the vacancy will be filled.
4 If there is any change as to who is serving as presiding overseer, field overseer or Bible study overseer, please keep the Society advised of the complete mailing addresses of these brothers and their telephone numbers, if they have such.
5 Normally the governing body will make appointments of additional elders and ministerial servants annually when the body of elders sends in these recommendations early in September each year. If brothers in the congregation become qualified during the year, the local body of elders can determine how they can be used to assist with the affairs of the congregation. But, the body of elders should wait until September to send such new recommendations to the governing body. (or, pp. 61, 67-69)
6 If, however, an appointed elder or ministerial servant moves into the congregation during the year and there is need in the congregation and the body of older men wishes to use his services, they can check with the body of elders in the congregation where he formerly served. If they find that he meets all the Scriptural qualifications, they may recommend him for appointment, as stated in the Organization book on page 66. (Please advise what congregation he previously served with.) The governing body will consider such recommendations at any time during the year.

