Presenting the Good News​—In All of Your Territory
1 It is our desire to contact all persons in the territory assigned to our congregation, isn’t it? Why? Because we realize that this generation is faced with the impending destruction of Babylon the Great, as well as the Armageddon destruction of all who have not taken their stand on Jehovah’s side. (Rev. 18:1-3, 8; 19:11-21) The Bible makes plain that it is only those calling on “the name of Jehovah” who will be saved. But, “how will they call on him in whom they have not put faith? How, in turn, will they put faith in him of whom they have not heard? How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach?”​—Rom. 10:13, 14.
2 What is involved is the saving of lives, others’ and our own. (1 Tim. 4:16; Ezek. 3:17-21) So that no one is overlooked in this lifesaving work, the Society assigns a certain section of territory to each congregation and this, in turn, is divided up locally into smaller sections for assignment to devoted servants of Jehovah who willingly share in preaching the “good news.” (1 Thess. 2:4) They keenly feel the responsibility to see that the congregation’s entire assignment of territory is worked thoroughly as often as possible. When was all of your congregation’s territory last worked?
3 In a recent survey of some congregations in the United States reporting an “average” territory coverage of about once in six months, it was found that, while some individual territories had been worked more than one time in six months, other territories assigned to the congregation had not been worked for a year or longer. It is suggested that a list be made up of all territories that have remained unworked for the longest period of time. The date last worked can be noted on the list, and, on a service meeting, special mention can be made of these territories and their locations. It would be well to arrange to have these territories worked as soon as possible.
4 If you would like to work one of these territories, it may be that it can be assigned to you upon request. Perhaps you can encourage other publishers to work with you in covering the territory. We suggest that the field overseer consider making arrangements for group witnessing on weekends, during worldly holiday periods, such as “Thanksgiving” and “Christmas,” etc., for the coverage of such territories. Endeavor to reach the occupants of every home with the good news. If no one is at home and it is unlikely you will be able to return for some time, perhaps you would like to leave a Bible study folder and an older magazine or a tract under the door, keeping in mind that the message we bear means life to those who embrace it. (Be sure that such literature is left out of sight, so that it does not serve as an invitation for burglars.) What joy there is in diligently endeavoring to give everyone in each territory an opportunity to hear, study and respond!​—John 17:3.
5 Some congregations cover their assigned territory more frequently than others. The service committee of a congregation that frequently covers its territory may check with nearby congregations to see if another congregation would like temporary help in territory coverage. If so, the arrangements can be worked out between the service committees of the congregations. If two congregations wish territory to be reassigned, that is, from one congregation to another, then please follow through on the instructions provided in the letter, “How to Request a Territory Adjustment,” that was sent to all congregations in the United States along with their supplies for the 1973 service year.
6 Appreciating the urgency of our work of Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making, it brings us much joy when we know that the people in all of our territory have a regular and frequent opportunity to hear the good news.​—Rom. 10:13, 14.

