Show Appreciation for Your Freedom
1 Jesus assured that “the truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) We have experienced this, and how thankful we are that it is true. No longer do Babylonish teachings and traditions hold us captive. Nor are we in slavish fear of men or their organizations. Showing good balance, we are careful that we do not use our freedom as a cloak for moral badness. Rather, as Jehovah’s name people, we are glad to serve as slaves of God and desire to be directed by Jehovah’s holy spirit.​—1 Pet. 2:16; 2 Cor. 3:17.
2 We were all thrilled this summer to receive so much spiritual direction at our district assemblies and to receive the new publications, including the book Paradise Restored to Mankind​—By Theocracy! Many of you have read this new book by now and others have been alerted to many of the high points by the special talks. We can see that God’s spirit searches into all things, even the deep things of God, and it is by that spirit’s operating on his “faithful and discreet slave” that we come to appreciate the writings of the Bible prophets. (1 Cor. 2:10) How much we appreciate both our freedom and that we are such a spiritually well-fed people in the midst of a spiritually famine-stricken world!
3 But are these truths for us to enjoy alone? Are we to keep them to ourselves and not share them with others? No, we are not selfish. It is our desire to share this information from the Word of God with any who will hear and receive it. Isn’t that the way you feel?
4 During November we will be using the book Paradise Restored to Mankind​—By Theocracy! in our house-to-house ministry as well as on return visits to interested people and our home Bible studies. Have you already provided copies of this publication for those who have shown interest? If not, by all means do so now.
5 How will we present the new book in the house-to-house ministry? A helpful suggestion was given on page two of the October Kingdom Ministry. You will observe that the suggested presentation was simple and direct. The subject of government or rulership is now in the minds of many. Would the householder like to know what the Bible says about rulership over the entire earth in the near future? Jehovah assures that He will bring to ruin those ruining the earth. Then the long-awaited paradise will be restored here on this earth by God’s own government. (Rev. 11:18; 21:3, 4) By reading the Paradise​—Theocracy book, the householder can learn more about this. Encourage all in your territory to obtain and read a copy.
6 Where genuine interest is shown, invite the person to go with you to the Kingdom Hall. Invite him to go with you to the congregation book study, where this publication will be considered. Knowing the benefits that will come to them, urge interested ones to put forth the effort to learn the truth, which will also set them free. As we take advantage of every opportunity to share the truth with others, we will in this way be showing that we appreciate our freedom.
[Blurb on page 1]
Exercise our freedom from “authority of the darkness.”

