Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 12
10 min: Song 25. Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “Show Appreciation for Your Freedom.” Questions and answers. Call on a number of publishers who are prepared to comment on how they have found it effective to present the “Paradise-Theocracy” book in the local territory.
25 min: Insert​—Brother Knorr’s letter about Bethel service.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include information in Question Box. Song 29.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 19
15 min: Song 11. Father takes the lead in discussing text, Branch Letter and appropriate news items with family members.
20 min: Insert on Bible study activity, pars. 1-10. Several brothers discuss material. Encourage any publishers who are seeking a Bible study to inform the Bible study overseer, also if anyone knows of a good prospect for a study and is not able to care for it, inform him of that.
12 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In All of Your Territory.” Brief question-and-answer coverage of material. Include report on territory needing attention in local congregation, where it is located, how many territories are involved. Encourage publishers to take out this territory and work it. Consider arrangements being made for group witnessing in this territory and encourage publishers to share fully in this activity.
If your territory is covered often, you may wish to discuss how better attention can be given to working it thoroughly, trying to contact those not at home, etc.
13 min: Concluding comments. Include appropriate items from “Announcements.” “How Is It Handled?” can be considered. Encourage family groups to share in the field service together during “holiday” weekend. Song 10.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 26
10 min: Song 65. Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “The Organization That Jehovah Is Using.” Questions and answers on “Organization” book, Chapter 2. Give attention particularly to pages 7-10, rather than trying to rush through all the material. Encourage brothers to give Scriptural basis for their answers. (Read paragraphs 1-4 and the last paragraph on page 12.) Par. 1. By what power did Jesus say the work of preaching and disciple-making would be carried on and succeed? Par. 2. What is to be noted about the disciples when the holy spirit was poured out at Pentecost 33 C.E.? and about the congregations as the preaching of the good news spread? Par. 3. How did our brothers in the first century show that they recognized the congregation is God’s? To whom do Jehovah’s witnesses look as their Supreme Ruler? Par. 4. Whom do we recognize as the Head of the congregation? Pars. 5-10. What is the purpose of the congregation? Who make up the “faithful and discreet slave” class today, and over what have they been appointed? (Matt. 24:47) Pars. 11-14. How can we show respect for the earthly organization that Jehovah is using?
15 min: Offer the “New World Translation” and the “Word of God” book. Family discussion of work for December and of territory needing attention in the congregation. See the article “The Bible.”
What will help the publishers in your congregation the most in their house-to-house work during December? Will some need help in making an effective presentation that is brief during the holiday season? Do the brothers need suggestions on points of interest to which they can direct the householder in the Bible or “Word of God” book when presenting it? What can they say if the householder indicates he already has a Bible? It is suggested that just one of these points, or possibly two, which will be most helpful to the congregation, be discussed and developed by the family handling this part.
20 min: Are You Following Up the Interest?
Chairman: (2 min.) We find interested ones when we are in the house-to-house work. The Society, other publishers, friends or neighbors may tell us of someone who has shown interest. At your secular work, when shopping, at school, as well as other times, someone may make a comment that indicates a good heart condition. Make note of all who show interest. Make return visits and do what you can to help them to learn the truth.
Publishers may make return visits by delivering magazines, or other literature, by conducting a study, writing a letter, calling the interested person on the telephone. Or, it may be just a friendly discussion in an effort to further stimulate the person’s interest in the truth.
When making return visits, some publishers find it difficult to get the conversation going and hold the householder’s interest.
Audience discussion: (10 min.) Ask congregation what subjects they find are of interest to people in the territory and are effective for discussion on return visits. It may be wise to expand on the subject discussed on the first call. Or, on the initial call, you may have observed that a particular subject was of special interest to the householder. (Invite publishers to express themselves freely. This is an opportunity for them to exchange ideas.)
Also, ask publishers how they introduce themselves and begin the conversation on return visits in order to both catch and hold the interest of the people. Some have found that being just warm and friendly, showing a personal interest in the householder and his family, will accomplish the most. It may be the subject you introduce for consideration that will attract and hold attention. Some publishers make effective use of questions to catch and stimulate interest. (Entertain as many suggestions from the publishers as time will allow.) Encourage the brothers to use the good suggestions given as they follow up the interest they find.
Concluding comments. (8 min.) Song 31.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 3
10 min: Song 20. Introduction. text and comments.
20 min: “What Is the Christian View of Dancing?” Family discussion of article in September 15, 1972, “Watchtower.” It is suggested that the family head read appropriate paragraphs from the article, inviting both questions and comments from family members after the paragraph or portion of it is read. Endeavor to help family members to appreciate the reasons for what is printed, why it is correct and the Scriptural principles involved. Consider the paragraphs that you believe will be most appropriate to the needs of the congregation.
20 min: Insert on Bible study activity, pars. 11-21. Audience participation.
10 min: Concluding comments. Encourage brothers to share fully in field service. Song 9.

