Accept the Implanting of the Soul-saving Word
How can the Word of God be said to be soul-saving, as stated at James 1:21?a
That Word of God safeguards us against needless calamity even now, saying: “He that would love life and see good days, let him restrain his tongue from what is bad and his lips from speaking deception, but let him turn away from what is bad and do what is good; let him seek peace and pursue it.” (1 Pet. 3:10, 11) Heeding this advice keeps one from many of the troubles that can unduly shorten one’s life.
The Word of God can also be said to be soul-saving as to the future life, for Jehovah God says: “Seek righteousness, seek meekness. Probably you may be concealed in the day of Jehovah’s anger.” That day of Jehovah’s anger is the foretold “great tribulation,” including Armageddon, “the war of the great day of God the Almighty.” Only those who accept the implanting of the soul-saving Word can hope to be spared at that time.​—Zeph. 2:3.
How important is the heart condition in accepting the implanting of the Word?
It is all important, as Jesus showed in his parable of the sower. Where the heart is hard, like the road under one’s feet, the enemy is able at once to steal the seed. Where the heart appreciation does not go very deep, the hot sun of opposition causes the plant to wither and die. Or where in the heart there is too much concern over the material things of life, or the desire to get rich, these choke the truth, the Word, so that it also dies. But where the soul-saving Word is implanted in “a fine and good heart,” the result is fruit to God’s praise and the saving of the soul of the one possessing such a fine and good heart.​—Luke 8:9-15.
How can a Christian family accept the implanting of the soul-saving Word?
One way is by regularly considering the Bible text (and comment on it) for each day in the Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
More than that, the parents should also see to it that at least one evening a week is set apart for a family Bible study. Throughout the world the Bethel families of the Watch Tower Society set aside Monday evening for this purpose. Parents should also seek to implant the Word in their children by discussing with them, day by day, Bible principles that apply to everyday problems of life. In this way they learn to look to God’s Word to guide every facet of their lives.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, January 1, 1970.

