VOL. XXXIV OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

The Race-Course of the Age— Its "Cloud 
of Witnesses" 291 

What Constitutes Weights? 291 

The Two Parts to Sanctification 292 

Trials Proportionate to Strength 294 

Acceptable and Unacceptable Worship 294 

Spirit of Service Spirit of Discipleship 295 

Humility Indispensable to God's Service 295 

A God-Fearing Bad Man 296 

A Double-Minded Man 296 

Consider One Another 298 

Let Us, Then, Judge Ourselves 298 

Oblivion Not Annihilation 299 

Actual or Reckoned New Creatures? 300 

Difference Between Soul and New Creature 301 

Dual Souls-Not Dual Minds 301 

Secret of Self-Control 301 

Acquaint Yourself With God 301 

The Editor's Foreign Tour 302 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 303 

page 290 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE AND WASHINGTON TEMPLE 

The following are Pastor Russell's appointments: 

Washington Temple Oct. 5, 19, Nov. 2 

Brooklyn Tabernacle Oct. 12, 26, Nov. 9 

Preaching services at 3 p.m. Evening meetings as usual. 

Baptismal opportunities at Washington, October 5; at Brooklyn, 
October 12. 



BEREAN QUESTION BOOKLETS 

We have Question Booklets in stock for Volumes I., II., III., IV., and 
V. of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, and also for TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 
Price 5c. each— 50c. per dozen, postpaid, brings them within the reach 
of all. Order freely according to your needs. 

Many of the Classes find these questions very helpful. The difficulty 
with many Classes in the past has been that not every one has the 
teaching ability to draw the information of the lessons from the Class. 
The successful class leader has little to say except as he sums up the 
answer to each question after it has been discussed by the Class; or, 
if the question be not understood by the Class, he may often render 
assistance by paraphrasing it and, if possible, simplifying it. 

Excellent as public preaching is we believe that the Lord's people 
learn more in Berean Classes than by listening to any sermon. Thought 
is stimulated, quickened. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR NOVEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
November follow: (1) 163; (2) 310; (3) 87; (4) 43; (5) 39; 
(6) 109; (7) 8; (8) 38; (9) 259; (10) 307; (11) 105; (12) 325; 
(13) 299; (14) 279; (15) 285; (16) 236; (17) 107; (18) 113; 
(19) 322; (20) 47; (21) 58; (22) 99; (23) 3; (24) 273; (25) 
102; (26) 4; (27) 179; (28) 145; (29) 168; (30) 190. 



R5318 : page 291 

THE RACE-COURSE OF THE AGE-ITS "CLOUD OF 
WITNESSES" 

Wherefore, seeing we also are compassed about with so great 
a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight and the 
sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with 



patience the race that is set before us."— Hebrews 12:1. 

THE opening words of this text direct our 

minds back to the preceding context, as 

though St. Paul were saying, In view of 

the great things, accomplished by these 

faithful characters of the past, who manifested 

such faith and confidence in God that 

they were willing to deny themselves all 

earthly rights and privileges— seeing that we 

are thus encompassed with so great a cloud 

of witnesses— martyrs— let the inspiration 

of their example spur us to the greatest faithfulness in 

running our race. 

The Apostle speaks of the Ancient Worthies as a 
"cloud of witnesses." He does not use the word witnesses 
in the sense in which it is used often today— in the sense 
of on-lookers. Originally, the word witness was used in 
the sense of a witness to the truth, or a martyr. Therefore, 
the text would seem to mean: Seeing that you 
have many surrounding you of those whose lives testified 
to the truth— martyrs, who were cut off from home privileges 
and from life itself— it should have a strong influence 
upon you. These Ancient Worthies, through the 
achievements of their lives, are looking down upon you. 

The fact that the Ancient Worthies were even then 
dead need not detract from the Apostle's figure of speech. 
This style of expression is commonly used by us all. As 
an illustration, we recall that on one occasion Napoleon 
addressed his army saying, "My men, thirty centuries look 
down upon you!" While, strictly speaking, centuries cannot 
look down, yet in one sense of the word they can; 
for we can look back into the past and realize matters 
that are thirty centuries old and more. 

The Apostle wishes us to remember that this "cloud of 
witnesses" is surrounding us, and that therefore we should 
run this race faithfully. While those noble characters 
will not obtain the prize for which we are running, they 
are, nevertheless, to have a prize. As we recall how 
faithfully they endured and achieved what was set before 

R5319 : page 291 

them, how careful we should be in running the race set 
before us— a race for glory, honor and immortality! 

This "cloud of witnesses" continually surrounds us. 
The experiences of the Ancient Worthies are our experiences. 
At every step of our journey we find encouragement, 
strength, from the contemplation of their course. 
The Apostle, in giving us the picture of our text, indicates 
that we are to consider ourselves as running a race. 
We are to view the affairs of the present life as from a 
race-course. 

No doubt St. Paul had before his mind the popular 
Grecian games of his day, especially the races. So his 
suggestions to those in the race for glory, honor and immortality 



are based upon that mental picture. As the runners 
in those races would strip themselves of all that was 
not absolutely necessary, so the Christian should lay 
aside all possible weights and hindrances in his course, 
and run with patience the race set before him. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES WEIGHTS? 

The weights to be cast aside might differ in different 
persons. One person might have inherited titles, honor, 
position. St. Paul himself was one of these. He was 
born a Roman citizen— an honor of great distinction in 
his day. This prerogative he laid aside when he entered 
the Christian race-course. He did, however, refer to his 
Roman citizenship when the interests of the Truth made 
it advantageous for him to do so. But he never tried to 
follow a middle course— to benefit himself and please 
worldly acquaintances a part of the time and then fellowship 
with the Lord's people at other times. One thing 
alone he did, as he tells us in these words: "Brethren, I 
count not myself to have apprehended; but this one thing 
I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and 
reaching forth unto those things which are before, I 
press toward the MARK for the Prize of the High Calling 
of God in Christ Jesus."-Phil. 3:13,14. 

Another weight might be wealth. One possessing 
much money might be hindered in the race by fostering 
the thought that he must occupy a large house, keep many 
servants, and live as do others of his class, but that 
nevertheless he would attend the meetings of the Lord's 
people. Still another weight might be talent along some 
line. Another might be love of the approval of men, etc. 

He who desires to win in the race for glory and 
honor eternal should lay aside all those weights and 
any others which he may recognize as such; otherwise 
he will be so handicapped that he will not run well. 
Some runners will be more than overcomers and will receive 
the prize. Others will barely be saved, because of 
handicaps, and will receive inferior positions. 

St. Paul tells us how much he valued these earthly 
possessions— ambitions, honors, etc. He weighted them 
and compared them with the Prize of the High Calling 

R5319 : page 292 

of God in Christ. His judgment in regard to these 
earthly honors was that they are but loss and dross. 
Therefore he threw them all away. 

Of those who retain their hold on earthly things the 
Lord declares, "How hardly shall they that have riches 
enter into the Kingdom of God?" These riches are not 
merely of gold, but may be of honor, position, power, 
approbation of men, etc. All these are likely to prove 
a hindrance in the race upon which we have been invited 
to enter for the Prize. 

As we look back to the faithful witnesses of the past, 



we find that they carried very few weights along with 
them. They cast their weights aside, and ran with patience 
the course before them. 

Not all weights and hindrances are to be cast aside, 
however. A man who enters the race with a wife and 
children must not throw these aside. If he has a child on 
each shoulder, then he must run with them. But if one 
who is unmarried is thinking of engaging in this race, he 
will do well to consider carefully how many children he 
should have on each shoulder, or whether he should have 
a wife on his shoulders. Some would be hindered with 
a wife, while others might be hindered without a wife. 
Each must decide for himself what is best. We are not 
trying to lay down rules. 

INHERITED WEAKNESSES AND BESETTING SINS 

Let us now consider that part of our text which deals 
with besetting sins. Another translation says the close-girding 
sin— the sin which wraps itself closely around us. 
Some sins are like a loose-flying garment, and others 
wrap themselves tightly about us. With these hindrances 
the runner is obliged to stop now and then to disengage 
himself, and so loses time. 

We are to avoid sin in every sense of the word. No 
one has the right to sin. If we cannot rid ourselves entirely 
of our close-girding sin, we must put it off to such 
an extent that it will not interfere with our running. 
If this sin be an inherited weakness, a part of one's very 
nature, what then? Then he shall run in the race— not 
walk, not sit, but RUN, bending all his energy to win, 
straining every muscle, every power of his being. This 
is what the Apostle sets before us in our text. 

The Lord has set this subject clearly before us in the 
Bible. The race is not an imaginary race, but a real one. 
It is a race that the Lord has arranged, and He has definitely 
stated the terms, the assistance to be expected, and 
the Prize at the end of the course. We thank God for 
the explicit information given in the Scriptures and for 
all the helps and encouragements of the way, as well as 
for this great cloud of witnesses surrounding us. And 
by the Lord's grace we will run with patience; for without 
this grace of the Holy Spirit one would soon fall out 
by the way, would soon lose all. 

CONSTANT VIGILANCE NECESSARY 

Any one might run a few steps; but when some of 
these find all the affairs of human life hindering them, 
and realize that they must drop all unnecessary weights, 
they begin to think that there is no use to try— the sacrifice 
is too great. So the Apostle encourages us to have 
patience; for all these trials, difficulties, etc., rightly borne, 
are developing character. The Lord wants true, loyal 
characters, established in righteousness, and these cannot 
be developed and demonstrated except by just such 



experiences as He gives His people. 

The Apostle well knew the terms and conditions of 
the race in which he had engaged, and that it would be 
impossible for him to win unless he lived up to those conditions. 
He knew that the closest attention and most untiring 
vigilance would be necessary to reach the goal on 
time, and during the race there would be more or less 
uncertainty as to who would get the victory— the crown 
of life. In the Olympic and other Greek games it was 
always uncertain as to who would receive the much-coveted 
laurel crown. 

The Christian is running a much greater race than any 
earthly course could ever exhibit. We know the goal 
toward which we run, and we have a sense of security— 
that if we run faithfully we shall gain the Prize of our 
High Calling. Ours is not a race merely to the strong, 
and a victory to the swift. It is a race in which each 
one, according to the earnestness of his effort, will be 
rewarded. If one runs with all his soul and strength 
he will surely gain the Prize. And never before was there 
such a race! never one so remarkable! never one so 
glorious as this race set before us! 



R5319 : page 292 

THE TWO PARTS TO SANCTIFICATION 

"Sanctify them through Thy Truth; 
Thy Word is Truth. "-John 17:17. 

THE prayer recorded in the 17th chapter of 
St. John's Gospel was offered while our 
Lord was on the way from the Memorial 
Supper to the Garden of Gethsemane. From 
the prayer we learn that it was offered for 
the Apostles and all those who through the 
Word of the Lord should become His disciples, 
or followers. 

The word sanctify has the significance of 
set apart, made holy. There are two parts 
to this work of sanctification. The first is that which we 
do, in the very beginning, when we set ourselves apart, 
with the desire to know and to do the will of God. The 
second is that part which comes gradually— the teachings 
and instructions which set before us things 
that we did not perceive before— certain principles of 
righteousness which we did not previously recognize. 
This is a deeper setting apart, and is done by God, inasmuch 
as it is done by the Father's arrangement. 

This deeper meaning of sanctification is the one signified 
in the text. Hence, our Lord prays the Father 
to do this work. The disciples had left all to follow Jesus, 
and were set apart in the sense that they desired to know 
and to do the will of the Father. Our Lord prayed that 



the work of Divine instruction might go on in them, as 
it is written: "They shall all be taught of God." The 
Master desired that the disciples should come under Divine, 
providential instruction, which He indicated would 
come through the Word of God. 

At that time the Word was not the Bible as we have 
it now, for the New Testament had not then been 
written. The Truth presented in the New Testament, 
however, is not God's Word in full, nor all of the Truth, 
but merely a portion of it. Our Lord did not pray that 
truth in general along different lines should be the portion 
of His followers, but rather that they should have 
knowledge of the Divine Plan and purposes. 

There may be more or less truth coming into a man's 
life, which will awaken his mind. It may be the truth 
concerning chemistry, or it may be other scientific knowledge. 
There is truth respecting geology, truth respecting 
the sun, etc. These may influence the mind and 
lift a man somewhat from his fallen condition. But these 
are not the Truth, to which our Lord refers, and which is 

R5320 : page 293 

far more necessary than is the knowledge of the weight 
of the earth or the distance of the stars. 

All the various truths which come to the world in 
general, which lead them to think, and which finally point 
some to their need of the Redeemer, are preparatory. 
But not only do these latter have such a drawing of God, 
but they must also set themselves apart. And these general 
truths, which are more or less clear, may bring the 
individual to the real school. These we may term a preparatory 
course. There must be such a preparation before 
the real course of the School of Christ is reached. 

THE FIRST PART OF SANCTIFICATION 

There is a sanctifying that takes place before the real 
sanctifying begins. The Lord said to the people of Israel, 
"Sanctify yourselves and I will sanctify you." This 
would be their setting of themselves apart by a certain 
hope. But the setting of one's self apart is one thing, 
and God's sanctifying him is another. Concerning the 
call of this Age, no man cometh unto the Father but by 
the Son, and no man cometh unto the Son except the 
Father shall previously have drawn him. 

First comes the drawing of the Father through the 
natural mind. Man's brain is so constituted that there is 
a natural drawing— a desire to know the Creator. This 
we see manifested in the heathen, who have never known 
God and have never had the Bible. These people have 
a natural inclination or desire to worship God. Those 
who have this natural inclination of the brain not too 
much perverted by the fall, are in our Lord's providence 
guided to the Truth, the Light, without which no man 
can come to Him. Perhaps they find Jesus through a 



hymn or a tract or a book. 

Willingness to receive God is merely the first step, 
as it were, in response to this natural drawing. As they 
come to enter the way, they learn that it is narrow, difficult, 
and that the "gate" is low. Of course, many are 
turned away. God is not seeking all. He is seeking a 
very special class; and therefore He is not seeking those 
who would be discouraged at the narrowness of the way 
and the lowness of the gate. These conditions are made 
so for the very purpose of turning such away. 

Formerly, we thought that those who turned away because 
of the narrowness of the way and the lowness of 
the gate would go to eternal torment. Now we see that 
God is seeking a special class to do a good work— those 
who are seeking to do His will. Whoever does not manifest 
the proper degree of zeal would probably be injured 
if he endeavored to go on. Therefore, the Lord says, 
Consider the terms, count the cost, weigh the matter, 
before you decide to be My disciple. Then, if you decide 
to be My disciple, come and follow Me. 

After one has become a disciple of the Lord, he comes 
into the condition of the class represented in our text by 
the word them. In this class were the twelve Apostles, 
the five hundred other brethren whom St. Paul mentions, 
and all who throughout the Gospel Age have accepted 
our Lord in sincerity and faithfulness of heart. To all 
such the prayer applies— "Sanctify them through Thy 
Truth; Thy Word is Truth"! 

Strange to say, this which we thought to be the end 
of the way is but the beginning of it. Formerly we 
thought that to accept Jesus was all that there was to do. 
Our friends said, You have heard of Jesus; you have 
accepted Him. That is all there is of it. Now tell some 
others about Jesus. 

But after we come to know of the Truth, we need to 
know more. If each of us were to cast his mind back 
and try to recall how much he understood at first, he 
would realize that he knew that he was a sinner and that 
if he came to Jesus the Father would set him apart. This 
is what St. Paul refers to when he says, "We are His 
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works." 
(Ephesians 2:10.) This setting apart the Father does 
through His Truth, as before pointed out. 

TRUTH THAT SANCTIFIES 

This sanctifying Truth is not to be viewed from the 
standpoint of general knowledge, for this Truth is not 
for the world— is not intended for them. It is for the 
consecrated— for those who have become God's children. 
It is the kind of truth that God gives His family. The 
Apostle Paul says that God has called us according to 
His purpose, that in the end He might show the exceeding 
riches of His grace in His kindness toward us through 
Christ Jesus. (Ephesians 2:7.) God has a purpose, 
which will be fully exhibited in future Ages in the further 



development of His great Plan. 

God had a special purpose when He called and set 
apart a special class. The special Truth which does that 
sanctifying work is the Truth of His great Plan of the 
Ages. He does not make all this known at once. The 
revelation of His Plan has been going on for centuries. 
Some of these revelations have come to us through the 
Prophets, some through Jesus and some through the 
Apostles. These revelations constitute the Heavenly provision 
for sanctification. 

It is necessary, however, that we have the Plan, and 
something more than the Plan also. Various other things 
are to be considered, although this Truth is the channel 
of sanctification: "Sanctify them through Thy Truth; 
Thy Word is Truth." If one were caring for a babe, for 
instance, she would think about its food, fresh air, exercise, 
etc. So it is with God's people. Truths are gradually 
opened up to their observation. Our Father leads us out 
into various experiences in order to have our senses exercised. 
Our experiences and providences cause us to 
think, to appreciate, to study, to inquire; and as we do 
so, we develop by means of these experiences and providences. 
We are led to consider, What does this experience 
mean, and what does that one teach? 

While God's Word is the basis for all our instruction, 
yet it is not our only source of knowledge. There are 
various lessons to be learned through the varied experiences 
of life. The child that would merely receive food 
and then lie still— merely eating and sleeping, never 
having a chance to toddle around— would not know 
how to walk. So it is with God's child. 

THE SECOND PART OF SANCTIFICATION 

We see that God called us with a new call. We are 
to have a new nature. Ours is not to be an earthly nature. 
The real object and purpose of our call is to fit and prepare 
us to be His New Creation, superior to men and to 
angels. We are to be Divine channels of blessing to all 
creatures— angels and men— for the development of all 
God's Universe, including other worlds, as they come to 
have inhabitants. As we come to see the scope of God's 
Plan, we see a reason why God is giving us trials, experiences. 
Our Lord Jesus was to be a merciful High 
Priest; hence His experiences, His sufferings. And if 
it was necessary that our Lord Jesus, the Shepherd of 
the Flock, should suffer, how much more is it necessary 
to our perfecting that we should suffer! 

We should have a great deal of trial, suffering, temptation, 
and, being succored in these, we should know how 
to succor others. Those who are faithful amongst the 
Lord's people now, become especially developed in character-likeness 
to the Master. They are privileged to become 
elders, that they may feed the young, that they may 

R5320 : page 294 



instruct the Flock, that these may grow in the fruits and 
graces of the Spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience, 
long-suffering, brotherly-kindness— love. Therefore, the 
chief qualification of those who would stand as monitors 
amongst the Lord's people is that they be faithful, loyal, 
and manifest, not a lordly spirit, but a humble spirit, a 
spirit of service. 

Sanctification is a gradual work, lasting throughout 
the Christian's life. It is not a point which he reaches 
only at death, but which he should attain soon after consecration. 
Consecration opens the door and gives him 
the standing, gives him the relationship, gives him the 
backing and encouragement of the Divine promises, and 
puts him in the way, therefore, to cultivate the various 
fruits of the Spirit, and finally to attain joint-heirship 
with our Lord in the Heavenly glory. But to maintain 
this standing in the Body of Christ, requires that fruits 
shall be produced, evidences of love and devotion. 

Testings will come thereafter as to the degree of 
faithfulness in service, and to see how much of besetments 
he would endure— how strong a wind of false doctrine 
he could stand, how much of the assaults of the flesh and 
of the Devil he could bear without being unsettled and 
driven away from the Truth. 

The Scriptures tell us that the Lord knows our frame, 
that He will, with each temptation, provide a way of 
escape. We shall all be tried. If the fire becomes so 
hot that to go any further would destroy us, the Lord will 
prevent this. By and by we become stronger. Then He 
may give us even greater testings. So "the Lord your 
God doth prove you, to know whether ye love the Lord 
your God with all your heart and with all your soul." 

TRIALS PROPORTIONATE TO STRENGTH 

A metallurgist tries his metal— proves it. He tests it, 
to separate the dross from it. After he has separated 
some of the alloy, he puts in another flux, to remove other 
dross; and then another flux, etc. So the Lord is taking 
away our dross. He does not take away all of the dross 
of our flesh; for it is the New Creature that is being 

R5321 : page 294 

perfected. As the dross in our minds becomes apparent 
to us, we as New Creatures will more and more co-operate 
with God in its elimination. 

So the Lord's people are to be more and more sanctified 
through the Truth. The word sanctify, then, conveys 
the thought of making saintly, holy. Every day of 
our lives should make us more sanctified— more fit for 
God's service in the future. 

It is not necessarily true that the one having the most 
trying experiences would have the most dross. Our Lord 
Jesus had more trials than any of His followers, and He 



was perfect. As St. Paul intimates, these trials work out 
for us "a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory." And the brightness of our future will depend 
upon the heart-development and character-development 
attained now. Our Lord Jesus will have the highest position 
because of greatest faithfulness under trials. Some 
of the Lord's brethren will have high positions because 
of having proved faithful under great trials. These 
trials are to fit us for a high position, both in the present 
life and in that which is to come. 

"Yes, in God's furnace are His children tried; 

Thrice happy they who to the end endure! 
But who the fiery trial may abide? 

Who from the crucible comes forth so pure 
That He whose eyes of flame look through the whole, 
May see His image perfect in the soul? 

"Not with an evanescent glimpse alone, 

As in that mirror, the Refiner's face; 
But, stamped with Heaven's broad signet, there be shown 

Immanuel's features, full of truth and grace; 
And round that seal of love this motto be— 
'Not for a moment, but eternity!'" 



R5321 : page 294 

ACCEPTABLE AND UNACCEPTABLE WORSHIP 

"God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must 
worship Him in Spirit and in Truth."— John 4:24. 

WORSHIP is that outward manifestation of 

reverence for holy things which is pleasing 

to God, if done in a proper manner and 

from the right motive. But it is possible to 

assume the attitude of worship, and yet not 

offer worship that would be acceptable to 

God. In His conversation with the Samaritan 

woman, our Lord is declaring the manner 

of worship which the Father would 

accept. One might worship and bow down, 

and yet not be acceptable to the Father. And so the 

Lord indicates here that acceptable worship is that which 

is offered to God in Spirit and in Truth. 

Our Lord makes a distinction between worship in 
Spirit and worship in Truth. We might have the Truth 
and know a great deal about the Lord; but if we did not 
go to Him in Spirit— in the right attitude of heart— our 
worship would not be acceptable, no matter how much we 
might know. On the other hand, a man might be a 
heathen and yet have a great deal of the Spirit of worship, 
but he could not render acceptable worship unless 
he had the Truth. Take, for example, Cornelius, the centurion. 



He prayed often and gave much alms to the 

poor, but he was a Gentile. He had the real heart intention 

to come near to God, but God did not accept him at that 

time. Why not? Because he did not have the Truth, and 

could not receive it until the due time for the Gentiles. 

But we find that when the right time came, this 

Gentile was the first one to receive from God the knowledge 

of the Truth, so that he might worship, not only in 

Spirit, but in Truth also. He received the assurance 

that his prayers were now accepted by God. 

The Truth which was sent to Cornelius is the essential 
thing that we must all have to come near to God and be 
acceptable. This Truth necessary to Cornelius was that 
though he was a sinner, God had provided in Jesus a 
Redeemer, a satisfaction for sin. He learned that by becoming 
a follower of Jesus and seeking to do the will 
of God as expressed by Jesus, he would be in harmony 
with God's arrangement. This was the great Truth made 
known to Cornelius. He received the Holy Spirit, and 
came into the family of God. 

The same principle holds good today. There are people 
in heathen lands who have the Spirit of worship, but 
they are without the Truth respecting Jesus. And this 
Truth must be known to the person before he can be a 
worshiper of God in the proper sense. 

This was true also in respect to the Samaritans, to 
one of whom the words of our text were addressed. The 
Samaritans were a Gentile people, who worshiped God 
in Mount Gerizim, the mountain of Samaria. And they 
took delight in thinking that God was their God. When 
this woman of Samaria inquired of Jesus she said, We 
worship God in this mountain of Samaria, but you Jews 
say that the only place to worship God is in Jerusalem. 

Jesus explained to her, saying in substance, Ye worship 
ye know not what, but we Jews have the Truth on this 
subject— we know what we worship. We Jews may worship 
God because, under the Divine Covenant made with 

R5321 : page 295 

our nation, we have the privilege of coming to God in 
prayer, and of having God hear and answer prayer. We 
are worshiping according to God's directions. And He 
might have added, Many of you have the spirit of worship, 
but you do not have the Truth on the subject. It 
would have been possible for the Samaritans to become 
proselyte Jews. But they did not know the necessity for 
this; hence they did not come in. 

During the Gospel Age we, through Christ, have the 
privilege of becoming joint-heirs with Him. Some have 
thus come into God's family. If, however, we should come 
with this Truth, but not in the proper spirit, our prayers 
would not rise above our heads. It is those only who 
have come into proper relationship with God as children 
of the Father through Jesus Christ our Lord, who can 
worship in Spirit and in Truth. These and these only 



will receive the fulfilment of the exceeding great and 
precious promises. 



R5321 : page 295 

THE SPIRIT OF SERVICE THE SPIRIT OF DISCIPLESHIP 

"Whosoever will be chief among you, 
let him be your servant."— Matt. 20:27. 

PROPER aspirations are very beneficial, both 

to the person himself and to those with 

whom he comes in contact. Our Lord had 

an aspiration. We read of Him that He 

"for the joy that was set before Him, endured 

the cross, despising the shame." 

(Heb. 12:2.) There are worthy incentives; 

otherwise the Father would not have set 

one before His Son. The thought which 

should inspire us is that if we are faithful 

in the things of this present time, the Lord will make us 

ruler over many things. So the ardent desire to obtain 

these things which God has reserved for those who love 

Him, is laudable; for these blessings are of God. 

Every New Creature has high aspirations. In fact, 
every one should have an ideal toward which he is striving; 
and having this wish to attain it indicates that 
there is a motive behind the desire. It is altogether 
proper to have incentives before the mind, and it is proper 
to know what kind are worthy of our efforts; otherwise 
wrong ones might lead us astray. In our text a most 
laudable aspiration is placed before us. 

The Church, which is the representative of Christ, is 
the Body of our Lord in the flesh. And the Apostle Paul, 
speaking of ambitions, advised the Church that they 
should have the more profitable aspirations, that they 
might be teachers, instructors of the flock; for this is 
the most useful office in the Church. It is known that 
one gift of St. Paul's time was speaking in an unknown 
tongue. It was a very remarkable gift. But the Apostle 
pointed out that to speak in an unknown tongue was not 
so much to be sought after as some gift that would be 
useful in the Church. 

We do not have these miraculous gifts in the present 
time, but we have the Word of God, and the desire to 
be able to make known the Truth of the Lord. Therefore 
the gift of oratory is still a desirable one. The 
Apostle proceeded to point out that we should desire to 
have the fruits of the Spirit— that they may have a controlling 
influence upon us. 

RESPONSIBILITY UPON EACH ECCLESIA 

As respects positions in the Church, the Lord indicated 



that He would do the setting. "Now God hath set 
the various members in the Body as it hath pleased Him." 
God ordained that there should be in the Body this setting; 
for instance, the service of the eye. As the eye member 
assists the human body, so the eye member in the Church 
may be very assistful to the Body of Christ. Also there 
are ear members, foot members, hand members and tongue 
members. These different members have unlike services 
to perform for the welfare of the whole body. The hand 

R5322 : page 295 

is not to say to the foot, "I have no need of thee," or 
vice versa.— I Corinthians 12:14-31. 

If the body tries to walk on the hands, it is not the 
Divine order. The body should walk on the feet. So it is 
in a congregation. But if the congregation lays too much 
on the feet members, it is depriving the hand members 
of their use. The various members should be in the 
positions where they can render the most efficient service. 
In other words, the congregation should seek to know the 
service God has evidently prepared each individual to 
perform. They are to seek to use their best judgment, 
to place the right person in the right position. 

We see congregations occasionally where they try to 
make all walk on the hands and not on the feet. That 
congregation loses in not putting every member into the 
place for which Divine Providence has especially qualified 
him. To do so is the responsibility of the congregation. 
However, if it tries to make the Body walk on 
the hands instead of the feet, it will learn in time, probably, 
to get the hands to exercise themselves in their own 
position, and likewise the feet in theirs; and each member 
will finally do the service for which he is fitted. 

HUMILITY INDISPENSABLE TO GOD'S SERVICE 

Not only is it to the disadvantage of the congregation 
for the members to be in the wrong positions, but 
it is also wrong for the members to try to do other services 
than those which they should be doing. It is not 
in our power to change ourselves from what we are by 
nature. Only Divine Power could prepare us for service 
in another part of the Body. Our proper attitude should 
be to really serve the Body of Christ, to serve the Lord. 
We should notice wherever there is a service to be rendered 
which we can do. "Do with thy might what thy 
hands find to do." 

The difficulty with many in the Church is that they 
desire to do what somebody else is doing— something that 
they admire. They are not looking around to see what 
they can always do— do good unto all men, as they have 
opportunity, but especially unto those who are of the 
household of faith. They have not the proper spirit of 
discipleship. Therefore the injunction of our text should 
lead them to say to themselves, My highest ambition 



should be to serve the Lord acceptably, and let Him take 
care of the place where I may serve. Here is a little 
place; there is a little corner. I will try to do the thing 
which is needful in my position. If the Lord shall open 
the way, and show me something else which seems to be 
more important, I will take that. But I will do with my 
might what it is my duty to do— whether it is sweeping, or 
engaging a hall for a meeting. Whatever comes as an 
opportunity to me, that I will do. 

This does not mean that we have no aspirations. The 
controlling impulse is to serve the Church. Here we 
have a laudable motive, a proper desire. But it seems 
that some are ambitious— seek to be chief. Our own ambition 
(and we believe it would also be the Spirit of the 
Lord) is not to help one who aspires to the chief place, 
into the position which he seeks. To assist him in such 
a course would do injury both to him and the cause. But 
if we find any one seeking to do with his might what his 
hands find to do, we may be sure that this will be approved 

R5322 : page 296 

of the Lord; and perhaps the Lord will later give 
him some more important work in recognition of his 
faithful service to Him. 

SELF-SEEKING TO BE DEPRECATED 

Each is to be content with what the Lord's Providence 
opens up to him. He is not to be self-seeking. "He that 
exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted." (Luke 18:14.) He that exalteth 
himself is not to be exalted by the Church; for he 
will not be exalted by the Lord. He that humbleth himself 
will be exalted, either by the vote of the congregation, 
or by the Lord's will. 

As the matter is stated in our text, we think the Lord 
meant this: There will be some of you who necessarily 
will be recognized as chief. There are various kinds of 
service, and it is necessary to have a chief in connection 
with the services of each congregation. God has recognized 
this Himself. He made Jesus a Chief. He passed 
by Satan, who was self-seeking. He chose Jesus, and 
made the road very narrow to Him! But after Jesus had 
proved His humility, then the Father gave Him the high 
exaltation, gave Him the great reward promised. 

The Father is seeking now those who will have the 
same spirit of humility, the same spirit of service, that 
the Lord Jesus manifested. We look at Him, and we 
see that, while the Father held out the condition of being 
chief, He also held out the condition of being servant. 
Jesus, we see, was the Servant of all. Therefore God 
exalted Him and gave Him a name above every name. 

So it should be with each little congregation of the 
Church. It is the Lord's will that not every one 
who would be its chief servant should be recognized as 



the chief. But the Lord will recognize the one who 
will show himself humble-minded, as He has shown 
Himself to be, in doing anything for the brethren. Let 
such be your servant. Each should consider that the chief 
honor amongst you, amongst the Lord's brethren, is to be 
servant. And the one who is most faithful should be 
given the opportunity to serve. In that sense he would 
be your chief. 



R5322 : page 296 

A GOD-FEARING BAD MAN 

-NOVEMBER 2.-NUMBERS 22:1 TO 23:10.- 

"A double-minded man is unstable 
in all his ways."— James 1:8. 

AFTER the Israelites had entered Canaan and 

were fully recognized as God's holy nation, 

it would appear that all dealings between 

God and the Gentiles were discontinued. 

Before that, apparently men of faith in God 

were more or less recognized by Him— for 

instance, Abraham, Job, Melchizedec and 

Balaam— the latter constituting the central 

figure of today's lesson. Balaam lived on 

the Euphrates River, in the country which 

Abraham left when he came to Canaan. He was known 

far and near as one whose messages either for good or 

for evil were sure to come to pass. In other words, he 

was considered an oracle. 

When the king of the Moabites perceived the Israelites 
conquering all with whom they battled, he greatly feared 
them, even though they had not molested the Moabites. 
He conferred with the ruler of the Midianites, and then 
sent messages four hundred miles to the Euphrates to get 
Balaam to come to pronounce a curse against the 
Israelites. A considerable reward was offered. 

The Prophet Balaam inquired of the Lord whether or 
not he should go on this mission. The reply was, No; 
Israel was blessed of the Lord, not cursed. Balaam gave 
the decision, and the messengers returned. Balak was 
all the more insistent and sent fresh messengers of higher 
station, intimating higher rewards. Balaam knew the 
mind of the Lord on the subject, but was a money-lover 
and somehow hoped for a chance to get some of the 
rewards of unrighteousness. In response to this second 
inquiry, whether or not he could go with the men, he 
obtained permission to go. 

It was on this journey that Balaam was reproved by 
his ass. An angel of the Lord stood in the pathway, in 
a narrow place where the ass, seeing the angel, could not 
pass him. Balaam's eyes not being opened, he saw not 



the angel. The ass, being beaten, remonstrated. Even 
this miracle did not stop Balaam's money-lust. He 
coveted the wealth, and would do anything in his power 
to obtain it— merely stopping where he must. 

Balaam was received by Balak, king of Moab, with 
honor. He directed that altars be built and sacrifices be 
offered to God. He would have a form of godliness, 
even while desiring to do contrary to the Divine will, 
which he already knew. The sacrifices offered, he began 
his prophecy, which the king hoped would be a curse, but 
which was really a blessing, the words being Divinely 
inspired. As wrote St. Peter, "Holy men of God spake 
as they were moved by the Holy Spirit." (2 Peter 1:21.) 
The king complained that instead of a curse would come 
a blessing. Balaam remonstrated that he had said from 
the beginning that he would be powerless to utter anything 
except the Divine message. 

The disappointed king, fearful of Israel, sought the 
exercise of black art in some manner against them. He 
took the Prophet to another viewpoint and urged the 
curse of at least this many of the host. Altars were 
built again; sacrifices were offered again. And again the 
hoped-for curse instead of blessing did not come. Getting 
desperate and angry, the king insisted that at least a 
portion must be cursed, and led the Prophet to another 
standpoint, from which a still smaller wing of the host 
of Israel was visible. But here again the results were 
blessings, not curses— for the third time. 

A DOUBLE-MINDED MAN 

The double-mindedness of the Prophet, Balaam, was 
abundantly manifested by his course, as we have examined 
it. He wished to be a Prophet of the Lord and to 
speak His Word in His Name; but he also wished riches, 
and the honor which would accompany them. He wished 
for what God's providence had not seen best to give 
him. Right and wrong— God's way and the way of riches 
—both were before him. Which would he choose with all 
his heart? He chose neither one. He tried to have 
both— to be a servant and mouthpiece of God, and to gain 
the rewards of an opposite course.— 2 Peter 2:15,16. 

Alas, how many in every age have had the Balaam 
spirit! Jesus warned against this spirit, saying, "Ye 
cannot serve God and mammon." How many have found 
the Master's words true! How many have found that the 
Lord would reject from His counsels and His fellowship 
those who regard iniquity in their hearts; and who, if 
they would not love to serve it, at least would love its 
rewards. Let us remember that God looketh upon the 
inward parts— the heart. Let us remember how it was 
written of Jesus: "Because Thou hast loved righteousness 
and hast hated iniquity, therefore God, even thy God, 

R5323 : page 297 



hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above thy 
fellows."— Psalm 45:7. 

In God's dealings with our Redeemer, He has exemplified 
the principles of His righteous Government. A 
double-minded man is unreliable in every way— not pleasing 
to God, not acceptable to Him. 

THE HEART WITH THE TREASURE 

The Master said, "Where your treasure is, there will 
your heart be also." Those who set their affection 
chiefly upon earthly things can with difficulty avoid the 
snares that go with them. Balaam's only safe course 
was in heart loyalty to God. Knowing the mind of the 
Lord on the subject, he should have delighted himself 
therein, and should to the fullest have rejected every 
overture looking in an opposite direction. The nobles 
who took King Balak's second proposition should have 
been kindly, but firmly, told that the Divine will was the 
law of Balaam, the Prophet; that he would not for a 
moment consider anything to the contrary of the Divine 
will; that money, wealth and honors as inducements to 
a course of opposition to God's will would be an insult. 
Let us each apply this lesson in life's affairs. Let God 
be first in our hearts, as well as in our words and acts. 

But if, overtaken in a fault, Balaam had gone so far 
as to start on the journey with the hope of somehow 
gaining the evil reward, he should have been thoroughly 
aroused by the incident of the ass. Even an ass knew 
better than to attempt to go contrary to the Higher Power. 
Evidently the greater reasoning power and courage of 
humanity above that of the brute may be used to great 
advantage. 

We see that Balaam's heart was wrong. He still 
continued to be a Prophet, but was ceasing to be a holy 
Prophet every minute that he toyed with the tempting 
wealth, the reward of unrighteousness. Alas, how his 
mind was debased, debauched, by the love of money! 
While outwardly he still remained loyal to God in that 
he would not utter a false message, yet inwardly his 
harmony with God was gone. The infection, from being 
a mere speck of a wish for the money, spread rapidly 
until it swallowed up everything noble and true in the 
man. The rot or blight which started in his heart, like 
the blight at the core of a beautiful apple, spread until 
nothing remained but the outward form. 

The professed man of God groveled in the mire of 
sin in his desire to obtain Balak's proffered wealth. He 
said to the king, The reason I am not permitted to curse 
Israel is that they are blessed of the Lord; but I will 
explain to you that the Lord's blessing is with them because 
they are His consecrated people, in covenant relationship 
with Him, seeking to obey His Law. The only 
way in which you could bring a curse upon Israel would 
be by tempting them to disobedience to God. 

Guided by Balaam, King Balak communicated with 



the leading people of the Midianites, and urged that their 
wives and daughters should apparently fall in love with 
the Israelites, and introduce them to the sensuous religious 
rites practised by Midian. In proportion as they 
would succeed in ensnaring the Israelites into sin and 
idolatry, in that proportion the curse of Israel's Law 
would fall upon Israel. How sad it is, and yet how true, 
that knowledge is a dangerous thing to those who misuse 
it! How true it is today that none can make so successful 
tools of Satan as those who have some knowledge 
of God! 

GOD PERMITTED THE LESSON 

God could have hindered all those evil machinations, 
as He could hinder evil deeds and evil plans today. But 
He allowed matters to take their course, and a great 
lesson thus to be taught— for then as well as for now and 
intermediately. The scheme was successful. Some of 
the leading wives and daughters of the Midianites attracted 
some of the leading men of Israel to adultery, 
and to idol worship and orgies. Forthwith a plague 
started amongst the Israelites, according to their Covenant 
with God at Sinai, Ebal and Gerizim. 

God's Covenant with Israel was that while they 
would be loyal to Him and His Law, their enemies could 
not prevail against them. They should be His people. 
They should be blessed in their every temporal interest. 
But if they would neglect His statutes and engage in 
idolatry, He would bring upon them various plagues. 
This course not only would punish them for their wrong 
doings, but serve as a lesson, a warning, to restrain them 
from excesses such as were common amongst the heathen. 

We must remember that the death of thousands of 
Israelites on such occasions was the whole penalty for 
their sin. They did not drop into a hell of eternal torment, 
but merely fell asleep, to await the better Day of 
Messiah, the Antitype of Moses, when they will be 
awakened from the sleep of death and be brought to full, 
clear knowledge of those things which, at very most, they 
then enjoyed only in a typical way. 

Not only did God punish the Israelites according to the 
terms of their Law Covenant, but He also punished the 
Midianites and Balaam. Under Divine direction Moses 
called for a thousand armed men out of each of the 
tribes. This army completely wiped out the Midianites as 
a nation, including Balaam, the Prophet, who, to secure 
the rewards of his nefarious advice, had evidently remained 
to oversee the work of iniquity. 

Our glorified Redeemer, in His last message to the 
Church, foretold that some of His followers would imitate 
Balaam and, for earthly advantage, put a stumbling-block 
in the path of the brethren. The intimation is that 
the harlotry and false worship would be on a higher 
plane than that which stumbled Natural Israel— even as 
everything in this Christian Dispensation is antitypical. 



BALAAM'S WONDERFUL PROPHECY 

Several passages in Balaam's prophecy are very striking 
in their fulfilment. For instance: 

"For from the top of the rocks I see him, 
And from the hills I behold him; 
Lo, it is a people that dwell alone 

And shall not be reckoned amongst the nations." 

* * * 

"Blessed be every one that blesseth thee 

And cursed be every one that curseth thee." 

* * * 

"I behold Him, but not nigh; 
There shall come forth a Star out of Jacob, 
And the Sceptre shall rise out of Israel. 
And One out of Jacob shall have dominion." 

Surely we see fulfilled the declaration that Israel shall 
be separate from all other nations. What other nation 
of that day remains a people of preserved identity? 

How true the statement that those who have cursed, 
or injured, Israel have brought injury upon themselves! 
As we scan the whole field of the world, we find that 
every nation which has dealt harshly with Israel has 
received severe chastisement or blight. On the contrary, 
Great Britain and the United States, nations which have 
blessed the Jew, have in turn received great blessings. 

The lines referring to Messiah's Kingdom are equally 
true. The Sceptre did rise out of Israel. The One who 
is to have the dominion of earth is of Jacob's posterity, 
according to the flesh. As the bright and morning Star, 
He is leading on to a glorious sunrise— the dawning of 
the Messianic Day, which is to scatter earth's night and 
to bring blessings instead of the curse. 



R5323 : page 298 

CONSIDER ONE ANOTHER 

-NOVEMBER 9. -ROMANS 14:7-21.- 

"It is good not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do anything 
whereby thy brother stumbleth."— Romans 14:21— Diaglott. 

THIS lesson makes, perhaps, the strongest appeal 
of anything in the Bible in favor of 
total abstinence from the use of intoxicating 
liquors. True, it is addressed only to Christians, 
as is the entire New Testament. 
Nevertheless, many who have not become 
followers of Jesus can appreciate the argument 
here, and to many such it will appeal 



—not along the highest Christian lines, but 
along the lines of the Golden Rule. 

To make a distinction between the Golden Rule, the 
acknowledged standard for all mankind, and a Christian's 
rule of life will be considered by many, doubtless, as a 
distinction without a difference. But this is not true. 

R5324 : page 298 

The Golden Rule, that one should do to others as he 
would be done by, is a simple rule of justice. All should 
recognize it. All should follow it, as none will dispute it. 

The rule for Christian living, as taught by the Master 
and exemplified by Him, is far more exacting than the 
Golden Rule, which is applicable to all men. Those who 
become followers of Christ are, of course, subject to the 
Golden Rule, but they voluntarily place themselves under 
a far more stringent rule. Their Covenant with the Lord 
is that in the doing of His will— the doing of righteousness 
—they will ever stand ready to sacrifice everything, 
even life itself. This is what the Apostle meant when 
he declared that Christ pleased not Himself. Even though 
His will was a perfect one, He renounced His rights, privileges, 
liberties, that He might serve humanity, and thus 
lay the foundation for carrying out the Heavenly Father's 
glorious purposes respecting our race. 

The present call of the Church is for those who have 
the "same mind which was also in Christ Jesus." It is a 
call for sacrificers. As St. Paul declares, "I beseech you, 
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present 
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God, which is your reasonable service." (Romans 12:1.) 
This sacrificing is not to be done in a foolish or aimless 
way. We are not to sacrifice the things that are right 
and proper, simply that we may suffer. Right and proper 
things we may enjoy, except as God shall open our eyes 
to see privileges and opportunities for self-denial which 
would enable us to forward His cause, and to minister 
grace and truth to those for whom Christ died. 

"NONE OF US LIVETH TO HIMSELF" 

Let us first consider our lesson from the standpoint 
of the consecrated people of God, and afterwards from 
the standpoint of others who love righteousness, but who 
have not, as yet, joined the Lord and His faithful, self-sacrificing 
band of followers. 

As for the world, they do live to themselves and die 
to themselves. That is to say, their own personal interests 
stand first with them. Only to Christ and the Church 
could these words apply; for none others than these have 
entered into such a Covenant of self-renunciation, giving 
up the present with all of its privileges and interests in 
exchange for a promise of a spiritual life hereafter, in 
the resurrection. 

All these, by the terms of their Covenant, are to live 



unto the Lord— to do His will and not their own will, to 
serve Him and not to serve self, to lay down their lives 
in fighting a good fight against sin. All these, when they 
die, will be dying unto the Lord, in the sense that they 
are counted as members of the Body of Christ, every 
member of which must die to the flesh before the entire 
Body complete can be glorified beyond the veil. To these, 
therefore, apply the words, "Whether we live or die, we 
are the Lord's." 

This being true, the Christian is to have no will of 
his own as respects his living or his dying, or any of his 
affairs. Everything is to be fully committed and submitted 
to the great Head of the Church. Christ's death on behalf 
of all is efficacious, not only for the dead, but also for the 
living. All who recognize Him, and are fully consecrated 
to His service, trust Him fully, in life and in death. 

The Apostle proceeds to show that we who constitute 
the Church which is the Body of Christ are not judges 
one of another, that all judgment is vested in the Head, 
the Redeemer of all. Each one now accepted as a member 
of the Church must ultimately stand the inspection of 
the Head of the Church; for our present membership in 
His Body is a probationary one. Loyalty, faithfulness 
to the Head of the Church now, will bring to us eventually 
membership in His glorious Body, the Church beyond 
the veil— His joint-heirs in the Kingdom— His Bride. 

The Apostle's argument, then, is that we should avoid 
condemning one another, and content ourselves with encouraging 
each other in the good way. Since it is written 
that every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to 
God, this proves that our final accounting as members of 
the Church of Christ will be to God, or to our Lord Jesus 
as His Representative. 

LET US, THEN, JUDGE OURSELVES 

The Apostle's argument also is that, instead of judging, 
condemning, fellow-members of the consecrated Body, 
we should be full of sympathy for them. We should realize 
that we do not know thoroughly their trials, their difficulties, 
their environments, their heredities. This should 
make us very sympathetic towards all the brethren. Our 
keen sense of justice, our love of righteousness, our 
hatred of iniquity, should find its principal exercise in 
self-criticism, and in watchfulness not to do anything that 
would stumble a brother— not to do anything that would 
discourage a brother or cause him to fall away from the 
faith and the works which the Lord requires. 

What a wonderful lesson is this in battling against 
self, rather than against enemies! How many find it 
easy to excuse their own weaknesses while they are very 
captious and critical as respects the shortcomings of 
others! How the Lord warned His people against such 
an attitude saying, "With what [soever kind of] judgment 
ye judge [a brother], ye shall be judged" [yourself of 
the Lord]. -Matthew 7:2. 



If you are hypercritical and wish to measure others 
up to the full standard of perfection, you are thus recognizing 
a high standard, and that recognition on your part 
will make it proper for the Lord to measure you by that 
high standard. If we could but remember this— that the 
merciful will obtain mercy— how glad we all would be to 
be extremely merciful to others, extremely lenient in our 
judgments and reproofs, hoping that the Lord would be 
correspondingly lenient with us!— James 2:13. 

The Lord is not in this establishing a low standard, 
and wishing His people to think lightly of their own weaknesses 
and failures, and those of others. He is, on the 
contrary, setting up a high standard of love, sympathy, and 
kindness. Love is the principal thing, in God's sight. 
Whoever, therefore, has love and sympathy most highly 
developed, the Lord may well esteem as highly developed 
along the lines most essential in His sight, most essential 
for a place in His Mediatorial Kingdom. 

NOTHING UNCLEAN OF ITSELF 

"I know and am persuaded of the Lord Jesus, that 

R5324 : page 299 

nothing is unclean [unholy] of itself," writes the Apostle. 
The Apostle is referring not to filthiness of clothing or 
person, but to foods which were to the Jew made improper, 
ceremonially unclean. In other words, while the 
Jew was forbidden the use of swine, rabbits, oysters, etc., 
it was not that these foods would make him actually impure 
or evil in God's sight, but that the restrictions were 
imposed as tests of his loyalty and obedience to God, just 
as the forbidden fruit of Eden was thereafter unclean to 
Adam and Eve. 

The Apostle's argument is that to the Jew who died 
to all hope of attaining eternal life through keeping the 
Law Covenant, and who became united to Christ, the restrictions 
of the Law Covenant would no longer be binding. 
And, of course, to the Gentile, who never was under 
the Law Covenant, its restrictions would have no application 
when he accepted Christ. 

Having stated this broad ground, the Apostle admits 
that if any man had his reasoning faculties so twisted on 
the subject that he thought himself under obligations, he 
would be responsible according to his mind or judgment 
on the subject. If, for instance, a Christian thought 
that he was obliged to avoid eating pork, that thought in 
his mind would constitute an obligation; for for him to 
violate his conscience would mean that he had willingly, 
knowingly, committed sin; for he would be wrong in 
doing what he thought was wrong, however harmless the 
matter might be in itself. 

But now comes the final argument: Anybody realizing 
his own liberty, as the Apostle did, might eat freely, 
according to his convenience, without any reproof from 



his conscience or in the sight of God. But the brother 

still in the dark respecting his liberty should have consideration 

—should not be urged to violate his conscience. 

Rather, the brother of enlightened mind should yield to 

the other, and abstain from using his liberty, lest he 

should tempt his brother to violate his conscience. 

This question of eating ceremonially unclean meat, or 
meat theoretically unclean because it had been first waved 
before an idol, is a question which no longer is a live 
issue among Christians; for general intelligence on the 
subject has gained the mastery everywhere. 

The special application of this lesson to Christians 
is along a still different line. For instance, suppose 
that one brother had from childhood been accustomed 
to drinking beer, ale, etc., and that in his estimation 
it did him no injury. But suppose a number of 
brethren, less strong than he, physically and mentally, 
could not touch intoxicants without harming themselves; 
and suppose that the example of the drinking brother 
would continue to be a temptation to the others. What 
should be his course? 

The argument of the Apostle would seem to be that 
the brother who is strong, mentally, morally and physically, 
should gladly abstain from anything that would 
stumble his brother, or anybody else upon whom he exercised 
an influence. "Destroy not him with thy meat, for 
whom Christ died." (Romans 14:15.) If Christ loved 
the world so much as to leave His Heavenly riches and 
glory to die for sinners, should not we, in proportion as 
we have His Spirit, be glad to lay down our lives for 
the brethren, as the Apostle elsewhere exhorts us? And 

R5325 : page 299 

if so, should we not be much more ready to abstain from 
the use of comparatively trifling liberties for the sake of 
our weaker brother, for whom Christ died? This is a 
strong argument. Who can deny it? 

"Let not then your good be evil spoken of." Your 
knowledge, your appreciation, of your liberties is a good 
thing, a desirable thing; nevertheless, you should so 
govern your exercise of that liberty that none will misunderstand 
it, and think you an evil-doer. Rather restrain 
yourself of your liberties, preserve others from the temptation 
too strong for them, and increase your own influence 
by faithfully abstaining from everything that might 
appear to be an evil in the sight of others, however right 
it might be in your own sight, and however correct your 
own judgment of the Divine Law on the subject might be. 

"NOT MEAT AND DRINK" 

The Apostle adds another argument (v. 17). He remarks, 
For the advantages connected with our membership 
in the embryo Kingdom of God consist not in the 
greater privileges and liberties we have in eating and 



drinking, but consist rather in the righteousness and peace 
and joy in the Holy Spirit which are ours because we are 
probationary members of this Kingdom Class. He who 
thus serves Christ is well pleasing to God and is approved 
of men. "Let us, therefore, follow after the things which 
make for peace and things whereby we may edify one 
another. Overthrow not for meat's sake the work of God. 
All things indeed are clean; but evil for that man who 
eateth with offense. It is good not to eat flesh, nor to 
drink wine, nor to do anything whereby thy brother 
stumbleth." 

The application of the Golden Rule on the part of the 
world would seem to be a settlement of many questions 
of the present time. Do unto others weaker than yourself, 
in precept and example, what you would have them do 
for you in precept and example, if you were the weaker 
and they the stronger. 



R5327 : page 299 

OBLIVION NOT ANNIHILATION 

Question.— Is it correct to speak of the condition in 
Hades as being a condition of oblivion, or of annihilation? 

Answer.— The word annihilation would be a very improper 
one to use in respect to the condition of a man in 
death, except it be the Second Death. The thought connected 
with annihilation is that of being absolutely wiped 
out of existence. Hence annihilation would be an improper 
term in respect to the Hadean condition. The 
word oblivion is not the same as annihilation. Oblivion 
means the condition of absolute unconsciousness; for instance, 
when a man falls into a sound sleep he goes into 
oblivion. He might say, I was wholly oblivious for an 
hour. He was ignorant of the things taking place. 

It is well for us, so far as possible, especially in speaking 
along the lines of the Bible, to use the right term, to 
avoid any possible confusion. The Bible is written in 
very good form. Our Common Version contains very 
beautiful language. It is a marvel in the purity of its 
English. We do well to keep ourselves within the terms 
of the Bible and to use the language which the Bible uses, 
and thus we shall not be in danger of misunderstanding 
or of being misunderstood. And if any one thinks we 
have not a wide enough range, we shall know at least 
that we are avoiding misunderstanding and misrepresentation 
of the Word of the Lord. In the case of Hades, 
Sheol, these words are not in the Common Version Bible, 
but they have been brought into the English language during 
the past few decades. Therefore it is proper that we 
should use these words, because they have become naturalized 
—common words. 

Question.— What would be the difference between the 
expressions used in the Old Testament: "They shall be as 



page 300 

though they had not been," and "They shall be utterly 
destroyed," and the word annihilation? 

Answer.— We would understand them to have the same 
meaning. These Scriptures have reference to the Second 
Death only. They might be used as showing what the 
first death would have been, had there been no redemption 
from it. But God's proposition was otherwise from 
the beginning; and the Redemption-price has been given. 
But the expression, "They shall be as though they had not 
been," is used in connection with certain systems of the 
present time, which shall utterly fall, shall go down completely. 
The same expression might be applicable to 
humanity. Those who sin wilfully now and die the Second 
Death, and those who will sin wilfully during the 
Millennium and die the Second Death— these will be 
blotted out of existence, annihilated. 

But to use any of these terms in respect to the first 
death is a mistake. The most we can say is, that as it is 
with the brute, so would it be with man, if God had not 
provided something better. God assured our first parents 
that the Seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's 
head. Thus early He gave a vague promise of a future 
redemption. There is no recovery from annihilation; it 
is the end of all hope. 



R5325 : page 300 

ARE WE ACTUAL OR RECKONED NEW CREATURES? 

"If any man be in Christ, he is a New Creature; 
old things are passed away; behold, all things 
are become new."— 2 Corinthians 5:17. 

OUR information on this subject of the New 

Creature comes from the Word of God. It 

is the Spirit of the Truth that bears the 

witness. "If any one be in Christ, he is a 

New Creation; the old things have passed 

away; behold! they have become new." 

[Diaglott Translation.] Apparently, then, 

if old things have passed away from us, and 

we are New Creatures in Christ, we are 

now receiving the blessings. There is nothing 

said about being reckonedly New Creatures. The 

change is actual, bona-fide. When God accepts the human 

will, He does not hold the New Creature responsible for 

any of the deeds done previous to consecration. The 

whole account is a new one. 

We are New Creatures in the sense that God has 
begotten us of the Holy Spirit. God has given us Heavenly 
promises instead of earthly promises. We are no 



longer striving to see whether we can attain a higher position 
in the world. We have new ambitions. Our aim is 
to live pleasing to God. And in every way this change 
of sentiment indicates a transformation of mind. 

Transformation means to form over again, across, different, 
in an opposite way. So we have been changed by 
reason of this change of our will. God has made us the 
promise that, if we make this change, or transformation, 
He will no longer count sin to us, that we shall have 
standing henceforth no longer as sinners, but as holy 
ones. The world does not know that we are children of 
God. They do not realize how fully we have given up the 
earthly hopes and are seeking a different prize from that 
which the world seeks. 

The fact that this change is merely in the mind and 
not in the body does not alter this matter at all. According 
to science, every seven years a complete change takes 
place in our bodies, the new matter coming on as the old 
matter sloughs off. But one is not a new man because 
his body has changed. If this were so, we would have had 
several changes by this time. So far as the mind is concerned, 
personality is not changed. If we had lost a hand, 
we would still be the same personality; or if we were to 
lose a hand and a foot, the loss would not change our 
personality. 

Our personality would not change in this event, because 
the personality is the mind, the ego. And so when 
the ego, the mind, is changed, that New Creature is distinctly 
separated from the other. The fact that it does 
not yet have a spirit body does not matter. The New 
Creature is the New Creature, only now he is the New 
Creature under adverse conditions; whereas by and by 
he will be the New Creature who has entered into that 
condition which God has promised— the Divine nature 
and everlasting joy— and in which he will abide forever. 

OUR STANDING FROM GOD'S VIEWPOINT 

We are now spirit beings in human bodies. The Apostle 
says, "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things 
which are above." It is not the body that is risen, but the 
New Creature. It was not the New Creature that died, 
but the old creature. It is not the life of the old creature 
that "is hid with Christ in God" (Colossians 3:3), but the 
life of the New Creature. The Apostle declares, "Ye are 
not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of 
God dwell in you." He says also that we are not only to 
reckon ourselves dead, but to reckon ourselves as though 
we had been raised from the dead. "Reckon ye yourselves 
to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God 
through Jesus Christ our Lord!"— Romans 6:11. 

The body is not the New Creature, but it belongs to 
the New Creature. It is the servant of the New Creature. 
The New Creature is the only one that God recognizes at 
all; for He knows us not after the flesh. And we should 
live in the Spirit, and view ourselves and all of our affairs 



from this standpoint. We should "walk not after the 
flesh, but after the Spirit." (Romans 8:4.) Our viewpoint 
should be this: As New Creatures, we merely inhabit 
these bodies for awhile. 

These bodies are our slaves and we are to use them 
as our slaves. The environment is unfavorable for the 
New Creature at the present time. But it is the New 
Creature that God is looking at. "If any man be in 
Christ, he is a New Creation; the old things have passed 
away; behold, they have become new." If he now fails to 
make good his consecration, fails to be an overcomer, he 
will have no resurrection; for all his earthly rights have 
been abrogated. 

"Ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit." We do, 
as New Creatures, have the fleshly bodies. But the flesh 
is not we; that is, not our kind, not our nature. It is only 
as the New Creature that we can inherit the Promise. 
Jesus was put to death in the flesh; that is to say, He 
sacrificed the flesh— He gave up His claim on the flesh 
at His consecration. And it was on the basis of His giving 
up His rights that the Father begat Him to the new 
nature. Therefore He said, My will is to do My Father's 
will. The Cup that My Father hath poured for Me, I will 
drink! -John 18:11. 

Jesus would not stand for His earthly rights. His 
dying was not merely at Calvary. It was begun at Jordan 
three and a half years before. In the type, the high 
priest slew the bullock, which represented the Man Jesus. 
Our Lord gave up His life completely— His human life. 

R5325 : page 301 

The High Priest was another person. He went inside 
and ministered in the Holy while His human nature was 
sacrificed upon the altar, and His body burned outside 
the camp, but in sight of the camp. 

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SOUL AND NEW CREATURE 

Every New Creature is a soul. The word soul is used 
in the Scriptures, in a very broad manner indeed, as signifying 
any sentient being, any being that has sensibility, 
intelligence. A fish has intelligence; therefore the Bible 
describes a fish as being a soul (See Genesis 1:20, margin). 
A dog, a cow, a horse, is each a soul. An angel 
is a soul, or being. God is a soul, or being— the Bible 
says so. The Scriptures say that "If any man draw back, 
My soul shall have no pleasure in him" (Hebrews 10:38) 
—this means God's soul. 

This broad use of the word, therefore, in connection 
with any kind of sentient being, assures us that as New 
Creatures all of us are souls— intelligent beings. We 
might be understood to be double souls in the sense that 
we were human souls to begin with, but that God has 
through Christ made a special arrangement for us whereby 
we are begotten again to be New Creatures. This begettal 



is of the mind; and only in this way are we New 
Creatures now. 

This New Creature is not yet perfected. This new 
soul has not yet reached that condition which God intends 
that it shall have. The Apostle tells us that we have this 
treasure of the new mind in the old body— the earthen 
vessel. The new mind must do the Father's will, irrespective 
of the will of the body, or of the friends of the 
body, and what they might desire it to do. The new mind 
is to do God's will under all circumstances. 

A spirit-begotten child of God may speak of himself 
as already possessing eternal life, which he does possess 
by faith. But the New Creature, the new soul, is not yet 

R5326 : page 301 

completed. God's promise is that when this new soul 
shall have been completed, we shall have a body like 
Christ. We shall be like Him. We shall see Him as He 
is and share His glory. We shall be souls on the Divine 
plane, whereas formerly we were souls on the human 
plane; now we are reckoned as in the transitional state. 

DUAL SOULS-NOT DUAL MINDS 

When we speak of being dual souls, we do not mean 
that we are dual-minded; for that would be a reprehensible 
condition. We are single-minded. Our duality consists 
in the fact that we have the mind of one nature and 
the body of another. A perfect soul results from the 
union of life-principle with an organism. It is thus with 
a fish, a dog, a horse. There is an organism, and there 
is vitality, a spark of life, before there can be a soul. 
The Lord's people were human souls, or had the powers 
common to all mankind, to begin with. Then they were 
begotten again. And the new will, the new mind, has at 
present an organism not adapted to its needs. 

In the resurrection the New Creature will have an 
organism fully adapted to its requirements. But now it 
is a soul that is neither perfect in the flesh nor perfect 
on the spirit plane. And since the nature goes properly 
with the mind, the will, therefore the flesh is counted as 
being that of the New Creature, and the New Creature is 
held responsible for this flesh. 

The Apostle suggests to us that not only our old minds, 
or wills, are dead, and that we reckon also our bodies 
dead, but that we go further, and reckon our bodies quickened, 
or made alive, from their dead and sin-disposed condition, 
that they may be fully our servants as New Creatures, 
that they may serve our purposes— "quickened by 
the Spirit of God that dwelleth in you." That is to say, 
so long as the indwelling power of the Holy Spirit is 
ruling in our hearts and minds, it controls and energizes 
the physical body. 

THE SECRET OF SELF-CONTROL 



God deals with us as New Creatures from the time we 
are begotten of the Holy Spirit. He has no dealings with 
the flesh. The flesh is under condemnation. God dealt 
with the flesh of Father Adam, condemning it to destruction. 
Then He provided a way in Christ by which 
the race may be rescued from destruction. The Church's 
relationship to God is purely as New Creatures. From the 
time, then, that we become New Creatures, accepted of 
God, He takes these mortal bodies of ours, which are consecrated 
to His service, as a part of the New Creature. 
So if we suffer, it is the New Creature that suffers. And 
in this sense God takes cognizance of our flesh from the 
time of our consecration. "Precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of His saints." 

Because our human bodies are vehicles for His service, 
God takes note of them. In proportion as we become 
strong in the Spirit of the Lord, we have the power to 
make the mortal body do what the new mind wills. But 
we are weak in ourselves. We cannot properly control 
our mortal bodies. God, therefore, gives us of His Truth. 
And the more we receive of the Truth, of the Spirit, the 
more fully sanctified we should be, the more fully in harmony 
with the Father's will, and the greater control we 
should have of our mortal bodies. 



R5326 : page 301 

ACQUAINT YOURSELF WITH GOD 

"Strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age, even those 
who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern 
both good and evil."— Heb. 5:14. 

IN THIS text the Apostle uses a well-known 

physical truth to illustrate an important 

spiritual truth. As human babes would be 

choked or have their digestion ruined by 

the stronger kinds of food which they could 

when older use to advantage, so, as the 

Apostle says, spiritual babes have need of 

the simpler truths, that they may grow 

thereby and develop character, as well as 

learn to appreciate the Divine Plan. That 

strong meat belongs to them that are of full age is an 

unquestionable fact. Adults may exercise discretion as 

to which foods would be expedient for their use— which 

would be palatable, which would be productive of the 

best results— that they may choose wisely. We all find 

that certain foods that agree with one do not agree with 

another. The food that is palatable to one would not be 

palatable to another. 

In proportion as one appreciates and uses the food 
that is best for him, he will find development and gain 



strength. So with those in Christ. There is such abundance 
spread on the table of the Lord that when we come 
to the table each may find the food adapted to his particular 
need at the time. Some may need faith; some, 
patience, some perseverance, etc. As each one comes 
to a considerable development in Christian knowledge and 
Christian experience, he should be able to determine which 
features of the Word of Truth are necessary for the supplying 
of the deficiencies of his own character. At the 
beginning of his Christian experience one is unable to 
discern clearly good and evil. A childish mind might 
misinterpret Scripture, or might combine texts so as to 

R5326 : page 302 

arrive at erroneous conclusions, separating them from 
their respective contexts. But a mature mind would see 
that such putting together of Scriptures would do harm. 

DEFICIENT APPRECIATION OF GOOD AND EVIL 

Some Christian people stumble over Bible Truths, and 
make evil out of them. For instance, our good Brother 
Calvin evidently did not have a sufficiently clear appreciation 
of good and evil. As a result, instead of getting 
good out of the doctrine of the Election of the Church, 
he brought out of it a very evil doctrine, namely, that 
all those who are not elected are damned. His new mind 
was not sufficiently developed to rightly divide the Word 
of Truth. (2 Timothy 2:15.) Any one who appreciates 
God's character sufficiently would have known, in spite 
of wrong teachings, that God would not deliberately doom 
our race to eternal torture before they were created. 

Many people of today have not their senses sufficiently 
exercised by reason of use. They charge the Almighty 
with something that no human being would even think of 
doing. This expression, "have their senses exercised," 
does not refer merely to minds, but includes the heart 
also. Brother Calvin had a very able mind, apparently; 
but the thing lacking was a proper heart-fellowship with 
the Lord; for if he had known the character of the Lord, 
he would have known that the doctrine of everlasting torture 
was contrary to every element of the Divine character. 
-See Jeremiah 7:31; 19:5. 

So far as we can judge, Brother Wesley must have 
been considerably developed along the line of spiritual 
appreciation of the Lord's character. We doubt whether 
Wesley was any more logical than Calvin— perhaps less 
so— but evidently he was in heart-harmony with God. 
Wesley very properly concluded that it would be impossible 
for God to make any such plan as that set forth by 
Calvin. In our own cases, we know that we might have a 
surface knowledge, and yet not have this spiritual development 
—the heart knowledge of God. We are to seek 
not only to have an intellectual knowledge of the Bible, 
or a familiarity with the words of the Bible, but also to 



appreciate the sentiment, the spirit, that lies behind the 
words— the character of our Heavenly Father and our 
Lord Jesus Christ— the spirit that They are of, and that 
we also would be of. 

DEEP STUDY PROFITABLE 

When the people of our day speak of Bible study, they 
very rarely mean a study and appreciation of the deeper 
spiritual truths there presented. Rather, they seem to be 
content with a study of the geography, the history, the 
psychology, etc. As we see these conditions, we are forced 

R5327 : page 302 

to the conclusion that the majority of Christian people of 
today, just as in the Apostles' day, have need that some one 
teach them again what are the first principles of the doctrine 
of Christ. 

The Apostle Peter (I Peter 2:2) says also, along the 
same line, "Desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye 
may grow thereby." We all have need of the simple 
things. But the spiritual babe that does not grow will 
never reach manhood's estate. He will never be a king 
and priest. We need a real acquaintance with God. "And 
this is life eternal, that they might know Thee, the only 
true God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent!— not 
merely know about God, and know about Jesus Christ, 
but that they might know Them in the sense of being personally 
acquainted with Them— know Them by having 
the same Holy Spirit, and growing therein— know them 
by a study of "the deep things of God." 



R5327 : page 302 

THE EDITOR'S FOREIGN TOUR 

(CONCLUDED.) 

THE evening following the close of the London 

Convention found us at Plymouth, where 

we had the pleasure of addressing an assemblage 

of eleven hundred, who manifested 

deep interest in the Message. 

The next evening (Wednesday, August 
6) we were at Exeter, and addressed an 
audience numbering about six hundred and 
fifty. Of these, seventy-two handed in their 
addresses for further literature, and otherwise 
manifested an interest in the Gospel of the Kingdom. 

Next came Cheltenham (Thursday, August 7), eight 
hundred being present at the public meeting, seventy-four 
of whom gave their addresses for additional literature 
along the lines of our discourse. 



The following Sunday (August 10) found us again 
with the London Tabernacle Congregation, morning and 
evening. The attendance was good and the interest deep, 
as usual. No attempt was made to reach the public, as the 
capacity of the Tabernacle is only about twelve hundred. 
During this trip abroad the efforts for the public were in 
the smaller cities. 

Lincoln was our next appointment for a public service. 
A large auditorium had been secured, and the number 
present was estimated at fifteen hundred. Of these, one 
hundred and sixty-eight handed in their addresses for 
further literature. 

Next came Hull, where the public meeting drew out 
one thousand, of whom one hundred and seventy-nine 
left their addresses for further reading matter. 

On Wednesday evening, August 13, a public meeting 
was held at Wakefield, the attendance being estimated at 
nine hundred. Seventy-eight gave their addresses for 
further literature. 

Next came York, Thursday, August 14— attendance 
fifteen hundred; addresses for further literature, two hundred 
and seventy-two. 

Friday, August 15, we visited Tunbridge Wells. There 
we were greeted by an audience of six hundred, seventy-four 
of whom handed in their addresses after meeting, requesting 
further literature. 

Sunday, August 17, we again had the pleasure of meeting 
the London Congregation at the Tabernacle, and 
again had two enjoyable services, breaking to them, to 
the best of our ability, the Bread of Life. 

Monday, August 18, found us at Walsall. Here a 
public gathering to the number of nine hundred and fifty 
gave earnest heed to the Message of the Kingdom. One 
hundred and forty-one of the audience gave their addresses 
after the service for further literature. 

Chester was next on the list, Tuesday, August 19. The 
hall was small; but about five hundred were present, one 
hundred of whom left their addresses for literature. 

Blackburn came next, August 20— a larger hall, eleven 
hundred present, and one hundred and ninety-six addresses 
given in for further literature. 

Bolton came next, the splendid Town Hall of which 
was secured. A deeply interested and intelligent audience 
of sixteen hundred were present. Of these, four hundred 
and twelve left their addresses and requests for further 
literature. 

We visited Preston Friday, August 22. Again we had 
a good hall and an attentive audience of fifteen hundred, 

R5327 : page 303 

four hundred and fourteen addresses being left, requesting 
further literature. 

The Glasgow Three-Days' Convention opened August 
23. It was a fine crowd, numbering about eight hundred 
to nine hundred— chiefly from Scotland, with visitors also 



from Ireland and England. We always enjoy our visits 
to Glasgow. Our Scotch brethren and sisters manifest a 
warmth and zeal of Christian love, which is impressive 
and inspiring. We addressed the Convention four times 
on things pertaining to the Kingdom— how we shall make 
our calling and election sure to a share therein; also respecting 
the value of Bible Study as an aid to character-building, 
etc., etc. 

The Sunday evening meeting at Glasgow was for the 
public. St. Andrews Hall, the largest in the city, had 
been obtained. It is said to seat forty-five hundred. Every 
seat was taken and some stood. In a nearby hall an 
overflow meeting, addressed by Brother Hemery, had an 
attendance of about nine hundred. The amount of interest 
may be judged to some extent by the fact that seven 
hundred and fifty-nine addresses were handed in at the 
larger meeting and sixty-nine at the overflow meeting. 

Following the Glasgow Convention, we visited Sterling, 
there addressing an audience estimated at one thousand. 
Two hundred and two requests for literature were 
handed in. 

Next came Coatbridge, with an audience of about one 
thousand, and one hundred and seventy-eight requests for 
literature— Wednesday, August 27. 

R5328 : page 303 

Thursday, August 28, found us at Kilmarnock, with 
twelve hundred in attendance and one hundred and 
eighty-two requests for literature. 

Southport was reached on Friday, August 29. The 
small hall available was crowded, some standing, about 
six hundred in all. We left on the night train for Paris, 
failing to learn the number of requests for literature. 

Sunday, August 31, found us in Paris, France. Here 
we met the little Convention of about seventy earnest, 
zealous brethren and sisters, some of whom had come as 
much as a thousand kilometers— from Belgium, Switzerland, 
Germany, and various parts of France. They represented 
little classes of Bible Students, and were full of 
the same loving zeal manifested amongst other 
nationalities. 

The intelligent interest of these dear friends was 
manifest in their faces and manner and in their testimonies, 
although we were not able to understand the latter, 
except with our eyes. We addressed the little Convention 
through one of the brethren, who acted as interpreter. 
Altogether we greatly enjoyed the Paris Convention. 
No public service was arranged for. 

We arrived back in London September 2, attended to 
some affairs connected with the work there, and left for 
Liverpool on the 3d, embarking the same day on the 
steamship "Tunisian." 

We had a pleasant homeward voyage, with good opportunities 
for literary work, reaching Brooklyn on Friday 
morning, September 12. 



page 303 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study XVI. 
THE PRESENT INHERITANCE OF THE NEW CREATION 

NOVEMBER 2 
Read p. 671, par. 2, to p. 674, par. 4. 

(21) What circumstances gave rise to this desire of St. 
Paul? P. 671, par. 2, 3. 

(22) What alternative is suggested, if we refuse the foregoing 
explanation? P. 672, par. 1, 2, 3. 

"OUR EARTHLY HOUSE" AND "OUR HOUSE FROM HEAVEN" 

(23) To whom is the Apostle writing in 2 Cor. 5:1-10, and 
what does he mean by "our earthly house"? P. 673, par. 1. 

(24) Why does the New Creature groan in this earthly 
tabernacle, and does it desire to be "unclothed"? P. 673, 
par. 2, 3. 

(25) What is the "earnest of the Spirit," mentioned in 2 Cor. 5:5? 
And why are we "always confident," as expressed 

in verses 6 to 9? P. 674, par. 1 to 3. 

(26) To what end, therefore, are we striving? P. 674, par. 4. 

NOVEMBER 9 



Read p. 675, par. 1, to p. 677, par. 2. 



(27) What is the significance of 2 Cor. 5:10, and when 
must we "all appear before the judgment seat of Christ"? 
P. 675, par. 1. 

(28) Do all mankind have a duality of nature? What 

other Scriptures refer to the New Creation as having an outward 
man that perisheth, and an inward man being renewed 
day by day? P. 675, par. 2. 

THE TRANSFIGURATION SCENE 

(29) How and when was fulfilled the Lord's promise to 
His disciples that some of them should not taste death until 
they had seen the Son of Man coming in His Kingdom? 

P. 675, par. 3; P. 676, par. 1. 

(30) Was the Transfiguration scene an actual occurrence? 
How do we know that Moses and Elias could not have personally 
appeared on the Mount? P. 676, par. 2, 3. 

(31) Explain the significance of this "vision." P. 677, par. 1, 2. 

NOVEMBER 16 



Read p. 677, par. 3, to p. 680, par. 1. 
PRESENT JOYS OF THE NEW CREATION 

(32) How does consecration unto death appear to those 

outside the household of faith, and to the consecrated, respectively? 
P. 677, par. 3. 

(33) Upon what do the present joys of the New Creation 
depend? P. 678, par. 1. 

"ASK AND YE SHALL RECEIVE, THAT YOUR JOY MAY BE FULL" 

(34) What is the relation between prayer and the perpetuation 
of our present joys? And what is the object of proper 
prayer? P. 679, par. 1. 

(35) What suggestions with regard to prayer were given 
by our Lord Jesus as recorded in Matt. 6:7,8,25-34, and why 
did He so admonish His disciples? P. 679, par. 2. 

(36) What are the two most important conditions of 
acceptable prayer? (John 15:7.) P. 679, par. 3; P. 680, par. 1. 

NOVEMBER 23 



Read p. 680, par. 2, to p. 682, par. 1. 



(37) Does the world in general have access to the Throne 
of Heavenly grace? P. 680, par. 2. 

(38) What was the position of Cornelius, and how does 
his experience illustrate the necessary steps to be taken by 

every person before he can use the privilege of prayer-communion? 
P. 681, par. 1. 

(39) How does the Apostle Paul express this same 
thought in Hebrews 10:17-22? P. 681, par. 2. 

(40) To what extent do the simply justified members of 
the "Household of Faith" enjoy the privilege of prayer? 
P. 681, par. 3. 

(41) How shall members of the "Household of Faith" be 
admonished as respects their limited privileges of prayer and 
the greater privileges possible to them? P. 682, par. 1. 

NOVEMBER 30 

Read p. 683, par. 1, to p. 685, par. 2. 

(42) Is it proper to recognize a distinction between the 
merely justified and the consecrated, and between believers and 
unbelievers? P. 683, par. 1. 

(43) What would be the special advantage to these classes, 
if such distinctions were clearly recognized? P. 683, par. 2. 
P. 684, par. 1. 

(44) What privileges of prayer belong to the children of 
believers? P. 684, par. 2. 

(45) What is the one thing for which all the consecrated 
should specially pray? Quote Scriptural authority for your 
reply. P. 685, par. 1. 



(46) Summarizing, in what manner and for what things 
should we pray in order that we should not "ask amiss"? 
P. 685, par. 2. 



page 305 
