Announcements
“JUBILEE TRUMPET” WITNESSING PERIOD—Leviticus 25:9, 10
The time is here for sounding liberty among all of earth’s inhabitants, to all races and nations. Freedom for all! That is welcome news to everyone who loves justice and truth and who unselfishly yearns for true liberty for all humanity. As conditions worsen and grow more unbearable, why should not people want to be free from such? The great Liberator has decreed that evil will not always prevail. No, his Word of promise offers freedom even now. This good news of liberation must be sounded out as though by trumpet blasts. This is being done by God’s faithful servants world-wide through the distribution of the Watchtower magazine. The “Jubilee Trumpet” Witnessing Period during April affords opportunity for many to take part in this fourth and last month of the Watchtower campaign. The Watchtower magazine is offered at $1 for a year’s subscription. New subscribers receive three Scriptural booklets free. To those already subscribers for The Watchtower, the Awake! magazine may be offered on the same basis. Get a supply of magazines and use them to acquaint others with their valuable contents. Single copies may be left with those who do not subscribe. Regular house-to-house distribution of the magazine will aid many to learn of freedom. So make April a magazine month.
DO YOU HAVE THIS BIBLE?
Regular readers of The Watchtower appreciate its use of the many and varied Bible translations. Frequently used is the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures (shown by NW). This splendid rendition of the Sacred Scriptures records in modern speech the words and acts of faithful servants of God: the Gospels, the Acts, the Epistles, the Revelation—all shine with fresh beauty in this version. This fine piece of workmanship is based on the most ancient manuscripts extant, and embodies the results of the latest research in the field of archaeology bearing on Bible lands, languages and customs. Bound in attractive green cover, with gold-embossed title, and 800 pages of large clear type, it measures 7 5/16ʺ X 5ʺ x 1ʺ. Sent postpaid for $1.50.
1952 MEMORIAL ANNOUNCEMENT
Thursday, April 10, 1952, at sunset, or at 6 p.m., Standard Time, is the beginning of Nisan 14. That evening is the time for observing the memorial of the Lord’s evening meal. All companies, units and other groups of persons dedicated to Jehovah’s service should assemble together, along with those persons of good will, and observe the occasion. Keeping the memorial of the Lord’s evening meal is the privilege of all true followers of the Lord Jesus. (1 Cor. 11:20-26, NW) In joyful and thankful commemoration, these true worshipers will assemble at the appropriate time, opening their meeting with song and prayer. A dedicated and baptized servant of Jehovah God, preferably one of Jehovah’s anointed, will deliver a talk on the meaning of the Memorial. The emblems provided, unleavened bread and red wine, will be served after the discourse has been given and the anointed ones will partake of them. Following the Memorial appropriate service announcements may be made, a song sung and the meeting closed with prayer. A cordial welcome is extended to every person of good will to attend this important and happy occasion in union with Jehovah’s witnesses in his vicinity. So be among the hundreds of thousands who will respond to this invitation. A report of the number in attendance at each gathering, and of the number partaking of the emblems, should then be sent to the Society.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of March 30: Keeping the Organization Clean.
Week of April 6: Propriety of Disfellowshiping, ¶1-18.
Week of April 13: Propriety of Disfellowshiping, ¶19-28; also, Sin Making Reinstatement Impossible.

