Insight on the News
“Fatal Fascination”
Under this heading, the Seattle Times told the story of 16-year-old Craig Hunt. Intellectually a top student, and president of his senior high-school class, he also excelled in sports and was noted as a happy, outgoing person. He was an active churchgoer and member of an evangelical youth group. Yet despite all of this, he committed suicide by jumping 320 feet (98 m) to his death at Snoqualmie Falls, leaving behind a suicide note. “In it,” says the newspaper, “Hunt indicated to his friends that it was not out of anger or bitterness that he was taking his own life, but rather because of a fascination with life after death.”
According to the Times, his best friend said that he “‘really seemed to be searching’ for something which would add a sense of meaning and worth to his life,” that he “had developed a strong urge to find out ‘just what lay beyond life on earth.’”
Such tragic results could certainly have been avoided by a true knowledge of the Bible’s teachings concerning the condition of the dead. (Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10; John 8:32) It is indeed wise for parents to bring up their children in the “discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.”​—Ephesians 6:4.
‘Armageddon Generation’?
“Five days before a terrorist bombing killed hundreds of American servicemen in Beirut,” states a New York Daily News report, “President Reagan reportedly recalled a biblical prophecy and said he wondered whether the world was facing ‘Armageddon.’” According to the report, Reagan said in a phone conversation with Thomas Dine, executive director of the American-Israel Public Affairs Committee: “You know, I turn back to your ancient prophets in the Old Testament and the signs foretelling Armageddon, and I find myself wondering if​—if we’re the generation that is going to see that come about.” He added: “I don’t know if you’ve noted any of those prophecies lately, but, believe me, they certainly describe the times we’re going through.”
It is noteworthy that world leaders see signs today that bespeak critical times. But are they aware that these signs now undergoing fulfillment point to “the last days” for this system of things? (2 Timothy 3:1-5; Matthew 24:3-14) Apparently not, because they are not willing to submit their sovereignties to God’s established Kingdom that will soon replace all human governments.​—Daniel 2:44.

