Announcements
REPORT OF YANKEE STADIUM ASSEMBLY OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
By the time this issue of The Watchtower reaches most subscribers, the great New World Society Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses at Yankee Stadium, New York city, will be history. But it is a convention that will not soon be forgotten, and it is something of which you will want to have a permanent record. To that end, a 96-page report on the assembly will be published in the near future. It will be complete with pictures of the assembly’s various features, and will record many of the high lights and details of the convention. In order to receive your copy of this report, send your request now. Order copies for your friends and business associates, and for persons of good will who are interested in the activity of Jehovah’s witnesses. Specify clearly the number of copies of the 1953 Convention Report of Jehovah’s Witnesses that you want, and enclose a remittance of 25 cents a copy. Type or print your name and address plainly. If your address should change between now and October 1, please be sure to advise us.
THE GREATER HAPPINESS OF GIVING
“There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving,” says the apostle Paul. (Acts 20:17-35, NW) Paul was an outstanding example of one who gave his energy, time and goods in preaching good news to his brothers and to anyone who was interested in God’s purposes. In this he imitated Christ Jesus, who was filled with happiness at his opportunities for giving to others the wonderful things he heard from his Father. Dedicated servants of Jehovah today can find no greater happiness than that which comes in magnifying Jehovah’s name by giving people of good will the surpassing knowledge of his magnificent purposes. During August all Kingdom publishers, refreshed by the world assembly at New York, will return to regular preaching from house to house, with an offer of three bound books for only $1.50, with three booklets free. Some congregations will again be working in unassigned areas during this month, but all will strive to be regular preachers. Write the Society or contact Jehovah’s witnesses locally if you wish to participate.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 30: Gathering Men of All Nations into One Flock, ¶1-16.
Week of September 6: Gathering Men of All Nations into One Flock, ¶17-41.

