The Bible and Medical Science
MANY professed Christians feel called upon to apologize for what they term the Bible’s unscientific features. But far from the Bible’s being unscientific, the fact is that the more scientific science becomes, the more it harmonizes with the Bible.
For example, the Mosaic Law declared that only animals that both part the hoof and chew the cud should be eaten, and regulations covered birds and fishes also. Recent studies have shown that the pig is subject to trichinosis; the rabbit to tularemia; certain fish to tape worms. Eating of blood was forbidden for spiritual reasons, but even from a health standpoint its avoidance was good because of such dangers as septicemia and parasites.—Gen. 9:4; Lev. 3:17; 7:26; 17:10, 11, 14; 19:26; Acts 15:19, 20, 28, 29; 21:25.
Today Jehovah’s witnesses believe this prohibition would include blood transfusion. Science is learning more and more of the dangers to health through blood transfusions. Transfused blood has spread such diseases as syphilis, malaria and especially serum hepatitis. One report claims 25 per cent of the seriously wounded in Korea were infected with serum hepatitis from transfusions. Science now is finding effective blood substitutes that spread no disease and violate no law of God. Moreover, in many cases they have been found more effective than either whole blood or plasma, saving lives where blood proved ineffective. Also, every person’s blood is different, just as much so as are fingerprints. So exact typing of blood is impossible. Big differences kill, and what aftereffects are caused by the smaller differences no one can authoritatively say.
In this connection note the following report appearing in the Providence Sunday Journal, May 17, 1953: “The Army will henceforth use dextran, a substance made from sugar, instead of blood plasma, for all requirements at home and overseas, it was learned last night. An authoritative Army medical source, who asked not to be quoted by name, said ‘a complete switchover’ to the plasma substitute has been put into effect, after ‘utterly convincing’ tests of dextran in continental and combat area hospitals during the last few months. This official said a major factor in the switchover to dextran was that use of plasma entails a ‘high risk’ of causing a disease known as serum hepatitis—a jaundice-like ailment. Not all plasma carries this hazard, he emphasized, but he added that dextran is entirely free of the hazard. ‘We have begun to fill all orders from domestic and overseas theaters with dextran instead of plasma.’”
Certainly Jehovah God knew what he was doing when he forbade the use of blood, and increasing knowledge is bound to vindicate him more and more.

