Grateful for Watch Tower Publications
AN ACCOMPLISHED musician appreciates the value of a fine musical instrument. A dutiful carpenter knows the worth of proper tools with which to work. And an earnest Bible student is grateful for the faith-building Watch Tower publications. They are of tremendous help in Bible study.
A letter voicing appreciation for their value was received from a Bible student in Oklahoma. It stated in part: “Although I’m not very good at expressing myself, I want you to know how much I enjoy The Watchtower and Awake! It seems like every time I want to know about something it appears in the next issue of these magazines. I also enjoy all your other Bible aids. I have been studying with Jehovah’s witnesses for about four months and it’s just wonderful having knowledge of the truth, although I still have a lot of studying and learning to do.”
A BENEFICIAL EXPERIENCE
In a letter from Salem, Oregon, a mother expresses gratefulness for an experience she read in The Watchtower, saying: “I learned a lesson I should have known. The experience of the young mother reading from the Bible to her three boys caused me to realize that I should be doing the same with my children. My two youngsters are seven and ten, and I expected protest when I announced they would have to give up some TV time in the afternoon for Bible reading and was surprised when they protested very little.
“We have been reading regularly at four o’clock every afternoon now for two weeks. Yesterday I went to town and was about five minutes late getting home, so the children were there before me. I expected the TV to be on full blast. You can imagine how pleased I was to open the door and find them at the table with open Bibles. David, my ten-year-old, had said the prayer to start the reading. Difficult names don’t discourage them from wanting to read Jehovah’s Word. We are becoming better Christians because of it. May Jehovah’s spirit be with you all always.”
VALUE OF ‘ALL SCRIPTURE INSPIRED’ BOOK
A Kingdom publisher from Vancouver, Washington, writes regarding the value of the textbook “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial,” saying: “The young man agreed to let us show him what the Bible had to offer. We started with the chapter in the ‘Inspired’ book, Archaeology Supports the Inspired Record. He was amazed that there is such a wealth of proof that the Bible is inspired and true. He had never heard such convincing arguments on the Bible’s authenticity. When we got to the end of the chapter he was convinced that the Bible really had something to offer and was willing to get into a study of it. I can definitely say that the ‘Inspired’ book was the instrument that Jehovah used to open his eyes to the fact that the Bible is inspired and true.”
ARTICLES BRING JOY AND COMFORT
Another letter of appreciation, from Lakeview, Ohio, stated: “I feel that one of the ways in which I might express thanks and praise to Jehovah must include an expression of keen appreciation for the wonderful series of Watchtower articles treating the matter of resurrection. . . . I want you to know that these articles have added a deepened joy to my weekly privilege of conducting the local Watchtower study.”
And from Florence, Italy, this expression was received: “I was studying and concentrating on The Watchtower—Italian—of the 15th of March (the one explaining the creation), when little by little I felt my eyes get wet with tears; my heart grew full of thankfulness. But I wish also to thank you directly for the pure joy that such a publication like this can give.”
A grateful Bible student from California wrote upon reading one Awake! magazine: “The cares of this old world sometimes crowd in upon you and then one of the latest magazines comes in the mail. I am referring to the article in the May 8 Awake!, ‘A Perfect World—Worth Working For?’ It put into words what we as Jehovah’s people feel in our hearts. Jehovah has blessed you to write such inspiring words to build us all up with the magnificent hope of God’s new order. I just had to take time to let you know that we appreciate the fine magazines.”
Persons who appreciate the clear ring of truth are grateful for publications that faithfully adhere to and magnify the teachings of God’s Word. And this the Watch Tower publications do.

