Announcements
● Literature offer for September: Live Forever or Bible Stories book for contribution of $2.50. October: One-year subscription for either Awake! or The Watchtower, or both, for contribution of $4.00 each. Six-month subscriptions are $2.00. November: Survival Into a New Earth, for contribution of $1.00. December: New World Translation with any older 192-page book, for contribution of $3.50, $4.00 or $4.50, depending on which Bible is offered. (See “Looking Ahead to the December Campaign With the Bible” on page 3.) The brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! may be offered for contribution of 30¢, especially to those with reading difficulties or where there are children.
● There will be no special public talks in January and February 1985. Congregations should plan to use talks from the regular series during that time.
● The presiding overseer or someone assigned by him should audit the congregation accounts on September 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● We are pleased to announce that a new Cost List has been prepared. Four copies are being sent to each congregation. The secretary should keep one copy. The other three should be given to the brothers caring for the literature, magazines and accounts.
● NOTE: The New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—Reference Bible (Rbi-8) in English, which was released at the district convention, will not be in stock until December 1984. So please do not order until then.
● New Publications Available:
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 4, P-Z)​—Portuguese
Holy Spirit​—The Force Behind the Coming New Order!​—Samoan
My Book of Bible Stories​—Lushai
Survival Into a New Earth​—English, French, Greek, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1982​—German
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth​—Mono-Kutuba, Ponapean, Samoan, Tuvaluan
The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever​—English, French, Greek, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish
The Time for True Submission to God​—French, Spanish
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Kingdom Melodies No. 5 (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)
My Book of Bible Stories (set of four cassettes in album; congregation and public: $8.00; pioneers: $6.00)​—Italian
My Book of Bible Stories (set of six cassettes in album; congregation and public: $11.00; pioneers: $8.25)​—Japanese
● You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth is now available in grade-one Spanish Braille. This five-volume publication may be obtained on a loan basis, or it may be purchased for $5.00. Orders for Braille items should be sent to the Society’s BRAILLE DESK; they should not be included on regular congregation literature orders. A remittance should accompany all orders for purchase.
● On September 1, 1984, the telephone area code for the Society’s world headquarters in Brooklyn will be changed. Beginning on that date, please use the following area code and number when calling the Society: (718) 625-3600.

