Continue to Speak the Word of God Fearlessly
1 Observing Jesus’ boldness in speaking, the people of Jerusalem exclaimed: “This is the man they are seeking to kill, is it not? And yet, see! he is speaking in public.” (John 7:25, 26) Jesus set the example as a fearless preacher of the Word of God. Jehovah had given him a work to do, and he was not going to allow fear of man to intimidate him into silence. This same fearlessness was implanted in his faithful disciples. In their final meeting together he commanded his disciples to preach and teach the message of the Kingdom far and wide. They did so, fearlessly.​—Matt. 28:19, 20; Acts 1:8.
DO WE SPEAK FEARLESSLY?
2 Today, in this country, we are not faced with persecution to the extent experienced by the first-century Christians. Nevertheless, you may be tested by more subtle fears. For example, are you fearful of speaking with strangers? Or do you have a fear of making return visits, feeling you will not know what to say? Some are apprehensive about working affluent territory. Young people often shy away from speaking with other young ones about the Kingdom message. Similarly, some are fearful about speaking with employers or fellow employees. What is the solution? The apostles prayed for divine assistance. (Acts 4:29) Satan tries to make us fearful, to destroy our unselfish desire to help others. But we can be assured that when we bring the good news to others, Jehovah will support us.​—2 Chron. 20:15; Acts 4:31.
3 During September, we can share in this work by offering You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth or My Book of Bible Stories. Since these books have been in use now for a few years, you may find householders who already have them. What then? You can demonstrate how they can get the most benefit from a home Bible study. Very likely there was some initial interest when they took the publications. Perhaps that interest can be rekindled and cultivated.
4 If you have not yet become proficient in using the Topic for Conversation, why not rehearse it with others before going out in the field? This will increase your confidence at the door and strengthen you to preach the Word fearlessly.
5 The first Sunday and the second and fourth Saturdays of each month are special field service days. We suggest that you reserve these days, especially, for sharing in the field ministry. Note that the Society’s calendar marks these days, reminding us that they afford special opportunities for service.
6 Our purpose in preaching involves more than just leaving literature with interested persons. To make disciples, we must make return visits. Renew your conversation by referring to the previous visit, mentioning some of the points you discussed. Have something specific in mind from the publication that you want to highlight. This will make the person aware of the value of the literature and perhaps provide you with an opportunity to demonstrate a Bible study.
7 What a joy it is to see so many accepting the truth! By our fearlessly preaching the Word of God, we show our love for Jehovah and his Son. Enthusiasm for this preaching commission will help us resist Satan’s attacks and show “all the more courage to speak the word of God fearlessly.”​—Phil. 1:14.

