Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 2
Song 27
12 min: Selected Announcements in Our Kingdom Ministry. “Literature Price Changes.” Discuss with audience. Brother handling this part will also make local announcements, review congregational arrangements for field service and encourage publishers to share in field service on weekend.
15 min: “Continue to Speak the Word of God Fearlessly.” Question-and-answer discussion, preferably by service overseer. When discussing paragraph 4, tie in local figures on regularity, and give suggestions that will help publishers prevent irregularity. Emphasize importance of keeping an accurate record of field service activity and reporting promptly at the end of each month. Special effort should be made to be in field service the first Sunday and the second and fourth Saturdays each month. Encourage having personal goal of sharing in the field service each week.
18 min: “Enduring With Life in View.” A talk by an elder with a few appropriate questions, based on chapter 14 of Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry.
Song 160 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 9
Song 72
12 min: Local announcements. Include “Looking Ahead to the December Campaign With the Bible.”
20 min: “The Blessings of Serving Jehovah.” Question-and-answer coverage. Have audience comment on upbuilding experiences they had during the 1984 service year and express what they hope to do during 1985 service year. One or two such experiences could be prepared in advance.
13 min: Review and demonstrate use of current Topic for Conversation. Encourage all to share in field service this weekend.
Song 129 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 16
Song 139
 5 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Encourage field service on fourth Saturday.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—To Young People.” Question-and-answer consideration. After considering paragraph 7, cite articles in current magazines that especially appeal to young people. Present a brief demonstration of speaking with a young person in house-to-house ministry.
15 min: “Do You Remember?” Discussion between a Congregation Book Study conductor and two other publishers. Introduce part with expressions of appreciation for abundance of spiritual food provided by ‘faithful slave’ and for helpful reminders that contribute to our spiritual advancement. Then proceed to discuss specific points set out in “Do You Remember?” feature of The Watchtower. (w84 4/15 p. 31; 8/15 p. 31) Encourage all to give special attention to this feature of The Watchtower each time it appears.
10 min: Local needs or use an appropriate Service Meeting part missed during week of district convention.
Song 54 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 23
Song 211
10 min: Local announcements. Outline local arrangements for midweek and weekend field service.
15 min: “Benefiting Fully From The Watchtower and Awake!” Consider with audience. Read paragraphs as time permits. Encourage audience to prepare for October’s subscription offer.
20 min: “Why do Jehovah’s Witnesses decline to exchange their Bible study aids for the religious literature of people they meet?” Consideration of “Questions From Readers.” (w84 5/1 p. 31) Have some audience participation.
Song 21 and concluding prayer.

