The Blessings of Serving Jehovah
1 “Look! How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!” (Ps. 133:1) Does this not express the sentiments of those who loyally support Jehovah’s organization and its activities? The spiritual achievements of the last service year indicate that this is so. There have been many reasons to express these words of the psalmist. Let us review some of these.
BLESSINGS EXPERIENCED
2 Fresh on our mind is the “Kingdom Increase” District Convention. The program increased our appreciation for the privilege we have to be living during this time of Kingdom increase. It is clear that Jehovah is having a tremendous work done at this time, and we were encouraged to have a full share. (Neh. 6:16) Now is the time to put into practice the many fine suggestions offered regarding our Christian living and activity. This will strengthen us for the difficult times ahead.
3 Another encouraging aspect of the past service year was the effort many put forth in the pioneer work, as shown in the April report. There were 123,442 who shared in the pioneer work that month, 19 percent of the total number of publishers. Of the 12,954,379 hours spent in field service, 8,013,900 were reported by pioneers. That was over 61 percent of the total number of hours! A fine shout of praise indeed!
4 Field service reports also indicate that the increase in those sharing in the Kingdom-preaching work is greater than the number who were baptized. This would seem to indicate that many have become reactivated, and others have seen the need to be more regular in the field service. Do you know of still others who can be encouraged to have a greater share? Can you help? If so, we suggest that you discuss this with your book study conductor or another elder.
PERSONAL GOALS
5 Jehovah is speeding up things toward a climax before the outbreak of the great tribulation. This adds a note of urgency to our work, and the path that has been marked out for us is clear. With this in mind, would it not be good to examine our individual situation and set meaningful personal goals for the 1985 service year? Many have found this helpful in keeping their attention focused on those things they would especially like to accomplish.
6 Can you arrange to auxiliary pioneer during the 1985 service year? The months of September and December 1984, as well as March and June 1985, all have five Saturdays and five Sundays. The month of August has five Saturdays. Could you auxiliary pioneer during one or more of those months? Or, is this the year you may be able to join the regular pioneer ranks? Give this your prayerful consideration.
7 As we increase our share in the field ministry we should also concentrate on improving the quality of our service. Last September we started a series of articles in Our Kingdom Ministry on “Improving Our Teaching Ability.” Why not review these articles and write down some of the key points? They could be kept in your Bible as reminders.
8 Starting a new Bible study would be another worthy goal. Make this a matter of prayer and work at it, concentrating on those who have accepted literature or have otherwise shown interest. When a Bible study is started, begin right away to direct this new interest to Jehovah’s organization. There are some very fine suggestions on this in the Our Ministry book, pages 91 and 92.
9 Do you have a good schedule for personal study? This is necessary in order to resist Satan’s attempts to destroy our faith. Some find it helpful to get up early in the morning and read while it is quiet and they are alert. Others have set aside certain evenings during the week for study. Whatever your schedule may be, do not let other interests or activities interfere. If you have had a problem establishing a practical study schedule, why not get a routine established by using the new releases we received at the district convention?
10 To be successful in reaching the goals you set for yourself will require a measure of sacrifice, but when we consider that the things of this world are “passing away,” theocratic matters should take first place in our lives. (1 John 2:17) As we reflect on the past service year and look ahead to the new one now beginning, let us do so with a determination to give our best. “To what extent we have made progress, let us go on walking orderly in this same routine.”​—Phil. 3:16.

