
TEACHING BOX 14A
Lessons From Ezekiel’s Temple Vision








Pure Worship Elevated and Protected

The visionary temple is exalted on “a very high mountain” (1). Have we lifted up pure worship, giving it the highest priority in our own life?
The perimeter wall (2), which enclosed the temple complex in the center of a wide area (3), reminds us that we must never let anything corrupt our worship of Jehovah. If things even for “common use” must be kept far away from pure worship, how much more so must unclean or immoral conduct be kept out of the life of a worshipper of Jehovah today!​—Ezek. 42:20.



Eternal Blessings

A stream trickles from the temple sanctuary, expanding to a torrent and bringing life and fertility to the land (4). These blessings will be discussed in Chapter 19 of this publication.



The Same Standards for All

The lofty outer gates (5) and inner gates (9) remind us that Jehovah has high standards of conduct for all who would engage in pure worship. Note that the outer and the inner gates are identical in overall dimensions. That is fitting, for Jehovah’s righteous requirements are the same for all his servants, regardless of their position or the capacity in which they serve.



A Meal at Jehovah’s Table

The dining rooms (8) remind us that in ancient times, the people could share in eating from some of the sacrifices that they brought to the temple, in effect, sharing a meal with Jehovah. It is different in the spiritual temple in which Christians worship today, for the “one sacrifice” has already been offered. (Heb. 10:12) Still, we do offer our sacrifice of praise.​—Heb. 13:15.



A Divine Guarantee

You may find all the detailed measurements in the vision overwhelming. But they teach a key point: They guarantee that Jehovah’s purpose to restore pure worship is sure and absolute, as precise and unchangeable as those measurements. Though Ezekiel does not mention seeing any humans in his vision, he records Jehovah’s strong counsel for the priests, the chieftains, and the people. All of God’s servants must uphold His righteous standards.



Return to chapter 14, paragraphs 13, 14

