Be There Right from the Start!
THE start of what? The start of the 1969 “Peace on Earth” International Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses! Why? Because its program, from beginning to end, will be the finest yet. It is filled with vital information that everyone needs to prepare for what lies ahead in the final years of this old system.
All who are keenly interested in what God is doing now and will do in the future will want to be present right from the first day of the program. Doing so will bring rich rewards. To appreciate why, let us consider the early part of the program.
The keynote address on the opening day is “Acquaint Yourself with God and Keep Peace.” How well do you really know God? You may well find that new avenues of thought are opened up to you if you are present to hear this keynote speech.
Also, a full afternoon early in the assembly will be devoted to a discussion of the evidence that the Bible really is the Word of God. In these “last days” the Bible is being subjected to increasing attack. But when you hear people say that parts of the Bible are “myth,” or that it is unscientific and unhistoric, can you produce facts to prove that they are wrong? How many solid arguments do you know that prove the Bible is not merely the writings of men, but that it really is the Word of God? An entire session will be devoted to this vital subject! It will surely fortify your faith.
Among the many other fine features of the assembly are the much-appreciated Bible dramas. Almost every day will include one of these. Some will have modern-day settings; others will be put on in the dress of Bible times. One drama will feature King Saul and his son Jonathan, David the son of Jesse, and lovely Abigail. As you watch, you will come to appreciate more fully its meaning for us today.
An audio presentation will let us relive the unusual experiences of the prophet Jonah. Another will take us to the court of King Belshazzar just before the collapse of the ancient Babylonian Empire. Here we will be able to review the experiences of the prophet Daniel, who was God’s spokesman at that significant time in history, and see how they should affect us.
PARENTS AND CHILDREN
In connection with parents and children, many families today have problems that cry out for solutions. A series of discussions will be presented to help families overcome difficulties. Practical suggestions and demonstrations will rivet your attention to the platform. And these suggestions really work, for thousands of families throughout the world are enjoying the benefits of them right now, building a happy family life.
Too, an entire day of the assembly has been set aside for young people. It is a day filled with frank talks, dramas and engrossing discussions and demonstrations on how to deal with the many problems that youths have to face these days.
LEARNING ABOUT THE FUTURE
What about the future? The Bible book of Revelation is a prophetic book that tells us about the future. But so many people have difficulty understanding it. This assembly can help you to appreciate the meaning of this wonderful prophetic book.
There is also a session designed to help God’s people to stand firm against all types of persecution. Servants of God expect Satan’s final all-out assault soon. Now is the time to prepare for it. How can we do so? The assembly will help us to answer that question.
The public talk on the final day also concerns the future. It is entitled: “The Approaching Peace of a Thousand Years.” Every person who longs for peace to come to this earth will want to hear it. It will bring comfort, encouragement and great hope in these critical times.
BE THERE FROM THE START!
How can you enjoy and benefit from all these outstanding features of this international assembly? By being there right from the start! And speaking of being there from the start, make it a point to be in your seat from the start of each session. At the opening of almost all sessions there will be enlightening and encouraging reports from branch servants and missionaries who are serving in all parts of the world. You will not want to miss them.
You are invited, yes, urged to come to this great gathering from start to finish. How important is it? It is Jehovah God who had this command recorded in his Word: “Congregate the people, the men and the women and the little ones . . . in order that they may listen and in order that they may learn, as they must fear Jehovah your God.”—Deut. 31:12; Heb. 10:24, 25.

