The Holy Spirit—A Force You Need in Your Life
“DO NOT throw me away from before your face; and your holy spirit O do not take away from me.” (Psalm 51:11) This was King David’s fervent prayer after he had made a tragic mistake.
David had long experienced the power of the holy spirit. When he was still a teenager, it had enabled him to vanquish Goliath—a formidable soldier. (1 Samuel 17:45-50) It had also empowered him to write some of the most beautiful psalms ever composed. “The spirit of Jehovah it was that spoke by me, and his word was upon my tongue,” David explained.—2 Samuel 23:2.
Jesus Christ himself confirmed the role of the holy spirit in David’s life. On one occasion, Jesus told his listeners: “By the holy spirit David himself said, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies beneath your feet.”’” (Mark 12:36; Psalm 110:1) Jesus knew that when David wrote his psalms, he was guided by holy spirit. Is that same holy spirit available to help us?
“Keep On Asking, and It Will Be Given You”
You may never write a psalm. But you may well face obstacles as daunting as a towering Goliath. For example, consider Isabel.a Her husband abandoned her for a younger woman. He left her saddled with debt, and he gave her no economic support to help her provide for their two young daughters. “I felt betrayed and treated like dirt,” she says. “Nevertheless, since he left me, I have felt that God’s holy spirit has sustained me.”
Did Isabel expect to receive holy spirit automatically? No, she implored God every day to send her his spirit. She knew she needed God’s strength to help her face the future with courage, to care properly for her children, and to rebuild her shattered sense of self-worth. She took to heart Jesus’ words: “Keep on asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you.”—Matthew 7:7.
Roberto also felt that he needed God’s spirit but for different reasons. He was addicted to tobacco and hashish, which he smoked constantly. He fought his addiction for two long years, and he relapsed several times. “You suffer anxiety when you stop taking drugs,” Roberto explains. “The body keeps on clamoring for the drug day after day.”
Roberto continues: “But I was determined to change my life so that I could serve God acceptably. I tried to fill my mind with positive thoughts from the Bible. I prayed fervently every day, asking God to give me the strength to clean up my life. I knew I could not succeed on my own. And I saw how Jehovah answered my prayers, especially when I felt demoralized after a relapse. I believe that God’s holy spirit gave me renewed strength; without his spirit I would never have overcome my addiction.”—Philippians 4:6-8.
Mounting Up “With Wings Like Eagles”
Like Isabel and Roberto, millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses have experienced the power of the holy spirit in their lives. Jehovah’s active force—the force behind the creation of the universe—can be made available to you if you wish. God is willing and eager to share his spirit with you if you earnestly request it. But to receive that spirit, you need to learn the truth about him and sincerely seek to do his will.—Isaiah 55:6; Hebrews 11:6.
Under the empowering force of holy spirit, you may receive the strength to serve God successfully and to face whatever challenges may arise in your life. This is what the Bible assures us: “[Jehovah] is giving to the tired one power; and to the one without dynamic energy he makes full might abound. . . . Those who are hoping in Jehovah will regain power. They will mount up with wings like eagles. They will run and not grow weary; they will walk and not tire out.”—Isaiah 40:28-31.
[Footnote]
Some names have been changed.
[Blurb on page 8]
‘I prayed fervently every day, asking God to give me strength. I knew I could not succeed on my own. And I saw how he answered my prayers’
[Box/Pictures on page 7]
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN ACTION
God used the holy spirit to create the earth and the rest of the universe. “How many your works are, O Jehovah! All of them in wisdom you have made. The earth is full of your productions,” the psalmist exclaimed. “If you send forth your spirit, they are created.”—Psalm 104:24, 30; Genesis 1:2; Job 33:4.
Holy spirit inspired godly men to write the Bible. “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial,” wrote the apostle Paul. (2 Timothy 3:16) The Greek word translated “inspired of God” literally means “breathed into by God.” Jehovah’s breath, or spirit, guided the Bible writers’ thoughts, so that they transmitted “the word of God.”—1 Thessalonians 2:13.
Holy spirit empowered God’s servants to foretell the future with accuracy. The apostle Peter explained: “No prophecy of Scripture springs from any private interpretation. For prophecy was at no time brought by man’s will, but men spoke from God as they were borne along by holy spirit.”—2 Peter 1:20, 21; Joel 2:28.
Holy spirit helped Jesus and other men of faith to preach the good news of God’s Kingdom and to perform miracles. Jesus said: “Jehovah’s spirit is upon me, because he anointed me to declare good news to the poor, he sent me forth to preach a release to the captives and a recovery of sight to the blind.”—Luke 4:18; Matthew 12:28.
[Box/Pictures on page 9]
WAYS IN WHICH THE HOLY SPIRIT CAN HELP US
Holy spirit can strengthen you to fight temptation and overcome harmful habits. The apostle Paul said: “God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear, but along with the temptation he will also make the way out in order for you to be able to endure it.”—1 Corinthians 10:13.
Holy spirit can help you to cultivate godly qualities. “The fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, self-control.”—Galatians 5:22, 23.
Holy spirit can fortify you to endure trials. “For all things I have the strength by virtue of him who imparts power to me.”—Philippians 4:13.

