Announcements
◆ When filling out reports, orders, remittances and all other forms, each congregation should use its official name as shown on its monthly statement.
◆ Watchtower and Awake! subscription slips that show the old subscription rate of $1 per year and 50c for six months should be corrected to read $1.50 per year and 75c for six months when using the slips in the field service.
◆ Literature offer for May: Paradise-Theocracy book and booklet, 50c. When you have placed the Paradise-Theocracy books that you have on hand, then offer the ‘Know Jehovah’ book in your field ministry for the rest of May. If you can use more ‘Know Jehovah’ books, these may be ordered from the Society. June: New World Translation and Great Teacher book, $1.25. (Various ones of the 25-cent books will be featured during the summer months; when the featured book is not accepted, one of the others may be presented.) July: Truth; August: Great Teacher; September: Evolution.
◆ Regular pioneers desiring to serve temporary special pioneers devoting a minimum of 150 hours a month to field service in isolated territory for two or three months during the summer may write for further information. Each assignment is organized for a team of two. Arrangements should be made for a partner (give partner’s name when writing) and a car that is in good condition before writing to the Society. Some financial assistance will be provided by the Society.
◆ Regular pioneers who were appointed on or before February 1, 1973, will be sent a cafeteria ticket for use at a district assembly during this service year. These will be sent to the presiding overseer along with the monthly statement for May. The Society will not be sending a midyear letter to the pioneers regarding their activity.
◆ The special report card showing the attendance at the Lord’s Evening Meal should be sent to the Society by the presiding overseer immediately after this meeting.
◆ New publications available:
Listening to the Great Teacher​—Indonesian, Sango
Is the Bible Really the Word of God?​—Greek
◆ Please show your congregation name in full on all checks sent to the Society.
◆ In answer to a number of inquiries from congregations letters addressed “To All Congregations of Jehovah s Witnesses,” etc., from individuals and worldly companies soliciting business are not to be read to the congregation nor should such information be placed on the congregation’s information board.​—See April 1969 Question Box.

