Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Watchtower Farm has been the scene of a lot of excitement lately. The Society has completed one new factory there and another one, a huge building, is well under way.
Since February 2 the first factory there at the farm has been producing literature for your use in the field. On that day, just a few weeks ago, the first magazines rolled off the printing presses in that new factory. And how this delighted the large family that serves on your behalf there at Watchtower Farm! Now two presses are running, and there are more to come. Three more large rotary presses have already arrived from Germany, and soon these will be erected, ready for production. Our brothers there are willing and eager to supply all the magazines that you can possibly use in proclaiming the good news!
With the new printing facilities, our capacity for producing magazines and handling subscriptions has been greatly increased. So we are now able to invite all of you publishers in the continental United States to have personal subscriptions for The Watchtower and Awake! again.
We want to take this opportunity to thank all of you for responding so well to the recommendation in Kingdom Ministry to obtain personal copies of the magazines at the Kingdom Hall when that seemed advisable. While some may prefer to continue doing that, doubtless many of you will again want to have both The Watchtower and Awake! sent directly to your homes. If you and other members of your family would like to have personal subscriptions, we will be pleased to provide that service for you now.
As for magazines sent to or from other lands, due to the high postal rates it is requested that publishers continue to get personal copies from the congregation’s supply, if that is what has been done up till now.
Something else that brought a lot of joy to members of the Farm family recently was the visit of the Gilead students on March 3. Brother Knorr took them there on a visit after they had completed their final examinations at school. Of course, the students were enthusiastic about seeing the new facilities there at Watchtower Farm. As for the Farm family, they thoroughly enjoyed the comments that Brother Knorr gave that day, as well as the excellent program that the students put on for them. Then, on graduation day, March 5, they repeated the program for the Bethel family, and their friends and relatives, gathered in New York city. It was a stimulating, enthusiastic program, featuring two magnificent Bible dramas. And Brother Knorr announced that both of these dramas are scheduled to be on the program at the “Divine Victory” International Assembly this summer. Don’t miss it!
Be assured of our warm love for all of you.
Your fellow servants,
BROOKLYN  BRANCH OFFICE

