Covering Unworked Territory
1 Two sisters who traveled from California to South Dakota last summer to help a congregation to cover unworked territory stated: “We’ll have memories for a lifetime. We recommend it to others.” A couple from New York city who attended the assembly in Denver, Colorado, and worked some territory in Kansas on the way home expressed themselves similarly. Four publishers from Washington working in North Dakota said: “We found the people friendly and receptive, and literature was placed at almost every home.” A family from Colorado that traveled to Nebraska for a weekend said: “All four of us felt that weekend to be one of our finest.”
2 During the summer months this year regular pioneers serving as temporary special pioneers will spend a number of months working territory that is not assigned to any congregation. While you may not be able to share in such activity, possibly you would be able to spend a few days working territory assigned to a congregation but not worked for a year or more.
3 If you want to assist in covering unworked congregation territory, please discuss matters with the presiding overseer. Let him know how many territories of two to three hundred homes you could work and how far you would be able to travel. Please give the needed information to your presiding overseer early enough so he can mail it to the Society no later than May 1. Generally speaking, the need for additional help is greatest in midwestern and southern states. A form has been sent to the presiding overseer of most congregations covering their territory at least once each year. It is requested that he use it in sending information to the Society regarding persons in the congregation who qualify to share in such activity. If your congregation is not covering its territory at least once each year it would be best to concentrate on covering unworked territory in your own congregation instead of traveling to some other congregation.
4 Where assignments are made to give assistance, the presiding overseer of the congregation needing help will be given written notice from the Society. A copy of the letter will be sent to the presiding overseer of the congregation offering assistance. The congregation needing help can then supply specific information regarding the territory to those volunteering to work it.
5 Those sharing in covering unworked territory during the summer months will have to make their own arrangements for housing, etc. Have in mind also that most of the territory needing attention is rural, so a serviceable car will be needed. Also, it would be best if just a few persons work in each car group.

