Presenting the Good News​—Offering the Paradise-Theocracy Book
1 We have good reason to be enthusiastic about offering this book during the month of May. But how, you may ask, can we generate interest in the contents of a book that relates the affairs of an ancient people seemingly far removed from our day? How can we convince the householder that the writings of little-known Hebrew prophets have force and meaning for us today?
2 Many enjoyed good success using the Scriptural presentation suggested in the October Kingdom Ministry. After commenting on our mutual desire for good government, you could ask: “Would you be interesting in knowing what the Bible says the future holds as regards rulership over all the earth?” If the householder responds favorably, you can read Revelation 11:18, pointing out Jehovah’s promise to bring to ruin those ruining the earth. The wonderful blessings that will be realized under divine rulership can be emphasized by reading Revelation 21:3, 4.
3 You may prefer a simple presentation using just the book itself. After an appropriate introduction, you could raise the question: “Do you believe that peaceful, happy conditions will ever be possible on this earth? [Allow comment by householder.] In spite of intense efforts by the major governments to establish a lasting peace, many are inclined to feel that it is unrealistic to expect this in our lifetime. The Bible clearly shows, however, that a peaceful, happy world not only is possible, but has been promised by God. [Open book to title page.] Man’s existence on this earth began in a paradise created by God . . . [Read Genesis 2:8.] Man lost paradise by his disobedience, but God has made provision by His Son to restore it. Before he died, Jesus made a promise that gives us a solid basis for hope . . . [Read Luke 23:43.] You may find that hard to believe. [Refer to page 7, paragraph 3, noting comments on reasons for belief.] This book Paradise Restored to Mankind​—By Theocracy discusses the Bible prophecies that confirm this hope.”
4 The Paradise-Theocracy book contains a most worthwhile message; an opportunity to read its contents can be a blessing to the people in your community. It would be good to cover as much of your territory as possible with this offer during the month of May. Make sure that interest ones already contacted get an opportunity to receive it. All those currently being studied with should be encouraged to obtain and read it. Let them know when and where the book is studied each week by the congregation, and invite them to attend. Also, many calls will be made during the month on those who subscribed during the Watchtower campaign; offer it to them too.
5 You will undoubtedly want to make return visits on all with whom you make placements, making an effort to start studies. If the paradise hope appeals to the householder, you may have an excellent opportunity to stimulate further interest through a regular study.
[Blurb on page 4]
Have you followed up all subscription prospects?

