Share in the Joy of Giving
1 The most valuable gift that we can give to others is Bible knowledge. For the receiver, that knowledge can mean everlasting life in God’s new order. (John 17:3) Do you have the joy that comes from having a full share in giving of this vital knowledge to others?​—Acts 20:35.
2 Our participating in the house-to-house ministry to the extent that our circumstances reasonably permit is an excellent way to share in the joy of giving. By endeavoring to call at every home, we are acting harmony with Jehovah’s desire for ‘all sorts of men to be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of the truth.’​—1 Tim. 2:4.
3 Consider your own circumstances. Do you have a regular time for sharing in the house-to-house ministry? Could you enlarge your share in this activity? It may be that you have been making return visits on certain people over a period of months or even years. They may enjoy listening to you and accept literature. But they may have made little progress. Perhaps they have not even once come to the Kingdom Hall. Yet, if you were to take some of the time spent in talking to those who have made little progress and devote it to the house-to-house work, you might be able to find people who are really longing for the truth. While not all respond favorably, is it not true that the house-to-house ministry is one of the main ways to locate those who are “signing and groaning”? (Ezek. 9:4) So why not put forth a special effort in the weeks ahead to search out persons looking for the truth?
4 The special issues of The Watchtower and Awake! can help you in this regard. Even those who are not religiously inclined feel the painful effects that death brings. So they could benefit from the Watchtower’s presentation of the resurrection hope. And who is not concerned about the increasing crime and violence? Truly, then, the special Awake! featuring “What Can Be Done About Crime?” will have wide appeal. Have you made definite plans to put forth a special effort in the distributing of these special issues? It is good to keep in mind that these magazines can help those reading them to become servants of Jehovah.
5 It is certainly encouraging to see Jehovah’s blessing on our efforts to declare the “good news.” Many of those with whom Bible studies were conducted are now sharing in the field ministry. Other Bible students are attending meetings. We are looking forward to the time when their hearts will move them to share in the house-to-house work. Some of them may already be aware of their privilege to participate in this grand activity. Are we alert to encourage them? For any who see the need to preach the “good news” and who are living in harmony with God’s will, there is no reason to delay. Encourage them to start NOW.​—Rev. 22:17.!
6 May this month as well as future months find all of us experiencing the joy that comes from having a full share in the house-to-house ministry.
[Blurb on page 1]
Preaching with dependence on God for authority.

