Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING APRIL 15
10 min: Song 35. Introduction, text and comments. Theocratic News.
17 min: “Share in the Joy of Giving.” Questions and answers. Interview a new publisher who has shared in the field ministry for the first time recently or relate encouraging experiences. Discuss why all who are learning Bible truth should be preparing to share in field ministry. Invite any not yet doing so to talk to elders to learn what they personally need to do to qualify.
10 min: “Covering Unworked Territory.” Encourage any in position to share in this work to talk to the presiding overseer promptly so that the necessary information can be sent to the Society by May 1. For those unable to travel elsewhere, provide information about territories locally or in nearby congregations needing to be worked and explain what plans are being made to cover them. Build up enthusiasm for participating in magazine work in congregation this week.
10 min: Review highlights of the special April 22 “Awake!” Discuss specific points that can be featured in presentations at the door.
13 min: Closing remarks. Give a short talk based on the slogan at the bottom of page 1, showing how the principle stated at Matthew 21:23, 24 can be applied. Song 46.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 22
12 min: Song 78. Introduction, text and comments. Also, discuss “Question Box encouraging prompt follow-up of any expiration slips currently on hand.
15 min: Results and experiences from the ‘Watchtower” campaign. Invite publishers to relate various types of experiences they have enjoyed in connection with offering the magazines during the past four months. Offer suggestions on following up all subscription promises before the campaign ends. Remind those who have obtained subscriptions about the need to call back to make sure the magazines have started coming in the mail and to bring the latest copies. Emphasize the benefit of subscriptions and the importance of trying to start studies with subscribers.
13 min: Branch Letter, also monthly accounts report.
10 min: “Convention Time is Approaching.” Questions and answers. Encourage all to begin making definite plans to attend.
10 min: Closing remarks. Invite any who temporary pioneered during April, or who otherwise expanded their activity, to express their feelings about the added joy brought by increased effort. Song 71.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 29
10 min: Song 41. Introduction, text and comments. Announcements.
20 min: Have Regard for Those Working Hard. (1 Thess. 5:12, 13) Group composed of ministerial servants and publishers discuss ways they can assist elders who have “plenty to do.” (1 Cor. 15:58) Can help best by being obedient and submissive. (Heb. 13:17), We can avoid being critical when things are not always arranged as we personally might prefer. Be willing to overlook their shortcomings; they are imperfect as we are. (Col. 3:13) Respond to their counsel; do not attempt to justify yourselves or raise issues over in minor things. Do not burden them unnecessarily with matters that must be decided by our own conscience; each one ‘must carry his own load.’ (Gal. 6:5) Husbands and fathers especially need to shoulder their responsibility to make decisions involving the family, not shirking their obligations of headship. (Eph. 5:23) Volunteering to assist in performing various tasks related to congregation activity is always appreciated. Their anxiety about the congregation is considerably lessened when they know they can depend on us to care faithfully for any assignment given to us. We can take the initiative ourselves to encourage and assist those needing spiritual upbuilding; this reinforces their efforts to “support the weak.” (1 Thess. 5:14) We can help a great deal by turning in reports promptly and checking to be sure they are accurate. Because these brothers unselfishly give their “own souls” in our behalf, we ‘reckon them worthy of double honor.’ (1 Thess. 2:7, 8; 1 Tim. 5:17) Appreciation should prompt us to cooperate fully and to keep “holding men of that sort dear.” (Phil. 2:29) Additionally, discuss ways that each one can assist in any other matters currently affecting your congregation.
17 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Offering the ‘Paradise-Theocracy’ Book.” Question-and-answer discussion. Arrange for a brief demonstration of a presentation using points covered in the article. (Also refer to October 1972 “Kingdom Ministry,” page 2, for additional suggestions.) Let all know of any plans made to cover territory with this offer. As time permits, invite others to offer ideas on presenting the book or the Scriptural discussion.
13 min: Closing remarks. Remind everyone to turn in reports for April, also subscriptions. Explain the recommended procedure to follow when new publishers report for the first time. (“or” book, page 75, par. 2) Song 33.
WEEK STARTING MAY 6
10 min: Song 42. Introduction, text and comments.
13 min: “How Do You View Material Possessions?” Discussion between an elder and some young people based on the article in the March 1, 1973, “Watchtower,” pages 155-159. Many teen-agers will be graduating from school shortly and others will have long summer vacations. Discuss the value of wholesome pursuits in view of the urgency of the times.
15 min: Are You Reporting All Your Activity? Field overseer explains how trend toward a decline in reported activity may be due in part to incomplete, inaccurate or late reports. Let the congregation know what problems have been encountered locally in this regard. Invite audience to offer comments and suggestions on what can be done to ensure complete, accurate reports. Questions that can be considered: How are reports helpful to the Society and the congregation? How can we keep an accurate record during the month? (Do not rely on your memory; make notation after each period of service. May use field service report slip; keep in your Bible or briefcase. Parents can remind children. Overseers can remind all to report at meetings toward end of each month. Be sure to include time spent witnessing informally.) What should you do if you forget to turn in your report? (Turn in the complete report next month; it will be included in the congregation’s report and noted on your card. Prompt reporting, however, is much to be preferred.) What method of reporting have you found works well for you? (Invite someone in audience to offer suggestions on what he has found to be practical ways to record and report his activity.) Although it may seem to be a small matter, this is another one of the ways we prove ourselves to be faithful.​—Luke 16:10.
12 min: “People Who Are Becoming Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Talk based on experiences in February 8, 1973, “Awake!.” pages 14 and 15. Include any local experiences about new ones who have made progress toward qualifying for baptism.
10 min: Closing remarks. Enthusiastically encourage young people to think seriously about enrolling as temporary pioneers during the coming school vacation. Let the congregation know how many subscriptions were obtained during the campaign and any outstanding features of the April report. Song 40.

