Appreciation for Jehovah’s Organization
AS TOLD BY JOHANNES WEBER
AS A small boy I already had a lively interest in the Bible. Secular and Bible history were among my favorite subjects in school. At the turn of the century the outstanding Bible stories were taught in our schools in Alsace, then Germany, now part of France. Religious instruction by the church minister was mostly based on the Bible. Large portions of the Hebrew Scriptures were assigned as homework, to be learned by heart or written out in the pupil’s own words. Our big old family Bible became my textbook. I found a powerful attraction in the story of Joseph and his brothers, though each time I read it I was moved to tears.
The teachers soon noted that I usually did good work on these subjects of sacred and profane history; so much so that if, by reason of negligence, I missed doing my homework, they quickly detected this and asked the reason why. In those days we memorized the names of the sixty-six books of the Bible, something that was to prove very useful to me in later years.
Even when still quite young I used to ponder the subjects of “hell” and “the soul.” When, at a funeral, our minister would say: “While the body begins to crumble to dust, the spirit or soul wafts toward heaven,” I often wished I could see some evidence of this development, though naturally I never did.
On leaving school I was apprenticed to a commercial concern in Strasbourg, and though the church was just across the street, I seldom attended. From my vantage point in the shop where I worked I preferred to watch others go in. Nor did I accept the invitation to join the youth club. As with so many other young apprentices, I tended to turn away from religion. Nevertheless, I felt the urge to read the Bible now and then.
Our shop changed hands, and the sister of the new owner, who went to live in a quiet valley of the Vosges mountains, gave me a prospectus of Watch Tower Society literature and recommended that I obtain and read the volume The Divine Plan of the Ages. This I did and read the book thoroughly, noting that its teachings were quite different from those of the church. Unfortunately, the lady seldom came to town after that, so I did not have much opportunity for discussion of the book’s contents.
INTEREST STIRRED
What did stir my interest in reading more was an advertisement at the back of this volume that quoted from Volume II of the same series the statement: “The Gentile Times end in 1914.” I said to myself, “One dare not make such a positive statement without some evidence to prove it.” So I ordered the second volume, and many things became clearer to me. I began to realize that Jehovah God had an organization of devoted servants on earth, through whom he was dispensing spiritual “food at the proper time.” (Matt. 24:45-47) Soon after, 1910-1911, I sent for all the other volumes available at that time and also subscribed for the German edition of The Watch Tower. I can remember going to the post office to pick up the package myself and opening it on the way home out of sheer curiosity.
I read through all these publications twice, faithfully looking up all the Scripture citations in my own Bible. I found the chronology particularly interesting, for it proved we were nearing the “times of restoration of all things of which God spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets of old time.” (Acts 3:21) Still, I had no one with whom to talk over these vital truths, and my understanding of many subjects, such as the military issue, was not clear. Thus I soon became embroiled in military operations, for the war was now raging. One thing, though, I firmly resolved​—that I would not do any killing, that I would carefully heed God’s counsel set out at Genesis 9:5, 6 and Exodus 20:13. And, strangely enough, I was able to maintain that resolve, and was often saved out of most critical situations. The other men used to joke about this and say: “Wherever Weber is you are safe!”
At the end of the war I longed to get in touch with the Watch Tower Society again. It seemed like a long time before the borders were opened and I could again receive The Watch Tower from Switzerland. At the time I was ignorant of the fact that there was a small class of Bible Students meeting regularly in Strasbourg. I kept searching, however. Then one day I spied a huge poster with a picture of Pastor Charles T. Russell, the Watch Tower Society’s first president, advertising a film show entitled “Photo-Drama of Creation.”
It turned out to be the most beautiful and imposing Bible drama I had ever seen. And, at last, I was in touch with others interested in study of the Bible with the Society’s Bible helps. Great crowds came to see the Drama showings, and often the film would be followed by question-and-answer sessions lasting over two hours.
The next outstanding event was the widely publicized lecture by J. F. Rutherford, second president of the Watch Tower Society, on the topic “Millions Now Living Will Never Die.” The meeting was a big success, though fewer people seemed willing to take a real interest in the Bible.
TURNING POINT REACHED
The turning point in my life came in 1920 when I submitted to baptism in water as a symbol of the dedication of my life to God. A convention of Bible Students was held at Strasbourg in 1922, and it was on this occasion that I received an invitation to come and serve at the Society’s branch office in Berne, Switzerland. It was a great surprise for me, for I felt that there were many others more capable than I. However, believing that it might well be the Lord’s direction, I accepted, though I did not know how I was going to straighten out my relationship with my secular employer. As things turned out, a substitute for me was soon located and I was free to take up full-time service with the Society. True, some tried to dissuade me and to make me anxious about my future security. However, the overseer in our congregation strengthened and encouraged me in my decision.
When I arrived at Berne, preparations were already under way for distribution of a special issue of the Golden Age magazine (now Awake!). Snow and ice were not permitted to interfere with a vigorous campaign in which we spread the message far and wide in this mountainous country.
In the Society’s branch at Berne I was assigned eventually to the bookbindery, and there learned a second trade, so to speak. There was always something most satisfying about producing the finished books for distribution by fellow Bible students in many lands. Much had to be done by hand in those days and many extra hours of work had to be performed, but it was always a pleasure to use our time in this manner.
With the passage of the years and the growth of the work it became possible to equip our factory with one machine after another. The years passed quickly, and today I can look back joyfully on forty-five years of service with the Society. It has been a joy to mark the advance of Bible understanding and the great expansion of the Kingdom work in all parts of the earth.
A WIDENED HORIZON
The year 1953 proved to be another outstanding period of my life. With others who also had a long record of service, my wife and I were invited to attend the New York international convention. Our joy knew no bounds! We managed to book the last two berths on the “Queen Elizabeth” and during the voyage enjoyed warm association with British Witnesses, joining them in studies conducted on shipboard.
We shall never forget the New York convention. We could note the friendly and obliging attitude of many New Yorkers, and were specially pleased to see how business houses had cooperated in the advertising of the convention. A brief visit to the Society’s headquarters office in Brooklyn, as well as a trip to the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead (in those days located upstate at South Lansing, New York) were very refreshing. It all made us feel so much more a part of this wonderful organization that Jehovah is using.
Time moved along and the work kept increasing. Growth in Germany made it necessary to expand the facilities of the branch office in Wiesbaden. The Society’s president, N. H. Knorr, made arrangements for transfer of our bookbindery equipment to Wiesbaden. Much to my joy, I was asked to go along and aid in its installation. It was a wonderful opportunity to become acquainted with many of our dear brothers in the faith in Germany.
As I look back over the years in which Jehovah has kindly permitted me to serve him, I can say that the “lines themselves have fallen for me in pleasant places.” (Ps. 16:6) True, age is now making itself felt and physical troubles assail me. At times I regret that I am lacking my former energies. Nevertheless, it is good to know that I can still have a useful, though small, share in making known Jehovah’s name.
I thank Jehovah for all his mercies, for his guidance, and for the great privilege that has been mine to share with other dedicated servants in his grand work. May he continue to sustain all in his happy organization.

