Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points.
● When did the 400 years of affliction upon Abraham’s seed begin? (Gen. 15:13)
The beginning of that affliction was when Ishmael, son of the Egyptian Hagar, mocked Isaac in the year 1913 B.C.E. Four hundred years later, in 1513 B.C.E., God delivered the Israelites from Egyptian bondage.​—P. 260.a
● What does a person’s “moving ahead” mean in Jehovah’s organization?
It is not a matter of getting ahead of others but means to move with the organization, to fit in, to fill in the needs, to be able to take on increased responsibilities.​—Pp. 335, 336.
● Why was a man in ancient Israel who had first married exempt from military service for a year?
It was done out of consideration for his wife and that he might have an opportunity to have and to see an offspring.​—P. 376.
● What are some of the ways a person can develop self-control?
Pray to Jehovah for his spirit. Work to gain balance by means of daily Bible reading and study. Apply the Bible’s principles and counsel to life’s problems. Be willing to accept discipline.​—Pp. 395, 396.
● Why is the battle of Har–Magedon called “the great evening meal of God”?
The ones slaughtered at the battle of Har–Magedon will be left as food for the carrioneating birds of the heavens. This victory will also be a feast for those of humankind who survive, as they will greatly rejoice at the end of wickedness.​—P. 408.
● How long is the great antitypical day of atonement?
It began in the fall of 29 C.E., when Jesus presented himself to do God’s will in taking up a sacrificial course. It ended in 33 C.E., when Jesus brought the value of his lifeblood into heaven itself.​—P. 430.
● What was foreshadowed when the high priest of Israel offered the firstfruits of the barley harvest on Nisan 16 and the two fermented loaves fifty days later on Pentecost?
The barley firstfruits pictured Jesus Christ as the firstfruits or firstborn from the dead, and the loaves symbolically represented the entire body of 144,000 spirit-begotten members of Christ’s body as being waved or presented by Christ Jesus before Jehovah as holy unto him.​—Pp. 439, 440.
● From what old, God-given, pre-Israelite ordinance did the right come for inflicting the death penalty upon those shedding human blood illegally?
From the words spoken by Jehovah to Noah, as recorded at Genesis 9:4-6: “Anyone shedding man’s blood, by man will his own blood be shed.”​—P. 496.
● What was prophetically typified by the cities of refuge?
The grand provision of salvation that God through Jesus Christ brought into operation for the eternal benefit of men of all kinds, to relieve and save them from the penalty of bloodguilt.​—P. 498.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1967.

