Preserving Our Possession of Christian Peace
TRULY pleasant is the very sound of the word “peace”! It suggests freedom from fear, calmness and tranquillity. There is very little peace in the world today, but, true to Jehovah’s promise, his people do have peace. “My people must dwell in a peaceful abiding place,” he foretold.​—Isa. 32:18.a
This is as it should be. Peace should pervade every Christian personality, every Christian home, every Christian congregation, for is not Jehovah the “God of peace,” and his Son the “Prince of Peace”? And are not Christ’s followers sent forth as peace messengers?​—Phil. 4:9; Isa. 9:6; Eph. 6:14, 15.
This peace that we as Jehovah’s Christian witnesses are to preserve as our possession is a unique peace. It is a peace “that excels all thought.” It is not dependent upon environment, nor is it peace at the price of compromise. It is always based on righteousness and can be acquired only by getting to be at peace with Jehovah God through dedication and baptism and then by living in harmony with God’s righteous principles, so as to have God’s goodwill.​—Phil. 4:7; Luke 2:14.
To preserve our possession of peace we must be on guard against the many peace disturbers, chief of which are all the works of the flesh. (Gal. 5:19-21) Materialism also is a great peace disturber, for we simply cannot serve God and Riches at the same time. (Matt. 6:24; 1 Tim. 6:9, 10) On the other hand, God’s Word assures us that “abundant peace belongs to those loving your law.” If we love God’s law we will be reading his Word regularly, as well as the literature based upon it.​—Ps. 119:165.
In particular will our cultivating the rest of the fruits of God’s spirit aid us to preserve our possession of Christian peace. Certainly love will make for peace, for it does not seek its own interests but bears and endures all things. And do not joy, long-suffering, kindness, goodness and mildness make for peaceful relations?
How practical is faith to preserving our peace! It helps us to please God and rely upon him to supply all our needs as we keep on seeking first his kingdom and his righteousness. Controlling our spirit in times of stress will also go far in preserving our Christian possession of peace.​—Heb. 11:6; Matt. 6:33.
Yes, let us at all times seek to preserve our possession of Christian peace by being on guard against peace disturbers, by meditating on God’s law and by cultivating all the fruits of God’s holy spirit!
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, August 15, 1966.

