Can the Churches Unite the World?
“OUR Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name,” chanted the crowd. They were words any schoolboy could recite; words so often repeated, recited and sung that they have been inerasably etched in the minds of millions. Yet on this occasion these words seemed particularly moving.
For one thing, the 3,500 worshipers under the brightly colored circus tent were a sampling of many races and nationalities. Each recited in his own native language, creating a babel that stirred one worshiper to whisper, “We’re speaking in tongues.” But perhaps even more remarkable was the fact that these worshipers did not share the same religion. Anglicans, Lutherans, Methodists and even Catholics prayed side by side.
The “Lima Liturgy,” a theological compromise reached just months earlier, laid the groundwork for this unprecedented tent service.a Nominal Christians of various sects could now lay aside centuries-old differences and share ‘Holy Communion’ together. And though Roman Catholics and members of the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox churches declined participation in the Communion service itself, representatives were there to join in the singing and prayers. The multilingual recitation of the Lord’s Prayer was thus a moving event for many. Worshipers wept, embraced and kissed one another. For a brief moment, barriers of race, color, religion and politics were dissolved.
Many feel that this religious service was the high point of the 18-day general assembly of the WCC (World Council of Churches) held from July 24 to August 10, 1983, in Vancouver, Canada. Some see it as a beacon of hope, a harbinger of the eventual triumph of ecumenism, the movement for Christian unity. Some even hailed this religious service as “a new Pentecost.” ‘But might it have even broader implications?’ wonder some. After all, religion has for centuries been a potent divisive influence. Now if the churches were somehow able to heal the wounds that have divided them for centuries, could not the nations do likewise?
Few thinking persons would deny the desirability of a harmonious human family. It is just that the possibility of ever achieving that oneness seems so remote. For lurking in the background of all human efforts at unity are the age-old hatreds, suspicions and doubts. Could it be, however, that the churches are now leading the way toward global cooperation? And under the powerful influence of a united church, might not political rulers be moved to stop their suicidal accumulating of nuclear weapons?
Really, though, how near are the churches to reaching an accord? Let us take a closer look at the recent assembly of the WCC.
[Footnotes]
The liturgy is named after a WCC-sponsored conference of Protestant, Orthodox and Catholic theologians that recently was held in Lima, Peru. The result of this meeting is a document called “Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry,” which, according to The New York Times, “encourages individual churches to recognize differing approaches to baptism, holy communion and ordination.”

