From Our Readers
The Pope on the Move
John Paul II has certainly turned the papal household upside down with his frequent visits abroad. It is intriguing to observe that, almost everywhere, the masses have been awed by his charisma, and yet prominent Catholics have publicly criticised the pope for either what he said or what he failed to say. Whether his purpose is to quieten dissent or to give relevance to his church in an era of fall in vocation and rise in defection is not clear. Your recent “Awake!” articles (December 8, 1983) presented a well-balanced review of his excursions to date and provide an interesting background against which any future visits can be examined. Thank you for such fine material.
D. B., England
Your invidious article criticizing the sincerity, conduct and propensities of Pope John Paul II, reeks of self-serving bigotry, as well as envy of the extraordinary charismatic and intellectual equipment with which John Paul II is endowed. As for John Paul’s reverence of the Virgin Mary, there is nothing novel about the preeminence of Mary’s status in the hearts and minds of a significant number of Catholics. Many Catholics involuntarily look first to the Blessed Virgin because of the unique comfort and understanding received from their own mothers. This may be readily verified by the broad attention the rosary (essentially a supplication to Mary) receives from countless Catholics whose spiritual needs are more thoroughly satisfied from saying the rosary than by the recitation of any other prayer.
E. L. D., New York
Pope John Paul II has been more active publicly on a worldwide basis than any pope in history. Because his example and teaching influence so many people, Catholic as well as non-Catholic, we felt an obligation to our readers to publish an objective review of the reasons for his travels and the problems he is facing. We quoted almost exclusively Catholic writers who are accepted and respected by the Catholic Church because we wanted our readers to be informed as to how prominent Catholics view these matters. We did sincerely criticize the pope’s veneration of Mary. In this view we have the support of none other than Jesus Christ. When a woman indicated a tendency toward veneration of Mary, saying, “Happy is the womb that carried you and the breasts that you sucked!” Jesus replied: “No, rather, Happy are those hearing the word of God and keeping it!” (Luke 11:27, 28) Further, Jesus said of himself, “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.” And, “Whatever it is that you ask in my name, I will do this, in order that the Father may be glorified in connection with the Son.” (John 14:6, 13) He said nothing about directing prayers through Mary. We urge all men to base their hope, not on Mary, but on the Kingdom of God by his only-begotten Son, Christ Jesus. This was the message of Jesus and his apostles, and also the message for our time. (See Matthew 6:9, 10; 24:14.)​—ED.

