Presenting the Good News​—With the Creation Book
1 The evidence abounds that a Creator exists and that he is interested in his creation. (Rom. 1:20, 21) Our study of God’s Word has convinced us beyond any shadow of doubt that man got here by creation, not by evolution. (Rev. 4:11) During September we have the opportunity to direct the attention of others to the truth about creation as we offer the book Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation?
2 In addition to our regular house-to-house ministry, we can offer the Creation book while engaging in street work and while witnessing informally. It is an attractive book that may well appeal to salesmen, businessmen, and others with whom we occasionally have dealings. Then there are those on our magazine route. Might they not enjoy reading this fine publication? There may also be people on whom we call or with whom we study who do not yet have this book but who would appreciate reading it.
3 Youths in the congregation, you have a territory of your own in which to share this excellent publication, and that territory is in school. Have you tried just carrying a copy of the Creation book with you to school? People who are curious may ask questions and give you the opportunity of showing them the book. If you carry one to school and leave it visible on your desk or read a portion of it in the lunchroom, you may find others asking how they might obtain a copy. Of course, outside of school hours, you could take the initiative and show others the book, talk to them about it, and offer them a copy for the regular contribution.
4 This is the season when the new school year starts. So all of us can be awake to opportunities of offering this publication to youths we may meet in service. When we meet parents at the door, after considering the Topic for Conversation, we can present the book and explain how helpful it will be for their children. Since evolution is taught in school, the book will help their children to understand what the Bible and true science have to say about creation.
5 There are many older people who do not believe in evolution and who may not be particularly interested in that subject. But usually they are concerned about the suffering they see in the world and may want to know whether there is any hope for the future. For such ones, we might highlight chapter 16 or 19.
6 If a householder raises questions about belief in the Bible, you can point out that chapters 17 and 18 will answer the questions “Can You Trust the Bible?” and “The Bible​—Is It Really Inspired by God?” The contents of these chapters may be just what he needs to restore his faith in the Bible as a book of truth.
7 We want as many people as possible to appreciate that Jehovah is the Creator. (Acts 17:24-28) So we do well to extend to everyone the opportunity to obtain and read Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation?

