Report Field Service Accurately
1 Shortly now the new Yearbook will be coming out with the worldwide report for the 1988 service year. We eagerly look forward to receiving this publication so that we can read about the recent accomplishments in the preaching activity throughout the earth. (Isa. 60:22) Since all publishers contribute to this annual report, what can we individually do to ensure that it is accurate?
2 At Matthew 24:14 we read of our commission to preach in the last days of this system. We can show our respect for Jehovah’s organizational arrangements and demonstrate our appreciation for the small part we have by conscientiously reporting our field service at the end of each month. Do you regularly and accurately report your service?
WHAT TO REPORT
3 Only whole hours should be reported to the congregation. An incomplete hour can be carried over by the publisher and be included in his report the following month. For the sake of accuracy, it is best to write down the time spent, literature placed, and the number of return visits made each time we go out in the field service. Then by simply totaling these figures at the end of the month, we will not have to estimate what was accomplished. The Field Service Report slip furnished by the congregation makes this record easy to keep.
4 Do not forget that a return visit should be counted each time you conduct a Bible study. At the end of the month, a Study Report slip for each Bible study conducted should be filled out and turned in along with your Field Service Report slip. After filling out each Study Report slip completely and accurately, the total number of different Bible studies conducted during the month should be written in the appropriate box at the lower right-hand corner of the Field Service Report slip.
5 It seems appropriate to include a reminder that your field service time should start when you begin your witness work and end when you finish your last call in each witnessing period. Thus, time taken for refreshments or meals during a break from field service would not be counted as field service activity. Those giving public talks may count the time actually spent delivering these. (See Our Ministry, page 104, paragraph 1.) By being conscientious in reporting our field service, we will all contribute to the accurate report that is published in the Yearbook.
6 Since the secretary has to send the congregation’s field service report to the Society by the sixth of the following month, it can easily be seen why it is important for each publisher to turn in his field service report promptly at the end of the month. Out of consideration for this arrangement, each publisher will want to follow this direction carefully. The secretary has only six days in which to gather all the reports together, total them, and mail the congregation’s report so that the Society receives it in time to include it with the field service activity of over 8,000 other congregations in this country.
7 Each publisher who willingly cooperates with the above organizational arrangements can have the satisfaction of knowing that he has contributed to making an accurate report on the worldwide activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Compare Ezekiel 9:11.) May all of us turn in field service reports that are accurate and on time!

