Start Bible Studies​—Now Is the Opportune Time
1 During the 1987 service year the average number of Bible studies conducted came close to equaling the total average number of publishers worldwide. What a marvelous potential for increase in Kingdom proclaimers! Are you sharing in this satisfying aspect of disciple-making? Now that many have returned from summer vacations, it is the opportune time to concentrate on starting studies.​—Compare 2 Corinthians 6:2.
2 The Our Ministry book, pages 89-91, impresses upon us our privilege of aiding others spiritually by means of home Bible studies. Page 91 urges: “If at all possible, make it your aim to conduct at least one home Bible study regularly in addition to any study you may conduct with children in your family.” This is a fine goal toward which all of us can strive by offering a Bible study at every opportunity.
WITH AID OF REASONING BOOK
3 Have you tried offering a Bible study on the very first call? On page 12 under “Home Bible Study,” the Reasoning book suggests two introductions that take this direct approach. These let the householder know that our purpose in calling is to offer a free home Bible study. No matter what presentation we use, we can offer to demonstrate how we conduct a study. Many householders already have some of our literature that could be used. Or a tract may be used as a basis for starting the study. This can be done even when the literature offer has been refused, if it seems appropriate and the householder is agreeable. For example, when we offer the Creation book, the individual may say he is not interested in creation and evolution. We might then offer to show him how we conduct a Bible study using chapter 19 of the Creation book, “An Earthly Paradise Soon to Come.” Depending upon the person’s interest, we could select appropriate material from chapters 16 through 20.
4 Another method for starting Bible studies involves using the Reasoning book on return visits. When making arrangements to call back on an interested person, raise the question, “Will planet Earth be destroyed in a nuclear war?” Then instead of simply telling the householder that the answer will be given when you return, have him write down three or four Scripture references taken from pages 112 and 113 of the Reasoning book. Invite the householder to read these scriptures in preparation for your next visit. Return as soon as possible within the week, and look up the scriptures together. Discuss how each one relates to the questions raised. Then raise another question that will be answered on the following visit. Again give the householder several scriptures to look up before you return.
5 It is good to show the interested person that you are obtaining your information from the Reasoning book. In time his attention can be directed to the Live Forever book for a regular home Bible study. As you can see, this method is effective even if the householder does not at first accept literature but does show concern over world conditions and wants to know what the future holds.
6 Keep in mind Jesus’ words to his disciples at Matthew 28:19: “Go therefore and make disciples.” Would you like to take part in this lifesaving work by conducting a home Bible study? Even if you are already conducting one, do you have room in your schedule for another one or two? Make the starting of studies a matter for prayerful consideration as you ‘buy out the time.’​—Eph. 5:15, 16.

