Announcements
SHARING IN THE FINAL WITNESS
Shortly before he was impaled Jesus counseled his apostles, “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for the purpose of a witness to all the nations, and then the accomplished end will come.” The time for the accomplished end of this wicked system of things is very near, and the servants of God are giving the final witness in every corner of the earth. What a privilege it is to have a share in this momentous work! Since you have now learned something of God’s gracious provisions for those who act in harmony with his will, wouldn’t you like to share in spreading this good news? For January Jehovah’s witnesses have as their service theme, Sharing in the Final Witness (Matt. 24:14, NW). During the next four months they will offer a year’s subscription for this Christian journal, The Watchtower, on a contribution of $1.00. Every new subscriber will also get a premium of three interesting booklets. Why not share in the final witness by calling the attention of your neighbors to the significance of the times in which we live and offer them a subscription for The Watchtower to aid them further to learn of God’s requirements? The local company of Jehovah’s witnesses will be glad to assist you; or write to us and we will furnish you with additional instructions and forms for reporting your activity.
NEW WORLD TRANSLATION
The New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures, first released to the public on Wednesday, August 2, 1950, during the international assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in New York city, answers a long-felt need for an accurate and dependable translation of the Greek Scriptures. Done in modern speech, it is just as understandable to present-day readers as the original writings of Christ’s disciples were understandable to the simple, lowly readers of their day. It is not a revision of any previous work, but is a new rendering from the original Greek text, using primarily the standard text of Westcott and Hort. To insure accuracy the translation is as literal as modern English usage permits. One of its outstanding features is the use of God’s given name Jehovah throughout. There are copious marginal references, chain references, footnotes, an enlightening foreword, an appendix, maps and illustrations. This new translation presents the Greek Scriptures in all their purity and is worthy of the close study of even the most critical student. A copy will be sent you, postpaid, on a contribution of $1.50.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 21: Praise to the New World’s Founder, ¶1-19.
Week of January 28: Praise to the New World’s Founder, ¶20-23; and The New World Crowd of Praisers, ¶1-19.

