Vol. XXX IX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., SEPTEMBER 1, 1918 


No. 17 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


Zionism is a theme of perennial interest to the Lord's people
, who for many years have watched with deep sympathy 
the evidences of the return of divine favor to God's chosen 
nation. The beloved Seventh Messenger has written much upon 
this subject in both the Scripture Sranins and the columns 
of this journal. In Vol. 2, Studies 4 and 7 he has demonstrated
 the fact that Israel's "seven times*' of divine disfavor 
fully ended in October, 1914: and that shortly after that date 
tho Jews would return to Palestine, He also pointed out 
that the year 1878 marked the turning point in the history of 
Israel j for in that year an event occurred which indicated 
clearly the beginning of the return of divine favor to the 
Jews/ In June of that year the "Berlin Congress of Nations" 
was held, in which Lord Beaconsfleld, then Prime Minister 
of Great Britain, took the leading part. We quote: 

"There England assumed a general protectorate over the 
Asiatic provinces of Turkey, among which was Palestine; 
and Turkey amended its laws relating to aliens, which greatly 
ameliorated the condition of the Jews then residing in Palestine
, as well as partially opened the door for others to locate 
there, with the privilege of holding real estate. But we must 
remember that the year A. IX 1878 was but the turning point 
of returning favor to Fleshly Israel. W have already 
learned from our study of 'The Times of the Gentiles' that 
Jerusalem and its people will continue to be trodden down — 
controlled and oppressed by the Gentiles < UNTTL the times 
of the Gentiles be fulfilled/ and hence, though favor was due 
and began in A. D. 1878, the Jew will not be received back 
into full favor until A. D. 1914. Thus their rise again to 
favor will he gradual, as was their fall from it." — Vol. 2, 
pp. 220, 221. 

Shortly before his death, October 31, 1916, Pastor Russell 
wrote concerning the Jewish hope: 

"We are free to say that the restoration of Israel has not 
been accoiraplished as rapidly as we had anticipated. Nevertheless
 the Jews in Palestine seem to be thus far wonderfully 
sheltered; and doubtless many of their co-religionists in the 
war districts, especially in Poland, would be glad if they had 
gone to Palestine when they had opportunity. It ^difficult 
to say how the conclusion of the war rrvny affect the interests 
of Israel. It looks as though the trying experiences of the 
Jews would arouse considerable numbers of them eventually 
to go to their homeland. We have never expected, however, 
that all the Jews would return thither, but rather a representative
 company of them, just as in the case of the return 
from Babylonish captivity— only about 52,000 returned, notwithstanding
 the great hosts that went to Babylon in the 
captivity. The returning ones represent those fullest of faith 
in the Tx>rd and his promises, and doubtless will be dealt with 
as representative of the whole. We remind our readers that 
when this volume was written r 1 8S9 ] the Jews themselves 
had little thought of going to Palestine. Now Zionism has 
sprung up, and has taken a deep hold upon the hearts of the 
Israelites. Although it was a secular Zionism at first, it has 
gradually turned to religious sentiment and hope." — Vol. 3, 
p. ii. 

Within less than a year after his death the joyful message
 was flashed around the world that Great Britain had 
promised the establishment in Palestine of a Jewish national 
center to which "Jews from all countries might unite in 
spread iing the influence of Jewish thought and idea-Is from 
Palestine to other parts of the world, in complete harmony 
with other peoples." In November of last year came the 
cheering news that General Allenby had taken Jerusalem from 
the Turks. Still later, about the Passover season, 1918, a 
committee of representative Jews arrived in Jerusalem to form 


the nucleus of a new Jewish Republic, a homeland for Israel. 
In June of this year, just forty years from the time when 
through the influence of Lord Beacon sfield the door of Palestine
 was reopened to the Jews, the Zionists held their twentyfirst
 annual convention at Pittsburgh. This convention has 
attracted much attention, and is said to have accomplished 
more than had all the preceding twenty conventions. Below 
wo quote froan various newspapers relative to this subject: 
AIM OF THE AMERICAN ZIONISTS 
An excerpt from the Pittsburgh Gazette-Times reads: 
"The main object of the Zionist movement in the United 
States is to aid in the re-establishment of a Jewish homeland 
in Palestine after twenty centuries of striving, thereby fulfilling
 Old Testament prophecy. There is no thought of any 
large number of American and English Jews returning to 
this homeland, but rather the setting up of an ethical center; 
the making of Jerusalem a City of Prayer for all peoples, 
rather than a rallying point for political activities. One of 
the cherished hopes of some of the leaders is a World University
 for the study of spiritual questions, as distinguished 
from the purely intellectual or materialistic. 

"The Great War has given a wonderful impetus to the 
restoration of Palestine to the Jews, which is altogether different
 from the restoration of Belgium, Serbia and Rounxania 
to their respective peoples. The same world event is proving 
an emollient in racial and sectarian affairs, and at times are 
more propitious for tiie Zionist m vement than ever before. 
For this reason the Pittsburgh convention will attract the 
attention and sympathy of a great mass of people who under 
different conditions would be less interested." 

Our readers will perhaps recall that the thought above 
expressed h the same t, xt Pastor Russell set forth in hi s 
sermon on Zionism, delivered in the HippodTome on Oct. 0. 
1910. On that occasion he said: 

"It is not my thought that the eight millions of Jews in 
the world will all go to Palestine, even though it has been 
estimated that the land could support more than twice that 
many. It is my thought that some of your most earnest 
and saintly people willgo to Palestine quickly and that the 
rejuvenation there will be astonishing to the world. Further 
it is my thought that the Jews in every part of the world, in 
proportion as they come under the holy influences of God's 
promises through the prophets, will go to Palestine sympathetically
 — by encouraging those who can better go than 
themselves and bv financial assistance and the establishment 
there of great enterprises."— Sermons, page 482. 
BESTJME OF PROCEEDINGS 
From the Pittsburgh Dispatch we clip the following: 
ir With all its constituent bodies cemented into one national 
organization operating under one head aJid in one direction — 
that of rehabilitating Palestine, the ancient home of the Jews 
— the Federation of American Zionists last night concluded its 
twenty- first annual convention in Soldiers' Memorial Hall. 
With the amalgamation of the many subsidiary organizations 
into one powerful body, the old name of the federation was 
dropped and hereafter the body will be known as the ZioniBt 
Organization of America. 

"The final day of the convention, which was the most 
important and largest that the organization has ever held, 
was marked by the completion of the amalgamation of the 
new national body, which will devote ite efforts for the restoration
 of Palestine, by the adoption of a constitution and the 
election of officers for the ensuing year. 

"Justice Louis D. Brandeis of the Supreme Court of the 
United States, who had served as honorary head of the old 
organization during the past year and wiho is one of toe 


[«815] 


(260-261) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


foremost Zionists in America, was re-elected honorary president
 of the new body by acclamation. The otiher officers, all 
of whom have been leaders of long standing in the Zionist 
movement, were also elected by acclamation. 

JUDGE MACK PBESIDENT 

"In addition to Justice Brandeis, the following were elected 
to administrative offices: President, Judge Julian W. Mack, 
of the United States District Court of Chicago; vice presidents
, Rabbi Stephen S. Wise, of New York, and Dr. Harry 
Friedenwald, of Baltimore; executive secretary, Jacob de Haas. 
of New York; secretary for organization, Louis Lipsky, of 
New York; secretary for education, Miss Henrietta Szold, of 
New York; comptroller, R. D. Kesselman, of New York; 
treasurer, K. W. Lewin-Epstein, of New York; assistant treasurer
, Louis Robisohn, of New York. 

"The constitution, as prepared by the constitution committee
, headed by William C. Cowen, of Philadelphia, chairman
, was adopted at the afternoon session. It provides for an 
executive committee of 40 members, 18 of whom shall be 
residents of New York and the remainder from various sections 
of the country and authorizes the executive committee to decide
 the places of convention. The constitution permits one 
delegate to the national convention to every 100 members and 
makes one-third of the total number of delegates a quorum. 
It also provides that the convention shall elect its own chairman
 and declares for proportional representation in the district
, the majority in the district being permitted to have 
two-thirds of the delegates and the minority one-third. 

THE RESOLUTIONS 

"Resolutions were adopted mourning the loss of comrades 
in Europe, extending sympathy and assurance of co-operation 
to those who have suffered imprisonment and expatriation; 
greeting members of the Jewish Legion of Honor, urging every 
delegate to take necessary steps to form a lo^al committee 
in his community to stimulate enlistment in the Legion of 
Honor; expressing deep appreciation to the British Labor 
Party for affirming the declaration of the- British Government 
with regard to the restoration of Palestine; expressing deep 
appreciation to the Inter-Allied Conference for Labor and 
Socialism for its attitude on the Britisth declaration; extending 
greetings to the Conference for Labor and Democracy; extending
 greetings to the newly formed United Organizations 
of New York for the Restoration of Palestine, and recommending
 to the executive committee of the Zionist Organization of 
America the unification and simplification of all funds collected
 in America for Zionist purposes. 

"Cablegrams of greeting from Nabum Sokolow, of the 
Zionist International Political Committee, and the American 
Zionist Medical Unit en route to Palestine, were read." 

The Afaccabaean, the official organ of the Zionist Organization
 of America, states the principles of the Zionist movement. 
We quote from the August number: 

TJIK PITTSBURGH PROGRAM 

"la 1807 the first Zionist Congress at Basle defined the 
object of Zionism to be 'the establishment of a publicly recognized
 and legally secured homeland for the Jewish people in 
Palestine/ The recent declarations of Great Britain, France, 
Italy, and others of the allied democratic states, have established
 this public recognition of the Jewish national home as 
an international fact. 

"Therefore we desire to affirm anew the principles which 
have guided the Zionist Movement sinco its inception and 
wfrictfi were the foundation of the ancient Jewish state and 
of the living Jewish law embodied in the traditions of two 
thousand years of exile. 

"1. Wo declare for political and civil equality irrespective 
of race, sex or faith of all the inhabitants of the land. 

"2. To insure in the Jewish national home in Palestine 
equality of opportunity we favor a policy which, with due 
regard to existing rights, shall tend to establish the ownership
 and control by the whole people of the land, of all natural 
resources and of all public utilities. 

"3. All land owned or controlled by the whole people, 
dhould be leased on su<<h conditions as will insure the fullest 


opportunity for development and continuity of possession. 

"4. The cooperative principle should be applied so far as 
feasible in the organization of all agricultural, industrial, commercial
 and financial undertakings, 

"5. Tlhe system of free public institutions which is to be 
established should embrace all grades and departments of education
, 

"0. Hebrew, the national language of the Jewish people, 
shall be the medium of public instruction." 

THE RESOURCES OF PALESTINE 

"Although Viscount Bryce is an acknowledged authority 
on Balkan and Near Orient questions, it is curious that he, 
too, is under the spell of the usual mistake concerning Pales 
tine. If Viscount Bryce had said that the Palestine of the 
time of the Judges was as small as Massachusettes he would 
have been in the right. But to say that this is the size of 
the kingdom of Solomon shows 'how little our land is know* 
even to the best Biblical students. 

"The Palestine of Solomon, as is well known, extend < 
from the Brook of Kgypt to the River Euphrates, and embraces
 a stretch of land which equals, if it does not surpass, 
the area of Italy, with over 100,000 square miles. As we have 
reason to believe, the British Government intends, as soon a* 
its armies have won the necessary victory, to restore to the 
Jews the boundaries of King Solomon. Within this enormous 
area most of the land, although apparently desolate and barren
, is really very productive, and it is only the Turkish government
 that reduced the most fertile provinces to desolation
. 

"Most of the Jewish colonies, owing to the reluctance of 
the government, as well as of the Arabs, to sell to the Jews 
cultivated land, have been founded in the midst of the desolated
 parts of the country, and at the outset no one believed 
that the Jews would be able to transform them into really 
fertile lands. But the Britialh army today, in its advance in 
southern Palestine, has found that these colonies, surrounded 
as they are by rocks and swamps, are the finest evidences of 
wfoat the Palestine of the future will be. 

"It is a known fact that out of a total area of at least 
twenty-five million acres of cultivable land only two million 
are cultivated by the Arabs and a quarter of a million by the 
Jews. But once a stable Hebrew government is established 'there 
with the help of the Allies, and irrigation methods comparable 
to those of Egypt introduced, the remainder of the land will 
be transformed into a wonderful farming region, especially if 
we consider the fact that the Jordan, the Letani, the Auja, the 
Yabok, the Yarmuk, and the Arnon have, according to well informed
 engineers, water for the irrigation of many million 
acres. And the rainy season, which is nearly tropical, provides
 the balance of the water necessary foT a vast irrigation
. 

"It is interesting also to note that most of the cultivable 
land does not belong to the inhabitants themselves, but to 
the government, and once the Palestine state is established and 
the land transferred to the new state, in accordan 3 with international
 law, possibilities of life and work would be provided
 not for 600,000. as Lord Bryce suggests, but for ten 
times as many." — Veio York. Globe, 

HONORS FOR JEWISH JTOGES 

The American Werkh/ Jewish Ncv:s records with pleasure 
another signal honor conferred by President Wilson upon 
American Jewry. Judge Julian W. Mack, of Chicago, Judge 
of the United States Circuit Court, a prominent educator, and 
newly-elected President of the Zionist Organizations of 
America, has been named as one of the ten men chosen by the 
President, from whom is to be selected an Umpire on all War 
Labor disputes. 

With equal pride, the Jewish people have learned of the 
appointment of Major Norman Bentwich, a young British 
Jew, as Procureur General and Judge of Appeals in the oc 
cupied parts of Palestine. The Jewish people have assumed 
important government posts in all lands, and now we have evidence
 that they are making rapid strides towards self-government
 in a land of their own. 


HONESTY OF HEART VS. PERFECTION OF WORKS 

"The Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the ouUr-ard appearance, but the Lord 
looketh on the heart." — 1 Samuel 16:7. 


netting into the wrong attitude of heart, Saul, king of 
Israel hnd knowingly violated the plain, specific command 
which the Lord had sent him through the Prophet Samuel. 
Apparently the king was not of evil intention, but rather 
lacked proper respect and reverence for God and for his 
divine arrangements. As a result, he was rejected of the 
I/ord. This rejection because of disobedience meant not only 


King Saul's ultimate removal from the kingdom, but the 
Lord's selection of another man of another family for the 
office of ruler in Israel and representative of the Lord upon 
the throne. 

In due time the Lord sent the Prophet Samuel to the 
little town of Bethlehem, there to offer a sacrifice, and incidentally
 to find and anoint the one who would some day 

[6316] 


Sfptember 1, 1918 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


1261-2*2) 


l>e exalted to the throne of Israel. When he arrived at Bethlehem
, the prophet, apparently according to divine instruction, 
associated himself with the family of Jesse, grandson of Ruth 
and Boaz, to the intent that after he had offered the sacrifice 
he might without public display anoint a member of Jesse's 
family- — one whom the Lord had chosen for the rulership of 
his people. Jesse had eight sons, tihe youngest of whom was 
herding sheep at the time when the prophet was looking for 
the Lord's choice for the kingly office. 

One by one tihe seven older sons of Jesse were inspected 
by the prophet, who thought that surely the Lord's anointed 
must be before him. Samuel was looking at the matter as a 
man. from the human viewpoint. But the Lord Raid to him: 
"Look not on his countenance or on the height of his stature; 
because I have refused him; for the Lord seeth not as man 
seefch; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the 
Lord looketh on the heart." The prophet then in perplexity 
asked Jesse whether he had not another son. Jesse replied 
that there was one, a mere lad, who was out with the sheep. 
The prophet said: "Send and fetch him; for we will not sit 
down till he come hither." When David came, the Lord indicated
 to Samuel that the lad was the one who- was to be 
anointed. WHAT GOD LOOKS TO SEE IN US 

Although tihe brothers were noble young men, yet David 
was the one with whom the Lord was pleased. Evidently 
God had seen something about David's heart that led him to 
choose the boy. He was not always pleased with David's actions
, however; for the record tells us that upon several 
occasions David was guilty of sin. But on the whole he was 
a very loyal, earnest-hearted man; and God was seeking a 
king who would have the right kind of heart, one whose experience
 would be such that in due time he could write the 
Book of Psalms, a king who would be a blessing U> the people 
of Israel. 

This principle of choice applies everywhere. God knows the 
motives of the human 'heart—the springs of thought. He sees 
what we cannot see. We merely conclude from the outward 
appearance whether some people seem more courageous or 
weak, and others less so; but we cannot judge their hearts. 
Some people may have very vicious sentiments, and yet be 
able to cover them up. Others might be veTy dishonorable, 
and yet be able to conceal their true heart condition. Nothing
 is hidden from his sight. Therefore all who are in the 
right attitude would seek to have their heart just such as God 
would approve* 

The qualities of heart which meet with the divine approbation
 are meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly-kindness, love. With these fruits of the holy Spirit 
God is well pleased. If his people are in the right attitude 
of heart they will be seeking after, striving after, the development
 of these qualities; for "God looketh upon the heart." 

To the Jews God gave the law, with the promise that whoever
 would keep it would live by so doing. To some this 
might seem as if God was looking upon the outward appearance
 of the individual. But not so! He knew all the while 
the true condition of the fallen race of mankind. He was 
fully aware that the Jews could not really keep the law. 
In fact, he gave them the law in order to demonstrate that no 
fallen human being can keep the divine law perfectly. Meantime
 he was looking at the heaTt. Amongst those who sought 
to keep the Mosaic law were some who had the spirit of 
the law, and who at heart were seeking to do the will of God. 
This class were rightly exercised by their experiences, and in 
the resurrection will constitute the ancient worthies, who will 
be made "princes in all the earth," during the Millennial 
reign of Christ. 

CAN THE CHTOCH JUDGE THE HEART NOW? 

At our Lord's first advent we see this same principle illustrated
. When he came to the Jewish people and offered theim 
the Gospel, the terms and conditions were such that only the 
honest-hearted were able to profit by the divine message, 
Those who weTe not honest at heart were repelled, not by any 
act on God's part, but by their own heart-attitude. They 
did not care to follow our Lord* To the Jews he said: "Come 
unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden; and I will 
give you rest." The honest-hearted were indeed heavy laden — 
burdened by their failure to keep the law. This class needed 
help; and they were blessed under the Gospel message. Of 
one such our Lord declared, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in! 
whom is no guile/' (John 1:47) To this claBS the Master 
said, "To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom 
of heaven." {Matthew 13:10-17) But to others his teachings
 were dark sayings; for God wished to favor only those 
whose hearts were right before him. 

All who are spirit-begotten recognize the fact that a real 
Christian is a dual being, that there is on inner and outer 


man. (2 Corinthians 4:16; Jiphesians 4:22-24 J While the 
world sees only the outward appearance, we know that the 
brethren in Christ have new hearts. Therefore, in dealing 
with them, we endeavor to see only the new creature. The 
world may say of a child of God; "You cannot deceive me 
about that person; I see through his little schemes.'* But 
the world judges only from the outward appearance. The 
Lord's people, however, know that it is quite possible to have 
a pure heart, and yet to have an imperfect power of expressing
 the sentiments of that heart. Realizing that we are ourselves
 endeavoring to live after the Spirit and to walk after 
the Spirit, we should think of others of the Lord's people with 
sympathy and try to see them according to the heart. When 
they tell us that their heart is thus-and-so, we should look at 
the heart and give them credit for the motives there, rather 
than judge them by the imperfect endeavors to express their 
real sentiments. 

We acknowledge that a good tree cannot bring forth bad 
fruit, nor a bad tree good fruit. Yet we pee that the fruit 
which is natural to a tree may be more or less changed by 
conditions. So amongst the Lord's people, in all those who 
have experienced a change of heart there will be an outward 
manifestation of that fact; and good fruits will be seen maturing
 more or less rapidly. If this class make mistakes, they 
will regret their failure; and if they regret this, they will 
bo glad to make restitution. If they have misrepresented 
some one else, thev will desire to offer apologies. 

Probably we all know some of the Lord's people who 
are continually making slips and blunders- — doing many things 
which they ought not to do, and leaving undone those things 
which they ought to do. Yet we do not reject them, as 
brethren. " On the contrary, we endeavor rather to judge 
them, not according to their imperfect works, but according 
to their profession of heart; and we look to see whether 
we can find in them some evidences of the development of the 
fruits of the holy Spirit; for we are not to reject any one who 
gives evidence of heart loyalty to God and the principles of 
righteousness. THE ANTITYPICAI, DAVID OIASS 

Our text appeals to us all in connection with the high 
calling of the Gospel age; and year by year we realize more 
and more its general applicability. Like the Prophet Samuel, 
we are the Lord's messengers seeking for those who are to be 
anointed with the oil of gladness, the holy Spirit, that they 
may be kings and priests unto God in his kingdom. We too, 
like the prophet, might fear to proceed with this work of 
anointirfg if we did not realize that the work of sealing the 
elect is a secret work which the world cannot understandIndeed
, no one can understand this matter of the sealing, the 
anointing of the holy Spirit, except those who have received it 
themselves — the David class, the beloved of the Lord. 

The name David signified beloved; and as it applied especially
 to our Lord, of whom Jehovah said, "This is my heloved
 son," so also it applies to all the members of the body 
of Christ. Each of these must be beloved; else he cannot be 
accepted as a member. To such the Head says, "The Father 
himself loveth you"; and again he admonishes us to love one 
another as he has loved us. (John 15:12) It is not too 
much to say that all who receive this anointing of the Lord 
must ultimately be of this David, or beloved, character. The 
spirit of love must be in them — love for the Lord and love for 
one another; else they are none of his. 

In seeking for the Lord's anointed who shall by and by 
reign in Millennial glory for the blessing of all the families 
of the earth, we notice that as in the type David was accounted 
by his brethren too insignificant to be considered in connection
 with Samuel's mission, so also in the antitype. Our Lord 
Jesus was disesteemed of his brethren; and when the suggestion
 was made that he should be the Lord's anointed, his 
people hid as it were their faces from him — disdained him, despised
 him, and considered him hopeless in regard to anything 
great or glorious — "as a root out of dry ground." The same 
has been true respecting the members of his body, the true, 
elect church. They also have been despised and rejected of 
men. Of this class the Apostle declares that they are accounted
 as the filth and offseouring of the world, considered 
fools for Christ's sake. — I Corinthians 4:10-13. 

Again St. Paul declares that not many great, wise, mighty 
or noble hath God chosen, but the foolish, the weak, the despised
, in, order that no flesh might boast in his presence. 
(1 Corinthians 1 : 26-29) St. James presents the same thought, 
saying, "God hath chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, 
and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them 
that love him." (James 2:5) This principle of the divine 
selection of things that are not esteemed amongst men, in 
order to bring to naught those things which are esteemed 
by men, is noticeable throughout the Gospel age. 


VII— 32 


[6317] 


(Jo2 <!6.1) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Hrookian, \\ V. 


Often ihave we. like the Prophet Samuel, looked about us 
amongst men seemingly eligible to a place in the kingdomr— 
looked upon those high in position, socially, intellectually, morally
, educationally, and in the esteem of men — and have expected
 that sureiy the Lord would sanction their anointing 
with the "oil of gladness" and would grant them a knowledge 
of the truth pertaining to the kingdom, only to find ourselves
 mistaken and to be reminded afresh that God looketh 
not upon the outward appearance, but on the heart. 

We concede that we are unable to read the heart; but we 
are satisfied to accept the divine decision in such matters 
and to trust tfaat when in due time all the secrets of this 


present life shall have been disclosed, we shall be able to understand
 the meaning of the Lord's selections more completely 
than we do now. We shall tiien be able to see what a difference
 there was between the hearts of those whom he accepted
 and the hearts of those whom, though outwardly 
humble, he did not so highly favor in respect to the kingdom 
call. Meantime, we must simply wait, trusting the Lord and 
accepting his decisions, even as' did our dear Redeemer when 
he said: "I thank thee, Father^ Lord of heaven and earth, because
 thou hast hidden these things from the wise and prudent
, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, Father; 
for so it seemed good in thy sight." — Luke 10:21. 


ST. PAUL'S LONGING OURS 


"For 1 am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to dep&rt 
The Apostle's longing was for the time of Christ's second 
presence when he*, with all others who love Christ's appearing
, would receive that reward for which they had labored 
and in comparison with which all the prizes of present fame 
seemed dwst and air. We are now living in the time to which 
the Apostle looked forward, On Scriptural evidence elsewhere
 presented we believe that Christ's return has taken 
place and that, having raised the sleeping meimibers of his 
body, he is now taking a hand in the affairs of earth, preparatory
 to a complete establishment of his kingdom of blessing
. 

We are living in the time where all the rays of prophetic 
light centre, the slightest knowledge of which was sufficient 
to spur to deeds of unparalleled bravery, to heights of incomparable
 moral courage, the faithful ones of past ages. If a 
distant view of this time thrilled them and enabled them 
to prove faithful against all manner of odds, is there not a 


and to be with Christ, which is far better." — Philippians 1:23, 
thousand times more cause for us living here and now? 

If deatin seemed gain to Paul, though he knerw he would 
have a long period of waiting in the grave, is it not much 
more gain for us w!ho do not need to sleep, but who may be 
changed "in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye?" To the 
faithful everything is to gain and nothing to lose! Can any 
sacrifice seem too great, any pain too keen, if we can but win 
Christ and be found in him ? What if we are sown in diphonor
? We shall be raised in glory. 

If we can share the unutterable joy of joining in that 
resplendent pageant, that magnificent cavalcade, that heavenly 
train, every one of them a miracle of grace, every one 
a radiant jewel to reflect the exceeding riches of God's love 
eternally, if we can join that train as it leaves earth and 
wends its way past moon, sun and stars, past angels, principles 
and powers to the smile of God ftimself, we too shall know 
that ^Tjeing with Christ, which is far better." 


THE DIVINE SANCTUARY AS SEEN IN EZEKIEL'S VISION 

STUDY II 

THiC LIVING WOBD CONDITIONS DETERMINED BY THE INDWELLING WORD AIX-IMl'OBTANCE OF THE W T OBD OF GOD CONDITIONS TYPED 

IN TABEBNACLE AND TEMPLE 


What the world of mankind needs above all things else is 
life, everlasting existence. 

"I am came," said our hlessed Savior, "that they might 
have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. " 
(John 10:10) Ohrist might have said: "That they might have 
the Word of God*' ; for of the Word he said, '"The words that 
I speak unto you, they are life*.'* (John 6:63) In a way 
we cannot appreciate until in the kingdom, the Word of 
God has life, as says Paul: "The W 7 ord of God is living 
(•quick' as in 'the quick and the dead')"; Peter adds: "The 
word of God, which liveth and abideth forever." — Hebrews 
4:12; 1 Peter 1:23. 

It is the indwelling Word that brings life everlasting to 
beings on <ftny plane of existence. Having the Word is equivalent
 to having in the very being Ohrist, who is the Word. As 
says John, "His name is called the Word of God" (Revelation
 19:13) ; and, "We have heard, and seen with our eyes, 
have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word 
of life." (1 John 1:1) It was the new creature, the new 
mind, the divine mind, that constituted Christ; it was the 
word in 'him that had life and was alive, begotten to divinity. 
Whoever has the Word of God appropriate to his plane of being
, has life, and is or will be in Christ, on the proper plane, 
As says Paul: (<r He [Codl'will gather together in one [family
] all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which 
are on earth.'* (Ephosians 1:10) He will have the Son, and 
with tha Son have life. "He that hath the Son hath life" (1 
John 5:12), and with clearer reference to the Word. "He that 
helieveth on the Son [has his words] hath life." Conversely, 
in the lacking of the words of Ghri«t. U death; for "Tie that 
helieveth not the Son [has not Christ's words within him] 
shall not see life, but the wrath [evidences of divine wrath in 
imperfection and disease of mind and body] of God abideth on 
him."— John 3:36. 

ALL-IMPORTANCE OF GOD'S WORD 

It is the possession of the Word of God peculiar to a 
certain plane of being in the kingdom of God that causes 
and will cause a person to become a being on that plane. "As 
he [a man] thinketh in his heart, ho is he." (Proverbs 23:7) 
The inner thoughts determine the plane or condition of a being 
in the finished work. A man who meditates upon fallen earthly 
things is of the earth, earthy," a fallen, imperfect man. One 
who meditates upon the Word of God relating to justification
 by faith is tentatively justified. Another whose meditations
 are, through the indwelling Word, partly upon spiritual 
things and partly upon earthly, is begotten to the spirit nature
 and in the resurrection will be a member of the groat 


company, upon the spirit plane. Still another whose heart 
meditations are concerning the things of God, the divine 
characteristics, and who makes it his one great end to live a 
godlike life, is begotten to the divine nature, to the nature 
of God, to divinity, and in the resurrection will be a divine 
being, on the divine plane, of the divine condition. — 2 Peter 
1:4. 

For, explains Paul, "God giveth it [the seed, the mind, the 
•character that survives in the resurrection] a body [an, imperfect
 body, a perfect earthly body, a spirit body, or a divine
 body] as it hath pleased him [according to the divine 
pleasure that as a man thinketh so is he], and to every seed 
[every mind or character] its own body [the body befitting 
the mind or character]." (1 Corinthians 15:38) "Minds are 
composed of thoughts, and thoughts are expressed in words; 
and according to the words which are in a man's mind so is 
determined the plane or condition of the man in the resurrection
. 

No greater lesson is taught by Tabernacle or Teanple 
than the all-importance of the Word of God. Nearly every 
feature of these divinely provided buildings teaches concerning
 the Word of God." In a sense, the Tabernacle and the 
Temple teach about two things, the Word and the flesh. The 
mind of God is expressed relating to the mind and character 
development necessary to be pleasing to God on the divine 
spirit, perfect huiman and depraved human planes, and the 
privilege and duties to be carried out in the use and disposition
 of the fleshly bodies of the members of the various 
classes developed from the Adamic race, the world of mankind
. THOUGHTS DETERMINE DESTINY 

For example, in the Tabernacle sin offering of the day of 
atonement, the Word of God for the divinely begotten new 
creatures, typed in the high priest at the brazen altar, is to 
slay and burn up the appointed portions of tho fleshly goat, 
in the prescribed manner, and for the animal to be slain and 
consumed exactly as God had directed, while the justified flesh, 
typed in the copper of the altar, is directed to bear continuously
 the fiery trials, for the sacred altar fire was never to be 
allowed to go out. It is the indwelling Word of God relating
 to each plane that constitutes the being on each plane 
what he is; the justified human being a justified one, the 
sacrificing priest a sacrificer, the divinely begotten priest offering
 up his heart's best endeavors; the Christ applying the 
merit in behalf of the world, the satisfier for sin ; and finally 
the glorious and higihly exalted blesser of the people, the benefactor
 of all humanity. 

Each being is what he is through the power of the Word, 


[63183 


SEPTEMBER 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(J63-264) 


God thus "working in him to will and to do." (Philippians 
2:13) As Paul says: "God make you perfect in every good 
work, 1 to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing
 in his sight, through [the words of] Jesus Christ; to 
whom be [the] glory [honor] for ever and ever." (Hebrews 
13:20, 21) "For we are his [God's] workmanship [through 
the indwelling Word] ereated [made so] in [the indwelling 
Word of] Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before
 ordained that we [tihe Christ primarily; ultimately all on 
all planes who shall through the Word be in Christ] should 
walk in them. It is [all] the gift of God [through God's 
Word]." (Ephesiana 2:10, 9) Every being in every condition
 [plane] is and will be what he is through God's Son, 
through whom as the Divine Logos [Word, Spokesman] "God 
hath m these last days spoken unto us by his Son, who upholding
 all things by the word of his [God's] power [hath] 
sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high."— Hebrews
 1:1-3. PLACE SYMBOL OF OOKDITION 

In both Tabernacle and Temple a place types a condition
. The condition represented bv each place is determined 
by that to which the Word pertains which finds lodgment in 
the mind and the heart of each being and find 3 expression 
in the thought^, words and acts, habits and character in the 
flesh; for God shall judge all men according to the deeds 
(deeds are the expression of thought, mind, word) done in the 
flesh, whether the deeds be good or whether they be evil, and 
"out of the abundance of the heart [mind, affection, will, purpose
] tlhe mouth speaketh" (Matthews 12:34) ; and out of the 
same abundance proceed the acts that make the character; and 
character determines destiny. 

A person whose mind contains nothing but the ideas, words, 
of fallen humanity, however good tihose ideas may be, and 
who is in no covenant relationship with God, is in the condition
 typed in the Tabernacle "outside the camp." He is "dead 
in trespasses and sins" (Ephesiana 2:1) ; he "shall of the 
flesh reap corruption" (Galatians 6:8) ; he is judicially dead 
because "the wrath of God abideth on him'* (John 3:36) ; and 
he "shall not see life," because none of the living and lifegiving
 words are received into his mind, as a seed into good 
soil, into a good and honest heart. In the Divine Sanctuary of 
Kzekiel this condition is symbolized by the land outside the 
sanctuary. 

The condition of those w r ho have indwelling the Word of 
God relating to the perfect human nature is symbolized in the 
Temple by the Outer Court and its gates. In the Gospel age 
and in the ages preceding the Gospel age, this condition) 
appears in the eastern portion of the Outer Court and in the 
east gate of the Outer Court. During the period prior to the 
Gfoepel age, justification was had only tentatively by tihe 
ancient worthies, and is figured in t(he east gate oi tihe Outer 
Court as far in as over the threshold of the porch. Tentative
 justification during the Gospel age is depicted in the 
same manner. The vitalized justification of the Gospel age 
and tihe vitalization of the justification of the ancient worthies
 — their "better resurrection" — are symbolized in the porch] 
of the east gate of the Outer Court, and in the part of the 
Outer Court between the east gates of tihe Outer and Inner 
Courts. PRIESTS IN THE TEMPLE 

In the Tabernacle the condition of tentative justification 
is typed in the Court by the space between the gate of the 
Court and the door of the Holy. The condition of vitalized 
justification is not definitely and separately typed; and if at 
all, it is obscurely represented in the Court for the priests 
and for tihose Levites typing the great company, when they 
are in the Court. The fleshly justified bodies of those In tOie 
Gospel ag'e who have received the holy Spirit, may be regarded
 in two ways; (1) as dead justified bodies, whose inward
 fat (loving inward zeal) and vital organs (representing 
the life itself) are being consumed on the altar, or (2) as 
living justified bodies suffering on the cross. "By him all that 
believe are justified from all things, from which we could not 
be justified by the law of Moses" (Acts 13:39), and "being 
justified by faitfh, we [the little flock] have peace toward God," 
and "a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law." 
—Romans 5:1; 3:28. 

The condition of those glorious ones who have been "more 


than over comers/' have become "partakers of the nature of 
God," and have won the great reward of divinity, is typed 
in both Tabernacle and Temple in the Most Holy. In both 
Solomon's and Kzekiel'^ Temples the Most Holy is given the 
significant name of "The Oracle." The expression '"oracle" 
means the Word of God, and suggests that in the condition 
of divinity, the Christ, Head and body, will together be the 
Word of God, the sole channel of expression of the divine 
will, plan and purposes. 

In both Tabernacle and Temple the condition of those begotten
 to the divine nature, is typed in the Holy. As tihe 
walls of the Holy in the Tabernacle and the articles therein, 
typing the Christ, are of gold, typing the divine nature, it is 
signified that tihose begotten to divinity, and having the divine 
mind, have divinity in the sense that it they do not let slip, 
or lose, the treasure they have received, they will surely have 
the divine nature in heaven. They have divinity tentatively, 
just as the tentatively justified hnve justification tentatively, 
or in a probationary manner. The condition typed by the 
Holy may be termed tentative divinity. 

LEVITES IN THE TEMPLE 

In the Temple the condition of the great company , who 
will be born of the spirit, but not to the divine nature, is 
clearly represented in uhe east gate of the Inner Court, and 
the spirit- born condition of the great company is symbolized 
in the Inner Court, The little flock and the great company 
are both begotten to divinity in the porch of the Temple 
building. The little flock retain in their bodies the wonderful 
treasure of the words of God relating to divinity, to perfect
 love, and so let those words find free course in their 
bodies, that they will be accounted worthy of the first resurrection
 to. glory, honor, and immortality. 

A very- largo class of those begotten to this divine nature 
and entering and being in the Holy for a time, prove unfaithful
, and are put out of the Holy into the east gate of the 
Inner Court. In the resurrection they will find themselves 
members of the great company, servants of the priesthood, 
Levites, and their begetting of the Spirit will be, because of 
its outcome, as though they had been begotten in the porch 
of the east gate of the Inner Court. They are portrayed by 
Paul, "Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, 
which is [being in] Jesus Christ. I have laid the foundation 
[of the words about being in Christ] and another buildetih 
thereon. The fire [searching judgment or inspection of divine 
justice] shall try every man's work. If any man's work shall 
be burned [exposed as not of divine love] he shall suffer loss 
(of the divine nature) ; but he himself shall be saved [as a 
spirit-born member of the great company]"; and, "I deliver 
such an one La apir it-begotten one turned to following after 
the flesh] unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that 
the spirit [the spirit-begotten being] may be saved." — 1 Corinthians
 3:10-15; 5:5. 

HOW FTJKOTIONS ARE TYPED 

As the Tabernacle type is intended for the instruction of 
the little flock, the condition of the great company is only 
obscurely typed. Hie great company are begotten, with the 
little flock, in the Holy to the divine nature; but the great 
company, proving measurably unfaithful, are put out of the 
Holy into the court. Thenceforth they are typed as Levites, 
not distinquished from other Levites, who type believers not 
having the spirit, until the end of the Gospel age. At a time 
still future, and designated Scriptural^ as the fall of ecclesiasticism
 (the city), all the Levites typing mere believers will 
go out of the court condition and leave in the court the 
Levites typing the great company. While the court does not 
there type the spirit-begotten condition of the great company, 
they are the only ones left in the court condition. From this 
fact it is easily seen how the Inner Court of the Temple, which 
corresponds in location to the Court of the Tabernacle, symbolizes
 the condition of the great company. 

In the Tabernacle the functions or offices of the various 
classes are symbolized by the use of things in the various 
places. In the Temple their functions and offices are symbolized
 in the pavements or spaces surrounding tihe Outer and 
Inner Courts proper and those surrounding the Holy of the 
Temple building. 


ABRAM LEAVING HOME 

October 6. — Genesis 12:1-0. 

divine plan of salvation foreshadowed in abraham's experiences — his call to seperate himself from his native land, 

nis kindred and his father's family — the great covenant which god made with him — how followers of christ 

become part of the seed of abraham — this seed to be multitudinous — its work. 

"Be thou a blessing" — Verse 2. 

Father of the faithful is a title which is justly applied all history. The most enlightened peoples of earth look back 

to the patriarch Abraham, one of the grandest characters in to him as the divinely appointed channel through whom all 

[6319] 


(.'65-2o6) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


their religious hopes and prospects have been received. God's 
promises made to Abraham constitute the foundation of faith 
for Jews, Christians and Mohammedans, although many of 
them are not aware of this fact. 

The Jews are Abraham's descendants through Isaac and 
Jacob; while the Mohammedans represent especially the Ishmaelite
, Keturah and Esau branches of Abraham's family. Christians
 profes9 to have become heirs to the chief est blessings 
promised to Abraham's seed by becoming heirs and joint-heirs 
with Christ Jesus, whom they consider the antitype of Isaac 
and the heir to all things. The Now Testament claims that 
the church of Christ, composed partly of Jews and partly of 
Gentiles, is the antitype of Rebecca, Isaac's wife and jointheir
. In this picture Abraham typified Jehovah God, Isaac 
typified Jesus Christ, and Rebecca the cihurch. The New Testament
 teaches that this spiritual seed of Abraham is yet to 
be God's agency in blessing all the nations of the world.— 
Ualatians 3:8, 16, 29; 4:22-31. 

FOLLY OF REJECTING THE BIBLE BECOBD 
Alas, how much of the New Testament teaching was lost 
sigtht of during the darkness of medieval times! Christians 
forgot their high calling, forgot that the Messianic kingdom 
was yet to bless all the families of the earth. Instead, they 
got the narrow view that merely the saintly elect would be 
saved at all, and that to all eternity this little flock would 
look over the battlements of heaven and see the remainder of 
mankind in torture, groaning in un tellable anguish to all eternity
. Only now are Bible students gradually getting freed 
from these erroneous teachings and coming back to the truth 
of God's Word. Only now are we learning the true import of 
St. Paul's words to the church: "If ye be Christ's, then are ye 
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise" made to 
him, as recorded in today's lesson. 

Under such circumstances one would think that every 
Jew, every Christian, every Mohammedan, would have absolute
 confidence in the fact that Abraham once lived. Indeed, 
it has been merely tiheir confidence in the promises whicih 
God made to their great ancestor Abraham that has held the 
Jews together as a nation, and that has gathered Christians 
from all nations to be heirs of that same promise. What excuse
 would the Jews have, living as they do in every nation 
and speaking many languages, for continuing to keep themselves
 Jews at all if they repudiate the peculiar promises of 
God whioh relate to them as a people and which caused them 
originally to remain separate from all other peoples, according
 to divine instructions and in hope of a blessing ultimately? 
The Jew or the Christian who would repudiate Abraham 
as a mythical personage would simply make himself ridiculous 
in the eyes of all intelligent thinkers. Such an individual 
would do himself credit to renounce all claim to either 
Judaism or Christianity, and thereby he would benefit those 
from whose company he would thus separate himself. 

Abraham's birthplace was Ur of the Ohaldees, the ruins 
of which are now called Mugheir, a mound on the western 
bank of the Euph rates, one hundred and twenty miles to the 
north of the Persian Gulf. This land is thought by modem 
scholars to have been about the size of Scotland, and it was 
known as the richest portion of Asia, His father Terah was 
a heathen. Polytheism, the worship of many gods, prevailed 
throughout this region. Jewish legends tell us that as a boy 
Abram, as he was originally named, loathed the vices with, 
which he was surrounded. W T hen only fourteen years old he 
refused to join with the family in idol worship, and on one 
occasion destroyed seventy-two costly images. 

GOD'S CALL TO ABRAHAM IK US 
From Ur the family migrated to Haran, about five hundred
 miles to the northwest and in the direction of Palestine. 
There Abram remained until his father Terah's death, when, 
he moved to the land of Canaan. According to the account 
given by St. Stephen (Acts 7:2, 3) God's dealings with 
Abram began while he was still in Ur. This city was then 
situated on the Persian gulf, whose waters have receded more 
than one hundred miles since that time. Ur is said to havo 
been a great maritime city, built with a wall and having a 
high degree of civilization and a large commerce. God called 
Abram out of the midst of its evil surroundings in order that 
he migfot be the founder of a new nation that would be holy 
and obedient to God. The words of the call are not fully given, 
nor are we informed of the manner in which it was conveyed. 
It is sufficient for us to know that *he recognized the message 
as from God and that he rendered prompt obedience. 

Evidently the Lord fixed no earlier date than the death 
of Terah for Abraham's going into Canaan. Otherwise the 
latter would not have been justified in delaying to go until 
after that event. Doubtless he had something to do with the 
migration from Ur to Haran. It took them away from the 


idolatrous scenes of the metropolis to the quieter conditions 
of pastoral life, and would be recognized by Abraham as a 
step in the right direction, a step toward Canaan, so that on. 
the death of his father he could quickly enter upon the divine 
arrangement. 

THE ESSENCE OF THE PEOMIBE 
A portion of the call is recorded: "Get thee out of thy 
country and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, 
unto a land that I will show thee; and I will make of thee 
a great nation, and I will bless thee and make thy name great; 
and thou shall be a blessing; and I will bless them that bless 
thee; and in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
—Verses 1-3. 

In harmony with this call Abraham, who was then seventy 
five years old, took up his journey at the death of his father 
Terah and went to the land of Canaan. There were no landed 
estates in those days. The land was free to all. Sometime before
 this, Abraham's elder brother, Nahor, had married and 
had set up an establishment of his own. His other brother, 
Haran, had died, as had also his father Terah. Abraham had 
married his half-sister Sarah; and together with his nephew 
Lot, the son of his elder brother Haran, he removed his flocks 
and herds to Canaan, so called because inhabited by the descendants
 of Canaan. — Genesis 10:18. 

The Bible makes a clear distinction between faith and 
credulity. Abraham was not credulous, but filled with faith 
in God. This featureof his character especially endeared him 
to the Almighty, who 1 v cause of that faith styled Abraham 
his friend. As St. Paul writes: "Abraham believed God, and 
it was accounted to him for rig \teousIless. !, (Galatians 3:6) 
The Bible does not claim that Abraham was perfect, nor that 
any other member of the fallen race of man is perfect. On 
the contrary, the very reverse of this ia declared: "There is 
none rigthteous [perfect], no, not one. . . . All have sinned 
and come short of the glory of God." (Romans 3:10-23) No 
human being measures up to the glorious image of God, as 
first it was represented in father Adam. Although Abraham 
had the weaknesses incidental to the fallen condition of the 
human race, yet withal he had a noble character. 

Abraham was not the friend of God because of his perfection
 as a man, nor because of his great education, nor because 
of any wonderful intellectual powers, None of his attainments 
are held up to us as a basis of his special favor from God 
and his special relationship to the Almighty. Nevertheless, 
we see that he had intellectual powers. The fact that he was 
very ricih indicates that he was a good manager. His skill as 
a leader of men and as a general was shown at the time when 
Lot and all the wealthy Sodomites were taken captive by King 
Chedorlaomer and his associates. In the most matter of fact 
language we are told that Abraham promptly armed three 
hundred and eighteen of his own servants, pursued the victors, 
routed them by strategy and recovered the spoils.— Gen. 
14:8-16. OHHJ>EEN OF ABRAHAM 

But it was not for his skill as a general, nor for his generosity
 in dealing with the spoils nor for Ids generosity on 
other occasions that God loved Abraham. The quality in him 
that God esteemed is repeatedly mentioned in the Bible as 
his faith. "Abraham believed God." He did not lean to his 
own understanding, did not believe in his own imaginations 
or in those of other men or in dreams or fancies. To have God 
as a friend and guide is to be esteemed far beyond every earthly 
blessing. 

From the divine standpoint Abraham's children include only 
those who have a faith in God similar to that of the patriarch
. The original evidence of his faith and obedience was the 
rite of circumcision of the flesh, which figuratively represented 
a turning away from sin to be obedient to> God and thus 
to become inheritors with Abraham of the promise made to 
him and to his seed. To the Jews circumcision has become 
largely a mere ceremony, in which they have little or no 
faith. Such faithless observance of the rite entitles them to 
no special favor from the Almighty. But all Jews who still 
trust in the God of Abraham and in the wonderful promises 
made to their great ancestor are subject to divine favor and, 
according to our understanding of the Bible, will soon be recipients
 of marked evidences of that favor at the hands of 
the glorious Messiah, the long-promised seed of Abraham, who 
is soon to set up God's kingdom and to bless all the families 
of the earth. 

St. Paul explains that all Christians who faithfully carry 
out their part of the individual covenant which they have 
made with God, whether they came originally from Jews or 
Gentiles, become the spiritual ^oed of Abraham, heirs of certain
 spiritual promises not yet fulfilled. But the Apostle tells 
us that as the natural seed must maintain their faith in circumcision
, to mark their separateness from the Gentiles, so 


[6320] 


Srptkmber 


1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(266-^.7) 


the spiritual seed must have an antitypical circumcision of 
the heart, still more effective, separating them from the world 
and from sin, marking them oil* as God's peculiar people 
zealous of good works. — Titus 2:14. 

We therefore exit or t both Jews and Christians to honesty 
and faithfulness, to obedience to God; the one class, that they 
may inherit the heavenly promises ; the other class, that they 
may be ready for the inheritance of the earthly promises, which 
will be theirs as soon as the heavenly, spiritual seed of 
Abraham shall have been completed by their change of 
nature in the first resurrection. The return of Palestine 
to the Jewish people is a marked evidence that soon God will 
deal with his chosen nation as in the days of old/; but first 
must come "the time of Jacob's trouble," after which they 
will recognize their Messiah, as the Scriptures foretell.- — 
Zedhariah 12:9, 10. 

THE GBEAT OATH-BOUND COVENANT 

The great promise made to Abraham, and confirmed to 
Isaac and to Jacob, reads thus: "In thy seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." This promise was for the 
future, not for the patriarch's own time. The world was not 
blessed in Abraham's day, nor did he have even one child at 
the time this promise was given. Isaac did not fulfil this 
promise; for it was repeated to him and later to his son 
Jacob. (Genesis 26:1-5; * 28:12-15) Isaac was merely a 
type of the greater seed of Abralham who in due time would 
bless all mankind. Jacob and his descendants, the twelve 
tribes, fleshly Israel, still looked for a great Messiah to fulfil
 uhe promise, to bless them and through them all the families
 of the earth. 

The Apostle Paul referred to this covenant made with 
Abraham, and declared that the seed of Abraham therein 
mentioned is the Christ. All Christians agree to tihis, even 
though they have not distinctively and properly associated it 
with the declaration of the promise. But the Apostle makes 
it clear to us that Ghrist is the seed of Abraham, that Jesus 
is the Head of the Christ, and that the overcoming saints of 
the Gospel age are the body. In other words, the long-promised
 seed of Abraham which is to bless all the world is not 
an individual, but a composite body. This is distinctly indicated
 in Genesis 22:17, where the heavenly seed is likened to 
the stars of heaven, a multitudinous company. 

The spiritual seed of Abraham, then, is the Gospel church, 
Jesus the Head and the church the body. (Galatians 3:29) 
It follows, then, tfhat this seed could not be completed until 
tihe full end of the harvest of the Gospel age is reached. That 
time is here, we believe. What a wonderful thought is involved
 in tfbis plain interpretation of the Word of God! It is 
filled with hope for spiritual Israel, the spiritual seed, for 
fleshly Israel, the natural seed, and ultimately the Millennial 
blessings for all the families of the earth. 

THE VEBT CREAM OF THE PROMISE 
To the churcti of Ghrist belongs the very cream of the 
Abrahajnic Covenant, "tihe riches of God's grace." The promise
 implies the greatness of the seed of Abraiham, the Lord 
Jesus Christ and the overcoming church of the Gospel age. 
This greatness is so wonderful as to be almost beyond human 
comprehension. Those who during the Gospel dispensation make 
their calling and election sure in Christ are to be joint heirs 
with him in the glorious Millennial kingdom which is to- be 
God's agency in bringing about the promised blessing of all 
mankind. To whatever extent we are able to grasp the meaning
 of these wonderful promises, they speak to us of blessings, 
favors, "exceedingly abundantly more than we could ask or 
think."— Ephesians 3:20. 

The second class to be blessed under the Abrahaanic 
Covenant is fleshly Israel. We are not forgetting that God 
declared them to be a stiff-necked, rebellious people; that they 
slew the prophets and crucified our Lord. Nevertheless, the 
Scriptures clearly hold that after they have had a period of 
chastisement, wthich they have been undergoing since our Lord's 
crucifixion, and after spiritual Israel shall have been glorified
 in the kingdom, then a blesbing from the Lord will come 
upon natural Israel. They shall be saved or recovered from 
their blindness: and as the prophet declares, "They shall look 
upon me whom they have pierced and they shall mourn for 
him/' for the 'eyes of their understanding shall be opened. 
We rejoice, too, that the Lord will pour upon them "the 
spirit of grace and supplication." This God will do, not because
 of their worthiness, but because of his promise made to 
the fathers; for this is his covenant with them when he shall 
take away their sins. 

But if God is to have mercy upon the natural Israelites, 
whom he declares to have been still-necked, hard-hearted and 
rebellious, would it surprise us that his benevolent purposes 
should be to bless others than the Jews — others who in the 
past did not have the privileges of that favored nation, and 
whose course therefore was less in opposition to the light? It 
should not surprise us; and so we find in this great oathbouixl
 covenant a blessing for all nations, all peoples. Let us 
look at the promise again, remembering that our heavenly 
Father made it deliberately and subsequently bound himself 
to its provisions by an oath, and that therefore without a 
peradventure this promise shall be fulfilled. It reads: "In 
thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." — Hebrews
 6:13-19. 

What is the blessing so much needed by all mankind? It 
is the very blessing which Jesus declared that he came to give, 
saying, "I am come that they might have life, and that they 
might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10) It is life 
that the whole world needs; and our Lord Jesus declares himself
 to he the great life-giver. Indeed, in the Syriac language, 
in which our Lord probably discoursed, the word life-giver is 
the equivalent to our word savior. Jesus came to save mankind
 from sin and its just penalty of death. It is a human 
invention of the dark ages to attach eternal torment as the 
penalty for sin. It is the divine arrangement to attach to 
sin a reasonable, just, but terrible penalty — death. It is because
 all mankind are sinners that the race is a dying one; 
and for our Lord to give life implies that he will take away 
the sin and all necessity for this penalty. Hence "Christ died 
for our sins." ftjTTJKE OP HEATHEN PEOPLE 

The clear teachings of the Scriptures are to the effect that 
at the present time salvation is only for the church class, who 
are the spiritual seed of Abraham under our Lord Jesus Christ 
the Head of this seed; and that when this Christ company 
shall have been completed, a blessing shall extend to every 
member of the Adamic race, the blessing of a full opportunity 
to know the Lord, to understand the advantages of righteousness
 and to choose oetween obedience and everlasting life, on 
the one hand, and disobedience and everlasting death on the 
other. 

The blessings of the future will be of such a kind that 
every one who has not had a full opportunity during this 
present life will have it then. This will not be an opportunity 
to become members of the little flock, the spiritual seed of 
Abraham, not an opportunity to have part in the great change 
from human nature to divine, not an opportunity to sit with 
the Lord in his throne, but an opportunity to obtain that which 
was lost in Eden — human perfection, everlasting life under human
, earthly, paradisaical conditions — an opportunity of coming
 again into the divine likeness, abnost obliterated in the 
human family during the six thousands years of the fall. 

Surely the hearts of the Lord's people are stimulated as 
they contemplate the meaning of the great Abrahamic Covenant
! It gives our souls encouragement as we perceive how 
gracious is the character of our heavenly Father, how wonderful
 is the plan which he has devised for the salvation of 
mankind, and how wisely he has carried it forward step by 
step up to the present hour 1 . By his grace we are what we are. 
By divine favor we have been called to joint-he irship with 
our Redeemer as members of the seed of Abraham, which in 
the near future will begin the great work of blessing all the 
families of the earth. 


TWO KINDS OF LIFE AT THE SAME TIME 


The word life may be used in different ways. No one 
but our Lord ever had a right to two kinds of life at once. 
He had a right to human life; for having been made flesh, 
he committed no sin and never violated or forfeited his right 
to life. He was always obedient to the divine law. His life 
was not taken from him ; as he declared, he laid it down of 
himself, (John 10:17-18) The Father's reward gave to him a 
new life, on the divine plane. Hence he had the right also to 
the divine life. He therefore had a right to two lives. Our Lord 
is to give his human life to the world of mankind, and the offer 
or gift of this life will be made during the thousand years of 


his reign on earth. If he were still a man, and should give that 
human life away, he would have no life for himself; for when 
he would apply his life for Adam, he would lose life altogether. 
But this right to life on two planes of being has never 
been ours, as disciples of Christ, We were born under sentence
 of death. We had no right to life on any plane. God 
never recognized us as having even earthly rights. The 
Apostle Paul says, "The life that I now live in the flesh, I 
live by faith of the Son of God." (Galatians 2:20) Before 
this he was in a dying condition, and the whole world is 
dead in trespasses and in sins. 


[6321] 


( 268 270) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BuooiaYjr, N\ Y. 


The only life-right the Lord's people have is spiritual, although
 actually they still have a measure of human life. Our 
work now is the laying down of the earthly life with ChriBt. 
Our human body is being sacrificed. It is reckoned dead, but 
it is really dying daily. As new creatures we nave life and 
a right to life, as recognized by God. The Apostle John says, 
'The world knoweth us not, because it knew him not/' (1 
John 3:1) So then, we are dual beings while in the flesh, 


though we are not dual-minded. The world does not understand
 this. The world did not know that Christ Jesus was 
a dual being when here on earth, after his consecration and 
baptism in Jordan. They knew not that he had a right to 
two lives — the one which he had not yet fully laid down, and 
the one which he had not yet fully assumed, life on the divine 
plane. 


ABRAM HELPING LOT 

[Paragraphs 1 to 11 of this article were reprinted from the article entitled, "Abraham was Very Rich," published in issue 
of January 15, 1913. The remainder was reprinted from the article, "The Oath-Bound Covenant," published in issue of February
 15, 1907. Please see the articles named.l 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


Question: What should be our attitude toward those who 
have withdrawn from our meetings and are in opposition to 
present truth? 

Answer: Those in opposition to the Lord's arrangement 
for this time should be treated according to St. Paul's advice 
to the early church: "Mark them that cause divisions and 
offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and 
avoid them." (Romans 16:17) Mark those wlho arc tending 
toward division. Do not make them your bosom friends; 
do not elect them elders, deacons, etc.; for to do so would be 
to encourage thorn in their wrong course. Do not encourage 
any one who is in a hypercritical condition of mind or who 
finds fault with the brethren. Moreover, do not permit any 
suctti disposition to gain an entrance into your own heart. 
Let us be gentle, courteous, but firm in our dealings with the 
opposers. If any such should approach us, we would shake 
hands with him, just as we would do with any worldling who 
would offer us his (hand; but we would not make of them 
confidential companions, would not fellowship with them. 
Let birds of a feather flock together. Out Lord Jesus is our 
bosom friend, or should be. We desire to be intimate with 
those who have most of his character likeness and who are 
therefore most like him. Counsel with those who have tihe 
spirit of the Lord. 


Question: What are the "heavenly things" mentioned in 
Hebrews 9:23? 

Answer: Under the Law Covenant a series of types cooperated
 — the animals, the sacrificing of the animals by the 
priests, the various parts of the Tabernacle, etc. All these 
were necessary; and the blood also was necessary to their 
cleansing, or purifying, which was there typically accomplished
. In Hebrews 9:23 the Apostle says that the heavenly 
things, the antitypes (the word heavens means the high or 
heaved up things) are purged with better sacrifices than these. 
These better sacrifices we understand to be the sacrifice of 
Jesus and of the church which is his body; and these better 
sacrifices purge the higiher things, typified by the Court, the 
Holy, the Camp, etc. Thus our Lord makes atonement for 
the church and for the world, making full reconciliation for 
iniquity and providing for the bringing in of the everlasting 
condition which God has promised: The words heaven and 
heavenly in this text have no reference to spiritual things. 


"'Dreamer of Dreams!' We take the taunt with gladness, 
Knowing that God, beyond the years men see, 

Hath wrought the dreams that count with them for madnea* 
Into the substance of the life to be." 


TWO GENERAL CLASSES IN THE RESURRECTION 


We have been asked, In view of the fact that some will 
never reach the condition of perfection, how shall we understand
 the words of the Apostle Faul in Acts 24:15, that both 
the just and the unjust are to be resurrected? 

This Scripture seems very plain and simple if we give 
careful attention to what we read. Those Jews who stood by 
and heard the defense of the Apostle before Governor Felix, of 
which the words of Acts 24:15 are a part, had every reason 
to believe that all of the just would have a resurrection- That 
is what they had been taught by their forefathers. And now 
the Apostle Paul was not only reiterating this, their conviction, 
but adding to it. He says, "There shall be a resurrection, both 
of the just and the unjust"; that is to say, the resurrection 
for which God has provided, and which is yet to come, is not 
only for the good, but also for those who are now evil. 

The thought is not that those who remain in an unjust condition
 will be granted a full resurrection. The text does not 
state that all tlhe unjust will be resurrected, brought to perfection
 of life. There are some now justified who will share 
in the resurrection, even as there are others who are not now 
justified who will also have a share in the resurrection. And 
all mankind will have a stfiare in God's provision for a resurrection
. The just will have a special resurrection, which will 
be a reward for their special obedience. But the opportunity 
will during the incoming age be thrown open for all to gain 
everlasting life, through Chrjst. Those who are now just, the 
church clasa, will be "changed in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye/' from the earthly to the heavenly condition*-— made 
perfect spirit beings. Those of the past dispensations, justified
 in God's favor through faith, are to be brought forth perfect
 men, instead of in the condition in which they died — imperfect
 men. This will be after the merit of Christ will have 
been applied for all the world. 

So we have the resurrection of the highest class of the 
just — the "little flock" — on the divine plane; that of the great 
company on a lower plane; that of the ancient worthies on the 
earthly plane — three classes who pass their trial, their testing
, in the present life. But it has been provided in the divine 
plan that the remainder of men may gradually be raised fully 
up, out of every frailty, back to the original perfection that 
Adam had in the beginning. They are unjust now, they have 
never come into relationship with God. The divine purpose 


is that the death of Jesus shall effect the release of the whole 
family from the condemnation in father Adam. Therefore, the 
entire thousand years of the Millennial reign of Christ have 
been set aside for the resurrection of the world. 

HOT ALL THE UNJUST TO BE BESTJBREOTED 

But how large a proportion will profit by this arrangement
 remains to be seen. The Scriptures say that during the 
next age a sinner a hundred years old shall be cut off from 
life altogether. They declare that such a sinner will be but 
a lad, in comparison to what he might have become if he had 
availed himself of the opportunities provided at that time. 
(Isaiaih 65:20. See especially Leeser's translation) It will 
be entirely their own fault if any do not profit by the bless 
ings of that day. Only wilful, personal rejection of God and 
his merciful salvation through Christ will consign any one 
to the second death. 

Note carefully that the Scriptures do not say that all shal] 
participate in the resurrection. How about the justified class ? 
Will they all be resurrected? Oh, no, there will be some who 
have been justified but who will go into the second death. 
And so with the world. After they have had a full opportunity
, under clear light, -whoever then sins wilfully against 
this ligflit, will receive the penalty of the second death. But 
nothing will be lacking, so far as God's provision is concerned
; 

The Lord said, "Xhe hour is coming w<hen all that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and 
alhall come fortih ; they that have done good, unto the resurrection
 of life; and they that have done evil, unto a resurrection 
by judgment." (John 5:28, 29. R. V. and Emphatic Diaglott) 
Tfhose who have pleased God in that they have exercised faith, 
have made consecration of t/hemselves to the Lord, and who 
obeyed the leadings of his providences and his Word — these 
are the ones who have done good. God does not ask any more 
of them than that they shall show their loyalty by doing their 
best, that they shall seek to live in harmony with his will 
according to their ability, whether they lived during this Gospel
 age or during the ages preceding. 

Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the prophets, and all others less 
prominent who are mentioned in Hebrews 11 — these died in 
faith. With these ancient worthies God declared tihat he was 
pleased, and that they shall have a "better resurrection." The 


[6322] 


.September 1, 1918 


T HE IV A T C H TOWER 


(270-271) 


superiority of their resurrection will be that they will be 
awakened perfect human beings; while others of the world will 
have to go through the thousand years to attain perfection. 
BESUEBECTION MEANS MORE THAN AWAKENING 

They thiit have done good will come forth to a resurrection
 of life. Some of these will receive a resurrection of life 
on the human plane, others on the spirit plane, still others 
on the highest order of the spirit plane — the plane of the 
divine nature. Then Jesus tells ua about the other general 
class — those who have done evil. This includes all whom God 
cannot approve and accept. Those who are not accepted are 
those who have not done good according to God's standard; 
they have done evil; they were unjustified. Many of them 
have been respectable, moral people, but they axe not wortihy 
of the "better resurrection." 

These will come forth also that they may attain, if they 
will, complete raising up to life. They will be awakened 
from the tomb in order that they may have a resurrection. 


They will be resuscitated from hades, the grave, the death 
state; but their awakening from the tomb will be only the 
beginning of resurrection. Some will be awakened only to die 
again later, because of failure to accept God's terms of blessing
. 

The resurrection process will go on day by day, week by 
week and year by year during tihose thousand years — the 
great resurrection day, that great day, the last day, during 
which there will be an opportunity for all to gain life eternal. 
But whoever will not make the proper progress will be accounted
 unworthy of a full resurrection. Those only who will 
be adjudged worthy of eternal life on God's terms will get it. 

Thus there will be a resurrection, a bringing up to perfect
 life, both of the just and of the unjust. All that are in 
the graves shall be brought forth, shall come to a knowledge 
of the truth, to the intent that they may be restored, if they 
are willing and obedient, to all that was lost in Adam and 
redeemed by the world's Savior — Christ Jesus our Lord. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 

GREETINGS FEOM THE CINCINNATI CONVENTION withthe context. Additionally, as it stands in the Authorized 

Dkar Bbethren: — Version the text gives no real reason for what God was about 

Jn remembrance of the manifold disinterested and self- to do; for it merely says, "For that he also is flesh," a stateHacrificing
 services rendered by you on our behalf we, the 175 ment which appears superfluous if applied to man, but which 

members of the I. B. S. A. representing churches from five if applied to the sons of God on account of what they had done 

states, assembled today in convention at Cincinnati, herewith by straying away or leaving their "first estate" as Jude says, 

express our heartfelt gratitude to God for your help in our would be a real reason. 

progress toward joint-heir ship with Ghrist Jesus, and assure Assuring you of our appreciation of your past services 
you of our keen appreciation, our deep and abiding love for and a continuance of our love to yourselves and of our loyalty 
you and of our constant bearing of all of you to the throne of to the medium which the Lord has so long used for the proheavenly
 grace. mulgation of the "meat in due season" for the household of 

Yours in the bonds of Christian fellowship, faith, we remain 

I. B. S. A. Convention. Your brethren in the narrow way, 

HID IN THE CLEFT OF THE BOCK F. W. D. and H. R. — England. 

Dear Bbethben in Christ;— in RE "tabernacle shadows" 

We thank our dear heavenly Father and our present Lord Dear Brethren in Christ: — 
for your labors of love on our behalf, and are grateful to him Having found Watch Tower articles invaluable for a 
that it is according to his wisdom that we still receive The thorough study of "Tabernacle Shadows" I enclose a list of 
Watch Tower, which is full of the "meat in due season", and such references from the Towers from 1014-1917. This supplewhich
 is so helpful to the household of faith at this time. We ments a list from Towers from 1907 to 1914, which was pubpray
 that the Lord's blessing may continue to be upon you lished in the issue of August 15, 1915. and which was sent in 
all. How sweet is it to know that througlh all the trials by a brother in California. Possibly you may consider this list 
and temptations of these latter days he knows and cares and is also helpful. 

watching the crucible to see that the precious metal is not in- Every succeeding issue of the Watch Tower is indeed 

jured by the flames, hut that just enough heat is applied to "meat in due season," and we wish to express both our graticleanse
 it of dross so that it may perfectly reflect his glorious tude for your arduous labors on our behalf and our steadfast 

image I t confidence in your devotion as our heavenly Father's human 

How precious is the knowledge of ihis wondrous plan, and agents in directing the closing work of the Gospel harvest and 

the knowledge that he neither slumbers nor sleeps in his watch under the present but unseen Chief Reaper, our blessed Lord, 
care over Zion! We can rest completely in him, always as- Your sister bv his grace. Mrs. A. M. T. — Til. 

sured of his love, and knowing that all things are working " rfffrfncfs 

together for our good and to his glory. Truly it is precious watch tower bkferlnces 

to be hid in the cleft of the rock, where only that part of the r . . SUBJECTS TEAR PAGE 

storm reaches us whieh comes through Jehovah's hand. ffi£i N £5 b2$$T. 1 1 1 .' \ \ \\\\\\\\\\\\\:\\ \ \ ml a? 

Your sister by his favor, D. M. — Kans. Progressive Steps of Justification and Sanctiflcation . . .1914 67 

SUGGESTIONS AS TO AH OBSCURE TEXT The Spirit-Begotten in the Holy 1914 79 

^ » u w** BXAV "° AO iU « "»«"*"»* a** Expiation of Sin— Adamic and Partially Wilful 1914 153 

DEAR BRETHREN: — Legal Expiation by Scape-Goat Class. . .* 1914 154 

At a Berean Study here recently an explanation of Genesis The Antitypical Scape-Goat 1914 155 

6:3 was asked for. Not finding it "explained in the Scripture ^"aSd'will' '.".'. lSil 190 

Studies we investigated with the help of Strong's and Young's Body of Christ No Part "of Ransom' '.'.'.'..'.'.'.'.'/.'.'/.'. '.i9i a 277 

Concordances and Professor Bush's notes on Genesis, and Jesus' Human and Spirit Natures Typified 1914 349 

found that the HeW word ruach .translated ^ spirit .in thU &^™d Vpi&tion of ' bur- L.Vd- , Huin.u Life" 14 " 9 

instance, is the same word translated spirits in Psalm 104 :4 Bights 1915 35 

and has the same thought as the Greek word pneumja, trans- The Church No Part of the Ransom 1915 36 

lated spirits in I Peter 3 :19 and applied to the angels. Would f£°*««? d ^I ^Jft".'. ::::::::: i :\ i ! ! ! \ Mil III 

we be justified in using the word spirits (plural) in Genesis Tne Ransom and the 6m Offering 1916 87 

6:3? Especially seeing that the word "strive" from the He- Value of Scape-Goat's Suffering 1916 89 

XrJTi **"•-? on ft once ^Vw^^w™ troZr^ln^V/S^ ::::::: :::::::::: ziSiS lol 

thought of to rule, m the sense of to control as a sovereign, Hag n an80m Price Been Paid 19 16 108 

and that the word translated "for that he also" is from the When and How is Justice Satisfied? 1916 108 

Hebrew b^hag-g*m, which as a ^*7*™*J^ * » tra ? S^e^^ ! ! ! ! ! ! \ \ '. /lilt III 

or to sin with more or lees apology, is also used only once. Raneom Price Deposited with Divine Justice 1916 183 

If this is so, would it not corroborate the inference of He- Ransoming Work — Legal and Practical Phases 1916 188 

brews 2:2, that the first dispensation was under the control of Scope of Abrahamic Covenant 1916 1«9 

, „ \ j. j ^r»i«« *i,«» A /«.^ nr^Til/t maA +tt«o. Office of Advocate and Mediator Contrasted 1916 220 

angels? A suggested rendering therefore would read thus: .ratification. What? When? How? 1916 281 

"And the Lord said, My spirits shall not always rule man; for Interesting Questions in re Type* 1916 299 

they have strayed away [while being] in flesh; yet their days Af M *p> B » Fo » ow . Typ« at Once 1916 300 

[o/rulingl shall be o/e hundred «fd twenty ye^rs. [longer/" £5 fec^ l\l 

Understanding that God does not strive with sinners and mom* riohist cowohms 

that the words "he also" imply others than man being flesh, THE *»<*" ZIOHIST COKOBBS8 

together with the fact that the one hundred and twenty years Deab Beotheb in the Lobd: — 

referred to evidently did not apply to the age limit of man, Ju3t a note to assure you of our continued love and loyalty 

since Noah, his sons and even Terah lived after the flood much to the Lord, the truth and the brethren, and of our daily petilonger
 than this period, would this not tend to support the tions to the throne of heavenly grace on your behalf. May 

suggested interpretation ? It seemingly is In complete harmony the dear Lord grant that your faith fail not in this the most 

[6338] 


(271-275) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


trying experience in your life. The Pittsburgh friends are 
rejoicing in the opportunity to suffer with you, and the Lord 
is granting the daily strength. 

On Saturday and Sunday we had the pleasure of hearing 
our dear Brother Thorn expound the further unfolding of God's 
plan. He spoke of the restoration of the Jews to their land, 
called the attention to the significance of their Passover Supper
 coming the day following ours, and also to the significance 
of the opening date of the recent Zionist Congress in Pittsburgh
, June 22nd, the day following a most memorable day in 
the history of our Society. Note how in tihis wonderful sequence
 of events the ceremonial and governmental features of 
the movements effected have been kept separate and distinct. 
This Congress accomplished more than did tihe former twenty 
Zionist conventions put together; and we are agreeably surprised
 to learn that it occurred forty years to the month after 
the Congress of Berlin, 1878, the first ray of hope to the Jew 


since the dispersion in 73 A. D. We are also glad to note that 
this important Congress honored the home city of our beloved 
Pastor, who for the past forty years has through his writings 
been calling the attention of the world to the significance of 
that event. 

"A little while, now he has come, 

The hour draws on apace, 
The blessed hour, tihe glorious morn 
When we shall see his face. 
How light our trials then will seem, 
How short our pilgrim way, 
This life of earth a fitful dream, 
Dispelled by dawning day!" 
With further assurance of our daily prayers, and requesting
 your prayers for our guidance, we are 
Your brother and sister in the Lord, 

0. M. & B. I. M.— Pa. 

