From Our Readers
Study Habits
I enjoyed the “Young People Ask . . . ” article about study habits. (August 8, 1984) I thought about my own study habits. I will be in the eighth grade this year and I needed that extra advice. I shared the article with the other kids at school, maybe it will encourage them too. It gave me a good feeling to think that we have others out there who really care for us.
J. B., Kansas
Marmots
In reading the article “The Marmot​—Nature’s Whistle Blower” (September 8, 1984), I was given the impression that marmots are not found in North America, only woodchucks. Since my husband and I have recently been through the Rocky Mountains where we saw marmots on rocky slopes, I thought you would like to know that North America does indeed have them too. I just thought you would like to know it is different from a woodchuck.
S. S., Minnesota
Yes, marmots indeed inhabit the slopes of the northern Rocky Mountains and other western mountains. According to the “Encyclopedia Americana” (1977 edition), America has two marmot species, the siffleur, or whistler, marmot that inhabits the tops of the northern Rocky Mountains and the familiar eastern woodchuck. Our article showed only some of the places where marmots are to be found.​—ED.
The Catholic Church and War
I find the article “I Started Out a Warbird but Ended Up a Dove” (July 22, 1984) very offensive. I wonder if Mr. Hurst realized how offensive his article was! I notice the words spoken by the Roman Catholic priest in 1945 to the writer were in quotes. Those were the words of one priest, and I think many people within any religion often have varying degrees of what is acceptable or not regarding war and peace. I believe this passage to be very hostile to the priest and to all people who share his faith. We, as Roman Catholics, try to love and understand all people and respect their varying views on religion, but I must say I do not like this direct ‘war’ against our greatly loved faith.
E. H., England
The account was definitely not an attack against the Catholic Church. Mr. Hurst recounted the problem that he had as a sincere Roman Catholic contemplating dropping bombs on German cities inhabited mainly by his fellow Roman Catholics. He related correctly the conversation he had with his Catholic chaplain. Not only did Catholic kill Catholic and Protestant kill Protestant by the millions in World Wars I and II, with the full blessing of the clergy on each side, but today in many parts of Central and South America, Catholic priests and church members are to be found fighting against one another in many guerrilla actions. Every sincere Catholic should honestly ask himself if these actions by practicing Catholics are in harmony with Jesus’ words found at John 13:35: “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”​—ED.

