Does God Have a Name?
MANY people might say: ‘Does God’s name matter? There is only one Supreme Being.’ For example, a clergyman in Canada once said: “The name that people give to God is also unimportant.” This cleric held that it would make no difference if one used “Allah,” as do Moslems, or “Manitou,” as do some North American Indians. Many of the clergy have the same opinion.
But let us consider: Why do we use names? What is in a name?
Basically, names are used for identification. They are also often closely linked with personal achievements or fame. To millions, such names as Alexander the Great or Ghandi immediately bring to mind the achievements of these men.
But why is God’s name necessary? Because, although many people believe in only one true God, countless others worship many gods. Hindu people have millions of gods. In other parts of Asia and in Africa, millions worship their ancestors. Many worship the State, political leaders or “stars” of the stage or screen. And of others, it is said that “their god is their belly.”​—Phil. 3:19.
To distinguish the Supreme Being from this “galaxy” of gods, he has a very exclusive and personal name. And this name, as we shall see, is not only important for identification but vitally linked with his reputation. He has made a name for himself.
WHAT, THEN, IS GOD’S NAME?
Could God’s name be “Allah”? No. As a good dictionary will show you, “Allah” is a shortened form of the Arabic term meaning “the god.” Obviously, this is not a name.
How about “Lord”? That is not a name either. “There are many ‘gods’ and many ‘lords,’ “ says the Bible. (1 Cor. 8:5) The Spanish word for “Lord,” used frequently in Spanish versions of the Bible, is Señor, which usually means “mister” or “sir.” How could that possibly be a personal, exclusive name for the Supreme Being?
Some might say: ‘Is not Jesus the name of God?’ When the birth of Jesus was announced to Mary, the heavenly messenger or angel told her: “You are to call his name Jesus. This one will be great and will be called Son of the Most High.” (Luke 1:30-32) So Jesus is the name of God’s Son, not that of the Supreme Being. Jesus himself said: “The Father is greater than I am.”​—John 14:28; compare Proverbs 30:4.
Being God’s Son, Jesus enjoys a very close relationship with his Father. And Jesus made it clear that his Father has a name. When Christ taught his disciples the famous Model Prayer, sometimes called the “Lord’s Prayer,” his very first words were: “Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.” (Matt. 6:9) In a subsequent prayer to his Father, Jesus said: “I have made your name manifest to the men you gave me. . . . I have made your name known to them and will make it known.” (John 17:6, 26) Accordingly, Jesus revealed to them the full significance of the Father’s name.
Interestingly, the Hebrew form of “Jesus” is “Jehoshuah,” which is an abbreviated form of “Jehovah-yeshua,” meaning “Jehovah is salvation.” So there it is​—the name of the Father, the Supreme Being, is JEHOVAH. And how appropriate that Jesus, as Jehovah’s agent for salvation, should thus be named after his Father!
WHERE IS THE NAME FOUND?
The name “Jehovah” is found in numerous writings and in many places. But the principal source of the name is in ancient Hebrew writings contained in the Bible. You may say, ‘Well, I have never seen that name in my Bible.’ It is true that some Bibles do not use God’s name. But remember that what we have in our Bibles are translations, and translators vary in their renderings of the original text. That happens not only with the Bible but also with any book or article that is translated by different people.
For example, the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, widely used in this magazine, contains the name “Jehovah” thousands of times. But in the well-known King James Version it is found only a few times. If you have a copy of this latter Bible, check the book of Exodus, chapter 6, verse 3, and you will find these words: “And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them.”
Maybe you prefer a Catholic translation. Many of them do not contain the name of God. But if you have a copy of The Jerusalem Bible, a modern Catholic translation, and care to check the above-mentioned verse, you will find that it uses the name “Yahweh” instead of “Jehovah.” Why is that?
WHY “YAHWEH”?
“Yahweh” (sometimes “Jahveh”) is simply an attempt to express God’s name in a form nearer to the original Hebrew. In writing ancient Hebrew, only consonants, no vowels, were used. God’s name in the older Hebrew manuscripts is shown as יהוה (YHWH or JHVH), and Bible commentators often refer to these characters as the “Tetragrammaton,” meaning “four letters.”
Down through the centuries, the correct pronunciation of the divine name in Hebrew has been lost. Hence, it is uncertain what vowels should be used to fill in the name. By combining vowel signs of the two Hebrew words A·do·nayʹ (Lord) and El·o·himʹ (God) with the Tetragrammaton, the pronunciation Ye·ho·wahʹ was formed. Eventually, in a Latinized form, this became “Jehovah.” Nevertheless, many Hebrew scholars say that “Yahweh” is more correct. But Rudolph Kittel, editor of Biblia Hebraica, vowelizes the Hebrew tetragram as “Yehwah,” in all his editions.
“JEHOVAH” IS FAR BETTER KNOWN
The name “Jehovah,” however, is far more widely known and used. For centuries, it has appeared in Bible translations and literature of all kinds.a It also appears in various inscriptions. For example, a Latin inscription on the municipal coat of arms of the city of Plymouth, England, reads Turris Fortissima Est Nomen Jehova, meaning: “The name Jehovah is the strongest tower.” (See Proverbs 18:10.) Hence, the name “Jehovah” appears even on the local buses.
Now let us pay a brief “visit” to the island of Minorca in the Mediterranean Sea, off the coast of Spain. Here, in the main town of Mahón, the Tetragrammaton appears on the wall in a public vegetable market, formerly a church cloister. Nearby, in the small town of San Luis, the Hebrew letters of Jehovah’s name have been inscribed on the local church tower.
Now let us look inside the famous Cathedral of Toledo, Spain’s ancient ecclesiastical city. Notice the beautiful fresco on the ceiling of the principal vestry. It is the work of Lucas Giordano, a famous Italian painter of the 17th century. There, in a prominent position, are the four Hebrew letters of God’s name.
Perhaps the most famous of all Christendom’s churches is St. Peter’s Basilica in Vatican City. There, adorning the tomb of Pope Pius X (1835-1914), is a painting of the high priest of Israel with the Tetragrammaton on his headdress. It is also found on a band on the forehead of a statue decorating the tomb of Pope Clement XIII (1693-1769).
Have you ever heard of the “Flavit Jehovah” medal? It was struck to commemorate the victory of the English fleet against the Spanish Armada in 1588 C.E.​—when a fierce tempest finished off the invaders. Inscribed on this medal are these words in Latin and Hebrew: Flavit יהוה et dissipati sunt​—“Jehovah blew and they were scattered.”
Lovers of serious music are well acquainted with the majestic “Hallelujah chorus” from Handel’s famous oratorio, The Messiah. Millions of people have heard it sung since its first performance in 1743. But how many have realized that “Hallelujah” (or, “Alleluiah”) means “Praise Jehovah”?
Another famous musician, Franz Schubert, composed the music for a song entitled “The Almightiness” (German, Die Allmacht), taking as its theme: “Great Is Jehovah, the Lord!” (See page 16.)
The personal name of God is honored and displayed in countless other places and settings. A little research also leaves no doubt that JHVH (YHWH) is the NAME of the Supreme Being, as shown in the Hebrew Bible. How often does that sacred name appear there? SIX THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED AND SIXTY TIMES! Is it not very obvious that the divine name was NOT MEANT TO BE LEFT OUT?
And yet many Bible translations have omitted God’s name. Why? Before answering, let us consider God’s name in history.
[Footnotes]
Webster’s New International Dictionary (1955) says concerning “Jehovah”: “The Supreme Being; God; the Almighty . . . A Christian form given the Tetragrammaton.”
[Pictures on page 7]
Church tower Menorca, Spain
City buses Plymouth, England
Statue on tomb of Pope Clement XIII

