The Power Behind the Universe​—A Mysterious Force or a Real Person?
TRIPS to the moon and scientific observations of many kinds have added tremendously to our knowledge of the universe. Its awe-inspiring vastness and orderly arrangement are becoming more and more apparent. For many people, the existence of such a universe without some sort of controlling power seems illogical. Although millions have lost faith in churches, creeds and religions in general, they still believe in “God.”
But what does the word “God” mean to you? A mysterious force? A vague intelligence? A remote, indefinable and nameless Person?
Or, to you, does “God” mean someone very personal, even close and dear like a loving father? For those who put faith in science and technology, that may sound like nonsense. But consider this:
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY HAVE THEIR LIMITS
From the viewpoint of discovery and increasing knowledge, we live in an exciting century. Man’s achievements have been remarkable. Gifted persons have enriched the human race with astounding inventions that have tremendously widened the scope of mankind’s activity and knowledge.
Yet scientists, with all their increased knowledge and advanced technology, will be the first to admit that they cannot produce a single living cell. A common thing like a blade of grass is far beyond the power of scientists to make.
To try to explain the marvels around them, some writers resort to such expressions as “Mother Nature made this,” or, “Evolution did that,” as if these were persons with intelligence. But is it not quite clear that an unintelligent force cannot possibly account for the amazing variety of life, nor for the infinite wisdom and power manifest in the universe?
THE REALM OF THE INTELLECT OR SPIRIT
When we enter the realm of the intellect or spirit and seek to understand the origin of qualities such as wisdom, justice, mercy, kindness and truth, where can we find reliable answers to our questions? Can any man explain the functions and origin of that amazing “mechanism” of man’s inner self that can tell him when he does wrong​—the human conscience? Animals do not have it. But even primitive, uneducated people do. As the early Christian writer Paul once explained: “They show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience bearing witness therewith, and their thoughts one with another accusing or else excusing them.” (Rom. 2:15, American Standard Version) Such matters are beyond the scope of human understanding. And, yet, are not man’s intellectual and spiritual accomplishments of far greater importance than his physical abilities?
Many animals have greater physical abilities than does man. Elephants are stronger, eagles can see farther, deer can run faster, bats can hear better, dogs have a greater sense of smell. But what animal can devise new things? True, birds can make nests, beavers can construct dams, spiders can spin webs. But these creatures invariably make the same thing after the same pattern. None can plan something new and develop it.
In sharp contrast, humans can conceive of, plan and make things of tremendous variety. Whether it is a woman knitting a jersey or technicians constructing spacecraft that can go to the moon and back, mankind finds delight in making things. It is part of human makeup. With mental capacity and traits far, far superior to those of animals and an innate ability to make things, man is an imperfect reflection of the Supreme Being, who made man according to His likeness.​—Gen. 1:26.
Consider now another quality of man that is not shared by the animals​—his desire to worship. It is an irrefutable fact, manifest in all ages and races, that mankind has a deep, natural desire to revere an unseen power or powers.
Modern philosophers may deny this, saying, “We have advanced beyond that.” “Advanced” to what? To a world that staggers from one crisis to another and that cringes under the mushroom-shaped shadow of feared world cataclysm. Why? Because so many have worshiped the “gods” of technology and various ideologies while rejecting the wisdom of the Supreme Being.​—Jer. 8:9.
Hence, many people today, although disillusioned with churches and religions, agree with these words from the most widely read and respected book of all time, the Bible, which says of the Supreme Being: “His invisible attributes, that is to say his everlasting power and deity, have been visible, ever since the world began, to the eye of reason, in the things he has made.”​—Rom. 1:20, The New English Bible.
SCIENTISTS HAVE HELPED CONSIDERABLY
The more scientists probe the universe, the atom and all forms of life, the more their studies reveal the beauty, the harmony and the complexity of all these things. The immensity and intricacy of the universe make men’s minds reel. But there is no effect without a cause. Behind all this beauty, this marvelous manifestation of wisdom and dynamic power, can you not “see” with “the eye of reason” the “invisible attributes” of the Great Maker? Obviously, the universe is governed by immutable laws. Does that not prove the existence of a Supreme Lawgiver? Countless conditions and provisions on earth clearly were made to fit man’s requirements exactly. And those multiple effects must have a corresponding CAUSE, a great Provider and Life-Giver.
What do some scientists say about this?
Frank Allen, a biophysicist, made this comment: “The adjustments of the earth for life are far too numerous to be accounted for by chance.”
A professor of mathematics from Cambridge University, P. Dirac, wrote in Scientific American: “God is a mathematician of a very high order, and He used very advanced mathematics in constructing the universe.”
Sir Isaac Newton, described by many historians of science as “the greatest scientific mind the world has ever seen,” wrote in his famous work Principia: “This most beautiful system of the sun, planets, and comets, could only proceed from the counsel and dominion of an intelligent and powerful Being. . . . The Supreme God is a Being eternal, infinite, absolutely perfect.”
Perhaps you agree with Sir Isaac Newton. Maybe you, too, delight in the glory of the stars, the radiance of the sun, the serene beauty of the moon, the refreshment of rain, the majesty of mountains, the ever-changing kaleidoscope of cloud and sea, the fascinating variety of flowers, trees, insects, birds and animals, the laughter of children, the kindness of friends and the love of a mate. And deep in your heart you know that all of this was provided by a real PERSON​—the great Builder of the universe.​—Heb. 3:4.
Logically, then, in accord with all facts and reason, the Supreme Being must be a REAL PERSON. That being so, does he have a name? If so, what is that NAME?

