They Won’t Forget Their Oriental Tour!
“UNFORGETTABLE days!” That was the way one couple expressed themselves about their tour of the Orient. Those sentiments were echoed by the many different tour groups that traveled there from various parts of the globe.
What was the object of these tours that resulted in such expressions of appreciation? It was the series of “Victorious Faith” International Conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses held in Oriental lands during the late summer.
Taste of Things to Come
Before the tours made their long journey to the Orient, a taste of good things to come was experienced in the Hawaiian Islands. The visitors were welcomed with the traditional Hawaiian warmth and hospitality.
Two international conventions were held there during July, with more than 17,500 attending. In addition to the upbuilding program centering on God’s purposes, the visitors were treated to a display of local flavor. On three of the days, before the program began, a one-hour presentation featured colorful songs and dances of Hawaii and other islands of the Pacific. Firsthand reports told of developments in places that many visitors had barely heard of, such as Truk, Ponape, Palau, Kosrae, and Yap.
One of the experiences related was from Yap, in the Western Pacific. An 18-year-old Witness greatly desired to attend the assembly in Hawaii, but had no way of making the money to pay the fare. Her father had died and her mother had abandoned her. To help her to attend the assembly, her fellow Witnesses gave her $500 (U.S.). Some of them started fishing, sometimes six to eight hours a night, selling the fish in the morning. Other Witnesses picked coconuts after work and sold them to stores. Also, they made copra to sell. From these activities an additional $900 (U.S.) was obtained, enabling the young Witness to attend assemblies, not only in Hawaii, but also in the continental United States and Canada​—her first trip off the tiny island of Yap!
On to Japan
A little over a week later, international conventions began in Japan. Of the many tours headed that way, one left from Anchorage, Alaska, aboard a Japan Airlines flight. One of the tour group related the following:
“It was after 5 p.m. when the giant DC-10 became airborne. We marveled at the sight of Alaska’s rugged mountain ranges below and at Mount McKinley in the distance, bathed in the light of the setting sun.
“About then a voice greeted me with the remark: ‘Is this your first trip to Japan?’ The young woman was Oriental, but from San Francisco, and was not part of our tour. ‘You’ll love Japan,’ she said, but then added, ‘Americans are always so open and so ready to smile even at strangers. Japanese by nature are not like that.’ But she was in line for a pleasant, unexpected surprise.
“Hours later, when we arrived in Tokyo, we were greeted by a whole congregation of Japanese Witnesses who had come to meet us. We were engulfed in a burst of excitement and friendliness. There were shouts of joy, applause, hugs and kisses. This demonstration of extraordinary warmth was very touching. I then turned to the woman who spoke to me on the plane about the Japanese being reserved and asked jokingly: ‘Did you say Japanese don’t smile, that they’re reserved?’ She laughed and shrugged her shoulders.”
Assembly Experiences
Nagoya, Osaka, Sapporo and Tokyo were the convention cities. Together they had an attendance of over 78,000, about 47,000 more than in 1973, the last time international assemblies were held in Japan.
When the assembly at Osaka was about to start, two vicious typhoons headed toward that coastal city. More than 800 Witnesses coming by chartered ship from Okinawa had to brave one of these typhoons. What was normally a 35-hour journey took 64 hours amid mountainous seas. The ship arrived at Osaka at 7 a.m. on the second day of the assembly. And where did the delegates go? To their accommodations to rest? No, they went straight to the convention! And after the day’s sessions, a group of these Okinawans volunteered their services to work at the assembly!
Many were impressed by a heart-touching procedure experienced by each speaker just before giving his talk. Because of the typhoons, there was much rain. So an elderly Witness, one who has been preaching full time for more than 20 years, waited with shoe-cleaning equipment. She took the dirt and mud off each speaker’s shoes and polished them, a modern-day version of Jesus’ instructions to “wash the feet of one another.”​—John 13:14.
Religious Superstition
Not far from Osaka is the city of Kyoto, where there are many Shinto and Buddhist temples and shrines. A tour was arranged to visit some of these places.
But what are those papers tied to trees in the gardens of the temples? A guide explains that those who have certain wishes buy a printed prayer or oracle that is prepared for that particular wish. Then the purchaser goes to a tree in the temple area and ties it to a branch. The individual is not thinking of a personal God, but of the “spirits” of people, now dead, who made the temple or shrine famous. It is felt that they were persons of power and can grant favors from ‘the other world.’ Yet, God’s Word clearly shows that the dead are unable to help the living.​—Eccl. 9:5, 10.
The travelers also saw people coming to large altars housed in the temples or shrines. These people would throw an offering of money into a large box, then pull a cord so that a wooden block would strike a bell. Others would clap their hands. It was explained that these actions attracted the attention of the “god” to whom they wanted to make an entreaty. The impression left is that the “god” was sleeping or else preoccupied. It reminded visitors of Elijah and his experience with the Baal worshipers.​—1 Ki. 18:27.
Great Contrast
What a contrast such sights were to the tours of the three branch facilities of the Watch Tower Society at Tokyo, Numazu and Ebina! These were throbbing with upbuilding activity, designed to help persons to free themselves from false worship.
Originally the facilities in Tokyo handled the work in Japan. But the growth of the work meant putting up another plant at Numazu, completed in 1972. By 1978 the staff had printed and shipped out over 100 million Watchtower and Awake! magazines from this factory!
As the work continued to expand rapidly another property was obtained at Ebina. Now a factory is going up there with a floor space of over 10,000 square meters (107,000 square feet), more than three times the space at Numazu. All the work is being done by Jehovah’s Witnesses, and completion is expected in a year. The facility will house 350 workers, a new four-color offset rotary press and automatic bookbinding lines capable of producing over 40,000 books a day.
Next: Korea
About a week after the Japanese assemblies began, others started in Korea. There were four​—one in Taegu, two in Seoul, and another in Taejon, with a total attendance of 33,181.
One of the overseas visitors later said: “Quite different in appearance and custom from our Japanese friends, our Korean brothers and sisters truly matched their hospitality. Almost every evening Korean brothers called at the hotel to pick up some of our tour group to take them to their home, or to some other location, to dine on their distinctive cooking and enjoy warm family gatherings.” Often the visitors were treated to Korean music, song and dance. All were deeply impressed with this warmhearted hospitality.
The Korean Witnesses face many problems. Family opposition due to tradition is prevalent. One experience related was that of a police officer whose wife became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. In his rage he told her: “You quit this religion, or I’ll shoot you!” In anger he took out his gun, and then to ‘save face’ shot, but with the gun pointed at the ceiling. Yet he later became interested in the Bible, and now is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses himself, along with all six of his children! Recently, he has been appointed a Christian elder.
After the Japanese and Korean tours, one visitor exclaimed: “So far our trip was like climbing a mountain​—the higher one climbs the greater the thrill. The farther we went on this tour the greater was our joy of being with our fellow servants of God in these different countries. So we asked ourselves: Can anything equal what we have experienced so far?”
Hong Kong was ready to meet the challenge.
Enthusiastic Chinese
It was interesting to learn that more than 500 of the 750 Jehovah’s Witnesses in Hong Kong had never attended an international convention. They were thrilled to have so many visitors from different countries. Said one: “This convention helps us to realize that people of one faith can live together in peace and harmony.” Another commented: “Truly we are all being taught by Jehovah no matter what our race or color, or what language we speak.”
The Hong Kong brothers and sisters warmly welcomed the visitors. One visitor related: “Their open friendliness pleased us instantly. They would come up in groups of threes and fours and say: ‘My name is Loo Mei Ling. But Rose is my American name. Loo is my family name. What’s your name? Tell me an experience.’”
The convention program conducted by the Chinese was outstanding, as was their melodic singing. All were delighted by the attendance of over 1,300.
Another unforgettable highlight was when the visitors joined the Chinese Witnesses in calling on the people of Hong Kong in their homes. An overseas delegate said: “So many of us took part that Hong Kong looked as though it was under invasion by Westerners. Some of us memorized brief introductory comments, such as ‘Jo San,’ which is supposed to mean ‘good morning,’ depending on how you say it! We would say the phrase at the door and then our Chinese partner would quickly step in and rescue us by talking to the householder in the native tongue. These moments together, whether calling at the homes, visiting the branch, or attending the assembly, has an emotional, rewarding spiritual effect on all of us.”
Philippine Hospitality
As August drew to a close, the next stop for many tours was Manila, in the Philippines. There two adjacent stadiums in the Rizal Memorial complex were used, with a combined attendance of over 35,000.
A pleasurable visit was made to the branch office of the Watch Tower Society in suburban Quezon City. Busloads of foreign delegates would pull into the driveway, and right there on the spacious lawn the members of the branch and other helpers were ready to serve food and cool drinks before the visitors made a tour of the premises.
Sharing meals together with the Philippine Witnesses and hearing their experiences added more unforgettable memories. In the evenings various ones of the tour would come together to compare notes and exchange thoughts.
But time was moving fast. Tomorrow? Off to Taipei, the capital city of Taiwan, for the next international assembly.
Not Easily Forgotten
Many of the travelers will long have vivid memories of their visit to Taiwan, with its bustling capital city and many scenic attractions. But most unforgettable was the thrill of being with their fellow Witnesses in Taiwan for the very first time and seeing their strong faith in God.
That faith is being tested in Taiwan. One reason why is that when a person becomes one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, often the rest of the family bitterly opposes. However, at the convention, where over 1,600 attended, four Chinese from different families saw other members of their families get baptized as Jehovah’s Witnesses! This showed that trying to help other family members to learn the truths in God’s Word at times gets a favorable response.
Here, too, a special program was put on for the visitors, and it was immensely enjoyed. Instruments such as the flute, drums, stringed instruments and gongs were all woven together into a fascinating fabric of sound. Witnesses from the Amis tribe, dressed magnificently in their costumes, sang and danced for the tours.
At the conclusion of the visit, this comment expressed the feeling of all the visitors: “The love and hospitality shown by the Taiwan brothers will always be in our memories.”
Truly International
The next part of our tour, at the end of August, was to Port Moresby, in Papua New Guinea. There 80 different language groups were represented! About 1,000 visitors (mostly white) from other lands met with about 2,000 native Witnesses.
The impact that these various groups had on one another was unforgettable. The average white does not treat these native people kindly. Yet here was genuine fraternization by people of many races, with real love shown.
The assembly of almost 3,000 was the largest meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses ever seen on this island. It was a real “eye-opener” for the 110,000 residents of Port Moresby.
The transforming power of God’s Word was evident from the experience of a Witness from the highlands. In earlier days he had been a leader in fierce intertribal fighting, had killed several people and wounded many others. But now, as a Witness, he travels in the same area where he had led tribal feuding, preaching the good news about God’s marvelous healing of spiritual wounds, and the physical healing to come in God’s new order.
Peace Instead of Battle
From Port Moresby a flight of just over two hours took visitors to Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands. About 35 years ago this island made world headlines as a theater of the Pacific war. The vicious fighting resulted in many casualties. At the bottom of one bay alone there are said to be at least 48 warships, as well as many other ships, sunk in the fighting.
But early in September, Guadalcanal was the scene for a gathering of the most peaceful people on earth. They were attending the “Victorious Faith” International Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses at the city of Honiara. The Witnesses working on convention preparation got a jarring reminder of the war days when a long-buried 500-pound bomb exploded just outside of town.
Part of this preparation was the building of special accommodations for the native Witnesses from the various islands. These were long houses with walls and roofs of thatched palm leaves. Some of the Witnesses had worked full time for several months, first cutting the leaves on their home island of Malaita, then traveling with them to Honiara where they were sewed into panels. Then came the erection of timber frames and the closing in of the houses with the leaf panels.
Of great interest was the number of former heathen among the native Witnesses. Some had been heathen priests, active worshipers of the Devil, living according to rules that labeled living in the same house with a woman, or even eating food cooked or handled by a woman, as tambu (forbidden). But now at the convention these same ones sat down with their brothers and sisters, ate food prepared by sisters, and were happy that the clean worship of Jehovah had freed them from their former enslaving tambu.
The assembly made a deep impression on the community. On the Sunday of the convention the town clerk spoke on the radio to express his pleasure with the care that the Witnesses had taken of the Community Center, where the assembly was held. He said it was far cleaner than the regular employees had ever left it. Over and over, local Witnesses were approached by people who knew them and who told them how impressed they were by the organization and the program. Also gratifying was the attendance of nearly 1,500, the highest ever for the Solomon Islands.
Following the convention, the many visitors departed for their widely scattered homes all over the globe. They would take with them the good things that they had heard and experienced at all the Oriental assemblies.
The tours were arranged primarily for spiritual purposes, to be with the Oriental brothers and sisters, and to experience an interchange of encouragement. Those purposes were fulfilled beyond expectations, causing one visitor to say: “Those were truly unforgettable days, days in which extraordinary hospitality and love were shown.” Thus it can be understood why many said that they regarded this series of international assemblies as “the best yet.”
[Picture on page 17]
At Honolulu, conventioners came from many lands, including these from Ponape in the Pacific
[Picture on page 19]
At Osaka, a ‘contest’ between an abacus and an electronic calculator resulted in a ‘draw’; visitors were also treated to a performance on the “koto,” a stringed instrument
[Picture on page 20]
A delegate from the United States enjoys the association of new friends at the Seoul, Korea, assembly
[Pictures on page 21]
A cafeteria with plenty of rice for conventioners at Taipei; and a mother from the Amis tribe with her baby
[Picture on page 22]
Welcome sign at the Papua New Guinea assembly in Port Moresby includes directions in Pidgin English

