Jamaica and the Cayman Islands
THE ISLAND of Jamaica is one of the most beautiful places on earth. Situated in the Caribbean Sea just 95 milesa south of Cuba and about 480 miles from Miami, Florida, its more than 2,300,000 inhabitants enjoy a warm to temperate climate all the year round. The Arawak Indians lived on the island when Christopher Columbus arrived there in 1494; they were the ones who named the island Xaymaca, meaning “land of wood and water.” It is indeed a land of evergreen mountains and valleys, lush tropical vegetation, cascading waterfalls and beautiful white sand beaches fringing a serene blue sea. Visitors have nothing but praise for the scenic beauty of the Paradise Isle, as the land is called.
BIBLE TRUTH ENTERS THE ISLAND
In 1897 something even more beautiful entered Jamaica​—the good news of God’s Kingdom. (Isa. 52:7) This is how it happened: Two Jamaicans who had migrated to Costa Rica learned the truth in that country and felt that such wonderful good news should be taken back to their homeland. So it was that H. P. Clarke and Louis Facey were the first to preach the Kingdom good news in Jamaica.
Reports tell of their going to the village of Camberwell in the mountains of the parish of St. Mary, where they preached to Patrick Davidson and his brother. Both accepted the Bible’s truth and immediately joined in the preaching. The response to the message was encouraging, and on March 26, 1899, which was two years later, 300 persons attended a convention and Memorial celebration of the death of Jesus Christ.
THE SOCIETY SENDS A REPRESENTATIVE
The interested ones were soon organized into study groups. So much interest was found that, six years after the first light of truth reached this land, the Society saw the need to send a representative, J. A. Browne, to oversee the work in Jamaica. Commenting on the work accomplished that year, the Watch Tower of December 15, 1904, page 373, said: “Jamaica was the center of a good work during the past year [1903]. The interested are nearly all blacks, and Brother Browne . . . has apparently been doing excellent service there; not so much in awakening new interest as in crystalizing and really directing and deepening that already started.”
Yes, good progress was being made because Jamaicans were and are a Bible-loving people. From school days they are taught to respect the Bible as God’s Word. Learning to recite Scripture passages from memory is part of their education. So one does not have to begin teaching about the Kingdom by first proving that the Bible is God’s Word, as that is generally accepted by the majority of the population.
CLERICAL OPPOSITION BEGINS
In 1905 a three-day convention in Kingston drew a peak attendance of 600 people. By then 24 colporteurs (the equivalent of today’s pioneers) were busy, distributing literature throughout the island, and the groups were being encouraged by eight pilgrims (traveling representatives of the Watch Tower Society) through Bible talks and their wholesome association. Such activity soon drew the attention of the clergy, who did not respond kindly to the preaching done by the Bible Students.
The last session on the final day of the convention took the form of a question-and-answer meeting. Who should appear but a member of the clergy who had been writing scurrilous material and making violent speeches against the Bible Students! Try as he might to upset matters, the tables were turned, and this opposer was exposed as the false shepherd that he was. As the Watch Tower of November 1, 1905, page 326, reported: “We are glad to believe that his questions were providentially permitted for the enlightenment of our visitors, many of whom, as a result, have become friends to the cause of Truth.”
SPREADING THE WORD DESPITE HARDSHIPS
Taking the message to rural areas in those early days required a great deal of courage, faith and determination. There were no motorcars, no rural transportation and no paved roads. As Brother Browne reported in the Watch Tower of January 1, 1907, page 7:
“The Colporteur brethren should be specially mentioned: the work here is extremely hard, even distressing, and we are sure that it is only the love of the Truth that would lead anyone to give up his life to it.
“There are no facilities for traveling or for conveying books. All the work is done in the mountains and brethren have to walk from 20 to 60 miles, carrying on their shoulders from 15 to 30 books. It is difficult traveling over the mountains and into the valleys, sometimes being overtaken by rain, sleeping out often at night because unable to find lodging, and, being disappointed many times in deliveries, and having to return long distances with the books they carried. And yet some of them call it a joyful privilege to be so engaged. Their appreciation is shown by the fact that others are joining the ranks.”
One brother, Amos Wilkinson, now deceased, told of a night when the only home available to him for lodging in a certain village was the residence of a clergyman. The man had readily agreed to his request to spend the night with him when he heard that he was a visiting preacher. However, as soon as he discovered that Brother Wilkinson was a Bible Student, the clergyman canceled his offer of hospitality and ordered him out of his house.
Leaving the clergyman’s house, Brother Wilkinson passed by the church and, on trying the door and finding it not locked, went in and slept there for the night. In the morning, before departing, he put some of the Society’s tracts in the Bible on the pulpit. Later, on his return to that village, he learned that the same clergyman had used the tracts as the basis for a sermon and afterward had distributed them to his congregation.
In spite of the problems encountered, over 1,200,000 pieces of literature, including tracts, were distributed during the year of 1906 alone. That same year the Society established a branch office in the city of Kingston. The work of Kingdom preaching grew so much over the next nine years that the Jamaica branch was assigned the responsibility of looking after the work in Costa Rica​—the same land from which the first two Jamaican Witnesses had brought the truth.
A MAJOR EARTHQUAKE HITS JAMAICA
On January 14, 1907, a major earthquake almost completely demolished the city of Kingston. Brother Browne wrote to the Society: “We are glad to report that no injury has occurred to any of the Lord’s people, so far as we have heard, save that one interested friend, who was a constant attendant here, was killed. . . . But what makes me sit in wonder continually is that our meeting hall is the only place of religious worship in the city that is standing and in a condition to be used; and it is all brick like the others, save that the two upper rooms which we occupy are of heavy frame set on top of the lower building, making it more dangerous. Our faith has been greatly strengthened by the experience.”​—The Watch Tower, February 15, 1907, page 53.
EXPANDING THE WITNESS
In 1908 a convention was held outside of Kingston for the first time. It was in the small seaside town of Annotto Bay, five miles from Camberwell, the birthplace of the Kingdom-preaching work in Jamaica. This convention had a peak attendance of about 350.
The next four years were marked by intense efforts to spread the Word by printed page and by public lectures. The clergy also stepped up their pressure to discourage the people from reading the Society’s literature. This resulted in the cancellation of orders and in requests for return of funds for literature previously taken, but the brothers were not discouraged. They even pushed out to foreign fields. Two pilgrims were assigned to Costa Rica and Barbados to organize congregations in those countries. By this time the Jamaica branch was also overseeing the work in Panama.
BROTHER RUSSELL’S VISIT
Charles Taze Russell, the first president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, made a three-day visit to Jamaica in February of 1913. A convention was planned to coincide with the visit. On the first day about 600 brothers and sisters, as well as interested people from all over the island, came to hear Brother Russell. The Watch Tower magazine reported on the convention and stated: “Some of these dear friends spent nearly all that they possessed to come to the convention. We found them a very interesting company, very earnest for the Lord and for the Truth.”
Typical of the zeal and determination of the Bible Students was that of Sister Eveline Prendergast, who walked 36 miles over dusty roads from Camberwell to attend the convention. Such zeal was also evident in the spirited singing of the Jamaican brothers. Said the Society’s president: “Their singing was excellent.”
The public talk during the convention drew such a large crowd that two auditoriums had to be used, one for the public and the other for the Bible Students. Jammed into the building for the public were 1,800 people, and over 2,000 were unable to get in! Included in the audience were a number of clergymen, some of whom commented on the eagerness of the people to hear the message. An Episcopal minister observed that the secret of the interest lay in the fact that the message was a “Gospel of Hope.”
The press also gave much favorable publicity to the convention. Said The Watch Tower of March 15, 1913, pages 94, 95: “The newspapers, commenting on the people comprising the convention, commented upon their cleanliness, order, etc.; and the fact that they used neither tobacco nor liquors, and needed no attention from the police. . . . They also referred to the fact that money and collections were not mentioned in connection with this convention.” That 1913 convention lived on in the memories of those who were privileged to attend.
TESTS AND TRIALS DURING WORLD WAR I
Like their brothers everywhere, those in Jamaica were eagerly looking forward to the year 1914 and the end of the “Gentile Times.” They, too, were disappointed that their expectation of an early end to Satan’s system was not realized. After Brother Russell died in October 1916, a real test of faith came on them. Many forsook the organization and began to put pressure on the loyal ones. The pressure increased with the visit of Paul S. L. Johnson from the United States. He had left the truth and had come to give support to the disloyal ones. Those who had faith that Jehovah would continue to use the instrument he had been using​—the Watch Tower Society—​remained steadfast and kept the light of truth burning during those trying times.
The sifting in those years caused many to cease associating with the organization. Eventually, they split up into small groups, and today nothing is heard about them. They may be compared to a branch that is broken from a tree. It looks green for a short time but eventually it withers and dies.
There were no external pressures on the Bible Students during World War I. Jamaica was then a British colony, and, although Britain was at war, there was no conscription or draft. So the question of neutrality did not present any problems. It was the internal pressures that tested the brothers severely and slowed down the evangelizing work. But the showing of the Photo-Drama of Creation, Biblical slides in color as well as motion pictures synchronized with phonograph records, helped greatly to keep interest in the Kingdom message alive during that time. The showings drew large audiences.
MILLIONS BOOKLET WIDELY DISTRIBUTED
In the year 1920 the booklet Millions Now Living Will Never Die was given wide distribution. That title became a catch phrase, which many Jamaicans still remember. The Memorial attendance for the island that year was just 44, indicative of the falling away from the truth that took place during the refining that occurred following the end of the Gentile Times. Those who remained steadfast, though, were not discouraged but continued to do plenty in the work of the Lord, and in 1921 the Memorial attendance rose to 132.​—1 Cor. 15:58.
FAITH-STRENGTHENING PILGRIM VISITS
A visit by pilgrim George Young did much to contribute to the work of strengthening the faith of the loyal ones. His visit to the beautiful north-coast town of Port Antonio resulted in a mighty witness. Said a prominent Catholic and member of the Legislative Assembly after one of Brother Young’s lectures: “I do not care who hears me. I have heard things tonight I never knew were in the Bible. I appreciate the message.”
When Brother Young visited the town of Mandeville, a cool resort city in the central portion of the island, 365 persons came to hear him. Among them was another member of the Legislative Assembly, who welcomed Brother Young and said to the audience: “You will be surprised to see me on the platform. Most people think I never trouble with Biblical matters. They are mistaken. It is the doctrine of eternal torment with its burning and roasting that drove me from the churches!” Visits and meetings to this and other towns laid the foundation for increase in later years.
NO GOVERNMENTAL OPPOSITION
From the latter part of the 19th century, when the truth began to be preached in this country, there had been no governmental interference with the preaching work. However, when the Resolution designated Indictment, adopted at the Columbus, Ohio, convention, July 20-28, 1924, was given wide distribution in Jamaica, the clergy, it is reported, covertly tried to influence the government “to stop the work of the Bible Students.” Far from being scared away and stopping, the small band of Witnesses continued to carry on the work of Kingdom preaching. They walked many miles and also traveled by donkey, mule and bicycle to carry the message to rural folk. One brother reported that he would leave home at 6:00 a.m. to travel by bicycle to the rural territories. Carrying the literature he distributed over a wide area, he would get back home nearly 12 hours later.
GROUP WITNESSING BY BUS
In the late 1920’s the congregation in Kingston obtained a bus so that a group could work the rural territories on Sundays. By means of it, territories far and near received a tremendous amount of sowing of Kingdom seed. In 1929, for example, 23,447 books and booklets were distributed island wide by the small band of loyal Witnesses. Some of the brothers and sisters who traveled on that bus are still alive and active. They have vivid memories of those witnessing trips.
Brother Charles Crawford remembers those days, saying that the brothers and sisters had to get up as early as 3:00 a.m. on Sunday. The bus left at 4:00 a.m. and traveled up to 80 miles. The publishers got off at towns along the route. Since some publishers reached their assignment before the sun was up, they had to wait for hours until the householders woke up. “We had joyful times together,” recounts Brother Crawford, “sometimes placing all the literature we had.” The bus, he said, became such a familiar sight in the rural towns that some people named it Unity. Perhaps this was because of the united spirit and efforts of those who traveled on it. Brother Crawford expressed deep satisfaction at living to see thriving congregations today in the towns he used to visit to sow Kingdom seed with the aid of that bus. He is now 82 years of age and pioneers in a small rural community.
WITNESSING WITH THE PHONOGRAPH AND TRANSCRIPTION MACHINE
The work entered a new phase in 1933 with the introduction of the portable phonograph, the transcription machine and the sound car. These instruments were tailor-made for this land. Here people gather quickly when music is heard, so the sound of the phonograph was the signal for many to gather at their neighbor’s door to hear the Kingdom message. The sound of the more powerful transcription machine induced people to pour out of the bush areas and come to the main roads to see and to listen.
There were three such machines and cars in operation. One sound car was operated by a sister, Amy Foote, who lived in Spanish Town​—the first capital of Jamaica, when it was ruled by Spain. Sister Foote recalled, shortly before her death, that she wrote J. F. Rutherford, then the president of the Watch Tower Society, and asked whether a woman would be permitted to operate a sound car. She got the go-ahead and went enthusiastically to the cities and villages, driving the old Ford car herself and publicly proclaiming the good news. Sister Foote did a man-size job and plowed up the field for further sowing and harvesting!
Another sound car was operated by Robert Logan, a zealous brother who was also a medical doctor. He is still remembered by thousands in Kingston and other towns for his public preaching and use of the transcription machine. His zeal was such that each of his patients had to receive a thorough witness before a physical examination. Even Witnesses had to receive a reminder of what they believed, before their own physical checkup.
The third sound car was operated by Brother P. H. Davidson, the branch overseer. The penetrating sound of the machines drew the ire of the clergy, so that in 1936, at their urging, the government banned their use in public places. This ban was lifted in 1938, however, and the message of the Kingdom again began to bounce from the hills and roll through the valleys into the homes of the people.
IDENTITY OF “GREAT CROWD” STIRS ZEAL
Another milestone in the history of Jehovah’s people was reached in 1935 when, at the Washington, D.C., convention, the “great crowd” of Revelation 7 was positively identified as an earthly class to be gathered before Armageddon. This new understanding served as a stimulus to greater activity, and the records show a steady increase in praisers of Jehovah in Jamaica. The number rose from 100 in 1914 to 390 in 1938, and by 1939 those inviting others to join them in becoming praisers of Jehovah reached 543.
Yes, the work was becoming better organized, and the home Bible study arrangement began to take shape. The gathering of the “great crowd” had begun, and that class was taking on a great share of the work of Kingdom preaching. In fact, they showed as much zeal and fearlessness as those of the anointed remnant.
ENCOURAGED BY A VISIT FROM THOMAS BANKS
In 1936 Thomas E. Banks, a pilgrim from the United States, made a visit to Jamaica. Commenting on the visit, Brother Davidson wrote in a letter to Brother Rutherford, dated May 4, 1936: “I have to thank you personally for your arrangement as president in sending Brother Banks to visit Jamaica. His visit has brought Brooklyn right into Jamaica and has supplied a long-felt desire to see things work here as in Brooklyn, hence our Bethel home, studies, service work, class visits, conventions and public witnessing have all been improved through the example and suggestions of Brother Banks.”
In conjunction with Brother Banks’ visit a convention was arranged in Kingston with a peak attendance of 2,000.
THE POPE GETS A LETTER
Typical of such zeal was that displayed by Brother Ronald Feurtado. He was from a devout Catholic family, and had himself been a zealous Catholic. Upon learning the truth, he felt it was his responsibility to give the pope a witness and to expose the false teachings of the Catholic hierarchy. This he did by letter. The Vatican returned the letter to Jamaica, sending it to the head of the Catholic Church on the island. He, in turn, reported the matter to the governor of Jamaica, since Brother Feurtado was a civil servant. The governor then summoned Brother Feurtado and requested that he write a letter of apology to the pope. This he politely refused to do, since he was convinced that what he wrote was the truth. Brother Feurtado was penalized by being denied promotion, but he died faithful and happy that he was able to give a witness to both pope and governor.
NEW BRANCH OVERSEER
In 1939 the Society sent Thomas E. Banks back to Jamaica to take oversight of the branch office. Said Brother Banks: “In those early years there was not as much office work in the Society’s branch as there is today. So my work consisted principally of traveling all over the island with a sound car that broadcast recorded Bible lectures and also giving Bible lectures in the evenings.”
Brother Banks did much to encourage the brothers and to advance Kingdom interests in Jamaica. He carried on as branch overseer until 1946, when, at the age of 75, failing health and strength made it necessary for someone younger and stronger to assume branch-oversight responsibilities. Said Brother Banks: “I was given the choice of returning to the United States to live with my children or of continuing to live at the Society’s headquarters in Jamaica, where I could do whatever work my health would permit. Since Jamaica was my assignment, I chose to remain there.”
When he reached 93 years of age, Brother Banks commented: “I use every opportunity to talk about Jehovah’s purposes and the truths of his Word with my visitors and by means of correspondence. I am very happy that I can complete my days on earth in my foreign assignment and still in Jehovah’s full-time service. Spending my full time in Jehovah’s service has been the joy of my life, and I look forward to continuing it eternally in association with Jesus Christ and his ‘holy ones in the light.’” (Col. 1:12) He faithfully stuck to his assignment until 1967, when he finished his earthly course at the age of 96.
ZONE WORK ORGANIZED
In 1939 the zone work was organized. The island was divided into four zones. Brothers were appointed as zone servants and were instructed to spend a week with each congregation to strengthen it and to aid it in its field witnessing activity. Brother Charles Laurent was sent to the east zone, Brother Conrad Anderson to the west, Brother Headley Graham to the north and Brother Edgar Carter to the south.
Brother Carter used to recall the days when he was a young, zealous pioneer of almost inexhaustible energy. He did a fine work of organizing congregations in the parishes of Clarendon, Saint Catherine and Manchester. His means of transportation for zone work was a bicycle equipped with a carriage for his belongings. Distance and hills were no obstacle for him. Later, when the zone work ceased, he traveled the length and breadth of the island on his bicycle, serving the congregations as servant to the brethren (circuit overseer). In 1945 he became the first Jamaican to receive training at the Watch Tower Bible School of Gilead. He continued to serve the Jamaican congregations after his graduation in January 1946 but soon became very ill and had to leave the full-time service. Although incapacitated, he remained active in Jehovah’s service until his death in August 1983.
TROUBLE AS WORLD WAR II BREAKS OUT
With the outbreak of World War II in 1939, the question on the minds of the Witnesses was: ‘What will this mean for the preaching work in Jamaica? Will there be conscription this time?’ Answers were soon forthcoming, as more and more nations became embroiled in total war.
The brothers never stopped their witnessing but continued without letup, declaring the Kingdom as the hope of mankind. There was no compulsory military service. Jamaica was still a British colony and was not required to mobilize, so there was no test on this issue of Christian neutrality. But other tests did come upon the loyal ones. Shortly after the outbreak of the war, the colonial governor banned four Watch Tower publications under an Undesirable Publications Law. The books Enemies, Light (volumes 1 and 2), and the booklet Model Study No. 2 were banned.
Some brothers thought it would be a good idea immediately to get the banned books into the hands of the people, whose curiosity was now greatly aroused as to their contents. For example, Brother Conrad Anderson packed up his books in a carton and labeled it, “For the Montego Bay Police Station.” Every inquirer who asked about the reason for the ban on the books was offered a copy. Eventually the whole carton was placed, so there was nothing left for the police to confiscate.
TOTAL BAN IMPOSED
By the year 1941 the partial ban became a total one. All publications of the Watch Tower Society or International Bible Students Association were prohibited from entering the country. This was announced in the government’s official paper, the Jamaica Gazette, of October 19, 1941. However, the organization was not outlawed, and there was still freedom of assembly.
Did the brothers stop preaching because there was no literature to offer the people? Not at all! Armed with only the Bible, they continued their house-to-house preaching.
NO LACK OF SPIRITUAL FOOD
Were the Witnesses starved for spiritual food because of the ban? Far from it! In miraculous ways publications, including every issue of The Watchtower, reached the island. They were copied by the branch office and sent to the congregations so that not one Watchtower Study was missed. Watchtower magazines, with only the subjects on the cover page, were received in the mail without any problem. Other publications, such as the Course in Theocratic Ministry, were also received, and the Theocratic Ministry School was instituted in the congregations while the ban was still on.
How literature at times found its way into the country is revealed by this experience: Customs officials confiscated Watch Tower publications brought in by contract workers returning from the United States. They would throw the publications on the floor of the port building where the workers landed. A brother who worked at the port would furtively collect some of the literature after the customs officials had left and before the confiscated literature was gathered up for disposal. Yes, many were the ways and means Jehovah used to keep his people spiritually fed!
EFFORTS TO HAVE BAN LIFTED
Efforts were made to have the ban lifted, but without success. A petition dated October 23, 1941, was rejected, and so was a request for the then governor to receive a deputation of local brothers to discuss the matter. Nevertheless, the brothers did not become dispirited but pressed on with the work of Kingdom preaching so that by the end of the war, the publishers had increased from 543 in 1939 to 884 in 1945. Assemblies were also organized, such as the “Call to Action Assemblies” in 1943. The public meeting campaign began here simultaneously with the one in the United States despite the limited number of public speakers.
THE BAN LIFTED
On June 23, 1945, a letter from the branch office brought to the attention of the government the fact that restrictions on the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses had been lifted in England and in many Commonwealth countries. However, it was not until early in 1946 that the government finally notified the branch office that the Jamaican ban on the literature had been lifted and importation was again permitted. The response by the Witnesses was an enthusiastic one. As the 1947 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses reported: “What few books the government had confiscated were released for distribution and in just a month or so practically all of them were placed with the truth-hungry people.” Many were especially anxious to get the book Enemies, which had become famous as the first of the Society’s books to be banned in Jamaica.
POSTWAR EXPANSION BEGINS
In November 1945, William Johnson was assigned to Jamaica as its first Gilead-trained missionary. He suggested some small changes in the only congregation in Kingston. For example, the brothers and sisters had been standing up every time they commented at the meetings, and at the Service Meeting the congregation servant always acted as chairman and sat on the platform for the entire meeting. Brother Johnson pointed out that these things were not necessary, and the brothers gladly accepted the suggestions.
The year 1946 could be termed a watershed year for the work of Kingdom preaching in Jamaica. That year marked the beginning of plans that achieved the most sustained and rapid expansion in the number of Kingdom proclaimers in the history of the work on this island. The stage for this was set by the visit of Brothers N. H. Knorr and F. W. Franz.
Shortly before the visit of Brothers Knorr and Franz, two more Gilead missionaries arrived​—Lee Dillon and Aleck Bangle. They immediately began their missionary work in the capital city of Kingston, with good response from the people.
EXPANSION IN KINGSTON
Shortly after his arrival, Brother Knorr met with the Kingston Congregation, which then numbered over a hundred publishers, and outlined proposals for expansion of the work in Kingston. He proposed that the Kingston Congregation be divided into three congregations and that the second floor of the branch building, which was used as the Kingdom Hall, be converted into a missionary home. The brothers happily agreed. Three congregations were soon organized and were named East, West and Central, according to their location in the city.
During his visit, Brother Knorr stressed the need for the immediate reinvigoration of the Kingdom work, and he voiced his wish to introduce the special pioneer work in the island.
RAPID INCREASE
The East Congregation, with missionary Aleck Bangle as congregation servant, increased from 26 publishers in April 1946 to 67 by August of the same year. Similar increase was seen in the other two congregations. As a result, the number of publishers in Kingston increased to 265 within six months, and the number of publishers island wide reached a thousand for the first time, with 35 serving as pioneers.
Soon, all three congregations bought property and built their own Kingdom Halls. The expansion continued over the years​—rapid at first and steady during the decades of the 1960’s and 1970’s. Today, Kingston and its suburbs have 12 Kingdom Halls, 22 congregations and a total of 2,156 publishers.
THE ROLE OF GILEAD MISSIONARIES
The role played by Gilead missionaries in the expansion of the Kingdom work cannot be overemphasized. A total of 29 missionaries were assigned to Jamaica from 1946 to 1962. Over that period the number of Kingdom preachers increased from 899 to 4,465. And the number of congregations in Kingston, where most of the missionaries were assigned, increased from one to 14 during that 16-year period. Today there is only one of the original group still in missionary service here​—Aleck Bangle, who has completed 38 years of faithful service in Jamaica and now serves as coordinator of the Branch Committee. The need for missionary service has decreased greatly because the country is well served by 153 regular and special pioneers. But the groundwork was laid by the missionaries, some of whom have been reassigned to other countries where the need is greater.
The missionaries were able to penetrate the territories where the more affluent class resided and where local publishers rarely received a hearing. Thereby a good witness was given to this formerly unreachable class.
FORMER BRITISH PRIME MINISTER HEARS KINGDOM MESSAGE
Quite a number of prominent people heard the Kingdom message from the late Theodore Nunes, a merchant tailor who had many of those of the upper class among his clientele. He was very zealous and made sure that all of his customers received the Kingdom message in the process of having their suits fitted. Many pieces of literature were placed in this way.
An item about Brother Nunes’ zeal in preaching appeared in the local daily newspaper The Gleaner of June 5, 1980. It told of his being called by the then colonial governor of Jamaica, Sir Edward Denham, to fit a suit for David Lloyd George, the former prime minister of England (1916-22), who was visiting the island. Brother Nunes seized the opportunity to tell him that God’s Kingdom was the only hope for distressed mankind. Lloyd George agreed with Brother Nunes and added that the world “will never get on an even keel again.” At this the former prime minister was asked why he did not then tell the people of England that the Kingdom of God is man’s only hope. Lloyd George responded that the people “do not want to hear it”! Surely, this is just as it was foretold​—that people would “turn their ears away” from hearing God’s truth, preferring “false stories” instead.​—2 Tim. 4:4.
CLERGY REACT TO INCREASED ACTIVITY
As expected, the clergy reacted to this greater penetration of their choice pasture. A pretext for opposition was found in 1952 when plans were submitted to the local Town Council in Kingston for the construction of a Kingdom Hall on a plot of land near the 200-year-old Saint Andrew Parish Church​—a venerable Church of England building that had many of the elite of the land on its membership roll.
The clergy contended that the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses were noisy and would interrupt their church services, and that there would be traffic jams in the area. When the matter came before the Council’s Building Committee, those “reasons” were successfully refuted by the Society’s lawyer, Enos Finlason, himself a Witness. So the Building Committee granted the application and rejected the objections raised by the attorney for the lay body of the Church of England. The issue attracted wide and continuous publicity in the local press, from the time the objection was lodged until the application was granted.
Determined not to be defeated, the clergy and church committee tried to circumvent the decision. They lodged an appeal to the whole City Council​—after the plans were signed by the usual signatories and delivered to the applicants, and building construction was under way.
BUILDING PLANS RECALLED
The mayor, who was a member of the Building Committee and who had voted against the application, ordered that the construction be stopped and the plans be returned. It was claimed that they were not properly signed​—not having been personally signed by the city engineer and the town clerk, as the law requires. The aim of this maneuver was to force another hearing before the Building Committee, during which it was hoped the clergy could influence that committee to have the decision reversed in their favor.
The chairman of the committee, Cleveland Walker, a just man, decided he would seek legal opinion on the objection before another hearing. This he did. The legal opinion ruled that the building plans were properly signed, that they should be returned to the applicants and the construction should continue. The opinion further stated that if failure of the town clerk and city engineer to sign the plans personally made the building illegal, then hundreds of other buildings would have been illegally constructed and would have to be demolished because plans for them had been similarly signed. So again, the Church of England and the Jamaica Council of Churches (representing eight denominations that had sent a letter of protest signed by the heads of their organizations) lost the battle against Jehovah’s people.
The religious opposers then launched an anti-Witness press campaign, led by a widely read columnist. Next, the government, obviously influenced by the religious leaders, refused to renew the expired permit that would allow two missionaries, Louis and Cora Woods, to stay in the country. The local Witnesses gave wide publicity to this. Many congregations passed protest resolutions against the cancellation and forwarded them to the government. Eventually the authorities relented and extended the stay of the missionaries.
LITERATURE RESTRICTED AGAIN
Even before the stay of the Woods was extended, an order was given to the relevant authorities not to sell the Watch Tower Society foreign exchange to pay for Bible literature imported to Jamaica. So a consignment of literature was held up at the port of entry and was eventually burned (except for Bibles), in spite of documentary evidence that the headquarters in Brooklyn was willing to regard the shipment as a gift. After written protests and a petition signed by 145,000 people (more than one out of every 14 people in Jamaica), permission was given to import literature from England but not from the United States. Only Bibles could be imported from the latter country. After more letters of protest and appeals, both locally and in England (since the country was still under British rule), the government finally agreed, on July 19, 1954, to allow the literature to come in from the United States as a gift. That arrangement is still in force due to the continued shortage of foreign exchange.
BROTHER KNORR VISITS AGAIN
Prior to this attempt to silence the Witnesses and to hamper their preaching activities, the brothers were strengthened and prepared for their tests by a visit from Brothers Knorr and Henschel.
Four years after Brother Knorr’s first visit, so much expansion had taken place that it was time to make plans for more expansion. The number of publishers in Kingston had increased by 25 percent. So a building committee under the chairmanship of Brother Robert Clarke was appointed to see to the purchase of property and the construction of two new Kingdom Halls for the two new congregations that were to be formed. One of these was the North Congregation. It was the building of their hall that roused the ire of the clergy as previously described. No wonder that a picture of that hall was published in one newspaper under the caption “The Church That Controversy Built.”
HURRICANE DISASTER BRINGS DISPLAY OF LOVE
In the summer of 1951, a savage hurricane struck Jamaica, killing 168 people. The roof of the building that served as the branch office and missionary home was completely blown off, but none of the brothers were injured. Thousands, including many brothers, were left homeless or lost their belongings. The response from fellow Witnesses in the United States was immediate and generous. Tons of clothing were shipped to provide relief for those who suffered. It was a practical demonstration of the love that binds Jehovah’s people in an international brotherhood. The brothers were greatly encouraged to go forth and comfort those who suffered and to explain to them who is responsible for world distress.
NEW BRANCH HEADQUARTERS
In 1954 Brother M. G. Henschel made a zone visit and recommended that an inspection be made to determine the structural soundness of the branch building. This was done, and the need for new branch headquarters was confirmed. Brother Knorr visited the following year and gave the go-ahead to secure land and make plans for the new branch office and missionary home. A suitable site was soon found at 41 Trafalgar Road in suburban Saint Andrew parish, and building plans were drawn and submitted to the building authority.
By the year 1957 the branch building project was ready to begin. The local Witnesses supported the project with loans and donations. It was on August 31, 1958, that the building was dedicated, before an audience of 1,276.
FIRST INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION
In 1966 Jamaica was chosen as a site for one of the many international conventions planned for that year. It was the first time the local Witnesses were called upon to be hosts to an international gathering. They enthusiastically arranged for rooming accommodations and tours and took on all the other responsibilities connected with a big convention. They were thrilled to host delegates from 18 countries, including 246 delegates from the British Isles and 218 from the United States. The public talk attracted the highest attendance at a convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Jamaica up to that time​—9,458.
Growth continued as the 1970’s began. In 1970 the number attending the Lord’s Evening Meal was the highest ever​—13,359. During the decade, the preaching continued without letup. There was freedom to preach the good news and to meet together. Still there were problems to overcome​—reminders that enemies of Kingdom truth were still here in Jamaica.
OPPOSITION TO ANOTHER KINGDOM HALL
For example, in 1978, plans were submitted to the local building authority in Kingston to build a Kingdom Hall in the northwestern section of the city. The Town Planning Department requested that the plans be revised so that a more elaborate structure would be built, one that, as they put it, “would uplift this area.” Even though this meant a much more expensive building, the request was complied with, and a design acceptable to all other city departments was approved by the Town Planners and the Building Committee of the City Council.
However, like the Kingdom Hall that stirred controversy in 1952 and 1953, the site was a short distance away from the Anglican church in that community, and the clergyman was totally opposed to having a Kingdom Hall built so near his church.
Construction, though, had already begun when he realized that it was a Kingdom Hall that was being built. The clergyman contacted his political friends on the City Council who, in turn, raised questions as to whether all building regulations were being complied with. One such regulation was that a notice of intention to build must be placed conspicuously on the site, inviting people opposed to its construction to lodge written protest within a specified time. Since the clergyman did not observe such a notice, he thought this regulation had been flouted. To his chagrin, the Town Clerk informed the inquiring councillors that all requirements had been met by the applicants.
CLERGYMAN’S FALSE CHARGE
The next move by this opposer was to circulate a pamphlet charging that the Kingdom Hall was being built with funds provided by the CIA​—the United States Central Intelligence Agency. He made this unfounded accusation because, at that time, charges were being made by some political people, including this clergyman, that the CIA was destabilizing the then government of Jamaica.
Of course, the accusation concerning the source of funds for the hall had no basis, as one writer to a local newspaper was quick to point out in refuting the clergyman’s claim. He wrote: “Jehovah’s Witnesses . . . believe in a future earth cleansed by Jesus Christ in which righteousness is to dwell . . . free from exploitation of man by man. . . . Jehovah’s Witnesses, though, believe in a purely spiritual solution, they do not salute the American flag, or any other flag. Neither do they sing the American or any other national anthem. They are hardly likely to be a C.I.A. church.”
Faced with a fait accompli and unable to prevent the construction, the clergyman wrote to the City Council, suggesting that in the future all applications for church buildings should be submitted to the local Jamaica Council of Churches for their recommendation before approval is given by the Building Committee. The City Council has wisely ignored the suggestion up to this time.
KINGDOM HALL COMPLETED AND DEDICATED
Meanwhile, the Kingdom Hall was completed on schedule, as many brothers and sisters freely gave of their time and abilities to help in the construction, especially on weekends and holidays. The cost of materials rose steeply during construction, which resulted in a doubling of the projected cost. To help meet the increase, several sisters made coconut cakes and pastries, sold them and donated the money. Others collected soft-drink bottles and redeemed them, turning over the funds for the project. So it was that the hall was completed and dedicated on October 15, 1980. The dedication talk was given by Brother U. V. Glass of the Brooklyn Bethel, to an overflow audience of 1,830. Three congregations now meet in this hall, and it is also used as an Assembly Hall for circuit assemblies. So again, Jehovah helped his people to triumph over opposition.
A FLASH-FLOOD DISASTER
The love that binds God’s people together in a worldwide brotherhood was highlighted in June 1979, when an unusual flash flood brought disaster to the western end of the island. The floodwaters washed away houses and bridges, drowned farm animals and destroyed crops. Thirty people lost their lives as torrents of water suddenly engulfed them in the night.
Upon learning of the disaster, Brother Louis Rochester, an elder and city overseer living 70 miles away, acted quickly. He borrowed some money, purchased food items, loaded them on a small truck and headed for the disaster area to provide relief for the affected brothers. With many roads impassable, the journey had to be made by a circuitous route that covered about 200 miles. But Brother Rochester made it, and how grateful the brothers were for his labor of love!
When Brother Rochester returned home, he found 40 cartons waiting for him. These contained donated clothing sent by the branch office. So, accompanied by his wife, he made a second trip and supplied his grateful brothers with the needed clothing. One group of brothers was cut off by a lake created by the floodwaters, and supplies had to be taken to them by boat.
A CIRCUIT OVERSEER’S PERILOUS JOURNEY
Circuit overseer Edgar Patterson was serving a congregation many miles away from the town of Savanna-la-Mar, which was in the disaster area. On hearing of the disaster, he collected food supplies from generous brothers, loaded his car and, accompanied by his wife, set out for Savanna-la-Mar. He reached as far as the coastal town of Whitehouse, 20 miles away, but could drive no farther due to flooded roads. So he hired a small rowboat and traveled by sea for the rest of the journey. It was a rough ride through turbulent waves. Fearing that the boat would capsize any moment, Sister Patterson kept singing Kingdom songs and praying in her heart for a safe journey. The boatman was a good rower, however, and they eventually made it safely to Savanna-la-Mar and distributed the food to the very appreciative brothers and interested persons.
PRESERVED THROUGH POLITICAL VIOLENCE
In 1980 Jamaica held its fifth general election since becoming independent from Great Britain in 1962. That election was preceded by the country’s most violent election campaign ever held. Hundreds of people lost their lives, and preaching God’s Kingdom in certain areas became very hazardous, as gun battles raged on, day and night. The neutrality of Jehovah’s Witnesses served as a protection for them, and not one Witness lost his life. The following experience shows how Jehovah protected those of his people who lived and preached in the most violence-prone areas.
An elder was making a return visit when a gun battle began on the same street. He reported: “At the end of the visit I tried to move quickly out of the area. On my way a group of men approached me and said, ‘You look like a policeman!’ [Many policemen were being killed during that period.] I quickly identified myself as a witness of Jehovah, using the publications I had and some tracts. That satisfied them and saved my life. I gave each one a tract and went my way.”
On her way to a meeting, a sister was stopped and searched by a group of men, who took away her books and money. She told the men: “I am going to the Kingdom Hall, and I need the books you took away and the money is my contribution.” They returned everything to her!
“CAUTIOUS AS SERPENTS”
Jesus’ instructions to his disciples to be “cautious as serpents and yet innocent as doves” had to be applied by the Witnesses who lived in those troubled areas. (Matt. 10:16) Some periodically had to change the route that they used for traveling to congregation meetings. Often, brothers had to turn back and try a different route. The physical effort that many had to exert to reach the meeting place sapped the energy of some, but their attitude is summed up in the words of a pioneer who said: “I never missed a meeting during all this time of violence.” Another publisher said: “The Yearbook experiences of what brothers in other countries have suffered certainly helped me.”
Adjustments had to be made in field service schedules in the areas affected by violence. If there was considerable gunfire in an area, field service would be suspended for a few days until things calmed down. The elders took the lead in working with the brothers. So they would be easily identified, the brothers carried copies of the Watchtower and Awake! magazines in their hands. A specific time and place was arranged for the entire group to meet after field service so that all could be accounted for before departure from the field.
NEUTRAL STAND RESPECTED
The neutral stand of Jehovah’s Witnesses with regard to political activity was respected by the majority of the people. For example, in one area the book study center was attacked with stones and other missiles. In the midst of the attack the Witnesses who lived in the home brought out the Watchtower and Awake! magazines and held them aloft while shouting repeatedly, “We are not involved in politics!” Immediately the attack ceased. To prevent any recurrence, the brothers wrote “Jehovah Is Our Salvation” on the wall of the house, and pasted the covers of several Awake! and Watchtower magazines on the windowpanes. Some time after this, the attackers returned to the area. They destroyed many houses with stones, homemade bombs and other missiles, but the home that served as the book study center was left untouched.
On another occasion, while a group of brothers, because of political violence, were moving away from the area in which they lived, 14 armed men stopped the truck containing their belongings and asked the driver: “Who do you have on board​—Labourites or Socialists?” (These were the two factions fighting each other.) The brothers responded: “We are Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Some of the armed men boarded the truck and made a check. They opened the bag of one brother and saw his Bible, Watchtower and Awake! magazines and other Watch Tower publications. That, along with the Witnesses’ explanation that they are neutral with regard to politics because of their faith and confidence in Jehovah’s Kingdom by Jesus Christ, satisfied the men. “All right, you all can go on your way,” the armed men said. The brothers did just that, with expressions of thanks to Jehovah.
On election day, one elder and his wife were taken by force to a polling booth and threatened with violence if they did not vote. They maintained their neutrality in spite of being physically assaulted. Subsequently they had to abandon their home, but loving brothers took them in, and they are still happy and active in Jehovah’s service. Others were threatened because of their neutrality, but Jehovah afforded his people protection and no one suffered serious injury.
A MEASURE OF CALM RETURNS
A measure of calm has since returned to the country. While Kingdom preaching throughout the island has never stopped, the rate of increase has slowed compared to that of the mid-1940’s to early 1960’s. One reason for this is that many publishers have emigrated to the United States, Canada and Great Britain, often due to bad economic conditions in Jamaica.
PROGRESS DESPITE MIGRATION
Nevertheless, a new peak of publishers was reached in April 1984 when 7,517 shared in the preaching work. That same month 6,564 home Bible studies were reported. The Bible study aid You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth has contributed to the tremendous growth in Bible studies. Since its release, over 40,000 copies have been distributed, and it has had a great impact on the preaching work. One newspaper columnist helped to advertise this book. He wrote in praise of it and said, among other things: “The witnesses deserve a hearing. If one can’t allow them to put a foot in the door, then by all means acquire You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth.”
Yes, those who have remained continue to preach the Kingdom good news zealously in order to gather in the many sheeplike people who inhabit this beautiful land. That many more are yet to be gathered is indicated by the large attendance​—23,270—​at the Lord’s Evening Meal in 1984. Yes, there are still some persons who will take a positive stand for the Kingdom as is shown by the following experience.
One man spurned many invitations to come to the Kingdom Hall, although he visited other religious groups. Later he obtained one of the Society’s magazines that discussed the blood-transfusion issue, and he was favorably impressed. Now he wanted to visit the Kingdom Hall. He appreciated the Bible talk highlighting God’s purpose for man. The friendliness of the Witnesses also impressed him. It moved him to find and read every book and magazine that he had got from Jehovah’s Witnesses in the past. Soon he accepted a home Bible study, and now he and two members of his family are dedicated servants of Jehovah.
It is the hope of the over 7,000 Witnesses in this country that, like this family, many more will be moved to seek first the Kingdom, and thereby be assured of the privilege to help make this earth into a paradise of beauty far surpassing that which has earned for Jamaica the name Paradise Isle.
But the history of the preaching work in Jamaica would be incomplete without a report on the Cayman Islands​—a small group of three coral islands that are about 200 miles to the northwest of Jamaica and that are still under British rule.
THE CAYMAN ISLANDS
Grand Cayman, Little Cayman and Cayman Brac are the islands that make up this group​—inhabited by about 19,000 people. The capital, Georgetown, lies on the largest island, Grand Cayman. The Jamaica branch supervises the Kingdom work here. The late Brother P. H. Davidson visited Grand Cayman in 1929 and sowed the seeds of truth. He made another trip in 1937 and tried to reach as many of the 6,000 inhabitants as he could. He also preached on Cayman Brac. Commenting on his second visit to the islands, Brother Davidson wrote:
“Religions of all shades exist in them. The ex-commissioner of Cayman Brac, H. W. Rutty, has been an ardent believer in the truth for about 25 years. But the people are bitterly opposed to truth. Some send messengers to warn others that the ‘no hell’ man from Jamaica has arrived. I have never seen such opposition anywhere among the ordinary people. Some threatened to do bodily harm.”
CHANGE OF ATTITUDE
The attitude of Caymanians to the truth has undergone dramatic change since those days. What has caused this change? Well, when the Watch Tower Society’s president, N. H. Knorr, visited Jamaica in 1950, he suggested that two missionaries from Jamaica be sent to the Cayman Islands. Aleck Bangle and Louis Woods were selected.
Loaded with 16 cartons of books, they boarded a boat and arrived at Georgetown two days later. They were allowed to land, but the literature was detained because the authorities thought the ban was still in force in Jamaica, of which Cayman was then a dependency. A check of the official government paper, the Jamaica Gazette, confirmed that the ban had been lifted in November 1945, so the literature was released.
The objective of the missionaries was to sow the seed of Kingdom truth all over the islands. Brother Bangle recalls that they procured two bicycles and worked the entire island of Grand Cayman, starting first with the outlying areas, towns and rural villages and then, lastly, the capital. The reason for that strategy, he said, was to cover the rest of the island before the authorities in the capital, Georgetown, could hear of the work and, if opposed, cancel the brothers’ permit to stay in the islands.
Unlike the situation Brother Davidson encountered in 1937, the missionaries found the people most friendly. The missionaries were always invited into the homes, whereupon they would have to listen to the entire family history before finally being able to give a witness. After six weeks the main island was covered with literature, and Louis Woods had gone over to Cayman Brac and worked the entire island. On the two islands some 2,000 pieces of literature were placed​—a tremendous amount of sowing indeed for the period of seven weeks that the missionaries spent on these islands.
WATERING THE SEED SOWN
Follow-up work was done in 1952 by two other Gilead graduates, and several home Bible studies were started. A missionary home was established in West Bay, Grand Cayman, and meetings were organized. By July 1956, eight people joined the missionaries in the preaching work. After ten months the missionaries had to leave the island, but the foundation was laid for future expansion.
In 1959 a congregation of 12 publishers was organized in Georgetown as a result of fine work by special pioneers.
After the special pioneers left the island, Brother Wilbert Sterling, a resident of Grand Cayman, was appointed congregation overseer to look after the Kingdom interests there. He still serves in the congregation as an elder, although he lost his sight many years ago. He is a fine example, and despite his handicap, he continues to give public talks.
Richard Dunning and his wife, Eileen, responded to the great need in Cayman and left England in 1971 to serve there. They have done much to consolidate the interest stirred up by earlier Witnesses. Brother Dunning now has resident status and serves as an elder in the Georgetown Congregation.
A fine Kingdom Hall has been built on a plot of land donated by a Caymanian businessman with whom Brother Dunning had cultivated a friendly relationship. Growth has been steady over the years, and a new peak of 56 publishers was reached in February 1984. Plans are now being made for organizing a second congregation on the main island.
ASSEMBLIES STIR INTEREST
The congregation in Georgetown is part of Circuit No. 2 in Jamaica. But due to the cost of travel it is not practical to arrange a circuit assembly in Grand Cayman, as most of the publishers in the circuit live in Jamaica and could not attend. For the same reason, most of the Caymanian publishers are not able to attend circuit assemblies in Jamaica. To enable the Caymanian brothers to benefit from assemblies, circuit assemblies with a modified program have been held in Georgetown. Chartered planes are arranged and brothers from all over Jamaica are invited to attend.
The first such assembly was held in 1970 with an attendance of 94. Another was held two years later, and two chartered planes transported over 200 brothers. A third was held May 2 and 3, 1982, and again there were two planeloads of brothers from Jamaica. These gatherings have served to encourage the Caymanian brothers and to give a good witness to the Caymanian people.
The people have remained very friendly and responsive, and there is good prospect for further increase. From time to time brothers on contract come from other countries to work in the islands, and that helps to strengthen the congregation organization.
The Cayman Islands are certainly among the islands that have responded to the invitation at Psalm 97:1: “Jehovah himself has become king! . . . Let the many islands rejoice.”
[Footnotes]
1 mile = 1.6 kilometers.
[Maps on page 71]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
JAMAICA and the Cayman Islands
CAYMAN ISLANDS
  Little Cayman
  Cayman Brac
  West Bay
  Grand Cayman
  Georgetown
[Map]
CARIBBEAN SEA
  Montego Bay
  Falmouth
  Savanna-la-Mar
  Annotto Bay
  Whitehouse
  Port Antonio
  Mandeville
  Spanish Town
  Kingston
[Picture on page 68]
Patrick Davidson, first Jamaican to accept the truth in Jamaica (shown witnessing in the Cayman Islands)
[Picture on page 77]
Members of the Kingston Congregation used this bus for rural witnessing on Sundays
[Picture on page 79]
Amy Foote (shown at the right) with the sound car that she operated
[Picture on page 80]
Robert Logan, a medical doctor, witnessed to all of his patients
[Picture on page 82]
Thomas Banks served as branch overseer for many years
[Picture on page 84]
Edgar Carter with the bicycle that he used in the circuit work
[Picture on page 90]
The first Gilead graduates to arrive in Jamaica. From left to right: Lee Dillon, Aleck Bangle, Edgar Carter and William Johnson
[Picture on page 92]
Theodore Nunes, a merchant tailor, witnessed to former British Prime Minister David Lloyd George
[Picture on page 95]
The Kingdom Hall that stirred up clergy opposition during 1952 and 1953
[Picture on page 97]
Present branch headquarters
[Picture on page 103]
The Kingdom Hall completed in 1980, also used as an Assembly Hall

