“Fully Accomplish Your Ministry”
Our yeartext for 1984 encouraged all of Jehovah’s servants to “speak the word of God fearlessly.” (Phil. 1:14) This certainly was done by all our zealous brothers earth wide, and Jehovah gave the wondrous increase that made our hearts so glad. For this year of 1985, the emphasis again is on the urgency of making known God’s Word, by diligently following the Scriptural injunction at 2 Timothy 4:5, “Fully accomplish your ministry.”
The unclean demon forces are gathering the nations to the war of the great day of God the Almighty. They croak forth froglike expressions against Jehovah and continue to wage war against all on his side. However, “the very One sitting in the heavens will laugh; Jehovah himself will hold them in derision. Saying: ‘I, even I, have installed my king upon Zion, my holy mountain.’”​—Ps. 2:4, 6; Rev. 16:13, 14.
These developments, therefore, place the issue squarely before all mankind: “Where do you stand? Are you for Jehovah or for his adversary, Satan?” The majority are blinded as to what is involved. They have been deceived into taking their stand on the side of the ‘seven-headed wild beast’ organization, but the name of “not one of them stands written in the scroll of life of the Lamb.” (Rev. 13:1-8) In order to have their names written in that scroll, they must learn how to flee out of Satan’s organization and walk in the righteous paths of Jehovah. This can be done only by knowing and being obedient to the Word of God. The time is near at hand when Jehovah will rise up to make the nations know what is involved in these life-and-death matters. (Zeph. 3:8) There will be no doubt as to the issues then.
All who take their stand on Jehovah’s side are pictured at Psalms 96 to 99 as singing or ascribing glory to Jehovah. The thrilling picture there described is, as it were, that of a mighty symphony orchestra made up of millions of human voices, together with the inanimate creation, as they ascribe glory to earth’s rightful Judge and King. Psalm 98:1, 5, 6 says: “Sing to Jehovah a new song. For wonderful are the things that he has done. . . . Make melody to Jehovah with the harp . . . and the voice of melody. . . . Shout in triumph before the King, Jehovah.”
Millions of humans are already singing this song, but at Psalm 98:7, 8 the creative works of Jehovah are invited to add their powerful voices: “Let the sea thunder and that which fills it. . . . Let the rivers themselves clap their hands; all together let the very mountains cry out joyfully.” What a thrilling illustration! Imagine the oceans roaring and thundering in the role of the percussion section of this colossal orchestra. Imagine also the majestic rivers clapping their “hands” in melodious rhythm and the huge mountain ranges crying out in joy!
That is not all. Psalm 96:12, 13 calls upon ‘all the trees of the forest to break out joyfully before Jehovah, for he has come to judge the earth.’ Picture, if possible, billions upon billions of leaves in the forests, singing Jehovah’s praises in sweet violinlike and flutelike voices! Heaven itself joins in the great chorus of hallelujahs as shown at Psalm 96:11: “Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be joyful.” How marvelous! In full unity and complete harmony all on Jehovah’s side in heaven and earth and all of his creative works are graphically pictured as ascribing glory and honor to their King.
More than singing is involved as shown at Psalm 100:1, 4: “Shout in triumph to Jehovah, all you people of the earth. Come into his gates with thanksgiving, into his courtyards with praise.” Millions of obedient ones have already come into those sacred courtyards, bringing with them their gifts of thanksgiving and praise. Over seven million attended the Memorial on April 15, 1984, and more than one third of these are actively serving Jehovah as his faithful Witnesses.
These are pictured in God’s Word as sheep. Jesus told his little flock of sheep that he had “other sheep” that he would bring together as one flock with the remnant in his due time. (John 10:16) The false shepherds of Babylon have not fed or cared for these sheep. They need food, water and tender care. However, Jehovah has promised that he himself, ‘will raise up over them shepherds who will actually shepherd them, and none of them will be missing.’ (Jer. 23:4) What comforting assurance!
All who now know Jehovah have the great privilege of caring for these sheep. Parents have the wonderful assignment of bringing up their own children as little sheep of Jehovah. They certainly need much shepherding, as do all the other meek ones of the earth. There is always plenty to do in caring for all these sheep, as Paul assures us at 1 Corinthians 15:58. Those who really keep busy in this manner receive the joy of Jehovah as a bountiful reward.​—Compare Matthew 25:23.
To ‘accomplish our ministry fully’ means that we will become skilled in the whole “art of teaching.” This involves much study and application of God’s Word in our lives. It also includes the public work of being evangelizers. This takes skill and true devotion. Many are now becoming regular pioneers in order to do this work more abundantly. This does not mean that only pioneers can ‘fully accomplish their ministry.’ Every individual who is truly devoted to Jehovah can have that grand privilege. (2 Tim. 4:2, 5) May all of us use every opportunity to “declare among the nations his glory.”​—Ps. 96:3.
May Jehovah’s rich blessings and love be upon everyone who has dedicated his life to our loving God, Jehovah, and to his ministry and service. May He also lovingly care for all who are preparing to do so.
Your brothers,
GOVERNING BODY OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES

