Apply the Things Learned
1 Moses, who was a man of faith and a doer of God’s will, said: “You must apply these words.” (Deut. 11:18) Why such an exhortation? Israel was to obey Jehovah, to love him, and to serve him. (Deut. 11:8, 13) It was not enough just to know the commandments. They needed to “apply these words.” Their doing so would result in many blessings.
2 In our day, the Greater Moses, Jesus Christ, is directing spiritual Israel and the “great crowd” of faithful worshipers. We, too, need to apply the things we learn. Jesus said: “Everyone that hears these sayings of mine and does them will be likened to a discreet man.” (Matt. 7:24) We ‘hear’ these sayings by reading the Bible and the Society’s publications and by attending congregation meetings, circuit assemblies, and district conventions. Do we apply what we hear?
RECENT REMINDERS
3 During the last circuit assembly series, emphasis was placed on the need to seek God’s glory and to walk decently in view of the hour. We were reminded that in contrast with the demoralizing world in which we live, we should hate the works belonging to darkness. Are you applying the counsel given relative to inappropriate videocassettes, books, magazines, and TV programs that can undermine your spirituality? What about the warning against questionable social gatherings and the immoderate use of alcohol? We were warned about the snare of greed as well as the dangers of blindly following modern fads that can pervert and corrupt. Appropriate admonition was given about our conduct at district conventions, including the need for adults and children alike to comport themselves well at hotels and motels and to pay close attention to the program, instead of carrying on conversations that may disturb others. Will you be remembering and applying this counsel?
4 At circuit assemblies and our congregation meetings, we have been learning ways to increase our share in the field service and to improve our effectiveness as ministers of the good news. Our recent circuit assembly program highlighted the pioneer ministry. We were asked, “Can you make room for pioneering?” Have you been giving serious consideration to the pioneer service? Have you been encouraging others to pioneer?
5 In 1985, Our Kingdom Ministry discussed many ways we could improve our ministry. Recommendations were made concerning ways to follow up the interest found, how to preach in business territory, how to offer subscriptions on return visits, what to do when preaching in high-crime areas, and what young ones can do to prepare a Scriptural presentation. In fact, the May 1985 Our Kingdom Ministry outlined a word-for-word presentation that young publishers could use. It provided direction to help publishers who are discouraged or lack conviction at the doors. Have you been applying the things learned?
6 During May the True Peace book will again be offered. Endeavor to apply the things you learned in March and April as to how the book may be presented. Make good use of the Reasoning book. By doing so, you will be better equipped to ‘teach all the things Jesus has commanded us.’​—Matt. 28:20.
HELP YOUR FAMILY
7 When Moses spoke to Israel, he said: “You must also teach them to your sons.” (Deut. 11:19) Have you parents been applying the things learned in connection with making disciples of your children? The July 1985 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry asked: “Does your entire family share in the field service the first Sunday of each month? What about the goal of helping family members learn the current Topic for Conversation or a new magazine presentation?” Does your family do these things?
8 There is no doubt that applying the things learned will bring countless blessings. Jesus said: “If you know these things, happy you are if you do them.”​—John 13:17.

