Effective Meetings for Field Service
1 Zeal for field service has noticeably increased in the past few years. In part, this may be due to better education of God’s people in how to present the good news to others effectively. Instructive meetings for field service play an important part in this educational process.
2 These meetings should prepare the minds and hearts of the brothers and sisters for the work they will be doing. Those participating in field service appreciate meetings that highlight good practical points and suggestions that will help them to be effective in their preaching activity.
3 In order to benefit those attending, the one assigned to conduct the meeting should think in advance of what he will do to make it both interesting and instructive. The daily text can be discussed, especially if it is appropriate for field service. Points from Meetings for Field Service should be used. There may be times when it would be appropriate to consider portions from Reasoning From the Scriptures. As a result, those attending should feel better equipped to carry on their ministry. The meeting for field service should be brief, limited to no more than 15 minutes.
4 How can you help to make meetings for service beneficial? By reviewing the material in advance and thinking about points that would be helpful to others. If you have good success in applying the suggestions being discussed, you may have helpful comments that can be made.
5 Before concluding with prayer, generally the one conducting should check to make sure that those in the group know with whom they will go and where they will be working. Sufficient territory should be assigned so that all will be able to keep busy for the full time they are in the field ministry. After the prayer, all should proceed to the territory, thus making the best use of time.
6 Well-planned meetings for service can greatly help us to get organized and to present the message more effectively. Many report that they share more zealously in the ministry and stay out longer as a result of being properly instructed at the meetings for field service.

