Improving the Quality of Our Meetings
1 The October 1985 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry featured the article “Manifesting Spiritual Growth by Participating in Meetings.” Have you followed the suggestions given? If so, your comments at the meetings have probably been more to the point and more beneficial to you and to others. At this time, we want to address the matter of improving the quality of our meetings and point out the benefits we can derive through personal preparation.
2 Let us illustrate it this way. If you were planning to visit the Bible lands, your anticipation would be greatly heightened if you first studied information about these lands and their history as presented in the Bible and in references such as the Aid book. If you were to make no advance preparation, there would be less eagerness on your part to see specific places of interest. The same is true with regard to attending congregation meetings. By taking time to review what is to be discussed at the meetings, we whet our spiritual appetite and become more eager to have a share in commenting.
3 Demands on our time are becoming greater with each passing year. How do we find the needed time to study? We have to buy out time from nonessential activities. (Eph. 5:16) By far the majority of Jehovah’s Witnesses are in attendance at all five weekly meetings, and for many it is with no small effort that they are present. In order to derive the greatest benefit from the time and effort spent in getting to the meetings, we need to spend some time on advance preparation.
4 When commenting, be conscious of such essentials as accuracy, brevity, and clarity. Advance preparation will help. Upon receiving a new issue of The Watchtower, read it through. Later, in preparation for the Watchtower Study, underline only key words and phrases. (Please see Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook, page 36.) This will enable us to give comments that are brief and to the point.
5 With more volunteering to comment, greater enthusiasm will be in evidence. This should stimulate shy ones to participate, giving a wider range of upbuilding comments. If we apply these suggestions, our joy will increase and the quality of the meetings will improve as we make “public declaration,” or “confession,” of our faith.​—Heb. 10:23, Rbi8 footnote.

