Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MAY 4
Song 55
 5 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage all to share in magazine work this Saturday.
12 min: Question Box. A talk with two or three pointed questions directed to audience to emphasize key points. Stress concern for rapid spiritual advancement of new ones, in view of nearness of great tribulation.
15 min: “Apply the Things Learned.” Question-and-answer discussion. When considering paragraph 6, highlight need to follow previous suggestions given in offering True Peace book during May. Demonstrate some of these.
13 min: “Effective Meetings for Field Service.” Talk. Emphasize importance of arriving on time for these meetings and benefiting to the full from information presented. Include local experiences in offering True Peace book.
Song 121 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 11
Song 183
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Theocratic News.
13 min: “Youths​—What Do You Want out of Life?” Talk based on Youth book, chapter 23, pages 180-6. Highlight need for Christian youths to establish wholesome goals, dedicate themselves to Jehovah, prepare for baptism, support congregation, and take ministry seriously. Endeavor to keep on road leading to life.​—Prov. 4:20-26.
22 min: “Parents​—Train Your Children in the Field Service.” Question-and-answer discussion handled by elder. There is a need to train children in the ministry from an early age. Help them to appreciate the need for dedication and to prepare for this and baptism as they grow both physically and spiritually. When considering paragraph 5, have brief demonstration, highlighting information outlined in om book, pages 99 and 100. Parent and youth approach elder, and parent asks whether his son (or daughter) is qualified to be counted as a publisher. Elder kindly reviews factors that must be considered. Youth has a basic knowledge of truth. Does he want to share in the field ministry? Does he participate in giving a witness at doors? How does parent feel? Elder agrees that youth does well and appears to be qualified to report as a publisher. Chairman concludes part by highlighting need for families to prepare for and participate in field ministry together.
Song 221 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 18
Song 143
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to share in magazine work this Saturday. Briefly consider specific articles from current magazines that might be featured; outline talking points.
10 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In Rural Territory.” Talk. Adapt material to local circumstances. Stress need for responsible elders to coordinate coverage of territory.
25 min: “1986 ‘Divine Peace’ District Convention”​—Part One. Question-and-answer consideration of insert, paragraphs 1-14. Highlight need to be quiet and attentive during program. To be handled by convention coordinator.
Song 163 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 25
Song 123
 8 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to share in door-to-door ministry on first Sunday in June. Literature offer will be Live Forever book. Give one or two suggestions for tying in literature offer with current Topic for Conversation. Publishers should pick up literature supplies for service this weekend.
12 min: “Improving the Quality of Our Meetings.” Encouraging talk. Illustrate points in paragraph 4 by using material from last week’s Watchtower Study or Congregation Book Study.
25 min: “1986 ‘Divine Peace’ District Convention”​—Part Two. Question-and-answer consideration of insert, paragraphs 15-31. Everyone should carefully consider “District Convention Reminders.” Highlight need for proper decorum and dress while attending convention. To be handled by presiding overseer.
Song 160 and concluding prayer.

