Parents​—Train Your Children in the Field Service
1 How vital it is to give adequate care and attention to one’s family! Paul wrote Timothy: “Certainly if anyone does not provide for those who are his own, and especially for those who are members of his household, he has disowned the faith and is worse than a person without faith.” (1 Tim. 5:8) In a spiritual way, one of the primary responsibilities of Christian parents is to study with and train their children. (Deut. 6:6, 7; Eph. 6:4; 1 Tim. 4:15, 16) Family training will result in more qualified ministers to spread the good news of the Kingdom.​—2 Tim. 2:1, 2.
2 Parents should regularly schedule time to work with their children in field service. This is not always easy. But we can all agree that spending time in the field ministry on a regular basis brings many rich blessings. Taking your children along regularly will help them to see the importance of field service. As they have a fuller share in the work and improve in their abilities and experience Jehovah’s blessings on their activity, their joy will increase.​—Ps. 71:17.
3 What can you do to help your children to appreciate and enjoy the field ministry? Show them how they can have a share. Prepare for the field service together. Youths appreciate the loving attention given, thus helping them advance through progressive training. Depending on their age, they can learn to be attentive at the doors or to give the householders an invitation or tract. As progress is made, train them to share in reading a scripture. Many young ones enjoy witnessing with the magazines. A simple magazine presentation can easily be learned. Parents can help their children to find good talking points in current magazines and to give effective presentations. Regular and progressive parental teaching and training produce positive results.​—Eph. 4:13, 14.
VALUE OF EXAMPLE
4 Children copy what they see. The Bible says: “One who is good will leave an inheritance to sons of sons.” (Prov. 13:22) Therefore, parents need to do their utmost to set the right example. Your attitude toward the service will greatly affect your children. Through conversation and regular participation in the preaching work, do you show your child how much you appreciate the field ministry? Do your conversation and attitude indicate that you view pioneering as a goal for which young and old can reach out?​—Deut. 5:29.
5 Many young ones who have not as yet been baptized are sharing in the field service. We are pleased to have them with us. (Matt. 19:13-15) It may be that they are too young to understand fully what dedication means. But time does not stand still. So parents should be helping their children to see the need to progress and, in due course, to take the steps of dedication and baptism. Are your children responding to the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah? Are they applying what they are learning in the home and in the congregation? It is our hope that our young publishers will make continued progress and grow in their love for Jehovah and in their desire to serve him.

