Presenting the Good News​—In Rural Territory
1 Although preaching the good news in rural territories offers challenges that are not generally present when working in metropolitan areas, it can bring rewarding experiences. Many people who live in isolated areas are responding favorably to the good news of the Kingdom, and we want to do all that we can to help them.​—Compare Isaiah 42:10, 11.
ADVANCE PLANNING NECESSARY
2 In order to cover rural territory thoroughly, advance planning is needed, especially on the part of the elders. They will consider whether the size of car groups of publishers should be limited so that all can keep busy and the most can be accomplished. In some rural areas, houses are close together; in other sections they are farther apart. These factors should be considered when car groups are arranged. Sometimes publishers can be dropped off and later picked up by the car driver. However, good judgment should be shown.
3 Weather and road conditions must also be taken into consideration when working rural areas. In some territories rain, mud, snow, or icy conditions may make it difficult to travel at times. Elders may make arrangements to concentrate on working certain territories during summer months.
COOPERATION NEEDED
4 Working rural territories requires cooperation and consideration on the part of all. Sometimes, when extensive driving is necessary, those traveling in car groups can assist with automobile expenses. Additionally, good judgment should be exercised when publishers are invited into homes. Others waiting in the car will want to be patient. On the other hand, the publisher who is at the house will not want to spend an excessive amount of time talking with the householder but be conscious that others are waiting. Arrangements can be made for a return visit.
5 Plan to spend long days working in distant rural territory. This may be done especially during summer months when days are longer so that more can be accomplished. Publishers can arrange to take their lunch, as well as a sufficient supply of literature.
6 If rural territory is not worked frequently, it may be appropriate to leave a back issue of a magazine or a tract at not-at-homes. Some individuals have read such literature with interest upon returning home and have learned the truth. Keep an accurate record of interest found, and strive to call back at a later date. Effectively working rural territory presents challenges and may call for sacrifices. However, the results can be most rewarding.
7 May Jehovah continue to bless the efforts of his people as we “declare abroad the kingdom of God” in rural territories.​—Luke 9:60.

