Gaining Joy Through Increased Magazine Placements
1 Jehovah’s great universal organization is noted for its productivity. By means of Jesus Christ, Jehovah has developed an earthly organization that is also characterized by willing, productive workers. (Ps. 110:3; Matt. 9:37, 38) When we give attention to the quality as well as the quantity of our ministry, increased joy is sure to result. (Luke 10:17) This is particularly true as we brace up our minds for increasing our personal distribution of the Watchtower and Awake! magazines.
2 Magazine distribution is one of the principal ways in which the Kingdom message is spread abroad. Although this continues to be true as the preaching work expands, it has been noted that in some areas magazine placements are decreasing. How can this trend be remedied? What are some essentials we can keep in mind that will enable us personally to place more magazines?
A POSITIVE APPROACH
3 A first step to increased placements is: BE MAGAZINE CONSCIOUS. This objective is more easily attained when we are regular readers of The Watchtower and Awake! ourselves. Once we are acquainted with their contents, we want to use every appropriate occasion to present them to the public. For most of us, every Saturday offers a fine opportunity to share in distributing the magazines from door to door. Many congregations set aside a time for midweek magazine activity to accommodate publishers who are not able to work in the field service on Saturday. Some may find that evening witnessing affords excellent opportunities to offer magazines from house to house. Street work, store-to-store activity, informal witnessing, and magazine routes are all fine ways by which we can share in distributing magazines. In regular house-to-house work, the latest magazines may be presented when the current offer for the month is refused. Being alert to do so can bring us joy.
4 A second suggestion for increasing magazine placements is: KEEP IT SIMPLE. Some publishers have apparently talked themselves out of magazine placements by giving long presentations. Other publishers have used the Topic for Conversation when engaging in the magazine work. However, this is not recommended. When encouraging wider magazine distribution, the December 1, 1956, Watchtower stated: “A short, to-the-point presentation is best when offering magazines. The object is to place many copies. They will do their own ‘talking.’ The Society suggests a half-minute to a minute presentation, a well-worded statement of one point discussed in the magazine being offered.”
5 Next: BE VERSATILE. Prepare more than one presentation. Then as you encounter varying circumstances, you will be able to speak with people of all sorts and tailor your presentation to their interests. This advance preparation often leads to increased magazine distribution and greater joy.
6 One final suggestion: SET A PERSONAL GOAL. You may recall this was stressed in the insert “Magazines Point the Way to Life,” which appeared in the March 1984 Our Kingdom Ministry. You may wish to strive for an average of one magazine for each hour you are in service for the month. Your personal goal should be a reasonable one, considering your individual circumstances and the time you are able to spend in field service.
7 By means of his visible organization, Jehovah continues to provide what we need to increase our share in the ministry. We have exciting, colorful magazines with which to work. Now our own individual effort in cooperating with the congregation arrangements for magazine distribution enters the picture. Since such activity glorifies Jehovah, we will experience the deep-seated joy that comes with an increased share in the ministry with the magazines.​—John 15:8.

