Help Others to Appreciate Our Grand Creator
1 As we observe the creation around us, there is no doubt in our minds that a Creator exists and that he is very much interested in our future. (Rom. 1:20) The book Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? has been instrumental in sharpening our appreciation for the Creator. It has also helped us explain to others just how life came to be.
2 After reading the book, one individual with a science background described it as the finest book he had ever read for building appreciation for life. A college professor stated: “I have never before seen such a well-presented argument for creation.” Obviously, the Creation book has been a fine tool in helping many appreciate our Grand Creator, Jehovah God.
TAKE ADVANTAGE OF ALL APPROPRIATE OPPORTUNITIES
3 During the month of September, we will again have the privilege of offering this book in the field ministry. In addition to our regular house-to-house ministry, we can offer the Creation book while engaging in street work and when witnessing informally. We can offer it to workmates, schoolmates, relatives, and others with whom we come in contact. Do your Bible students have a copy? If not, why not see that they get one? Do you have a magazine route? It may be that these people would like to have a copy. Take advantage of every appropriate occasion to offer the Creation book this month.
4 Many young ones have been successful in placing the Creation book at school. Have you tried carrying a copy of the book with you to school? When those who are curious ask questions, you will have opportunity to witness to them. Some publishers have found success doing street work just outside college campuses and have had good discussions with many of the students.
USE THE TOPIC FOR CONVERSATION
5 The Creation book offer goes well with our Topic for Conversation, “Worship the Giver of Life.” In presenting the book, you might say: “Many people are interested in knowing how life got started. Have you ever wondered about that? [Allow response.] There are different opinions about the origin of life. Let us consider the Bible’s reasonable explanation. [Read Hebrews 3:4.] So logically every building or house we see around us today had a designer and a builder. Obviously, the much more complex universe must have had a creator. According to Hebrews 3:4, the Creator is God. But how should knowledge of this fact affect us? [Read Revelation 4:11.] So the wise course to take while there is yet time is to learn the Creator’s will and conform our lives to it.” Then offer the book, pointing out that it will show how man got here and how obedience to our Creator can lead to eternal life.
6 How happy we are to have this beautifully illustrated, 256-page volume that explains the truth about evolution and about creation! Primarily, however, this book honors our Grand Creator. It does that by letting us know how life got here, Jehovah’s marvelous purpose to sanctify his name, and his promise to bless mankind through the Kingdom.

