Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 4
Song 154
 7 min: Local announcements and appropriate announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage Saturday magazine activity. Suggest appropriate talking points from current magazines as time allows.
18 min: “Help Others to Appreciate Our Grand Creator.” Question-and-answer discussion of material. After discussing paragraph 5, have publisher demonstrate use of Topic for Conversation. Use the illustrations and captions on pages 130 and 251 when presenting Creation book. Encourage all to have a full share in offering the Creation book this month.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Boldly Witnessing in Business Territory.” Question-and-answer discussion of material by service overseer. Encourage greater participation in reaching businesspeople in territory. After considering paragraphs 6 and 7, demonstrate the magazine and the Creation book offers in business territory.
Song 92 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 11
Song 211
12 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Mention donation acknowledgments. Commend brothers for being alert to financial needs of local congregation and of worldwide preaching work. Call attention to article “Awake! on Audiocassette.” Emphasize importance of using appropriate subscription form. Announce field service arrangements.
20 min: Our Congregation’s Progress. Secretary discusses with congregation its activity during past service year. Compare the figures during the past two years as reported on Congregation Analysis Report (S-10). Point out where progress was made and what needs attention. Review suggestions made by circuit overseer.
13 min: Question Box. Presiding overseer will handle by question-and-answer coverage. Highlight reasons for presenting information from Society clearly and concisely.
Song 128 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 18
Song 133
12 min: Local announcements. Discuss appropriate introductions from Reasoning book that could be used locally with the suggested Topic for Conversation. Encourage all to share in magazine witnessing this Saturday. Highlight Theocratic News items as time allows.
18 min: “The Topic for Conversation.” Question-and-answer discussion. Interview two pioneers, asking which topics they have used effectively in congregation territory. Demonstrate presenting Creation book as suggested in paragraph 5 of article.
15 min: Prepare Well for the Field Ministry. Talk by elder who is effective in the field ministry. Discuss Ephesians 6:18, 19, showing that Paul asked the brothers to pray that ability to speak would be given him. We need to pray similarly for ourselves and for one another. Discuss need to schedule time for preparation, both as individuals and as family groups. (1 Cor. 14:40) Some have practice sessions with newer ones. Then, while working with these newer ones in the field ministry, they discuss the various situations experienced. (sg p. 39 par. 3; qm studies 44, 45) Use the Reasoning book in discussing introductions that fit the local territory and ways to handle conversation stoppers that are often heard. If you are having difficulties with some aspect of the ministry, arrange to work with experienced publishers and pioneers, inquiring specifically about the area in which you would like assistance. Preparing to serve Jehovah in the field is a joy. We are all busy and may find it difficult to set aside time, but even a few minutes thoughtfully spent will result in much improvement. Encourage all to prepare well for their ministry.
Song 156 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 25
Song 20
10 min: Local announcements and consideration of day’s text. Call attention to weekend arrangements for field service. Briefly mention offer for October and new Topic for Conversation.
20 min: “Gaining Joy Through Increased Magazine Placements.” Questions and answers. Compare average congregation magazine placements with amount received over last six months. When considering paragraph 6, have two pioneers discuss a few highlights from March 1984 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. Each pioneer should take a turn presenting a 30- to 60-second magazine presentation. As time permits, interview one or two publishers who do particularly well in placing magazines. Make local application as needed.
15 min: Local needs or presiding overseer discusses highlights of the July 1, 1989, “Questions From Readers,” encouraging exemplary young men to reach out for greater privileges of service.
Song 53 and concluding prayer.

