Presenting the Good News​—By Boldly Witnessing in Business Territory
1 Boldness is necessary in presenting the good news. This is especially true when witnessing in business territory. Some publishers are hesitant to work business territory. But this may be due to lack of experience. Or it may be an area in which there is a need to ‘muster up boldness.’​—1 Thess. 2:2.
2 Many publishers have obtained good results witnessing in business territory. One circuit overseer reported that in nine mornings of working business territory, a total of 177 books were placed. More could have been placed, but supplies simply ran out. You too may have success if you make the effort to share in working business territory.
KEEP A POSITIVE ATTITUDE
3 Being successful often depends upon our attitude. Some publishers are inclined to think that witnessing to storekeepers would be extremely difficult. One publisher who took this view said: “I expected that the response would be negative. However, to my surprise, the reaction to the Kingdom message was just the opposite. They were genuinely polite and friendly and almost always accepted the magazines.” Yes, those who share in working business territory speak of it as a fruitful work that brings blessings.
4 Elders, especially the service overseer, should take the lead. It may be beneficial to prepare special territory maps of heavily concentrated business areas. In other areas, the business places can be worked along with the residential territory. Be sure not to overlook shops, offices, factories, and so forth. The elders may see fit to select qualified publishers to work concentrated business territory.
5 Those who participate in this work should be neatly dressed and strive to be brief and to the point when contacting businesspeople. Presentations that are no more than a minute or so in length are most appropriate. Selecting days and times that are less busy is important in getting better results when working business territory. Some have found an early hour on Saturday morning to be appropriate, whereas others find it advantageous to call early on weekdays when owners are not so occupied and stores are not crowded.
WHAT WE CAN SAY
6 When working business territory, we could feature magazines, the current literature offer, or tracts. Our approach and the offer may vary according to the circumstances. When offering the magazines we could say: “Since it is often very difficult to find businesspeople at home, we are making this effort to contact you today. In the latest issue of The Watchtower, there is an article entitled [give title] that contains information that personally affects you. We feel you will enjoy reading this article as well as the others. We offer The Watchtower along with the Awake! for a contribution of only 50¢.”
7 This month we are featuring the publication Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? When offering this publication in business territory, you might say: “As a businessman, you know that much thoughtful effort is required to succeed. Could blind chance have succeeded in bringing about life and the universe? This book offers scientific proof that God created life. It also shows God’s thoughtful purpose in creating man. During this month we are offering this book entitled Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? It has much to say about life and what the future holds for mankind. We are leaving it on a contribution of $3.00.” (Small-size book is $1.50.)
8 We can be confident that Jehovah will bless our diligent efforts to reach people with this lifesaving good news. There is a vital need for thoroughness in our witnessing activity. (Acts 20:24) Since it is often hard for us to find businesspeople at home, we should take advantage of opportunities to speak with them at their place of work. Though working business territory may be challenging, we can be successful if we ‘muster up boldness to speak the good news of God.’

