The Topic for Conversation
1 The March 1977 Our Kingdom Service introduced the feature “Topic for Conversation” and gave suggestions on how it could be used effectively. All of us have benefited from this feature during the past 12 years. It has helped many to improve their effectiveness in presenting the good news.
2 During the past few years, a new Topic for Conversation has been introduced every three or four months. In the future, Our Kingdom Ministry will be changing the suggested Topic for Conversation more often. Generally, there will be a different topic each time the literature offer changes. This will help us make a smoother transition from our Scriptural presentation to the literature offer. It will also add greater variety to our ministry.
ALTERNATING TOPIC FOR CONVERSATION
3 Ordinarily, you will find that the basic suggested Topic for Conversation can be presented at each door. However, none should hesitate to alter the topic or use a different one if it seems advantageous to do so. Of course, when training new or young ones, it may be advisable to stick closely to the suggested Topic for Conversation.
4 Pioneers, as well as all who work their territory frequently, will no doubt find it helpful to use variations on the suggested topic to prevent their presentation from becoming routine. Various circumstances may make it advisable at times to use a topic different from the one suggested in Our Kingdom Ministry.
SOURCE MATERIAL FOR PRESENTATIONS
5 When we feel a need to vary the Topic for Conversation, where can we get other ideas to use? Past issues of Our Kingdom Ministry will be helpful. The publication you are offering also may be used as the source of your topic for conversation. Select a picture, a scripture, or a chapter theme and make a brief presentation to arouse interest. Try to get the book into the hands of the prospective reader so that he will look at it for himself. You may be surprised to see how easy it is to make the placement in this way. Later, when making the return visit, you can go into more detail. So keep the initial presentation relatively short.
6 All of us should continue to ask Jehovah for “the tongue of the taught ones” so we will know how to teach those we meet in our territories. (Isa. 50:4) It is our sincere desire to use the Topic for Conversation effectively. Lives are at stake.​—1 Tim. 4:16.

