Introducing Mankind’s Search for God
1 Many today feel that their choice of religion is a very private matter. Thus, it can be challenging to talk to our neighbors about this subject. But now we have the book Mankind’s Search for God, which has proved to be an invaluable aid in preaching to people of varied religious backgrounds.
2 What will you say to arouse the householder’s interest in reading this book? What points or features will you highlight that will appeal to professed Christians? to those with non-​Christian beliefs? or to those without faith? The following suggestions will help us be prepared to show our neighbors the need to “search for Jehovah” and to “call to him while he proves to be near.” (Isa. 55:6) The suggestions can be adapted to local circumstances.
3 Why Investigate What We Have to Say?: Since many profess to be satisfied with their religion and are not interested in changing, we may need to tailor our introduction to help the householder examine with an open mind what we have to say.
4 After an appropriate greeting, you could say:
▪ “In talking to our neighbors, we find that many people are satisfied with their religion and do not wish to change. But if people took the time to examine the beliefs of others, do you think this could lead to better understanding and less hatred in the world? [Allow householder to respond.] Notice what the Bible says about those who love God and how they should feel about others.” After reading Acts 17:26, 27, direct attention to paragraphs 15 and 16 on page 10 of the book Mankind’s Search for God.
5 Many have found that turning to a chapter in the book that discusses the householder’s religion will capture his attention. Note how this could be done.
6 After introducing yourself, you might say:
▪ “With so many religions today, have you ever wondered how we can determine if our religion is approved by God?” After the householder comments, direct his attention to the box on page 377 of the book Mankind’s Search for God, which shows ten ways to identify the true religion, noting particularly point number 7. Ask the householder if he agrees that one practicing true religion should feel that way about other races and nationalities. If time allows, look up the three scriptures cited. Then conclude by stating that the other nine reasons given have similar sound Scriptural backing.
7 Other Helpful Features: The extensive subject index in the back of the book can also be used. For example, what if many people in the territory feel that all religions are just different roads leading to God? Then look under the heading “Religion” where there is a subheading entitled “‘all religions equal’: 12.” This illustrates how the index can help us find talking points. When speaking with those who do not believe in God, we might show them paragraphs 1 and 2 on page 329, which address the question of modern disbelief. The five “Questions That Require an Answer” on pages 17-18 may especially interest those who question whether the Bible teaches what most religions preach.
8 By using effective transitions to introduce the book Mankind’s Search for God, we may be able to help the people with whom we talk to search for the one true God, Jehovah.

