Mankind’s Need to Search for God
1 During this 20th century, there have been mass movements of population as a result of wars, oppression, and economic pressures. And with faster travel and communication, the world seems to be getting smaller. This has brought various religious groups into closer proximity. Thus, religion is often in the news as affecting the lives of people everywhere.
2 Our preaching work has also been affected. It is no longer unusual to contact people who are of a religious background with which we are unfamiliar.
3 To help us have a clearer understanding of other religions and their historical background, we have been provided with the book Mankind’s Search for God. It answers hundreds of questions about the basic beliefs of the world’s major religions. We will be using this book in our ministry during the month of June. What subjects from this valuable aid can we highlight to encourage sincere ones to learn more about God?
4 One fundamental question that is handled throughout the book is: Does man have an immortal soul that survives his death and goes on to an afterlife? In one form or another, nearly every religion teaches that concept. Other questions addressed in the book are: Is there such a place as hell where souls are tormented? What is the true hope for the dead? Is there one God, or are there many gods? Attention can be drawn to the questions on pages 17-18 of the book. Even when talking with an atheist or an agnostic, questions 4 and 5 may get his attention and perhaps result in a profitable conversation.
5 All mankind needs to search for God and to seek his favor now. World events show that Armageddon is coming on apace. It is a time for zealous action. What a privilege we have in urging others to seek Jehovah now, while he may be found! (Isa. 55:6, 7) How does the book Mankind’s Search for God assist people in their search for God? It provides thought-​provoking information for persons of varied backgrounds. For example, paragraph 26 on page 297 points out to Muslims that true Christianity does not teach the Trinity doctrine. Notice how paragraph 43 on page 229 might stimulate the interest of Jewish people regarding the use of God’s name.
6 We have every reason to be enthusiastic about presenting this book. If we are well acquainted with its contents, we will find opportunities to arouse the interest of sincere people of many religious backgrounds. May we show zeal for this service.
7 Jehovah is a generous and merciful God. How gracious his invitation to learn about him! There may be many more who will become praisers of Jehovah. During June, with the aid of the book Mankind’s Search for God, we will be able to help many in Christendom as well as those from non-​Christian and godless backgrounds to start worshiping Jehovah “with spirit and truth.” (John 4:23, 24) May we persevere in finding truth seekers and strengthen their relationship with the God of truth. He can be found!

