Pioneering​—An Expression of Love
1 Love for Jehovah and for our fellowman is what moves us to participate more fully in the preaching activity. As our love for Jehovah and for people grows, we are stimulated to plan for an even greater share in the ministry. Our love expands as we increase in “accurate knowledge” of God’s Word. (Phil. 1:9, 10) The more we learn about Jehovah’s will, the more we appreciate the urgency of the times in which we are living. This intensifies our concern for others. Many are expressing their loving concern by taking up the pioneer service.
2 Can you make necessary adjustments to become an auxiliary or a regular pioneer? Granted, not all of us are able to pioneer. But each one of us should analyze his circumstances prayerfully.
3 Few Christians find that they have much free time to pioneer; therefore, it becomes necessary to ‘buy out the opportune time’ from those unnecessary things that are presently demanding our time. (Eph. 5:15-17) Our love for God and for people should make us willing to sacrifice some of our personal desires and comforts in order to express our love more fully. (Mark 12:33) Many of the things we acquire, and perhaps feel are normal, may be viewed as luxuries in other parts of the world.
4 What can parents do to assist their children to think in this God-oriented way? Parents should put theocratic goals before their children from an early age. As they approach graduation from school, are they thinking of secular goals or of spiritual ones? We want to help our youth see the lasting benefits that come from entering the pioneer service at an early age. This is storing up treasures in heaven. (Matt. 6:19-21) It pleases God and gives evidence of our loyalty and devotion to him. And it saves the lives of others.
5 It is God’s will that ‘all sorts of people should be saved.’ (1 Tim. 2:4) Can we show that this is also our will? We can if we are willing to put Kingdom interests first. We can also do this by having confidence that Jehovah will provide the necessities of life. (Matt. 6:31-33) Economic conditions may worsen, but Jehovah’s promise to care for us never changes.​—Ps. 37:25.
6 Exerting ourselves to share in the field ministry as much as our circumstances allow is an expression of love. For some this will mean being a regular pioneer. Why not do all you can to start by September 1, 1992?

