Returning With the Goal of Starting a Bible Study
1 After initially locating an interested person, thoroughness is needed on our part to keep this interest alive. Making return visits may lead directly into lifesaving Bible discussions and Bible studies. Consider these suggestions for making effective return visits.
At the end of the initial call, you might lay the groundwork for a return visit by asking:
▪ “Have you ever wondered why there are so many religions?” Upon returning you could say: “The last time I was here, the question was raised as to why there are so many religions. There are a number of reasons for this. I would like to read something interesting that I found in my review of this question.” Turn to page 322 of the Reasoning book and read the section under the subheading “Why are there so many religions?”
2 Can God be found in all religions? For God to be with a religion, it must be producing the right fruitage.
To start a return visit, you could ask:
▪ “How should religion affect a person’s conduct? What Jesus Christ stated at Matthew 7:17-20 gives us the guidelines that true religion is expected to follow.” Read the scripture directly from the end of paragraph 19 on page 12 of the book Mankind’s Search for God. Then ask the householder what he sees in the picture on page 13. “While millions claim to believe in God, many deny him by their works.” Next, read the first two sentences of paragraph 20. “These violent actions identify religions that do not follow the direction given by Christ to love one another, even our enemies. On my next visit, perhaps we can discuss what a religion must be doing if it is bearing good fruitage.”
3 What does the future hold for those who seek the true God? A discussion of this question right from the book Mankind’s Search for God may lead to a Bible study.
To begin a conversation, you might say:
▪ “With economic conditions as they are now, many people wonder if they can have a positive view of the future. I have found the Bible to be very encouraging when it talks about the future. Let me share with you God’s promise in Isaiah 65:21, 22, 25. [Read and comment briefly on the scripture.] The book Mankind’s Search for God answers some interesting questions on this, beginning in paragraph 17 on page 372.” Then demonstrate the Bible study arrangement, using paragraphs 17-20. “Next week I would like to consider the question, What is the foundation for the new world promised in the Bible?”
4 Make wise use of the time left to share in the thorough witness now being given in all nations of the earth. (Compare Acts 20:21.) Making return visits with the goal of starting a Bible study could mean everlasting life for those to whom we preach.

