Service Meetings for June
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the district convention and then for a 30-​minute review of the program highlights at the Service Meeting the following week. The day-​by-​day review may be assigned in advance to two or three qualified brothers who will be able to focus on key points. This well-​prepared review will help the brothers remember key points for personal application and use in the field. Comments from the audience and experiences related should be brief and to the point.
Week Starting June 1
Song 80
 5 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
10 min: Are Your Plans Complete for Attending the District Convention? Enthusiastic discussion between elder and ministerial servant. (Use brothers who will be attending convention with local congregation.) Discuss why we attend conventions. (Deut. 31:12, 13) All need to be attentive with objective of determining how they can use the information personally and in the field service. There is a need to make final check to see that all have transportation arrangements. There are some cautions all should have in mind. No one should plan late-​night recreation during convention, since all of us need sufficient rest. We should plan on witnessing. To whom? People met on public transportation and at gas stations, restaurants, hotels, and so forth. We must be discerning when offering literature and should not leave literature indiscriminately in public places or with persons who do not show genuine interest.
15 min: “Mankind’s Need to Search for God.” Questions and answers. Build enthusiasm for our work in the field this month. Show how the publication can help people of various religions in your territory.
15 min: “Introducing Mankind’s Search for God.” Discuss and demonstrate some of the suggestions in the article. In one demonstration show how to use the direct approach for starting studies. Also, show how the ten ways to identify the true religion on page 377 can be used effectively.
Song 225 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 8
Song 145
10 min: Announcements. Prepare in advance to have two regular or auxiliary pioneers comment on introductions they have found effective while working in local territory.
20 min: “Have a Self-​Sacrificing Spirit!” Talk on article in the February 1, 1992, Watchtower, pages 25-8. Emphasize that having a self-​sacrificing spirit is not optional but a Christian requirement. We do not lose by sacrificing material things and recreational activities in order to pursue Kingdom interests first.
15 min: Read and discuss Society’s letter dated May 1, 1992, regarding publishers cooperating with elders and Hospital Liaison Committees. Stress that this is an update of the previous letter about cooperating with elders and the Hospital Liaison Committees when facing a faith-​challenging medical situation. Tie in the cited Bible texts. Give special emphasis to paragraphs 2 and 6.
Song 61 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 15
Song 34
10 min: Announcements. Mention highlights of March field service report. Show what part the local congregation had in the field service report for March. Give accounts report. Commend congregation for work done in field service and for generous financial support of congregation.
20 min: “Will You Share in Informal Witnessing This Summer?” Discuss and demonstrate points in article. Stress fact that we are Jehovah’s Witnesses at all times, so we want to look for opportunities to give a witness. Prepare in advance to have two short experiences where individuals engaged in informal witnessing with good results or where someone in the congregation became interested in the truth as a result of informal witnessing.
15 min: Discussion and demonstrations of Bible discussion and presentation of Mankind’s Search for God, using Isaiah 55:6, 7 and Acts 17:26, 27. Show how new and young ones can use a simplified presentation, using just Isaiah 55:6, 7. In demonstrations make it clear that literature is offered only to persons who show genuine interest and who really want to read it. After the person agrees to read the publication you are offering, you might say: “We know you will benefit greatly by reading this information. This work is supported by voluntary donations. If you wish to make a small donation toward our work today, we are pleased to accept it.” When householders contribute, publisher should put the donation in a separate purse or envelope. Such donations should later be placed in appropriate contribution box at Kingdom Hall for the Society’s worldwide work.
Song 154 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 22
Song 173
 5 min: Announcements. Theocratic News. In covering items, compare present report with information on that branch for the 1986 service year, as found in the service year report in the 1987 Yearbook.
20 min: “Pioneering​—An Expression of Love.” Questions and answers. After discussing paragraphs 3 and 4, interview three regular pioneers (or publishers who auxiliary pioneer regularly or periodically), including, if available, one young regular pioneer who pioneered right after getting out of school. Ask how they arranged their affairs to pioneer, what motivated them to do so, what material sacrifices they have had to make, and what blessings they have received while serving as regular pioneers.
20 min: “Returning With the Goal of Starting a Bible Study.” Discussion and demonstrations. Demonstrate suggested Bible discussion in paragraph 3. Use paragraphs 17-20 on pages 372-5 of book Mankind’s Search for God as a basis for starting a Bible study.
Song 135 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 29
Song 90
10 min: Announcements. Have two short demonstrations showing how to have a Scriptural discussion when presenting magazines in field service this weekend.
15 min: “Apostolic Succession.” Service overseer accompanies a pioneer making return visit on person who raised question: “Is not the pope a successor of the apostle Peter?” Base discussion on Reasoning book, page 37 to first heading on page 39.
20 min: Local needs. Could review points presented at last circuit assembly or special assembly day program that can be applied locally.
Song 167 and concluding prayer.

