R957 : page 1 

VOL. VIII. PITTSBURGH, PA., AUGUST, 1887. NO. 12. 



page 1 

WE HAVE about a hundred copies of 
cloth-bound DAWNS VOL. I. which are 
slightly scuffed, "shop-worn" outside, but 
clean and perfect inside. They are just 
the thing for loaning. While they last 
you can have them at 40 cents each,— by 
mail 10 cents extra for postage. 



R958 : page 1 

DAWN VOL. I. IN ITS THIRTY-SEVENTH 
THOUSAND. 

You will be glad to learn that the thirty-seventh 
thousand of M. DAWN VOL. I. is 
now on the press. The extreme heat of 
the past month reduced the demand somewhat 
and enabled us to get fully caught 
up. We are now ready again to fill orders 
from the new lot. New laborers are 
continually entering the harvest field, and 
the sixteen chapters of DAWN, as sixteen 
sermons, are thus being delivered daily to 
hundreds who could not be reached so well 
in any other manner. In each case too a 
special blessing seems to be upon the 
laborers. 



R957 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER 

We are impressed with the fact that 
the present is a most favored time for the 
saints in every respect. It is favorable 
for personal growth in grace and knowledge. 
How the early truth-seekers of 
this age, the Bereans, etc., would have 
rejoiced at such student's helps as the 
Diaglott, Young's Concordance, Dawn, 
and the monthly Towers furnish; besides 
which, are the numerous histories, cyclopaedias, 
dictionaries and other works of 
reference accessible to all in the public 



libraries of even moderate sized towns. 
With such helps more can be learned of 
God's Word and plan in a day, than it 
formerly would have been possible to 
gather in a year. The only obstacle is, 
that now science, philosophy, politics, 
pleasure-seeking, and above all money-seeking, 
are also alive, and so absorbing, 
that only those well consecrated have grace 
enough to resist these many claims upon 
time and strength, and to use the abundantly 
provided helps, to grow thereby. 

And if the opportunities for getting good, 
discerning the truth, etc., be favorable 
far beyond every other time, how does the 
present compare with the past in opportunities 
for letting the light shine upon 
others? There never was a time so favorable 
as the present for Christian effort in 
the vineyard. While it is true that sectarianism 
has closed the churches of to-day 
against the truth more thoroughly four 
fold than the Jewish synagogues were 
closed against it in Paul's day,— while he 
could go into the synagogue and preach 
Christ among the Scribes, Pharisees and 
hypocrites without hindrance, for a while 
at least, until he laid the plan before 
them, and while you have found it impossible 
to do this, being debarred by the stricter 
usages, regulations, etc., established not 
by the Lord or his Apostles, but by a self-constituted 
"clergy"— yet, for all this our 
day is far more favorable than Paul's day. 

If we would travel from place to place 
to meet with believers we can do as much 
traveling in a week, as Paul could do in a 
month or more, and with much more 
comfort. If we would preach, though we 
cannot often do so to large gatherings by 
voice, we live at a time when every one 
can read and write, which only the very 
few could then do, and when the printed 
gospel is cheap and convenient, and often 
more effective than oral sermons. 

The anxious willing heart can do far 
more thus, than Acquilla and Priscilla 
could do in their way and time with the 
same amount of effort. Nay, our arms are 
not shortened; for we can preach with 
both the printed and written page through 
the agency of the wonderful mail systems 
of our day, to friends and strangers the 
world over, and at almost no cost. 

Another and not the least of our privileges 
and advantages over those of the 



early church, is that the ministry of to-day 
can be self-supporting. While Brother 
Paul was compelled to labor at tent-making 
at times while preaching the gospel, when 
necessary means failed to come from the 
brethren, Brother Adamson and others 

R958 : page 1 

of to-day may most effectively preach the 
gospel from house to house while the necessary 
provision for the daily bread falls as 
noiselessly as did the manna from heaven. 
Selling DAWN they are able to pay their 
way and reach far greater numbers and in 
a much more comfortable manner than 
was Paul's privilege. 

Then, too, our day is favored in that 
though still there are religious bigots who 
correspond to those shrine-makers to Diana 
whom Paul encountered at Ephesus, 
ready to incite the people against us because 
their craft is in danger (Acts. 19:23,35-41), 
yet now even more than then, 
the civil authorities protect our persons 
from violence, as the "town clerk" 
helped them; and those who go about the 
Master's work now with earnest sobriety, 
wise as serpents and harmless as doves, 
will not be either beaten with stripes or 
stoned. 

Seeing what grand opportunities the 
Lord has given us, should we not bear 
much fruit? and will he not look for much 
fruit on every branch of the vine truly 
united to him? Surely the Master will 
expect fruit, not only in the beautiful graces 
of Christian character but also in faithful 
earnest effort for the spread of the glad 
tidings to honor him and bless our fellows. 

Out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh. This is a close test of 
our spiritual condition always; for if the 
Lord, the truth, the kingdom, and the 
service of others is uppermost in our hearts, 
they will come most freely from our lips 
and pens, and will find some outlet. 

The above is the present outlook; the 
outlook for the future we leave for the 
"View" of next issue. 



R958

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Falls Church, Va., June 26, 1887. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I read in this 
month's Tower a selected article entitled 
"The Son of God and the Son of Man." 
The question is asked, Why does Jesus call 
himself the Son of Man? and the writer 
seems to think the answer is found in the 
fact that he descended from David, and calls 
attention to the fact that the Greek emphasis 
makes the term read— The Son of 
the Man. 

It seems to me that the answer must be 
sought for farther back than David, who 
was not the man, but a man. Adam might 
be called the man, because God created 
him by a special act, but David was the 
natural son of Jesse. When God promised 
a Deliverer who should bruise the Serpent's 
head, he was to be the seed of the 
woman. Adam was not mentioned because 
he was legally dead, as were all his 
descendants, David with the rest— In 
Adam all died. But if we come down to 
the giving of the law to the children of 
Israel we get further light on what is to 
many a very strange provision of that law. 
If a man died without heirs his brother 
took his widow and raised up seed unto 
the dead brother. The children were 
literally the children of the living man, but 

R959 : page 1 

were counted to the dead brother. We 
see by the light of this typical provision 
of the law, why God promised the Deliverer 
through the woman and not through the 
man. Adam had sinned and was legally 
dead, and therefore could have no living 
children; all would be like himself dying 
and reckoned dead, while justice demanded 
as a ransom from death an exact equivalent, 
the sacrifice of a living, perfect, 
man. In due time God raised up just 
that man, in the person of Jesus, born 
of the virgin Mary; not by the will of 
man, but by the power of God. He became 
so to speak the son of the widow of 
the dead Adam by a living father, and by 
the provision of the law he came to fulfill 
was reckoned unto the dead Adam the 
only living son, therefore he had a right 
to be called the son of the man. 
G. E. R 



page 1 

Ohio, July, 1887. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-It is getting to 
be something of a task for me to write 
even a short letter. 

It seems a long time since I received a 
letter from you, but I know that the 
Master's work makes a demand on all your 
time, and I will not complain. I am 
quite feeble and not able to do much more 
physically than to sit in my easy chair 
from morning to night. But the Lord is 
very gracious to us, and bestows blessings 
more than I can enumerate. Among them 
we number the visits of the TOWER. 

We enjoyed the May WATCH TOWER 
much. Glad there was so much interest 
in last Passover meeting. I never saw before, 
that the cup is drank only by the Priest 
class, while the bread is eaten by all believers. 
If this be correct, (and I do not doubt 
it) how true is the counterfeit, (Papacy) to 
the genuine. She gives the cup to the 
priest only, and the wafer to the people. 

Am greatly pleased with "The body of 
Sin destroyed." Those who are misled after 
a careful study of that article, are not, it 
would seem to me, very anxious to find the 
truth. All I can now do, is to pray that 
God may keep the eye single that the 
whole body may be full of light. 

I deem Sister R.'s article in July TOWER 
"Discipline in the church" very timely. 
It surely is time that any who deny the 
great foundation, that the Lord bought 
them, should be cut off; [ignored as brethren]: 
else the body would be without 
spot, etc. 

I think I am gradually failing, as my 
strength is growing less, my lungs seem 
to be worse, and I am losing my flesh, 
but though heart and flesh fail, my trust in 
God shall never fail. He most gloriously 
sustains us day by day. 

We send our love to you both. 
Affectionately, S. T. TACKABURY. 

Texas Co., Mo. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have canvassed 
about one half of Mountain Grove, and 
got 36 subscribers. I think I will get 
65 or 70 there, and will want 10 or 15 
extra copies to sell to acquaintances between 
there and Seymour; therefore 
please send me 80 copies, paper bound 



DAWNS. 

I have desired to sell M. DAWN ever 
since I read it last fall, but was not able 
to pay my expenses and do so, and I did 
not think I could sell enough of them to 
pay expenses. My intention now is to 
spend the remainder of my life selling 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. My reason for supposing 
I could not make expenses selling 
DAWN was that I had tried to sell FOOD and 
take orders for Z.W.T. and failed to 
clear expenses. 

May the Lord continue to strengthen 
you in the work. Yours in fellowship 
and service. J. R . 

Lebanon, O., June 18, 1887. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am laboring 
on slowly in the way which the Lord 
seems to have outlined for me one in which 
self is wholly subjected to the law of the 
Spirit, and no allowance made for the 
flesh. I am slowly passing from the milk 
stage of the gospel into that in which I can 
endure some stronger meat; I strive to 
forget the things of my gentile state and 
press on and reach after the things which 
pertain unto godliness. 

My Z.W. TOWERS samples are about exhausted. 
I sent many of them by mail, 
and I am constantly receiving letters from 
those of the faith and oh! how wonderful! 
they all speak the same things, having the 
same mind and judgment. 

page 2 

How easy to be of one mind when once 
we reach the fat place in God's unlimited 
pasture lands. It matters little how lean 
the sheep may be on leaving their sectarian 
enclosures, soon after reaching the rich 
succulent pastures of Christ's fold they 
begin to improve. Some of us are having 
a weekly Bible meeting in which we search 
the Scriptures to see if these things be true. 
The Lord is with us and we are getting 
stronger and stronger. 

In conclusion, I cannot refrain from 
saying that I am so glad I am free; free from 
those awful shackles of a benighted and 
misguided mind and conscience. I shall 
always thank God for your instrumentality 
in lifting this burden from my tired 
shoulders, and pointing me to the glorious 
light. I remain Yours in Hope and service. 



J. P. M . 

Johnson Co. 111. June 20, 1887. 

BRO. RUSSELL:-I received the circulars 
and followed the plan of using them in 
canvassing our town for a while. But I soon 
found this too laborous, so I adopted the 
talk plan and put energy and soul into 
the work with the following results: I 
went from home two miles to town and 
took 48 orders for the paper bound DAWN 
and 3 for the cloth bound, 5 1 in all, in 
less than one half day. 

I enclose on a separate sheet an order 
for more books; also Money Order for the 
same. Yours for the Master's honor. 
H. N. A . 

Willow Springs, Mo. 
C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR BROTHER:- 

Since writing to you before, I have had a 
severe attack of Pneumonia Fever in which 
I came near dying, and from which I have 
not yet recovered. I am now so that I 
cannot walk more than a quarter of a mile 
without resting, and every one or two 
hours I have to lie down and rest, so that 
in four days and a half, I have been able 
to put in only sixteen hours work. But 
during that time, I have taken fifty orders 
for the paper bound DAWN, and eight for 
the cloth bound. I am going from here 
to Cabool, to canvass there while I am 
waiting for the enclosed order to come. I 
desire to spend the remainder of my days 
canvassing for the DAWN. Fifty eight 
copies in sixteen hours beats any preaching 
I ever knew, 16 sermons to the copy 
makes 928 sermons in 16 hours. 

The advice of the Doctor is that I go 
West for my health; so I wish to canvass 
in that direction. Hoping to hear from 
you soon, I am yours in the service of our 
Lord. J. R . 

R959 : page 2 

London, England. 
DEAR SIRS:-I have been both reading 
and praying with friends over the truths 
contained in the book entitled "Food for 
thinking Christians"— and we do feel that 
our loving Father has caused us so to do. 
I have had that book by me for about five 
years, and never thought of reading or 
becoming in any way, interested in it or 



the subjects upon which it dwells: but 
blessed be God! He has caused us (a few 
young men and women) to thirst and hunger 
after righteousness, and also implanted 
within us a desire to "come out and be 
separate," and to fully consecrate ourselves 
to Him who has redeemed us: and also 
to know of the things of God that we 
may be the better able to serve Him. 

Will you kindly send me any further 
matter upon these or other truths which 
will be to the glory of God. We do 
earnestly ask for your prayers. We pray 
for you: May the grace of the Lord Jesus 
be with you. I remain Yours in the Lord, 
FRED S. D . 

Columbus, O., July 4, '87. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL: 

—It has been sometime since you have 
had a letter from me, but it has not been 
from lack of love or zeal, but because I 
wanted to give a good account of myself. 
Of course the Master knows, but one 
wants the brethren to know also; for "we 
all are one in Christ." 

I have wanted to canvass with the DAWN 
ever since it came out, but from one 
cause or another I could not get out with 
them until the 24th of June. I am naturally 
very timid with strangers, and that made 
it quite hard for me, but with the aid of 
the Master, I have succeeded, not in 
selling the DAWN, but in overcoming the 
flesh. I trembled like a leaf in the first 
house, but was treated so well that I soon 
gained composure and retained it throughout. 
I think the Lord was with me. Although 
I did not take any names, I found 
quite a number of truth-hungry people to 
whom I loaned the TOWER. 

I have great hope of selling a few DAWNS 
at least. I suffer with terrible headaches, 
which lay me up for several days, and have 
to be careful about getting too tired. I 
tried to follow as carefully as possible the 
directions in reference to canvassing. I 
shall never forget my first effort, how I 
stood at the gate and said, Dear Lord I 
cannot. But now I can say, My Master I 
can, I must. Our Father is able to help us 
in every undertaking that is right. Blessed 
be his holy name. 

Enclosed find Money Order for $5.00. 
Please send DAWNS as soon as possible. 
Your sister in Christ. B. F. M 



page 2 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed 
you will find $5.00. Please send MILL. 
DAWN to the following persons:... 

Please send some April TOWERS for distribution 
and for the balance of the money 
please send me M. DAWNS, paper bound. 
I am more thankful than I can ever express 
for a knowledge of these grand truths, and 
desire to do what I can to give them to 
those who will accept them. 

With much love to dear Sister Russell 
(whose articles in Z.W.T. do me so much 
good) and gratitude to yourself so generously 
permitting us to spread this knowledge 
of God's plan, I remain Yours in 
Christian love. MRS. O. W. SEELEY. 

Oceana Co. Mich. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-A few of us 
here who are rejoicing in the freedom 
wherewith Christ hath made us free, met on 
the evening of April 7th and united in 
celebrating the Anniversary of our Lord's 
death. A blessed season to all was the 
result. 

While we continue to be denounced by 
the blinded worshipers of the "image," 
yet our God is with us, and the truths we 
proclaim are becoming more manifest in 
the sight of men, as from God. 

I have discovered a movement, among 
the Swedes similar to ours, a family of 
them rented a farm joining mine. They 
are good pious people. I paid them a 
visit after they had become settled, and 
learned that they in common with numbers 
of their countrymen here had discorded 
sects and sect names, salaried ministry, 
etc., etc. They believe that where two 
or three meet, there is the true Church, 
and every one is encouraged to use his or 
her own talents as the Lord has endowed 
them. The Bible and the Bible only is 
their rule of faith and practice. I found 
that from a study of Scripture they have 
discovered many truths similar to those 
we rejoice in. 

Mr. B , the head of the family, was 

highly interested in the account I gave 
him of our Church with no name, but 
Christian. He would like to have a 
sample copy of the SWEDISH TOWER; he 
can speak but not read English. I believe 



my dear Brother this is the very class (the 
meek) which it is our privilege to feed, 

and Mr. B . may desire to spread the 

truth among his countrymen. 

We have meetings once a week for 
studying, praise and prayer, and the members 
of the Lord's body are realizing daily 
growth in grace, and in the knowledge of 
the truth. 

May the Lord bless you and Sister Russell 
with all who in your city call upon the 
Lord in sincerity and truth. The Church 
here sends love and greeting. 
Your brother for the truth. 

THOS. BREWER. 

Tuscola County, Michigan. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-May the grace 
and peace of God be with you and all the 
"elect." May the Giver of every good 
and perfect gift endow you with wisdom 
and courage, and strengthen your faith. 
May you be able to discern and expound 
the truths contained in God's Word; for 
we realize that the days are evil. I am 
fully persuaded that the time when "the 
very elect" should be deceived, if it were 
possible, is upon us. Within the past 
year or two I have seen quite a number of 
new periodicals purporting to give advanced 
light, pointing out unmistakably 
many of the errors of "Orthodoxy," and, 
although somewhat garbled, many of the 
truths of God's Word; and holding up 
the example of Jesus Christ, as the beacon 
to guide us up to everlasting perfection. 
These teachings will be very apt to mislead, 
and indeed are misleading many 
thinking Christians who are unlearned in 
the Word. A noticeable characteristic of 
these new doctrines is an ignoring of 
God's ransom for the lost, but taking, for 
imitation, the example of our Lord's suffering 
for the right, just as any general 
might inspire his soldiers by telling them 
how Napoleon's soldiers faced death at 
Austerlitz or Lodi, or how Leonidas stood 
at Thermopylae. They thus ignore the 
fact that the penalty for sin is death, and 
that man having sinned is in death; that 
the laws of God are absolute and eternal, 
and that there is no escape from the penalty 
of these laws until the uttermost farthing 
is paid. How easy for the flock to 
be deceived by some of these "strong delusions;" 
these thoughts have induced me 



to write to you now, instead of waiting 
longer until I could get a little money to 
send. I can sell a few "Dawns," to some 
that I have talked with. I have been an 
invalid for two years but I am some better 
now. If you will send me ten April 
"Towers," I will place them discreetly; 
also send me ten paper-bound DAWNS. 
But if the interest of "Tract Fund" will 
suffer by it do not send them. I perceive 
that there is so much to do that I want the 
means used that will accomplish the most. 
I do not expect to be able to do much for 
awhile yet but I can do a little. 

W. C. M . 

Ohio, July 28, '87. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Card received. 
Thanks. Took 60 subscribers to-day. Best 
day (though hot), except the day I expected 
to take 100 and ran out of territory, 
after I had 70. I shall yet take 100 subscribers 
in a day. But it is not safe for 
me to go more than a slow jog in this great 
heat. It is very hard not to preach as we 
canvass. I think this almost a model day 
in respect to refraining from it. DAWN is 
preaching, and will— the separation goes 
on rapidly and every DAWN agent is a 
bright and shining light— a repetition of 
those who at the first Advent preached: 
"The Kingdom of heaven is at hand." 

Much love, regard and sympathy joined 
by Mrs. A. to you and yours, 

J. B. ADAMSON. 

Willow Valley, Neb. 
DEAR FRIENDS:-A few days ago a 
friend handed me MILLENNIAL DAWN and 
asked me to read it. As soon as I looked 
it over, I saw I had received it as an answer 
to my prayer for more light on the 
teaching of the Scriptures. I had been 
fed on the diluted "Milk of the Word" 
so long that I was nearly famished, and 
when I saw a table before me loaded with 
such soul-satisfying food, I could hardly 
sleep until I had devoured it, and now my 
hunger is appeased for the first time in my 
life. Pray, do not think by my ready acceptance 
of this, that I am one of the kind 
that is "blown about by every wind of 
doctrine." I had previously searched the 
Scriptures enough to know that this doctrine 
harmonized perfectly with its teachings 
the attributes of God, and the need 



of the whole human race, and what more 
could any one ask. I had seen long ago 
that sectarianism was contrary to the spirit 
of Christ's prayer for the unity of the 
church, and that the Scriptures did not 
teach any kind of lasting life to the wicked. 
But I had not seen the restoration of the 
human race to human perfection during 
the Millennial age. When you showed me 
that, it shed such a flood of light on the 
Scriptures that God's plan for the redemption 
of mankind seemed to stand out in 
capital letters all through the Bible. How 
could I have been so blind! My almost 
one prayer for myself has been that God 
would not let me fall below the highest 
possibilities of his grace, and so when I 
received for bread what to all appearance 
was a stone, I knew it must be just the 
kind of food I needed. I see now that he 
was preparing me to receive "meat in due 
season." I hope to send you with this 
my subscription for "Dawn" and "Tower." 
Please send me what reading matter 
you think best for distribution. I am a 
farmer's wife and do my own work, but 
have many acquaintances in town whom 
I hope to interest in this work, and I 
think I can get quite a list of subscribers 
for the paper and book. I shall consider 
it not only a duty but a blessed privilege 
to assist, by every means at my command, 
in proclaiming this gospel. Sincerely 
yours, O. E. S . 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel grateful 
to you for your kindness and generosity 
in sending the WATCH TOWER so 
long, and that, too, without remuneration. 
I am an old man— in my 87th year, I can 
labor but little. 

Be assured, dear brother, that the WATCH 
TOWER is a welcome visitor. It is always 
freighted with the "meat in due season." 

Your "View" article in the June TOWER 
is truly seasonable, but to the world at 
large, and even to the nominal church, it 
will be "all Greek." But few can tell 
whereabouts we are in the world's history, 
and what relation the "land question" or 
any other question sustains to prophecy. 
Darkness more dense, (if possible) than 
that which pervaded Egypt, enshrouds the 
people on all of the vital questions which 
are coming, or are already come. 

"The perilous times," in which we now 



find ourselves engulfed, should intensify 
our desire for the kingdom to come, and 
the will of God to be done in earth as it 
is done in heaven. 

Our God is not slack concerning his 
promises, as some men count slackness. 
Everything is hastening to its final end. 
Human governments are very fragile, and 
they will be able to stand the strain which 
is brought to bear on them but a short 
time longer. M. I. LEWIS. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Not long since I was 
busily engaged in reading Charles Reade's 
novels. A friend whom I esteem dearly 
sent me MILLENNIAL DAWN with the request 
that I cease my novels and try to 
become interested in it. I did so to please 
my friend, without the least notion of 
being anything but bored, still I wanted 
to be able to say, "I have read it." 

Now I will digress into a little autobiography 
that you may understand how I 
feel since reading DAWN. I was educated 
with a view of entering the Presbyterian 
Ministry, and on various accounts abandoned 
that and with it all interest in 
religious affairs. I became skeptical and 
had no patience with either churches or 
preachers. In this condition came DAWN, 
and you can understand why I did not 
expect to be interested. I had not gone far 
until the scales began to fall from my eyes 
and the light to pour in upon my darkened 
mind. I finished the book almost before 
I gave it up and I thank God this day for 
the glorious results to me, in which I have 
the assurance beyond a doubt that I have 
found the "narrow way" and am rejoicing 
in the truth. I have passed through a 
very severe ordeal of sickness and have 
felt that my remarkable preservation from 
death must have a purpose. So strongly 
had I been impressed that months before 
I heard of DAWN I promised that if God 
would show me his will I would devote 
myself to his service. I trusted I should 
be shown and when DAWN came I saw. 
I felt that whatever it was I would accept 
the work for Christ, however humble, and 
I started out with my volume of DAWN 
last Monday morning, and while the heat 
was intense and my crippled condition 
made the work very laborious, I have today 
(Thursday noon) 58 orders for DAWN 
to be delivered in two weeks. I am much 



encouraged— hope to sell 200 volumes here. 
I make this an order then for 200 copies 
of DAWN to be shipped by freight to this 
place at once so I may meet my engagement. 
I expect if my health admits it to 
push the work as rapidly as possible. 
I am very faithfully, Yours believing. 
G. W. DALE. 

Chatham Co., N.C. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I now give you an 
account of my success in Durham. I was 
one week in canvassing the place, I sold 
twenty the first day, twenty three the next 
day by eleven o'clock, and so on, thirty-six 
being the highest sold in any one day, 
my average per day was thirty. I enjoy 
the work very much. 

I enclose an order for 210 copies of 
paper-bound DAWNS VOL. I. Please send 
at once. 

I wish that every Christian could realize 
that there is a work for him to do. I wish 
that they would come and help us to roll 
this large wheel. It is rolling fast but we 
need more help, we want the labor of more 
thinking Christians to carry on this grand 
work of God. Yours truly, J. G. C 



R958 : page 3 

THE GOSPEL OF GRACE 



God, in eternal counsel, planned 

To form in space this rounded earth; 
And in response to his command, 

Submissive nature gave it birth. 
A perfect human pair was formed 

In their Creator's image pure, 
While 'round them Eden was adorned 

With all perfection could insure. 

Upon this Adam (man and wife) 

But one restriction God did place: 
To disobey would forfeit life, 

And bring destruction on the race. 
The serpent, subtle more than all, 

Beguiled the woman, she the man, 
And from their station high, they fall, 

Thus bringing death on all the clan. 

The sentence just, must take effect. 
God's purpose, then, defeated is? 
His work, by Satan's malice wrecked? 



Has all He planned thus gone amiss? 
Ah! no; "A RANSOM!" gracious words: 

God says, "A RANSOM I have found!" 
What wondrous joy the cry affords, 

As from thy Throne is heard the sound. 

A little less than angels formed, 

JESUS we see, God's only Son, 
With glory, honor, He's adorned, 

By death for sinners to atone. 
"Lo, I come; of me 'tis written, 

To do thy will, Jehovah God." 
For Adam's sin the Lamb was smitten; 

For us He bore the chastening rod. 

And in our stead, instead of ALL, 

He bore the curse, and tasted death 
For every man, who, by the fall, 

Must yield to God his vital breath. 
The "CORRESPONDING PRICE" is paid: 

Our God is just, and will restore 
All those who in the dust are laid, 

To give them life forever more. 

But one condition here we find, 

In off ring all this gift sublime: 
The human will, the human mind, 

Must then accord with the Divine. 
And to secure this harmony, 

The SEED— the Christ— hath been prepared, 
And we of that blest seed shall be, 

Who, here, his sacrifice have shared. 

And those (their number must be few,) 

Who, in "Times of RESTITUTION," 
Reject the offer to make new 

And be raised up to full perfection, 
Must be destroyed in "lake of fire" 

(Not "life in pain," but sure destruction) 
With him who to God's place aspired, 

And all who share like condemnation. 

Then "ALL-in-all" our God shall be: 

His creatures all (now to his will 
Brought into joyous harmony) 

Shall their respective stations fill. 
O'er every name, THE CHRIST, divine, 

In heavenly glory e'er shall shine, 
And every being on each plane, 

That exaltation shall proclaim. 

This is the "Plan" the WORD reveals, 
"The Church," attired in harlot dress, 

Rejects the light, the truth conceals; 
But God has cast her from her place 

Who holds truth in unrighteousness, 



And to his saints He makes it known, 
As the blest Gospel of his grace, 

To ALL, "in due time," to be shown. 

If this be true, WHEN dawns the day 

Of this exultant Jubilee? 
And when shall saints in "Narrow-way" 

Be like their Head, as Him they see? 
E'en NOW the light begins to break, 

Of that blest day when all shall wake. 
Then lift your heads, exalt them high, 

For your Redemption draweth nigh. 
S. I. HICKEY. 



page 3 

THE writer of the above signed it A Believer, 
but I take the liberty of putting his 
full name, knowing that our readers will 
appreciate it the more. You will remember 
him as the brother whose letter appeared 
next to last among the "Kind 
Words of Commendation" to DAWN published 
in April TOWER. For several months 
Bro. H. has been in a furnace of severe 
trial, prostrated by sickness. He was obliged 
to remove, and to abandon the meetings 
so favorably started in Brooklyn and 
also the canvassing, but is still strong in 
the Lord. We print his last letter that 
you may be able the more closely to sympathize 
with him. --EDITOR. 

July 13th, 1887. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: -Grace 

unto you and peace, from God our Father 
and Jesus Christ our Lord! 

I have been again prostrated by my enemy, 
if so I can term that which is God's 
instrument in consuming the sacrifice, so 
freely presented. Since writing you, I 
have suffered prolonged, intense and fearfully 
weakening pain. I am now at very 
low ebb, but mending slowly: perhaps to 
regain strength, and perhaps only to be 
again suddenly and violently attacked. 
But all is peace, joy, and confiding trust 
in my blessed God and Savior. He doeth 
all things well, and I bow in glad submission. 
My physician here advises me, as 
the very best thing to do, to go to Saratoga 
and drink certain of the waters there 
for the removal of the gravel by dissolving. 
My wife wrote, last week, to an old physician-friend 



residing there, stating my 
case. He replies in indorsement of this 
opinion, and says "I can find a place in a 
private boarding house at $7.00 per week 
—my services free to him." 

Now I thought that if I continue to gain 
strength for another week, I might be able 
to go and to pay my way by selling DAWN 
in Albany and Saratoga, if these places 
have not been canvassed. Please write 
me as to this immediately. 

In patient waiting, Your brother in 
Christ, S. I. HICKEY. 

P.S. My wife read above and says, I 
must not try to do any thing. Well, perhaps 
not. But I hope for strength. 



R959 : page 3 
CHRIST CRUCIFIED. 

In an age when human ingenuity taxed 
itself to the utmost limit to invent cruelties 
to torture the victims of public revenge 
or hate, crucifixion certainly had 
a bad pre-eminence. Among the Romans 
it was reserved, with few exceptions, 
for slaves and foreigners, being considered 
too horrible and disgraceful for a Roman 
citizen, no matter what might have been 
his crime. It was the greatest possible 
indignity that could be heaped upon any 
offender whether considered in the light of 
a public disgrace, or of physical anguish. 

Crucifixion was a slow, lingering, horrible 
process of dying, lasting always many 
hours, and often for several days. The 
victim was usually bound to the cross as 
it lay upon the ground; the hands and 
feet were then nailed to the wood, and 
the cross elevated and planted in the 
socket prepared to receive it. This gave 
the body a terrible wrench and great was 
the agony which followed. The hot sun 
beat upon the naked body and uncovered 
head, (which in our Lord's case was 
pierced with the additional cruelty of the 
crown of thorns). The ragged, undressed 
wounds festered and inflamed and shooting 
pains darted from them through the 
quivering flesh. Added to this was the 
agony of an increasing fever, a throbbing 
head and a raging thirst; and even the 
slightest movement intensified the anguish. 



As death drew near, swarms of insects 
gathered about to increase the torment 
from which there could not be the slightest 
relief. As no vital organ was directly 
assailed, life lingered on until the power 
of endurance was completely exhausted. 

Over the head of the sufferer was usually 
an inscription describing the crime 
for which he had been condemned. This 
was generally borne before him as he wended 
his way on foot to the place of execution 
bearing his heavy cross. In the 
case of our Lord, he bore his cross to the 
gates of the city where they met a man 
from Cyrene, Simon by name, whom 
they compelled to bear it the remainder 
of the way, doubtless because Jesus 
was too faint and exhausted. 

It appears from certain rabbinical writings 
that a society of Jewish women was 
formed to alleviate the sufferings of those 
condemned to die. They accompanied 
the condemned to the place of execution 
and administered a prepared drink which 
acted as an anodyne to allay their pain. 
It was probably these who offered to our 
Lord the "vinegar and gall" (more properly 
—sour wine and myrrh) which he 
refused, preferring his mind to be clear 
and awake to the end. The drink offered 
him on the cross by one of the Roman 
soldiers, and accepted, was not the anodyne 
proffered and refused before, but 
simply sour wine, the common drink of 
the soldiers. 

The ultimate physical cause of Christ's 
death is believed to have been literally a 
broken heart. Otherwise he would probably 
have lingered much longer. Crucifixion 
seldom produced death in less 
than twenty-four hours, and victims have 
lingered as long as five days. Pilate and 
the guard were surprised on learning of 
Jesus' death so soon. Instead of lingering 
long, he died suddenly, and before he 
was fully exhausted; for he had conversed 
with the thief and had commended his 
mother to the care of John; he had declared 
his great work finished and then 
with a loud [literally, a strong] voice 
which indicated considerable remaining 
strength both of body and mind he cried, 
"My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 
me?" and instantly died. In the 
agony of Gethsemane the heart and blood 
vessels were affected. The palpitation of 



the heart was so intense then as to cause 
bloody sweat, a phenomenon rare but not 
unknown, produced by intense mental 
excitement. Already weakened by such 
an experience, a repetition of the anguish 
probably ruptured the membrane of the 
heart causing instant death. 

Such was the awful tragedy of Calvary 
which ended the human existence of our 
Lord, who thus gave himself as a lamb to 
the slaughter. "As a sheep before her 
shearers is dumb, so he opened not his 
mouth" when falsely accused, condemned 
and crucified. Had he exerted himself 
in self-defence either in Pilate's judgment 
hall, or in Gethsemane's garden, 
to speak again to the people as before, 
again doubtless they would have said 
"Never man spake like this man," and 
would have hailed him their king as 
they did only five days before, saying 
Hosanna to the son of David, blessed 
is he that cometh as Jehovah's king. Or 
had he prayed to the Father, He could 
immediately have had a life-guard of 
more than twelve legions of angels. 
-Matt. 26:53. 

He could have escaped the awful experience, 
but he did not do so, but willingly 
gave himself a ransom for sinners. 
He knew that his hour had come, when 
according to his Father's plan the world's 
redemption price should be paid. Remember 
his words to a disciple who 
attempted his defence— "Thinkest thou 
that I cannot now pray to my Father and 
he will presently give me more than 
twelve legions of angels? But how then 
shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus 
it must be?" 

Yes, the Scriptures must be fulfilled, 
they expressed the Father's will which he 
had come to do, hence the fulfilling of 
what was written, was the all-absorbing 
interest with him; the plan of God must 
be carried out at any cost, and to the execution 
of that plan he submitted himself 
in perfect obedience, even unto death, 
even the horrible, torturous, ignominious 
death of the cross. 

Though our Lord submitted himself to 
death at this time because he recognized 
this to be the hour foretold by the prophets, 
he did not seem to understand 
clearly why so much public disgrace and 
torture of mind and body should accompany 



it. Hence his prayer, "O my 
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass 
from me. Nevertheless not as I will, but as 
thou wilt." (Matt. 26:39.) He well 
knew that baptism (immersion) into 
death, was his mission, and not for one 
moment could he think of avoiding it: 
and he knew too that with it must also 
come a bitter cup of suffering and shame: 
but not until his hour was almost come, did 
he seem to fully realize how bitter would 
be the dregs of that cup. Seeing that 

R960 : page 3 

death was the penalty for our sins, and not 

shame and misrepresentation, left room 

for our Lord to question the Father's wisdom 

and love, in apparently asking him 

to endure more than was needful to redeem 

mankind. But he bowed to the 

Father's wisdom and love in it all, saying 

—Thy will, not mine be done! In the 

light of the Apostle's words we can see 

that the perfect "man Christ Jesus" was 

not only redeeming men, but by his obedience 

even unto death— even the death 

of the cross, he was proving himself worthy 

of high exaltation to the perfection of the 

divine nature, which because of this implicit 

and even blind obedience he has 

now attained. (Phil. 2:9.) So too in 

his last moments, in being treated exactly 

like the sinner whose ransom he was giving, 

when mental communion with the 

Father was interrupted and he felt for the 

moment alone, separated from the Father, 

cut off and condemned as the sinner whom 

he represented, it was more than he could 

bear— He cried with a loud voice My 

God! My God! Why hast thou forsaken 

me? This was more severe than all else, 

the very dregs of this cup of suffering. 

Not until afterward was the necessity and 

wisdom and love of this part of the Father's 

plan made manifest. Up to that hour he 

had communion with his God.— See 

Jno. 16:32. 

What a lesson on obedience was thus 
furnished to every creature of God, in 
every age, and on every plane of existence 
—an obedience which bowed in loving 
submission to the will of God even in 
blindness as to why it should be so, and 
even under the most heart-rending trial. 
What a glorious character for our example 



and imitation! perfect submission to the 
will of God and perfect confidence, which 
implicitly trusted the Almighty Father 
where it could not trace him. 



R960 : page 3 

CRUCIFIED WITH CHRIST. 

Having above examined briefly the 
actual crucifixion of our Lord, the 
actual death of the Lamb of God who 
put away our sins by the sacrifice of himself, 
let us now glance briefly at a figurative 
use of the word crucified, not by way 
of setting aside the foregoing actual occurrence, 
but to learn the proper significance 
of the figure as used by our Lord and the 
apostle Paul in the following passages:— 

"Whosoever will come after me, let him 
deny himself and take up his cross and 
follow me. "-Mark 8:34. 

"They that are Christ's [members of 
the "anointed body"— "the Bride"] 
have crucified the flesh with its affections 
and desires."— Gal. 5:24 compare 3:29. 

"I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless 
I live, yet not [the old] I [any longer] but 
Christ liveth in me."— Gal. 2:20. 

R960 : page 4 

"Our old man [our former selves, justified 
by faith in Christ's sacrifice] is crucified 
with Christ [that we might be members 
of his body, spiritual new creatures, and] 
that the body of sin [the entire sin system 
with all its members and branches] might 
be destroyed." Rom. 6:6. See fuller 
treatment of this text and context in 
May '87 TOWER. 

We have seen that actual, literal crucifixion 
signifies to deliver up to a torturous, 
slow, but sure death. And the figurative 
closely resembles this, so that the same 
definition fits it perfectly. When we say 
then that any one is taking up his cross to 
follow Christ, it signifies that such a one is 
consecrated and is taking the first step of 
self-denial in espousing the cause of Christ, 
though it be with fear and trembling; submitting 
willingly to painful humbling and 
contempt in the sight of the world and of 
the chief priests and their blind followers, 



to share with the Master and all the members 

of his body the coldness and the scorn 

of the world and of many they seek to bless; 

to be alone, and yet not alone as was 

our Head, for we have comfort and sympathy 

from him as our High Priest, and 

from our fellow members in his body. 

With him none could sympathize: he was 

the fore-runner on this race-course, and 

of the people there was none with him. 

But where does our cross-bearing begin? 
and where our crucifixion?— where does 
it end? and how much does it involve? 
some may inquire. We answer, Circumstances 
alter cases to some extent, and 
each must apply the matter in his own case. 
To enable all to do this, let us notice three 
notable examples of such cross-bearing 
—our Lord, Peter and Paul. 

Our Lord, born under the conditions 
of the Jewish Law, could not begin his 
service (ministry) until he was thirty years 
old, though his earlier years were spent in 
studying prophetic utterances concerning 
God's plan and his share therein. This is 
made evident by the only record of his 
boyhood days. When twelve years old, he 
was seeking information concerning the 
Father's business and was found among 
the eminent teachers hearing their explanations 
of the prophecies and asking them 
questions. 

When he was thirty, was his first opportunity 
to begin the work which he had come 
into the world to do. We might say then, 
using the figure, that he took up his cross 
when at thirty, he came to John to be 
baptised of him in Jordan. This was a cross, 
a humiliation, because the masses of the 
people like John were ignorant of the deep 
meaning which our Lord attached to 
immersion as a symbol or figure of death. 
John, and the people, used it only as a 
symbol of washing, cleansing or reformation 
from sin. Nor was it proper for our 
Lord then to explain to them a symbol which 
belonged to an age and work not proper to 
be known until Pentecost. 

Nor would they have understood him if 
he had explained. But it became him to 
set the example, which as their leader 
he would afterward expect all his disciples 
to follow, and hence as in his actual death 
he who knew no sin was counted among 
transgressors, so in its symbol, the water 
immersion, he was "numbered with transgressors," 



(Isa. 53:12) who were there 

figuratively washing away a sinful past to 

start anew. 

For the sinless Lamb of God to be thus 
misunderstood was no doubt a heavy cross, 
but it opened the way to a still clearer 
appreciation of the Father's will which he 
had come to perform. Obedience in taking 
up the cross proved him worthy of 
continuing in the Father's service— even 
unto death. The holy power of God came 
there upon him enabling him to see more 
and more clearly his future pathway down 
to Calvary, but bringing also clearer and 
clearer apprehensions of the exceeding 
riches of divine favor and high exaltation 
in reservation for him at the end of the 
"narrow way." 

Under the increased light of his fuller 
insight into the plan of God and where 
the narrow way would lead, his spirit of 
consecration led him to turn aside into 
the wilderness, there to more fully consider 
in private the Father's plan and his future 
course in obedience thereto. There the 
cross grew heavy as he more fully realized 
the shame, ignominy and self-abasement 
to which his consecration would lead. 
And the tempter bore his weight upon the 
already heavy cross by suggesting other 
ways of doing good more agreeable to the 
flesh than sacrifice. But after counting the 
cost our Lord refused any other methods 
either Satan's or his own, of doing good, 
and chose to have God's will done in God's 
way, saying: I have come to do thy will, 
O my God. And with his victory he was 
stronger, and his cross seemed be lighter as 
he came out of the wilderness crucified, 
willingly delivered up to die— hands, 
feet and all and every talent and power 
restrained from self-service— all offered up 
a sacrifice to God in the carrying out of 
God's plan, whatever that might involve, 
whether the dying should prove to be of 
longer or shorter duration, or of more or 
less pain. As a man, then, our Lord's will 
was already dead to every human hope 
and ambition— dead to his own plans and 
control as a man. And yet he was not 
dead in the sense of being insensible to 
scoffs and pains and piercing words, but 
crucified, delivered up unto death. The pinioned, 
bleeding members (human talents, 
rights etc.) quivered and twitched but always 
remained pinioned (crucified, delivered 



up to death) to the last, as when he 
prayed that the cup of ignominy might be 
omitted. 

During all those three and a-half years 
of our Lord's ministry, he was crucified 
in this figurative sense; that is, he was 
delivered up to death— his will, his talents, 
his all, bound and pinioned— in harmony 
with the Father's plan. And every 
deed of his by which "virtue [vitality, 
life] went out of him" to bless and 
heal in mind or body the condemned 
sinners about him, was part of his dying, 
and finally ended in death— even the literal 
death of the cross. 

Brother Paul was not literally crucified 
but ended his course by being beheaded. 
Yet figuratively he tells us long before his 
literal death, "I am crucified with Christ." 
That is to say: I am delivered up to death 
—my will and self-control, my talents and 
powers, my rights and lawful ambitions as 
a man, are all pinioned and stopped by my 
consecration, so that having no will or 
plan or way of my own, I may be fully 
able to let the holy spirit or mind (will) of 
the Master dwell in me and rule my every 
act to his service— not so dead that I will 
not occasionally feel a twinging of the 
flesh, and have a suggestion as to another 
way and as to what would or would not 
be necessary, but I keep my body and its 
wishes under (1 Cor. 9:27.), subject to 
the will of God, saying as did the Master 
under similar circumstances, "Not my will 
but thine (Father) be done." 

Many get the idea that our Lord and 
the Apostle referred only to sinful desires 
being crucified. They read it as though the 
Apostle meant, My sinful ambitions and 
desires I keep under and crucify, and as 
though our Lord meant— Not my sinful 
will be done, O Father, but thy holy will. 
This is a mistake: our Lord was holy, 
harmless, undefiled; as such he could not 
have a sinful will or desire: His will was 
not to kill, steal, blaspheme, covet the 
things of others, nor to bear false witness 
of others, nor to backbite, nor to do any 

R961 : page 4 

sinful thing toward God or man. His will 
on the contrary was to do good only, to 
honor God and to bless men. But as a 
man— a perfect man, he had a mind, a 



strong mind or judgment as to how good 
could best be accomplished, how God could 
be most honored and men most blessed. 

Had our Lord followed his own judgment 
and will as to best methods of honoring 
God and blessing man, it would probably 
have been in the line which naturally 
suggests itself to other good judgments and 
wills— in the line of political and social 
reforms, in establishing pure government 
for the people, in meeting out justice to the 
oppressed, in establishing hospitals, asylums 
and colleges, and in cleansing the religious 
system of his day. But such a good will, 
though it would doubtless have accomplished 
much temporary good, would never 
have worked out the grand deliverance for 
the race, which we now see God's greater 
comprehensive "plan of the ages" is designed 
to work out. Such a plan did not occur 
to the mind of even the perfect man Christ 
Jesus. It is beyond the scope of human 
thought and planning. But knowing that his 
Father was greater than he, he rightly reasoned 
that implicit submission to Jehovah's 
will was the proper course whatever it 
might involve. 

To be God's messenger and accomplish 
his will, our Lord must crucify (deliver up 
to death) all of his own good, holy, 
harmless, pure will, and must say fully, 
"Not my will (Father) but thine be done" 
—Thy will in thy way entirely. 

The nearer a person is to perfection the 
stronger will be his will, and the more 
difficult to crucify it. The more confident 
one is that his will is good and for good 
and blessing to others, the more 
difficult it is to see good cause for surrendering 
it. Thus our dear Lord knew that it 
was needful for him to DIE as the ransom 
price for the world and shrank not from it; 
but knowing also that pain and public 
scorn and contempt as a criminal was not 
part of the penalty, he questioned its necessity, 
whether the Father was not asking of 
him as the Redeemer more than the penalty 
of man's sin and therefore prayed, "Father, 
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me" 
—nevertheless I claim no rights, I attempt 
not to follow my own ideas nor to exercise 
my own will; my will is fully surrendered; 
I leave all to thy wisdom— Thy will be 
done. Our Lord evidently saw not then, 
what for our advantage and strengthening 
he has since showed us who are following 



his footsteps, crucifying our own wills, etc. 
—that extreme trial of obedience, even 
unto death, even the death of the cross, 
was expedient and proper, because of the 
very high exaltation to the divine nature, 
for which his implicit obedience to the 
Father's will in giving our ransom, was to 
be the test of worthiness. 

We as followers in the our Lord's footsteps 
have neither such strong wills to 
overcome and crucify nor the proportionate 
strength of character whereby to 
overcome them. But we have the advantage 
of knowing clearly why so extreme 
and exact obedience is necessary, in all 
who would be accounted worthy of a place 
in that select "body of Christ", which is 
to be so highly honored with its Head, 
Lord and Redeemer, Jesus. 

As with our Lord, so with the Apostle 
Paul crucifying did not mean the crucifying 
of a sinful will, or sinful desires, plans, etc.; 
for he says "I am crucified with Christ," 
and elsewhere he calls it being "dead with 
Christ" and having "fellowship in his 
sufferings." So then if Christ's crucifixion 
was not the crucifixion of a sinful will, and 
desires, neither was Paul's; and neither 
are yours and mine as followers of the 
spotless Lamb of God, crucified with him. 

True, Paul and all other followers of 
Christ were by nature sinners and children 
of wrath even as others, and hence very 
much less than perfect in will, compared 
with the undefiled one. But their first 
step of faith in Christ showed them that 
they had no right or privilege, to will or to 
do wrong, and in accepting of JUSTIFICATION 
through Christ's death, they not only 
confessed sorrow for sins past, but repentance 
and change from sin for the future 
to the extent of their ability, realizing also 
that the imputed merit of the ransom not 
only covered sins past, but also all unwillful 
weakness and errors future. And this justification 
through Christ and change of 
will from sin to righteousness preceeded 
their "call" to follow Christ and to suffer 
with him and to share his glory and high 
exaltation to the divine nature. Thus we 
see that with us as with our Lord, it is our 
good human wills, our good intentions and 
good plans, (not actually perfect as our 
Lord's, but reckonedly so through his 
imputed merit) that are to be crucified, 
delivered up to death with, and like Christ 



to share in his sacrifice. 

As our Lord set aside and crucified his 
own will, and accepted of the Father's will 
instead, so we set aside or crucify our wills 
or desires, no matter how good and wise 
they appear to us, to accept of the guidance 
and direction of our Lord Jesus who, now 
glorified, delights still to carry out the 
Father's plan, and the grandeur perfection 
of which he can now fully appreciate. 



R961 : page 4 

CONSECRATED BUT NOT CRUCIFIED. 

Practical illustrations of how some who 
love the Lord are not crucified with him, 
may be seen everywhere. Thousands of 
Christian people (zealous, but not according 
to knowledge) are striving, each in his 
own way, to do good. Because their own 
wills have not been crucified, but still live, 
they are unable to see clearly God's will 
and way. Hence many are spending time 
and talent in moral, political, and social 
reforms, which though good are not so good 
as the Lord's way. The uncrucified will 
however always thinks its own way the best, 
not learning to obey orders from the head, 
and to trust to his superior wisdom where 
they cannot trace him. 

Thus though our Lord prayed not for the 
world (John 17:19.) and shows us that 
the work of the present age is not the world's 
conversion, but the selecting of his "body," 
"his bride," out of the world (Acts 15:14) 
to be joined in heirship with him in the 
great work of blessing the world afterward 
—yet these have a will and plan of their own 
uncrucified and do not submit themselves 
to the will and plan of the head. Their 
will and plan is to convert the world now, 
to the neglect of the special selecting and 
fitting for that work of a royal priesthood 
and they feel sure their Lord must admire 
and accept and bless their plan and their 
work in his name. 

They are worried, anxious, fearful, perplexed, 
because their plans do not work 
out as expected, like a hen who hatches a 
brood of ducks. Yet they are always 
hopeful and full of confidence that the 
working out of their cherished schemes 
will yet be grand, because sure that the 



Lord must approve their plans. Such 
when they pray to God generally tell him 
what they want him to do and how they 
need his help in carrying out their plans. 
Such because their plans are so urgent 

R961 : page 5 

have no time to search God's Word to 

know his will and plan. They go to it to 

find some statements which they can fit 

and apply to their plans, to convince themselves 

and others that God approves of 

their plans, and they have no time, they 

think, for more. 

Poor foolish ones! How different the 
anxiety and fear with which they labor, 
from the composure with which our Lord 
and the Apostles labored. The difference 
is that the latter had crucified their own 
wills and had accepted the plan and will 
of God, and were confident that all things 
were working for the accomplishment of 
that plan whether they see how or not. On 
the contrary these who are striving to carry 
out their own wills and plans and praying 
to God to help them, can have no such deep 
grounded confidence. Their prayers in 
this direction go unheeded, and they continually 
see their cherished plans miscarry. 
Many such in coming days must be more 
disappointed than ever. Those who have 
loved and labored for sectarian systems and 
who have mistaken them for the one true 
church "whose names are written in 
heaven" will experience bitter disappointments 
when they see these all broken to 
pieces, that the false may be completely 
stumbled and separated and leave the 
saints alone, the only adherents to the 
ransom foundation. 

Only those who completely ignore their 
own will and plans, and thus are ready 
and willing to learn and co-operate in 
God's plans, can appreciate his statement. 
"My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither 
are your ways my ways saith the Lord: 
For as the heavens are higher than the earth 
so are my ways higher than your ways, and 
my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isa. 55:8,9.) 
Only such can pass through 
the trying times, present and coming, unmoved, 
for such only can see intelligently 
the cause and necessity of the trouble and 
overturning, and the grand outcome of it 
all, as delineated in the plans and specifications 



of the great divine Architect. 

Would that such consecrated ones could 
see the necessity of sacrificing, crucifying 
themselves and do it. The time for 
sacrificing is nearly ended. Those who do 
not fulfill their covenant are not worthy, 
and their crowns must soon be given to 
others. 

We see in this the reason that some of 
the very humble and comparatively unlearned 
of God's children are able and do 
see his plan much more clearly than some 
others, whose natural advantages are greater 
—the one has crucified his own will and 
has no obstacle in the way of his progress; 
the other has not crucified his own will and 
cannot get beyond it, even when seeking 
to grow in grace and knowledge. 



R962 : page 5 

THE BODY-MEMBERS IN PARTICULAR. 

In illustrating the complete subjection of 
the now crucified, will-dead little flock to 
their once crucified but now exalted Lord, 
it is difficult to find a more perfect figure 
than that which Paul suggests, viz., the 
human form, head and body. As a human 
body is composed of many members with 
various functions, yet all perfectly controlled 
and ordered by the one head, and 
without any will or desire to control themselves, 
so is "the body of Christ" under its 
head, Jesus. Every member must be in 
perfect accord with the head, that the 
great work of the Christ in the coming age 
may be accomplished perfectly. 

That perfect "body of Christ" is as yet 
only an ideal: it is a body of the future 
and not of the present, and will not be 
complete until the last member has been 
tried and proved worthy and glorified 
—made like unto, though subject to its head 
Christ Jesus. During the Gospel age the 
prospective members have been called or 
invited (none but the justified believers, 
are called) and this is styled "a high calling" 
and "a heavenly calling" because it invites 
these to so high and grand a station, and 
to a heavenly nature and glory and honor 
and perfection which is to be restored to 
in exchange for, and instead of the 
earthy glory and honor of the world 



in general. The joining together of this 
body in the present life is only probationary 
—a membership on trial, to 
ascertain who are worthy. Hence 
it is that those already called members of 
the body of Christ, are exhorted to make 
their calling and election sure, or permanent, 
by full and hearty submission to 
all the tests which their Lord and forerunner 
on the course shall impose. Such, 
too, have the assurance that their head 
sympathizes with them, and will not permit 
them to be tempted and tested beyond 
what they are able to withstand, but who at 
the very moment when their strength and 
endurance would fail— not through lack of 
desire to do his will, but through weakness 
of the flesh— will open a way for their escape 
from the trial. 

Under misconceptions, false teachings, 
etc., many are nominally counted as members 
of Christ's body, or church, whom 
the Lord in no sense recognizes as such, 
whom he does not enter among the probationers 
on trial for permanent membership 
in that choice "little flock," because 
they have never taken even the first step 
toward becoming members. 

Every one answering to the "high calling," 
(already justified believers) was informed 
of the conditions of membership, 
namely, that such must deny themselves, 
set aside and entirely ignore their own wills, 
and plans and ambitions however noble, 
must crucify their human wills with all their 
human affections and lusts (desires) no 
matter how pure and good, and must submit 
everything to the will of Christ, whether 
they see or do not see the wisdom of 
his arrangements. To the worldly-wise 
this is foolishness and those who obey this 
call are considered fools, even as was their 
Master for the same cause: For the world 
knoweth us not, because (for the same reason 
that) it knew him not.— 1 John 3:1. 

The narrow way of self-sacrifice through 
which the high calling invites us, is so 
contrary to worldly wisdom that few find 
it in the sense of knowing or realizing it; 
and fewer yet, after finding it, will walk in 
it; it is so narrow, so difficult and painful 
to crucify the flesh with its human affections, 
hopes, aims and desires; so difficult 
to have a mind and judgment and will of 
your own and yet obey not their dictates, 
but crucify them and take and follow the 



will of another which often seems so much 
less complete than our own, and whose 
ultimate advantage we so often cannot see. 

The conditions therefore upon which we 
become probationary or trial members of 
the body of Christ, are that we covenant, 
or solemnly consecrate ourselves and all our 
interests as human beings, to the Lord's will 
and service. This the probationary member 
symbolizes by baptism into water. 
His immersion into water is a figure of his 
death to all earthly things, chief among 
which and representative of all, is his 
HUMAN WILL. It must be buried in order 
that the consecrated one may be reckoned 
a fellow-member in that will-less body, 
whose will is the will of the head only. 
"Therefore are we buried by baptism INTO 
CHRIST" into membership in that "body 
of Christ;" for as many of you as were 
baptised into JESUS CHRIST were baptised 
into his death, "Crucified with Christ" to 
earthly hopes, etc., and risen by faith to 
heavenly hopes, plans, etc., under his 
direction, to which we shall attain if we 
faint not, but continue firm unto the end, 
keeping our wills fully subject to the will 
of Christ, and our bodies as much so as 
possible. 

Every such consecrated one is recorded as 
a prospective member among those "whose 
names are written in heaven:" but the 
record is such as can be erased. The final 
inking of the record, so to speak, is not 
done until the probationary membership 
is ended, and all the consecrated ones 
adjudged either worthy or unworthy of a 
place in that perfect glorious "body of the 
Anointed" whose record in the Lamb's 
book of life is indelible; among, and a part 
of that company which God foreknew or 
intended from the foundation of the world, 
as his honored instrumentality for blessing 
all the families of the world. 

Not all the consecrated, probationary 
members shall be of the real body of Christ, 
but only the overcomers. Of such the Lord 
says "I will not blot out his name out of 
the book of life, but I will confess his 
name before my Father and before his 
messengers." (Rev. 3:5.) And, blessed 
thought, our overcoming consists not in 
perfect works, but in a perfect heart or 
will. His own will fully crucified, the 
will of Christ dwelling in his heart richly, 
none need be barren or unfruitful in the 



knowledge of the Lord, but shall renew 
his strength, and go on from grace to 
grace in the knowledge and service of his 
head; and finally such shall be accepted 
into the everlasting permanent membership 
in the body glorified. 

And there is a thought beyond crucifying 
our own wills. We should not only crucify 
our own wills, but fully accept of and 
use the Lord's will instead. "Let the 
word of Christ dwell in you richly," and 
Let the mind be in you which was also 
in Christ Jesus. (Col. 3:16; Phil. 2:5.) 
A human body whose members were merely 
without will or plan of their own, 
would be aimless, lifeless, and useless, and 
so probationary members of the body of 
Christ, if merely dead to the world will be 
cold, aimless, idle, languid and lifeless, 
and hence profitless. The apostle therefore 
exhorts that we be not only dead to 
present hopes, and aims, and hoping for 
the future glorious body and its glorious 
work, but our mortal body which with its 
will we have crucified, we should partake 
so thoroughly of the holy spirit of our Master's 
consecration, that the mortal body 
alive, and active in God's service— delighting 
to do his will engaging heartily in his 
plan and work. (Rom. 8:11.) 

Until our own wills are crucified, we 
are not truly prepared to seek to know the 
will of our Lord. The uncrucified will, 
if it goes to the Word of God to learn his 
will, is not prepared to receive it, and 
stumbles over it, blinded by its own plans, 
desires and ambitions. Misled by these 
it wrests and misapplies the word of God 
to fit its wisdom or plan. Alas! how many 
of the consecrated are crucified only in 
part, and how many not at all. How many, 
failing still worse, see nothing of the high 
calling, and have passed by justification by 
faith in the ransom and are trusting to 
secure justification by crucifying their sins. 
Let us walk in the light as he is in 
the light, and have no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness, but 
rather reprove them. And in order to do 
this and attain the great prize let us see to 
it that we can say with Paul "I am crucified 
with Christ, yet I live, yet not [the 
former] I, but Christ liveth in me." 
His will being fully mine I can call myself 
his and feel confidence before him. I 
being fully his, he can own me as a member 



of his body and use me as such now 
and forever. 



R962 : page 5 

AFTER THE ORDER OF MELCHISEDEC. 

"Jehovah hath sworn and will not repent, Thou 
art a priest forever after the order of Melchisedec." 
Psa. 110:4. 

A priest, in the only true sense, is a 
mediator between God and fallen creatures, 
the object of such mediation being 
to restore and establish harmony. 

The office of the priest or mediator between 
God and man is to restore to perfection 
and consequent harmony with 
God, a whole race of beings condemned 
to death, and already dead or dying. 
Hence this priest must of necessity be 
"mighty to save". (Psa. 89:19.) He 
must have both the right and the power 
to recall the dead to life, and ability to 
instruct and discipline, and thus to lead 
every willing subject back to the perfect 
estate from which Adam, and the race 
through him, fell. To secure this right, 
he must first satisfy the demands of Justice, 
which required the extinction of the human 
race; and these demands of Justice 
could only be met by a corresponding sacrifice 
—a human life for a human life. The 
life of Adam, and all represented by him, 
could be redeemed by another perfect human 
being only. And so it was— "Since 
by man came death, by man came also 
the resurrection from the dead." (1 Cor. 15:21.) 
By the sacrifice of a perfect human 
existence, then, the right of the priest 
to restore is secured. 

But beyond the right, or privilege, of 
restoring, the priest must have the power, 
and power would of necessity presuppose 
his own everlasting existence. He must 
have power to create, since to restore to 
being that which had completely lost existence, 
is to re-create it, and is a greater 
work even than the first creation; he must 
also have perfect knowledge, both of 
God's requirements and of human necessities, 
as well as perfect ability, to guide 
a race so destitute, back to the glorious 
heights of perfection and blessed harmony 



and communion with God. 

What an office! Who would presume 
to assume such a title? It belongs really 
and only to Jehovah's Anointed. Even 
Jesus, "the Anointed one, did not glorify 
himself to become a High-Priest," but he 
has "been declared by God a High-Priest 
according to the order of Melchisedec." 
(Heb. 5:5,10, Diaglott.) Jehovah 
honored him by inviting him to that position, 
and giving him all power to fill it. 
In harmony with God's plan, not only 
has Jesus, his Anointed one, been chosen 
as the Chief, or High Priest, but the little 
flock, who follow him in sacrifice now, 
are called to be joint-heirs with him in 
the same honor. "If we suffer with him 
we shall also be glorified together." Jesus 
alone is the Priest, but when redeemed 
by his death and associated with him in 
sacrifice now, and in divine power hereafter, 
we are counted in with him, and together 
with him constitute the great 
Prophet Priest and King promised, to liberate 
and bless the groaning creation— 
the Seed of promise.— Gen. 22:18; 28:14; 
Gal. 3:29; Acts 3:20-23; Psa. 110:4. 

From these considerations it should be 
plain to all that the real Priest is just as 
truly a King, in whose hand absolute power 
is vested. And in looking back to the 
types or illustrations God has given us, 
we find just such an illustration in Melchisedec, 
to whom we are cited as an illustration, 
both by the Psalmist and by the 
Apostle Paul (Psa. 1 10:4; Heb. 5:5,10.), 
who show that he was a priest upon his 

R962 : page 6 

throne. Illustrations of the Christ as a 
Priest are given in the Aaronic Priesthood, 
where the special features of the redemptive 
sacrifice are shadowed forth— its perfection, 
its completeness, its acceptableness, 
as also the share which the little 
flock has with him in that sacrifice. 

Christ was not constituted a priest of 
the Aaronic order, that priesthood was 
only the type or figure. The Aaronic 
priesthood sprung from the tribe of Levi, 
while "our Lord (according to the flesh) 
sprung from the tribe of Judah, of which 
tribe Moses spake nothing concerning 
priesthood"; and the members of his body 
are chiefly chosen from among the Gentiles. 



As a man, Jesus was not a priest, 
neither as men are the saints members of 
the royal priesthood, but as "new creatures" 
they shall hold and execute their 
office. Jesus as a "new creature," "partaker 
of the divine nature" (to which he was 
begotten at the time of his baptism), was 
the priest, and as a priest he offered up 
his perfect human nature an acceptable 
sacrifice to God. He consecrated or offered 
himself in sacrifice before he became 
the priest, but the anointing was necessary 
to enable him to accomplish the sacrifice 
as well as to apply its benefits to men. 
The human nature, when sacrificed, could 
do nothing more; it must remain a sacrifice 
forever; but the new nature, fully 
developed in the resurrection, has "all power 
in heaven and in earth."— Matt. 28:18. 

The new nature (the priest) is not of 
the Aaronic order, it does not trace its 
lineage to any human source. This fact 
is strikingly typified in the priesthood of 
Melchisedec, whose lineage and death 
are not recorded. He was a priest 
without having inherited the office from 
his father or his mother— thus typifying 
Christ's priesthood, which came not of the 
lineage of the flesh, as did the Aaronic 
priesthood, which Israel thought to be the 
real. Neither was Melchisedec's death 
recorded, nor a successor named (Heb. 7:3 
Diaglott), that thus might be typified 
the endlessness of Christ's priesthood. In 
this type the work of sacrifice is not shown, 
as he represents the Christ glorified and 
reigning, after the work of sacrifice has 
been completed, and the divine nature 
fully perfected. 

In Heb. 7:4-10 Melchisedec is declared 
to be greater than Abraham, thus showing 
that the divine Christ will be greater, and 
therefore able to bless every "friend of 
God" on the human plane. 

"Wherefore he [Christ] is able to save 
them to the uttermost, that come unto 
God by him, seeing he ever liveth to 
make intercession for them." "For such 
a High Priest became us, who is holy, 
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, 
and made higher than the heavens" [lifted 
higher than the highest— to the divine nature]. 
(Heb. 7:25,26.) And this blessed 
assurance of such a priest, so mighty to 
save, is confirmed unto us by the oath of 
Jehovah. (Heb. 7:21; Psa. 110:4.) 



What strong consolation, then, may those 
have, who have fled to Jehovah's Anointed 
for refuge: "Jehovah has sworn, and will 
not repent. Thou art a priest forever after 
the order of (or typified by) Melchisedec." 
What believer, then, may not 
read his title clear to the promised restitution? 
and what justified one who has offered 
himself as a living sacrifice may not 
read his title clear to joint-heirship with the 
Head in that glorious anointed body. He 
is authorized and is able to save completely 
all that come unto God by him— of 
whatever plane, he can deliver them to 
perfection. 

"Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers 
of the heavenly calling, consider the 
Apostle and High Priest of our profession, 
Christ Jesus. ..for we have become 
associates of the Anointed, if indeed we 
hold fast the beginning of our confidence, 
firm to the end."-Heb. 3:1,14- Diaglott. 

We conclude, then, that while the 
Aaronic priesthood furnishes typical illustrations 
of the sacrifices and sufferings of 
Christ and the blessings to follow, yet it 
did not completely illustrate the glorious, 
everlasting and unchangeable character 
of his priesthood during the Millennial 
age; and for this cause Melchisedec was 
presented as a type, that thus might be 
shown his glorious office of priest and king 
—a priest upon his throne. Here, too, 
the body of Christ is no longer shown as 
separate individuals, but as one, complete. 
In the work of sacrifice we have seen the 
head or chief priest and the under priests 
more or less separately sacrificing, as represented 
in Aaron and the under priests; 
but in the future glory all will unitedly 
share as represented in Melchisedec alone. 



R963 : page 6 

MADE LIKE UNTO HIS BRETHREN. NO. 2. 

In all things it behooved him to be made like 
unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and 
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God- 
to make reconciliation for the sins of the people." 
-Heb. 2:17. 

In our previous paper (in July TOWER) 
under this caption we showed, we trust 



conclusively, that this passage of Scripture 
in no way signifies that our Lord was a 
sinner in any sense or in any degree, 
—neither the vilest of the vile, nor vile in 
the least degree, but that, as emphatically 
stated in Scriptures, he was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners. Now, 
we hope to show clearly in this paper what 
the above and kindred passages do teach. 

Who are the "brethren" whom he was 
"like unto." Surely the Sodomites and 
antediluvians are not the "brethren" 
referred to; so he was not like unto them, 
and was not tempted like as they were. 
Nor are sinners of any age, of these 
"brethren" like unto whom our Lord was; 
nor was he tempted like unto any or all 
sinners. Our Lord himself tells us who 
are his brethren saying "Whosoever shall 
do the will of my Father which is in heaven, 
the same is my brother and sister and 
mother." No sinner can measure up to 
this requirement; only the saints can fill 
the measure, and they, only by having 
their sins passed over, covered by Christ's 
meritorious sacrifice, and having their 
motives accepted now, through Christ, as 
instead of their actual works. Only these, 
in whom the righteousness of the law is 
reckoned as fulfilled through Christ— who 
walk not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit, fully consecrated to God, are the 
brethren of Christ, brethren, too, whom 
he declares he is not ashamed to own, 
—brethren of holy desires, justified and 
sanctified. 

Like unto these our Lord was, and like 
unto these he was tempted i.e., tested, 
tried, and proved obedient to his covenant 
of consecration. 

He was not tempted with the depraved 
tastes and desires of a drunkard or dissolute 
person, nor with the besetments and 
frivolities of present day "society," nor 
with wealth, nor with the perplexing 
annoyances of a parent, nor in a thousand 
other ways that men and women are perplexed 
and annoyed; but he was tempted 
or tested in all points like as we, the 
consecrated, are tested. Thus: We as 
followers in his footsteps find three points 
from which our covenant of self-sacrifice is 
tested— the world, the flesh and the devil 
—and so did our Lord. 

"The world" tests us by presenting 
opportunities for the use of our faculties 



and talents which are good, and right, 
sometimes benevolent and grand, and often 
more in sympathy with our human wisdom 
and tastes than God's plan which we have 
covenanted to follow. It is not only 
difficult to ignore and overcome the 
thousands of besetments from this source, 
but the greater the talents and the more 
nearly perfect the individual, the severer 
the test; because the clearer the head, the 
better and more benevolent the plans 
conceived of; and the greater the ability 
for executing those plans, the more difficult 
it will be to set them utterly aside and act 
merely as the tool of another— God's tool. 

"The flesh," or earthly desires, here 
comes in— not in us "his brethren" desires 
to do evil of any sort (for none of 
"his brethren" have pleasure in sin,) 

R964 : page 6 

but desires to do good of an earthly sort, 
congenial to the laudable tastes and 
ambitions of perfect men and women, to 
use time and talent in such a way as would 
afford pleasure and comfort and worldly 
approval and praise, rather than in a way 
to cost sacrifice of worldly praise and ease 
and comfort, in being "crucified to the 
world," its aims and rewards. 

"The devil" (we use this word devil to 
represent not only the being called Satan 
but evil influences started originally by 
his temptation in Eden,) takes advantage 
of the attractions of earthly things for our 
(consecrated) flesh and uses his influence 
against us powerfully. He operates through 
various agencies, and sometimes in opposite 
directions, to hinder the consecrated; 
and he is permitted to do so, to test those 
running for the prize and to make manifest 
the "overcomers"— the body of Christ. 
He rules the world in general, but not the 
"brethren." These he recognizes as 
opponents, whom he would deceive, 
ensnare, and hinder in their race, and he 
will succeed in doing so with all except a 
little flock, the "brethren" who, like their 
Lord, and by his aid, will overcome. 

To deceive the consecrated, he must 
counterfeit the true consecration, and get 
them to feel satisfied by some outward 
forms and ceremonies, united to benevolent 
worldliness, which will gratify the flesh 
instead of crucifying it. How skillfully 



the adversary has operated to carry out 
this plan, we all know. Great systems, 
each claiming to be the church— yet composed 
almost entirely of the unconsecrated, 
and in great part of unbelievers, full of 
the spirit— the plans, ideas and dispositions 
—of the world, full of pride and very 
unchristlike, have been organized to suit 
every shade and degree of spiritual 
derangement, each posing before the world 
as "the little flock" of overcomers, crucified 
with Christ. Those only who are free from 
these systems, standing fast in the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made them free, 
can see the hollowness and falsity of such 
claims. These can see that not one of these 
human systems is "the church of the first 
born ones whose names are written in 
heaven," though some of the members 
of that true church are bound in those 
systems. Such can see, too, the absurdity 
of supposing that all of these various 
"bodies", with their various heads, and 
various and contradictory faiths and 
baptisms, can be the one body whose only 
head or Lord is Christ, whose only faith is 
that once delivered to the saints— the Bible 
—whose baptism is into Christ and into 
his death. 

But many are deceived by these immense 
sectarian systems which Satan, by operating 
in harmony with the spirit of the world 
and the flesh, has succeeded in getting 
many of the truly consecrated to organize 
and uphold. Such feel continually opposed 
to the methods of these systems, and 
realize that their spiritual natures are not 
fed and are not growing, and see that the 
descriptions of his church given by its Head 
does not fit these systems, when he declared 
it would be a "little flock," despised and 
rejected by the world, reviled because of 
its faithfulness to his word. But they are 
overawed by the greatness of their systems, 
and by the influence of the world, and by 
their respect for the word of men, and by 
the honor they have one of another, so 
that they find it impossible to accept of 
God's Word only, and His approval only, 
and of a membership only in the church 
written in heaven, but ignored and despised 
on earth. 

Such are the temptations, tests, or 
besetments of the "brethren;" and the 
Master was tempted or beset or tested by 
the same. If the world offers opportunity 



to us for doing good with our limited 
talents, energies and ambitions, and our 
known likelihood to miscalculate, etc., 
what must have been the temptation to 
the perfect "man Christ Jesus" with sound 
judgment as to what would be practicable 
and what he could accomplish in the way 
of moral, social and political reforms for 
the world. Thus his flesh (holy, harmless 
and undefiled) would powerfully draw him 
toward that course which would be in 
harmony with its judgment and plan of 
well-doing, and draw away from the total 
surrender of those plans, talents and powers, 
which the Father's Word mapped out. 
[Our Lord evidently was guided as to the 
Father's will concerning him and his work 
on earth by the prophetic Scriptures and the 
Mosaic types— just as we are, though seen by 
him with a clearer, a perfect mental vision, 
instead of which we, his "brethren," have 
his and the apostles words and examples 
to aid us.] 

Our Lord also was tested and proved by 
religious systems— "like as we are." 
Judaism, with its various sects, Pharisees, 
Sadducees, etc., was in the very zenith of its 
glory as a religious system. Its laws had been 
made doubly strict, its votaries fasted two 
days in the week, made long prayers, and 
gave much alms to the poor. As a religious 
system it was very zealous, compassing sea 
and land in missionary efforts (Matt. 23:15.) 
and not without success, for the 
whole civilized world was beginning to 
respect it; and to its holy feasts came yearly 
devout men out of every nation (Acts 2:9) 
— Parthians, Medes, Elamites, dwellers in 
Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, 
Phrygia, Pamphylia, Egypt, Lybia, Cyrene, 
Rome, Crete, and Arabia. It was gaining 
favor with men of influence in the world, 
who not infrequently built and donated 
synagogues for divine worship and even the 
ungodly king Herod had built them a 
Temple which in magnificence far surpassed 
that of Solomon. Here, then, stood a great 
temptation: none could see more clearly 
than our Lord how easily, with his perfect 
power, he could have associated himself 
with the great ones of that system, 
soon have made himself their leader, and 
then have spread the influence of that 
religious empire over the world, gradually 
bringing about social and political reforms 
and greatly blessing the world. How 



thorough a crucifixion of the flesh it implied 
when he deliberately set aside all these 
positive, grand opportunities of doing good, 
to accept of another, the Father's plan, 
the full out-working of which he evidently 
could not at first see. But our Lord knew 
that the way it was written in the Law and 
the prophets, was the way God had designed 
the work of blessing the world 
should be accomplished, and that if he 
would be acceptable with the Father as 
the one who was to do the blessing, he 
must follow the Father's plan, and fulfill 

R964 : page 7 

all that was written in the Law and the 
prophets concerning the Anointed. He 
knew that though it was written that 
Messiah should be great, and reign, and 
bless, it was also written, that first, he 
must be despised and rejected by those 
who could appreciate neither the Father's 
plan nor his obedience to that plan, and 
that he must die to redeem men before he 
could have the right to permanently bless 
them. (Isa. 53.) And he bowed to the 
plan of Jehovah; crucifying his own 
gracious plans he meekly obeyed, even 
unto death— even the death of the cross. 

Here, then, we recognize the Lord's 
"brethren"— those who seek, love, and do 
the will of the Father in heaven, in preference 
to their own. Here we see how he 
was tested in all points like as we are, yet 
without yielding— without sin. Our Lord, 
holy, harmless, undefiled, was like unto 
these, his justified, sanctified "brethren," 
who in him and through him are also 
recognized by the Father as holy, harmless, 
undefiled, and separate from sinners. 

That this is the correct understanding 
of the Apostle's words is proved by the 
verses preceding the text we are examining: 
(Heb. 2:11-13.) "For both he 
that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified 
are all of one, for which cause he is not 
ashamed to call THEM brethren: Saying 
[as it was prophetically written], "I will 
declare thy name unto my brethren; in 
the midst of the church [the "little flock"] 
will I sing praise unto thee." And again 
"I [the entire head and body— one] will 
put my trust in him." And again, Behold, I 
and the children which God hath given me. 

So, then, argues the apostle, our Lord's 



mission into the world was to save those 
whom God foresaw would accept of his 
favor, and become children of God. 
These were all under sentence of death, 
and therefore Christ became a man, 
partook of flesh and blood (human nature). 
But he partook not of its depravity and 
imperfections. To have done so would 
have frustrated the design of his coming; 
for the Apostle declares that he partook 
of our human nature in order that by his 
DEATH he might break the power 
(authority or control) of death and release 
these foreseen children of God and bring 
them into life, that through these, in turn, 
in the coming age, all might be blessed. 

Yes, dear "brethren," our Head, our 
Lord, was perfect as a man and gave a 
perfect sacrifice, without spot or blemish, 
for our sins, and not for ours only, but also 
for the sins of the whole world; and as 
our blemishes were laid upon him and he 
bore our sins in his own body on the tree, 
so his perfections were imputed to us so 
that we bear his righteousness. He, the 
holy, the pure one, was made a sin offering 
on our behalf, in order that we might 
be made the righteousness of God in him. 
2 Cor. 5:21,Diaglott. 

For such an high priest, holy, harmless, 
separate from sinners, became us [suited 
us, was necessary for us]. He was tempted 
in all points like as WE ARE, and is 
able to sympathize with and assist us in 
our efforts to be dead to every worldly 
ambition, and alive only to the will of 
God. Wherefore, let us go to him in 
confidence and trust his every direction 
as to every step of the way; for he will 
not suffer [permit] us to be tempted above 
that we are able to withstand, but will 
provide a way of escape. (1 Cor. 10:13.) 
Trust him, then, unflinchingly, confidently, 
and do your part as far as you are able, 
assured that you shall not be tried further. 

"Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers 
[with Christ Jesus] of the heavenly calling, 
consider [think of, notice carefully] 
the Apostle and High Priest, of our profession, 
Christ Jesus, who was faithful." 

R965 : page 7 

(Heb. 3:1-2.) Consider the necessity 
of his being tested before being so 
highly exalted, and you will not wonder 



that you as partakers of the same "high," 
"heavenly calling" should be severely 
tried to prove faithfulness to God's word 
and plan, that you may be worthy to 
share in his glory. Consider that though 
your Master was perfect before he became 
a man, and perfect as a man, yet before 
being so highly exalted as he now is, it 
was proper that he should be tested to 
perfection, to the last degree (Heb. 2:10); 
that when he shall command obedience of 
all to Jehovah, it will not be possible for 
him to demand more of any, than he 
would and did himself yield to the Father. 
Thus the already perfect, sinless, holy, 
"man Christ Jesus" was proved worthy 
of, or perfected for, the divine nature and 
great exaltation, upon which he entered 
fully at his resurrection. 

Rejoice, "holy brethren:" our Lord's 
obedience and his aid provided us, insures 
our victory, if like Paul we "press along 
the line [marked out by our Head and 
Fore-runner] toward the prize of our 
high-calling which is of God, through 
Christ Jesus our Lord." He was tempted 
like as we are, and will succor us, and is 
not ashamed to call us "brethren." 



R965 : page 7 

IS LIFE A GIFT OR A PURCHASE? 

A Brother writing us asks: If Christ 
Jesus our Lord, as our ransom or substitute, 
bought us and all our rights to life, how 
shall we understand the Scriptural statement 
that "The gift of God is eternal 
life?" If a purchase for us by Jesus, how 
can it be a gift of God? or vice versa, 
If a gift of God, how can we say that 
Jesus purchased it for us? 

We reply: It is just such short sighted 
reasoning that is causing the general 
sectarian confusion on all Bible doctrines 
—the setting of one Bible doctrine against 
another, instead of seeking to see in what 
way they harmonize. Now, the brother 
cannot question that the Bible does teach 
clearly that the wages of man's sin was 
death, and that it passed upon all, and 
that Christ DIED for our sins, and hence 
paid our penalty. Nor, can he contradict 
the Lord when he says that He came into 



the world that he might give his life a 

ransom (a price) for many lives (Matt. 20:28); 

nor the apostle Paul when he says 

that Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom 

[Greek, a corresponding price] for all (1 Tim. 2:6), 

nor Peter when he says that 

Christ purchased us with his own precious 

blood. (Acts 20:28; 1 Pet. 1:18,19.) 

But our brother seems to think that all 

these very exact statements and many more, 

as well as all the typical sacrifices of the 

Jewish Age, are all opposed, contradicted 

and upset by the one text he quotes, that 

"the gift of God is eternal life." 

Our brother errs in this; for these are 
not contradictory: he has merely misquoted 
the last text and omitted the part 
which shows the harmony between this 
and the others which he thought it contradicted. 
Now see: "The wages of sin is 
death, but the gift of God is eternal life 
through JESUS CHRIST OUR LORD." 

God has no gifts for sinners, but stands 
pledged to pay to such, the wages of sin, 
which is death. Our Lord Jesus, by becoming 
our substitute, ransomed us from 
the wages of original sin, and brought us 
into that harmony where we could receive 
from God, not the wages of Adam's sin, 
but the gift of everlasting life. So far as 
men are concerned, the gift of life and 
forgiveness of sins is as directly of the 
Father as though our Lord had not redeemed 
us. But in order that we may 
have full confidence in our heavenly 
Father, he explains to us the process and 
philosophy of the redemptive plan, by 
which he remains just and maintains his 
just laws, which condemn sinners to death, 
and yet has provided a way for justifying 
the sinner, releasing him from the just 
penalty and granting him life— through 
Jesus Christ, our Lord. 

Notice some other statements of this 
same Apostle in this same epistle, regarding 
other favors of God conveyed to the sinner 
through his Redeemer, and in no other 
way. For instance:— 

"We have peace with God THROUGH our 
Lord Jesus Christ."— Rom. 5:11. 

"That as sin reigned unto death, even 
so might favor reign through righteousness, 
unto eternal life by [THROUGH] Jesus 
Christ our Lord."— Rom. 5:21. 

"Reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed 
unto sin, but alive unto God THROUGH 



Jesus Christ our Lord."— Rom. 6:11. 

"For the wages of sin is death, but the 
gift of God is eternal life THROUGH Jesus 
Christ our Lord."— Rom. 6:23. 

Every divine favor is granted in and 
THROUGH Christ.-"He is Lord (master, 
owner,) of all." All things are of the 
Father even as all things are by or THROUGH 
THE SON.-l Cor. 8:6. 



R965 : page 7 

UNSUCCESSFUL WORKERS. 

Desponding Christians do not make 
successful workers or valiant soldiers. 
"Feeble-Hearts," and "Ready-to-Halts," 
and "Little-Faiths" win no battles, and 
wear no crowns. They are so occupied 
with themselves, with their own experiences 
their own evidences, their changing moods 
and feelings, that they have no time for 
manly, noble service. They are so busy 
in trying to perform "acts of faith"; and 
having performed them, they are so intent 
upon analyzing them, in order to ascertain 
whether they be all of the exact quality or 
quantity which will recommend them to God, 
that they leave no space for "joy in blessing," 
and no room for the free, large-hearted 
labor which such joy cannot fail to 
lead to. Tossed up and down on the 
waves of unbelief and fear, they have no 
heart to work. Shutting their eyes against 
the light, they grope their way uncertainly, 
and cannot run the race. Afraid to 
believe, but not afraid to doubt; afraid to 
trust, but not afraid to distrust; doubting 
themselves, and making that a reason for 
doubting God; putting away peace, and 
giving full scope to gloom; refusing light, 
but letting darkness reign within them; 
they are not in a condition to do hard work 
—nay, to do any work at all. Strength 
comes from joy, and of that joy they have 
none. They refuse both food and medicine, 
and they become lean and sickly. 
They are fitter for the hospital than for the 
battle-field. They seem, too, to get more 
and more emaciated, though the food provided 
is abundant. Laboring under what 
physicians call atrophy, the more they 
eat the less they seem to be fed.— Bonar. 



R965 : page 7 

THE MORNING COMETH. 

It is a self-evident truth that the age of 
doctrinal uniformity has gone past; equally 
obvious that no doctrinal platform whatsoever, 
however comprehensive and liberal, 
can serve as the gathering-place of deep, profound, 
and Christ-like thinkers. This raises 
an issue at once threatening evil and disorder, 
and yet prophetic of good and 
harmony. The only truth capable of 
bringing about a reconciliation of divergent 
opinions, or which will help to spread 
genuine charity, is that there is a church 
forming within all churches, and in the 
minds of all true and noble thinkers, disclosing 
to all true minds higher views of 
truth than the sects can any of them hold, 
and imparting to all intellects that turn to 
the Lord, a life which the sects as such 
cannot give; that the Lord Jesus Christ is 
coming nearer and nearer in spirit, and 
that this energy is creating a new thought, 
and an entirely new affection among men; 
that this spirit is not evolving a new sect 
or ecclesiasticism to which men point and 
say, Lo! here, or Lo! there; it is a quickened 
spirit from the Lord, and out of that 
spirit a new theology will arise, more reverent, 
more heavenly and practical, before 
which the old scragged dogmas will melt 
off and fall away.— Progressionist. 



R967 : page 7 

THE LAMB OF GOD APPROVED FOR 
SACRIFICE. 

"Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away 
the sin of the world."— John 1:29. 

"We are reminded that he is THE 
SPOTLESS LAMB-a lamb without blemish 
and without spot. Now I need not remind 
you who are at all familiar with the 
Old Testament history, how important it 
was that the lamb that was offered up 
should be without blemish. So vital was 
this, that it was required that the priest 
who was appointed for that purpose should 



carefully inspect the victim that had been 
selected, to be sure that there was no blemish 
in it, and then seal it with the Temple 
seal, in token that it was fit for sacrifice 
and for food; and now we find our Lord 
Jesus Christ taking up the thought, and 
saying, "Labor not for the meat that 
perisheth, but for that meat that endureth 
unto everlasting life, which the Son of 
man shall give unto you; for him hath God 
the Father sealed." On the banks of the 
Jordan, the heavens opened, and the Spirit 
descended like a dove, and rested upon 
him, and God spoke saying, "This is my 
beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased."— A. J. Gordon. 



R988 : page 7 

THE OLD Pharisees rejected Jesus because 
He taught men that God's plans of 
grace were wider than they had believed 
them to be. The Gentiles, the outcasts, 
the whole world of humanity, was included 
in them. The Pharisees believed that the 
Jews, and especially their own sect, had a 
monopoly of the grace of God. It is 
strange how this old spirit of human nature 
comes out in our day. Many in the 
church seem to be just as averse to any 
view of the gospel which widens its scope 
beyond the narrow lines in which they 
have conceived of it. The idea that there 
can be any blessing in it for the countless 
masses of the dead who passed out of life 
before Christ came, or who have since 
died with no knowledge of Him, is something 
they cannot admit. Nor have they 
an ear for any interpretations of Scripture 
which do not pass current in their sect, 
or which bring within the scope of God's 
love and blessing those whom they have 
always regarded as outside of His covenant. 
Men love to think that they belong 
to that favored class who have a monopoly 
of both the truth and the grace of 
God.— Words of Reconciliation. 



R965 : page 7 

BABYLON'S NEW SUBURBS. 



THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

NEWFOUNDLAND has adopted the system 
urged by Catholics in this country and 
divided its school money among the religious 
denominations in proportion to their 
numbers. The total sum is $96,065. Of 
this, again divided, the church of England's 
share will be $32,138, the Methodists' 
$24,488, while something over $1,000 
goes to other sects, the Baptists getting 
the least, their share being only $29. 



R967 : page 8 

"K. OF L." BREAKING UP. 

POWDERLY'S REPLY TO THE ASSERTION. 

We are breaking up as the plowman 
breaks up the soil for the sowing of new 
seed; we are breaking up old traditions; 
we are breaking up hereditary rights and 
planting everywhere the seed of universal 
rights; we are breaking up the idea that 
money makes the man and not moral 
worth; we are breaking up the idea that 
might makes right; we are breaking up the 
idea that legislation is alone for the rich; 
we are breaking up the idea that Congress 
of the United States must be run by millionaires 
for the benefit of millionaires; 
we are breaking up the idea that a few 
men may hold millions of acres of 
untilled land while other men starve for 
want of one acre; we are breaking up the 
practice of putting the labor of criminals 
into competition with honest labor and 
starving it to death; we are breaking up 
the practice of importing ignorance bred 
of monarchy and dynamite, in order to depreciate 
intelligent skilled labor at home; 
we are breaking up the practice of employing 
the little children in factories, thus 
breeding a race deformed, ignorant, and 
profligate; we are breaking up the idea 
that a man who works with his hands has 
need neither of education nor of civilizing 
refinements; we are breaking up the idea 
that the accident of sex puts one-half of 
the human race beyond the pale of Constitutional 
rights; we are breaking up the 
practice of paying woman one-third the 
wages paid man, simply because she is a 



woman; we are breaking up the idea that 

a man may debauch an infant girl and 

shield himself from the penalty behind a law 

which he himself has made; we are breaking 

up ignorance, intemperance, crime and 

oppression of whatever character and 

wherever found. Yes, the Knights of 

Labor are breaking up, and they will 

continue their appointed works of breaking 

up until universal rights shall prevail; 

and while they may not bring in the Millennium 

they will do their part in the 

evolution of moral forces that are working 

for the emancipation of the race.— T. V. 

Powderly. 



R966 : page 8 
WORLDLY PLEASURES. 



Bradford Co., Pa. 

DEAR. BRO. RUSSELL:-MILLENNIAL 
DAWN received, many thanks. If you can 
find time would very much like an answer 
to the following question. 

Could any one who had not the Holy 
Spirit take your book and read it and understand 
it? Would any one care for 
those things if they did not have the 
Spirit? You think, do you not, that any 
one who desires to do the will of the 
Father no matter what it may cost, is begotten 
of the Spirit? that this mind to 
do his will is the DIVINE MIND and is the 
"earnest of our inheritance". If you can 
get time please answer. 

Should I sacrifice everything— all the 
innocent pleasures of my home life, or 
could I enjoy such things as come to me 
which do not seem to be wrong and in 
which I may be happy. I wish to do the 
Lord's will in all things, so far as it is 
made known to me. 

Do you think I can say that God is revealing 
his will, his plan, through your 
works? or if I had his Spirit should I be able 
to take up the Bible and understand it all? 

Yours in hope of being one of the 
"overcomers," MRS. W. L. M . 

[DEAR SISTER: -It is my judgment that 
the evidences you mention are sufficient to 
identify you with the spiritual children of 
God. If you appreciate those things 



which are above, so that your affections 
are centered on the heavenly things in 
preference to the earthly, and to such an 
extent as to lead you to sacrifice earthly 
things, then I would judge that you are 
not of the earthly class, but that you are 
begotten to a higher nature through the 
word of divine truth. 

Now keep your eye of faith fixed on the 
prize of your high calling which is of God 
through Christ, and carry out your consecration 
faithfully and thus make your 
election sure. 

If you were on the natural (human) 
plane, you might still take pleasure and 
delight in learning God's great plan as all 
the world shall, by and by. But your 
hopes, ambitions and aspirations would 
still be earthly. The prospect of the 
earthly glory would be your delight, 
although aware of the higher spiritual 
glory. 

Not all of those begotten of the Spirit are 
able to understand the Scriptures without 
assistance, but such can do so by assistance 
which others cannot accept of. God has 
always raised up some in the church, in every 
age, to be teachers and helpers of others, 

R967 : page 8 

to bring forth from his storehouse of truth 
"meat in due season," "things new and 
old." Call to mind an article in the 
TOWER of March, '85, "If the whole body 
were an eye." Every member of the body of 
Christ has not the same office of service, 
but every member has some ministry 
(service) to perform for the benefit of 
other members. 

It is not wrong but right to examine 
yourself in the light of God's Word to 
determine what part you are to take in his 
plan. The test as to pleasures is not as you 
suppose; if entirely crucified the doing of 
the will of God will afford you greatest 
pleasure. The saints are never miserable 
though others would often be if in their 
places without their hopes and aspirations. 
It is a part of God's will that we do a 
reasonable share to make others happy, 
only, moderation must govern and in this 
as in all things we must seek to honor our 
Master and his principles, while not 
neglecting other duties and privileges. 

May the Lord bless you and give you 



grace to endure hardness as a good 
soldier.-EDITOR.l 



R966 : page 8 

DAWN VOL. II. WANTED. 

Janesville, Wis., May 7, 1887. 

TOWER PUB. CO., GENTLEMEN:-I 
have finished reading "M. DAWN," Vol. I. 

Evidently this is a work of too great 
importance to be left incomplete. It is 
also one of such interest to those who are 
interested, that (speaking as one) we would 
prefer the ideas to be included in volume 
II. in a rough dress and without the polish 
of the well rounded sentences which characterize 
Vol. I. rather than wait a single day 
longer than is absolutely necessary— and 
trust to time and opportunity for the 
author to do the polishing on a second 
or subsequent edition. 

Will you kindly let me know where, 
and the very first moment when, Vol. II. 
can be procured. 

Very Truly Yours, WM. W . 

[We are glad to learn through this and 
sother means that the truth is finding the 
truth-hungry and causing their hearts to 
rejoice in hope of the glorious outcome of 
the great divine plan of the ages. Vol. II. 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN will be pushed as 
rapidly as limited opportunities will permit. 
We hope to have it out early in 
1888. Meantime let a thorough acquaintance 
with the plan of God and its Bible evidences 
prepare the way for the stronger 
meat of Vol. II. which will further establish 
the truth upon a chronological basis, 
showing how the great clock of the ages 
marks with wonderful precision the exact 
time for every advance step in the great 
plan of the ages. -EDITOR.] 



"HE WHO has learned to seek nothing 
but the will of God shall always find what 
he seeks." 



BROTHER BOWMAN writes as follows:- 



Moultrie Co., S.C. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Having 

spent part of the winter and the early 
spring in the city of Wilmington and three 
or four counties in N.C. in preaching the 
grand and glorious truths set forth in the 
(incomparable) MILLENNIAL DAWN, I am 
now here staying with one of my sons, 
where I expect to remain the balance of 
the summer. The greatest opposition I 
meet with in proclaiming these truths is 
from Second Advent preachers. O how 
strange! I am the first man that ever 
preached Second Advent doctrines in S. 
Carolina, and now because I have taken, 
as I conscientiously believe, another step 
in advance, I am branded the second time 
as a heretic. Well, be it so. The good 
Lord be praised. Wherever I go the 
people receive me and these truths with 
gladness. If I live until next September, 
I will be 78 years old; so you see what 
I do must be done quickly. Please send 
me here some reading matter for distribution. 
If I had a dollar in the world, I 
would send it to you. May a holy God 
bless you and your dear wife in the great 
work you have undertaken. I am yours 
in giving all for Jesus and his glory. 
PEYTON G. BOWMAN. 

[DEAR BROTHER B.:-I well remember 
hearing you speak as a champion of Second 
Adventism in Philadelphia, Pa., about 
twelve years ago. You had come among 
them from the Baptists, I think. I then 
thought you honest, and longed to have 
you see "the way of God more perfectly" 
and afterward I sent sample TOWERS to 
your address. I am glad to note your 
present clearness and zeal. Surely our 
Lord's words are fulfilled to each and all: 
—"If any man will do my Father's will, 
he shall know of the doctrine." 

Though old, you have a strong constitution 
Brother, and the Master is able to 
sustain it in his service. I therefore suggest 
to you the sale of paper bound DAWNS 
throughout southern cities and towns. The 
"expense allowance" will pay your way, 
and as one brother writes, so you can say to 
yourself: "If I can sell 100 books per week 
that is preaching 16 sermons to 100 people 
counting each chapter a sermon." May 
the Lord richly bless and use you in the present 
"harvest" work, is my prayer.— ED.] 



R966 : page 8 
A BAPTIST Brother writes:- 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed is 
one dollar for TOWER for this year and 
please send me two copies of M. DAWN, 
paper covers. There are some excellent 
things in DAWN, but to my mind some 
chaff as well as wheat. 

I appreciate your writings. I am pastor 
of a Baptist church. You do not quite 
understand the Baptist freedom and privilege. 
I preach the truths your paper contains, 
and am not hindered from doing so 
by my congregation, and I am under no 
other earthly jurisdiction. You seem to 
think, a Baptist church is a monarchy. It 
is not so. Yours truly, W. C . 

[DEAR BROTHER:-We greet you, glad 
indeed to learn of your liberty. I am well 
aware that Baptist churches are independent, 
in the sense of not being under the 
control of Conferences and Presbyteries. 
I know, too, that once they occupied the 
same position that we hold regarding the 
division of God's people into sects by 
names and formulated creeds outside the 
Bible, and that the name "Baptist" 
was attached to them slurringly by their 
enemies, while they, as we do now, simply 
called themselves Christians. 

But, dear Brother, I also know that today 
the liberty of Baptists is in name 
mainly; for they follow closely the practices 
of other sects except in the matter 
of immersion. If you have come across 
a company of people among them, who 
will "endure sound doctrine," and to whom 
you do not shun "to declare the whole 
counsel of God," you have certainly come 
across a rarity, or else have been a very 
faithful and successful pastor whose flock 
is highly favored. What a power such a 
church should be— full of zeal and of the 
spirit of truth. 

If such is your church, it is a proper 
Christian, earthly organization, but no 
more. It is still true, that the real church, 
the body of Christ, is only that whose 
names are written in heaven, and whose 
only name is Christian. Of this however 



be assured, that unless your congregation 
consists of overcoming saints only, there 
will ere long come divisions produced by 
your faithful presentation of the truth, because 
we are in the "harvest," the separating 
time. And the more advanced your 
teachings, and your people, the sooner will 
come the separation by the sickle of truth. 
Thrust in the sickle for the harvest is come. 

As for not seeing eye to eye with the 
Editor of the TOWER on every point, 
I would say: We do not limit our recognition 
of the Brotherhood thus. We recognize 
every believer in the ransom living 
a moral life, as a justified child of God: 
and every such one who went further and 
in the acceptable time presented himself 
a sacrifice and was baptized into the body 
of Christ by being baptized into his death, 
we recognize as a fellow-member and joint-heir 
in "the body of Christ"— the church, 
the little flock. As such fellow-members 
we are all growing in grace and knowledge, 
building one another up continually. 
But we believe the time is near, if 
not present, when all such may and should 
see eye to eye— for the set time to favor 
Zion has come. The thought of some 
that "of course" we cannot see alike and 
have unmixed truth, is often a fruitful 
cause of stumbling over plain clear truths. 
-EDITOR.! 


