Continue Assisting Those Who Attended the Memorial
1 As Jesus celebrated that first Memorial with his apostles, he said to them, “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.” (Luke 22:19) He was referring to that which took the place of the Passover supper. Since we are concerned with those newly interested ones who attended the Memorial last month, how can we help them to associate with us at other congregation meetings? Their spiritual progress in the truth depends on continued assistance.
2 Jesus surely set a fine example in this regard. He continued assisting his disciples even though they temporarily abandoned him that eventful night. He said: “All of you will be stumbled in connection with me on this night, for it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’” However, he did not reject them! His very next words were: “But after I have been raised up, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.”—Matt. 26:31, 32.
WHO?
3 Can we also set an example for those who have not yet reached full spiritual strength, in effect, by ‘going ahead of them’? Surely the elders will want to take the lead in spiritual matters. (Matt. 28:20) It is the Christian thing to do. Do you not agree? But how? First of all, we have to know whom to assist. So if someone you invited did attend, it would be good to let your congregation book study conductor know about that interested person.
HOW?
4 The next question is how to assist them. We never want to underestimate the powerful effect the Memorial celebration can have on an interested person. It brings home dramatically what God and Christ have done for him or her personally. The Memorial softens the heart and makes it more receptive to further spiritual intake. In an African country a few years ago, a congregation of about 100 publishers put a large sign in front of their meeting place that simply said “MEMORIAL.” Then they distributed 1,000 invitations. The result? Nine hundred and sixty-six persons were in attendance! The account ended by saying: “Much interest was aroused, and this is now diligently being followed up by home Bible study activity.”
5 In most cases our meeting places are already identified. However, this experience points up two things that can be done to assist Memorial attenders. One is to direct them to the meetings and the other is to study with them. If help is needed, the book study conductor may be able to assist you in getting a regular home Bible study started. It may require a series of well-planned and well-timed return visits to accomplish this.
6 The rate of progress a new one makes is often directly related to how much personal reading and study he does on his own. Inquire to see if he is receiving the magazines through the mail. Does he have the latest bound books, particularly the one being studied at the congregation book study? Has he obtained a Yearbook and does he know about the provision of the daily text and comments? In most cases, we would not try to provide all of these things at once, but help them to appreciate that God is pleased with spiritual progress.—1 Tim. 4:15.
7 Getting acquainted with others in the congregation often serves as a springboard to increased association. New ones need friendships to fill the vacuum caused by the loss of previous associates. So occasionally take your book study conductor or another elder or ministerial servant with you when you conduct your home Bible study. In this way the new one will not feel he is a stranger when he begins to attend additional meetings.
8 If a baptized but inactive person attended the Memorial, be sure that arrangements are made to give spiritual assistance in harmony with the program outlined in the January issue of Our Kingdom Ministry.
9 The continued assistance Jesus gave his disciples produced mature Christians. He did not abandon them. As we follow his example today, undoubtedly many more will progress spiritually and come to realize the full benefits of Christ’s ransom sacrifice. Let us continue assisting those who attended the Memorial.

