Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MAY 2
Song 116
 5 min: Introduction and local announcements. Highlight field service arrangements and encourage participation in magazine work second Saturday of month. Have all field reports been turned in?—Luke 16:10.
15 min: Question-and-answer coverage of article “Effectively Using the Symbolic ‘Horses.’”
15 min: Briefly review Topic for Conversation with congregation. Then discuss highlights and talking points in current magazines. What good field points have you noted? Demonstrate two brief magazine presentations highlighting (1) ‘Kingdom’ articles from May 1 issue, and (2) the articles on women in the May 8 issue. Point out that such magazine presentations can easily be combined with Topic for Conversation to make subscription offer during regular service or when special interest is found. Also, remind brothers to read article “What’s Happening in the Schools?” in May 8 Awake! Much good would be accomplished if parents encouraged their school-age children to place copies of this issue with their teachers as well as school principals.
10 min: Talk based on article on page 10 of February 8, 1982, Awake! “Holy Spirit at Work Today.”
Song 16 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 9
Song 31
 7 min: Local announcements, accounts report.
20 min: Elder discusses Convention insert from beginning through subheading “Endeavor to Be a Good Listener.” Read key paragraphs, as time allows. Stress importance of attending all sessions and need for all to concentrate on program.
18 min: “Continue Assisting Those Who Attended the Memorial.” Discussion with audience by book study conductor. Interview other publishers or conductors briefly as to what they have done to follow up Memorial interest.
Song 15 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 16
Song 8
 5 min: Local announcements and Our Kingdom Ministry Announcements.
 8 min: How can we use current magazines in the field? Discuss with audience interesting talking points. May 15 Watchtower contains “The Signs of the Times—What Do They Mean to You?” May 22 Awake! has as the cover theme “Sports—Why the Increasing Violence?” Many have found they can interest householder by simply asking the question: “Have you ever wondered why . . . ” and then lead into a current magazine article. If you have specific points to show, interest is often aroused so persons will want to know more.
27 min: Elder discusses with congregation Convention insert from subheading “Conduct While Attending Convention” to conclusion. Highlight the need to demonstrate Christian love and consideration for others relative to saving seats. Encourage all to provide wholesome example for others to follow.
 5 min: Have publishers relate experiences on obtaining subscriptions and what they hope to do to follow up interest. Encourage brothers to call back and renew offer to those who indicated they may subscribe at a later date. Also encourage offering subscriptions on return visits and to Bible students.
Song 49 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 23
Song 51
 7 min: Local announcements. Comments on service accomplished by congregation in previous month. Note also February Service Report. Encourage brothers to show spirit of Romans 11:13.
10 min: Question-and-answer discussion of article “Covering Unworked and Unassigned Territories.” Consider how congregation able to give attention to more thorough coverage of its own territory if it is not possible to share in working unassigned areas.
12 min: Question-and-answer discussion of the article “Presenting the Good News—Caring for ‘Not-at-Homes.’” Include points from Our Kingdom Service of June 1981, page 3.
16 min: Over the years many have associated with the truth, perhaps attending meetings for a time or even becoming publishers, but then drifted away for one reason or another. Elder can give brief talk highlighting points from May 1, 1982, Watchtower article ‘Return to the Shepherd of Your Souls.’ Encourage study conductors to cooperate with the service overseer and secretary in arranging visits on those who might appreciate this article. We want to leave it with them, perhaps study it with them if convenient and give them encouragement to come to meetings. By working with the service overseer and secretary we can avoid a duplication of effort. However, any publisher who has someone in mind needing help might suggest it to the secretary so that none are missed. Prepare two demonstrations by qualified publishers to illustrate application of points in talk. One can show publisher just leaving the magazine and encouraging former associate to read the article and come to meetings, possibly referring to Proverbs 2:20-22 to show need to keep close to Jehovah. The next demonstration can show publisher being invited into home, presenting magazine and suggesting they spend a little time going through the material. Publisher then proceeds with study of the article.
Song 102 and prayer.

