Part 8​—Conducting Progressive Bible Studies
Directing Students to the Organization
 1. Why is it beneficial to share a point about Jehovah’s organization each week on a Bible study?
1 Our goal in conducting Bible studies is not only to teach doctrinal information but also to help students become part of the Christian congregation. (Zech. 8:23) The brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Who Are They? What Do They Believe? can help us to do this. Place a copy with new Bible students, and encourage them to read it. In addition, take a few minutes each week on the study to share a point about Jehovah’s organization.
 2. How can you encourage Bible students to attend congregation meetings?
2 Congregation Meetings: The principal way in which Bible students come to appreciate God’s organization is by associating with us at congregation meetings. (1 Cor. 14:24, 25) Therefore, you might begin getting them acquainted by describing the five weekly meetings, one meeting at a time. Mention the title of the next public talk. Show them the material that will be considered at the Watchtower Study and at the Congregation Book Study. Describe the Theocratic Ministry School and the Service Meeting. When you have an assignment in the school, perhaps you could rehearse it with them. Share outstanding points that were presented at the meetings. Use photographs in our publications to help them visualize what takes place. From the very first study, invite them to attend.
 3. What features of the organization might we discuss?
3 When the Memorial, assemblies, and the visit of the circuit overseer approach, take a few minutes to explain and build enthusiasm for these arrangements. Progressively answer questions such as: Why are we called Jehovah’s Witnesses? Why do we refer to our meeting places as Kingdom Halls? What are the duties of the elders and ministerial servants? How are the preaching work and the territory organized? How is our literature produced? How is the organization financed? What are the roles of the branch office and the Governing Body in overseeing the work?
4, 5. How can our videos build appreciation for the organization?
4 Instructive Videos: Another way Bible students can see Jehovah’s marvelous organization is by means of our videos. These can take them To the Ends of the Earth, acquaint them with Our Whole Association of Brothers, and show them how we are United by Divine Teaching. A woman who had received our magazines and other literature for five years was moved to tears by the video Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name. She had come to trust the Witnesses that visited her, but after watching the video, she felt that she could trust the organization too. A formal study was started with her, and the following week, she attended meetings at the Kingdom Hall.
5 By spending a few minutes each week with our students and using the tools that have been provided, we can progressively direct Bible students to the one organization that Jehovah is using today.

