Persist in Preaching
1 Critical times are here. Civil strife, ethnic wars, natural disasters, and other horrific events are commonplace. Now more than ever, the human family needs good news. However, apathy toward spiritual things is widespread. In some areas, it may be difficult to find people at home and even harder to find people who will listen to us or who want to study the Bible. Even so, it is vital that we persist in preaching the good news of God’s established Kingdom.​—Matt. 24:14.
2 Love for People: Our preaching underscores Jehovah’s love for people. “He does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.” (2 Pet. 3:9; Ezek. 33:11) Hence, he has decreed that, as Jesus said, “in all the nations the good news has to be preached first.” (Mark 13:10) God appeals to people to turn to him and escape the coming judgment on Satan’s world. (Joel 2:28, 29, 32; Zeph. 2:2, 3) Are we not grateful that Jehovah extended that opportunity to us?​—1 Tim. 1:12, 13.
3 The worldwide report shows that during the 2004 service year, an average of 6,085,387 Bible studies were conducted each month, and an average of some 5,000 new disciples were baptized each week! Some of these newly dedicated ones were found as a result of Jehovah’s blessing on the persistent endeavors of publishers who made an effort to speak with everyone in their assigned territories. What joy that has produced in the congregations, and what a privilege it is to be a fellow worker with God in this lifesaving work!​—1 Cor. 3:5, 6, 9.
4 Praising God’s Name: We persist in preaching in order to praise Jehovah publicly and to sanctify his name before all mankind. (Heb. 13:15) Satan has misled “the entire inhabited earth” into believing that God is powerless to solve mankind’s problems, that he is indifferent to human suffering, or that he simply does not exist. (Rev. 12:9) By our preaching, we champion the truth about our magnificent heavenly Father. May we continue to praise his name​—now and forever.​—Ps. 145:1, 2.

