Service Meeting Schedule
Note: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer months. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the “Godly Obedience” District Convention. Where appropriate, use 15 minutes on the last Service Meeting before attending the convention to repeat counsel and reminders from this month’s insert that apply locally. A month or two following your convention, set aside 15 to 20 minutes on a Service Meeting (perhaps using a local needs portion) for a review of convention highlights that the publishers have found to be helpful in the field ministry. The special Service Meeting part will give us the opportunity to explain how we are using what we learned at the convention and how that has helped make our ministry more effective.
Week Starting April 11
Song 4
15 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Use the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory) to demonstrate how to present the April 15 Watchtower and the April 22 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used. In one of the demonstrations, show the publisher engaging in street witnessing.
15 min: “Persist in Preaching.”a As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
15 min: “Do Good and Share With Others.”b Make local application of the material, mentioning practical ways that we can assist others.
Song 47 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 18
Song 76
10 min: Local announcements.
20 min: “Conducting Progressive Bible Studies​—Part 8.”c Include a brief demonstration in which a publisher provides a new Bible student with a copy of the brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Who Are They? What Do They Believe? The publisher draws attention to the picture on page 20 of the brochure and briefly describes the Public Meeting. He mentions the title of the next public talk and invites the student to attend.
15 min: Living With Soundness of Mind in an Electronic Age. (Titus 2:11, 12) A talk based on the September 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8, paragraphs 1-7, and the November 1999 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 5, paragraphs 24-6, and page 6, paragraphs 35-6. As time permits, other points from the November 1999 Our Kingdom Ministry insert may be included if applicable locally.
Song 169 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 25
Song 111
15 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Remind publishers to turn in April field service reports. Using the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory), demonstrate how to present the May 1 Watchtower and the May 8 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used. In one of the presentations, demonstrate how to handle the conversation stopper “I’m not interested.” (See Reasoning book, p. 16.) Mention articles that may more readily appeal to people in the territory.
30 min: “Laud Jehovah in the Big Congregation.”d To be handled by the congregation secretary. Mention the convention to which the congregation is assigned. Consider the numbered paragraphs in the manner of the Watchtower Study. Have the paragraphs read by an assigned reader. Review the box “District Convention Reminders.”
Song 8 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 2
Song 148
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly review the article “Studying the Keep on the Watch! Brochure,” on page 6. Mention that this material outlines the schedule for consideration of the brochure. Encourage all to prepare well for and participate each week in the study, starting the week of May 23.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “All Sorts of Men Will Be Saved.”e Make practical application of the material to the local territory.
Song 112 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

