From Our Readers
Overcoming Ridicule
Thank you for your article “How Can I Make Kids Stop Picking on Me?” (February 22, 1984) I am only 12 years old and I seem to get picked on at school. At first, when I got called names, I got a bit upset, but now when they call me names I walk right past them without saying anything and they look at me amazed. It’s true what you say, the more you ignore it, the more they seem to stop calling you names.
J. A., England
I just had to write to tell you how overjoyed I’ve been with your article “Why Won’t the Kids Let Me Alone?” (February 8, 1984) Recently I had problems with the kids picking on me. I’d come home and cry and couldn’t sleep at night. It was just getting me down. Your article has helped me a lot.
T. A., Missouri
I just want to thank you for the article “How Can I Make Kids Stop Picking on Me?” I am 11 years old and I have this trouble at school. Usually I tried to talk back, but with the advice in your article I see I shouldn’t. Thank you.
M. J., Indiana
Meditation and Relaxation
I was pleased to see that you had addressed the very important issue of meditation and relaxation. (February 22, 1984) The overall message was presented correctly. However, there was a negative reference to Yoga​—a generalized statement regarding its purpose of “emptying the mind.” True, it helps to clear the mind of clutter. But I’ve found that I can practice Christian Yoga by carrying out the postures while praying to the Lord. I hope people will not be discouraged from participating in this invigorating form of body and mental relaxation.
P. U., Colorado
To empty the mind goes further than merely organizing the mind or freeing it of unnecessary “clutter.” As stated in our article, the mind swept completely clean is easy prey to outside influence, possibly by unprincipled humans or superhuman demonic forces. Though practicing only the Yoga physical exercises might appear harmless, yet pursuing the Yoga discipline, even when combined with Christian prayers, could be fraught with dangers, as stated in 2 Corinthians 6:14-17. One risks trying to unite something clean with something God considers unclean.​—ED.
Resisting Rapists
Last week my 19-year-old daughter was attacked by a man with a knife as she walked from school to her car. His intention was rape, but she was determined he was not going to rape her. She struggled with this man for 15 minutes, calling aloud to Jehovah for help constantly. She recalled these points from your article on this subject. (February 22, 1984) The man gave up and left. The police said her boldness and attitude saved her. I am so grateful to you for publishing information we can recall at such times of need.
E. G., California

