VOL. XVII. AUGUST 15, 1896. No. 16. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 186 

Views From the Tower 187 

"The Lord Preserveth the Faithful" 189 

Poem: What Would Jesus Do? 193 

Restitution, Faith Cures (Continued) 193 

The Glory of Methodism 195 

Forgiveness of Injuries 196 

Are Public Prayers Authorized? 196 

Bible Study: Absalom's Rebellion 198 

Bible Study: Absalom's Defeat and 

Death 199 

Encouraging Letters 200 

page 186 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 



if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2026 : page 186 

"In a service that His love appoints 
There are no bonds for me; 

For my secret heart is taught the truth 
That makes His children free. 

And a life of self -renouncing love 
Is a life of liberty." 



Let us not be ashamed of the true gospel, nor of any of its agents 
or agencies. He who is ashamed of the brother or sister or tract or 
book through which God was pleased to send him the truth, shows 
clearly that, had he lived in the days of our Lord's humiliation, he would 
have been ashamed of him, and of the humble men whom he chose and 
used to promulgate his gospel in the beginning. The truth is not intended 
for the proud or the dishonest. God hides his truth from the 
worldly wise and prudent, and reveals it unto babes. (Luke 10:21; 
1 Cor. 1:19.) By candor and humility and zeal let us keep ourselves 
in the love of God and continue to walk in the light. 



R2011 :page 186 

"Thou must be true thyself 

If thou the truth wouldst teach, 

Thy soul must overflow, if thou 
Another soul wouldst reach; 

It needs the overflow of heart 
To give the lips full speech. 

"Think truly, and thy thoughts 
Shall the world's famine feed; 

Speak truly, and each word of thine 
Shall be a faithful seed; 

Live truly, and thy life shall be 
A great and noble creed." 



R2018 :page 187 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE confusion of tongues at the tower of Babel led 

to the scattering of mankind on the earth— to 

sectional and racial selfishness, independence, clannishness, 



—to classes and castes. This in turn has led to 
selfish animosities, wars, etc. On the other hand, it 
no doubt worked some advantage by preventing all 
from falling into the same ruts, vices and superstitions. 
But lately, especially since the beginning of "the time 
of the end" (A.D. 1799), the tendency in every direction 
is for the peoples of the earth to commingle, to obliterate 
caste and racial prejudices. People of every 
nation commingle with those of every other nation; 
not without prejudice, but nevertheless with the effect 
of gradually breaking down prejudice. 

The city officials are compelled to guard the sanitary 
conditions of the poorer quarters as well as of the 
wealthier; for disease in the tenements, where clothing 
or cigars are made, means disease elsewhere,— wherever 
their wares are used. Quarantines are as needful 
for paupers as for the wealthy who pay the tax for the 
expense incurred. In courts of justice crimes against 
the poor are recognized, as well as against the rich. 
This is not only just, but necessary for the preservation 
of respect for justice before the masses. The failure 
of a crop in one quarter of the globe does not now 
affect that part alone, but diffuses itself over the whole 
world by causing a slight general advance in price. So 
also with diseases. La Grippe spread as a scourge over 
Europe and America and was traced by science to Russia, 
and as the result of a famine which prevailed there the 
year before. The enlightened world has learned that it is 
not only humane to relieve the famine-stricken, but that it 
is necessary for the protection of those who have plenty. 

Even the lower animals are benefiting; for since it 
is learned that many contagious fevers are induced by 
the eating of infected meat and milk, the sanitary conditions 
of dairies are being guarded by the law; and the 
kind of cars in which cattle are shipped, and the food 
and drink supplied to cattle in transit, are being made 
subjects of careful legislation. 

This growing oneness of the interests of the world 
is well illustrated in Trades-Unionism. It started as 
local institutions, thinking little of the interests of others; 
but before long they were extended to all of the 
same craft in the same section or environed by the same 
conditions. Next it was found that with new machinery 
it was not difficult for a man of skill in one craft to 
turn his skill to another; and federations and amalgamations 
sprang up on broad bases of fellowship and cooperation. 
Next international unions were called for, 
especially in Europe; and it was found expedient also 
to organize the female laborers, since they with machinery 
were likely to become competitors to a larger 
extent yearly. And now, finally, realizing that the 
millions of Japan, India and China are likely to come 
into competition with civilized labor, the Socialistic Labor 
Congress of the world, which met in London in 
July, proposed to extend its doctrines and organization 
to the barbaric peoples. The resolution on the subject 



reads as follows:— 

"Considering that the aim of the foreign and colonial 
policy of the governing classes of all modern states, 
as the trustees of capitalists' interests, is to gain possession 
of new worlds to capitalize; considering further, 
that the aim of Socialists must necessarily be opposed 
to this absorption of barbaric races and the lands occupied 
by them into the great system of modern capitalistic 

R2018 :page 187 

civilization as tending to give to that system a new 

lease of life, shorter or longer, as the case may be, it is 

resolved that the policy of the Social Democratic party, 

irrespective of nationality, should be to support, and, 

in every feasible way, to make common cause with barbaric 

peoples in their efforts to maintain their independence 

against the raids of European civilization, no 

matter what the power may be, by whom the raid is undertaken, 

and no matter what may be the specious excuse, 

humanitarian or patriotic, by which such raids 

are supported or defended. It is further resolved that 

a standing international committee be appointed to 

watch events and to take such action in the above sense 

as from time to time may seem desirable, thereby inaugurating 

a new departure in the sense of a foreign 

policy, at once united and definite, for the Social Democratic 

party in all countries, irrespective of so-called national 

interests." 

While this proposition is absurd in the extreme, it 
illustrates the trend of our times; the unifying of the 
interests of mankind. The lessons of the present time, 
although taught by selfishness, are preparing mankind 
the better to appreciate the levelling and unifying which 
the Kingdom of God will shortly establish on an unselfish 
basis— on a basis of a sympathetic love which 
redeemed all and will bring all to a clear knowledge of 
the truth that they may be saved. 



The federative union of Protestants foretold in the 
Scriptures comes on apace. It has been hindered, however, 
to some extent by the hopes of some that it might 
as a federation include Roman Catholicism and Greek 
Catholicism, and thus be the more "imposing." Much 
dependence was placed upon the known sympathy of Pope 
Leo XIII. with the union movement; and it was confidently 
hoped by many that he would in some manner 
recognize the Church of England and its clerical orders, 
as the Greek and other Catholic systems had already 
been recognized. This matter seems to be positively 
settled in the negative by the Pope's last Encyclical 
(as we knew and pointed out from the Scriptures it 
would be). Now, therefore, all hope of union with 
Rome being abandoned, it is not unreasonable to expect 



that greater energy than ever will be directed to effecting 
the union or federation of Protestants, foretold. 

The following editorial review of the Encyclical in 
"Harper's Weekly" will be interesting:— 

"He of the Vatican has spoken again. Pope Leo 
XIII. has often spoken, but this time on a new theme. 
No pope of the last two centuries has surpassed him in 
keen and quick perception of the rapid changes in popular 
sentiment, and of the paternal way, from the Vatican 
point of view, in which to confront and adapt 
them. Besides, he excels in stately and labored declamations 
on the main thought of the hour upon ecclesiastical 
polity and doctrine. His encyclical is well 
timed, for it recognizes the preeminence of the aspiration 
for the union of Christendom. 

"Gladstone had heard that something of the kind 
was in due time to come from the Vatican. He therefore 
wrote his letter to Cardinal Rampolla, the Pope's 
Secretary of State, pleading for Leo's recognition of the 
validity of Anglican orders. The encyclical is not an 
answer to Gladstone, and was probably in type and 
translated into many languages before the great Englishman 
had put his plea on paper, and nowhere mentions, 
even remotely, the validity of the orders of the 
35,000 Anglican clergy. But in a sense it is an answer, 
for it says in substance: All who are out of my fold are 
schismatics; they belong to no Church; they must accept 
me as the one Holy Father, and they must adopt 
every one of the Roman Catholic doctrines. The inspiration 
of the Apocrypha, the celibacy of the clergy, the 
immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary, papal infallibility, 
and all the rest must be accepted, or the recusant 
is 'outside the Catholic communion.' 

"The language is explicit. Nobody can be admitted 
into this blessed unity 'who in the least degree 
deviates from even one point of the doctrine proposed 
by the authoritative magisterium of the Church.' The 
primacy of the Pope, the recognition of his authority, 
and the assent to every doctrine which he represents 
are the conditions of the only Christian union which 
Rome can entertain. 

"The Pope begins by declaring his desire to bring 
all peoples into the one Christian fold, and then proceeds 
to place before them the example of the Church 
in which all should be united, and to show that the 
Church is a visible body, and only one body; that it is 
the guardian of the world's faith; that of necessity there 
must be a unity of government as well as of faith; and 
therefore that 'as Christ willed that his kingdom should 
be visible, he was obliged to designate a vicegerent on 
earth in the person of St. Peter. He also determined 
that the authority given to him for the salvation of 
mankind in perpetuity should be inherited by St. Peter's 
successors.' 

"The conclusion is now natural and easy. The 
authoritative magisterium being determined— and this 



is only a beautiful and classical euphemism for the 
mastery of the Pope above bishops, councils, and all 

R2019 :page 188 

else— nothing further is wanted than the application, 
which is substantially this: 'Come into the Church of 
Rome. Do not hesitate. The ultimate tribunal is 
vested in one man— namely, his own pontifical self— 
who, when speaking in his official quality, divides his 
authority with no man or number of men when he declares 
on doctrine or morals. He can annul whatever 
councils determine. He holds St. Peter's keys, and 
can bind or loose at will. All must obey his orders. 
How easy, then, is the union of all Christendom!' 

"One learns a lesson from this last encyclical from 
the Vatican— that Rome has lost nothing of its monumental 
egoism. The invitation of the Thirteenth Lion 
to all the lambs to come into union with him might 
easily have been made by Leo X. or Gregory VII. It 
is musty with the antiquities of the temporal power of 
four centuries ago. The dust of the centuries flies out 
of it as one turns over its parchment pages. Rome 
alone is in the true path. 

"Still, there is a difference in the way of putting 
things nowadays. Even a pope scolds no more. The 
language of the authoritative magisterium is calm. 
There is nothing of the elder bluster. The anathemas 

R2019 :page 189 

against Protestants are forgotten as though veritable 
antiques. This is a gain for the courtesy of words. 
Never more will a pope speak as universal master." 



Recent accounts of cyclones, hurricanes, "cloudbursts," 
tidal waves, etc., in various parts of the world 
are appalling. About six weeks ago 3500 Japanese 
were drowned by a tidal wave, and now about 4000 
Chinese have met a similar fate. The numerous disasters 
at home are too well known to require mention. 

Creation groans (Rom. 8:22) under the curse. 
Present conditions are only what we might expect as 
a race of criminals under sentence of death from the 
Divine Court. True, the ransom price for sin has been 
paid; but the time is not yet fully come for the lifting 
of the curse. It must yet rest very heavily upon 
the culprit race; a dark hour of trouble must precede 
the glorious sunrise of the new day wherein there 
"shall be no more curse." 

Great physical changes in nature may reasonably 
be expected as a part of the impending trouble (intermingled 
with the social, political, financial and religious 
troubles of this day of the Lord). What the 



changes will be we know not; but we do know that 
present conditions of climate, etc., are not such as we 
should expect or are promised "when the Kingdom is 
the Lord's and he is the governor among the nations." 
If, therefore, any of the King's Own shall witness at 
close quarters any of the fearful signs connected with 
the grand changes now due, let them remember that 
the Lord knoweth them that are his and will not permit 
anything to come upon them that he will not overrule 
for good. 



When pointing out some time ago that the Scriptures 
indicate that the Jews are to be persecuted in all 
lands, so as to drive them out, eventually, into their 
own land, we mentioned the anti-Jewish sentiment in 
France, Germany, Italy, Austria and Russia; and the 
probability that intense and general Jewish persecution 
would break forth ere long; but intimated that the 
British would probably not share in it. But even in 
Great Britain an anti-Jewish feeling is taking root. The 
publication of a letter from Mr. Gladstone in the public 
press, recently, avowed his opposition to the race, 
—saying, "I am an Anti-Semitist"— much to the surprise 
of others as well as ourselves. Jew-hatred— 
"Judenhetze"— is making progress in England; and is 
being discussed in the prominent journals. It is really 
a movement against the Jewish money-lenders, and is 
of a piece with the Silver Movement in the United 
States. The following is clipped from the Quarterly 
Review:— 

"The day may dawn, even in France, when a popular 
Government will be the voice of the people. In 
countries not so manipulated and hoodwinked— in the 
German Empire, with its military feudal spirit on one 
side, its spirit of Socialism on the other; in Austria, 
where the Hebrew conquest dates from yesterday; in 
Russia, which M. de Vogue calls 'a mightier Islam,' 
the reaction may take a swift and sudden turn that 
would be far more dreadful than any Judenhetze known 
since the expulsion of the Marranos from the Spanish 
Peninsula. It is not an appeal to the principles of '89 
which would then avail to prevent scenes of horror and 
confusion. The European Democracy has no mind to 
be shorn of its golden fleece for the benefit of the Rothschilds 
and the Oppenheims. Let the situation be clearly 
understood— and it is growing clearer with each day's 
news, in Italy, in the Transvaal, at Vienna— who can 
believe that Christendom will allow itself to be made a 
farm, a tenement of which but a handful even among 
the five million Jews are to enjoy the fruits and the 
revenue? The Emancipation of the Jews'— that old 
Liberal watchword— has already given place to its antithesis 
Emancipation from the Jews,' economic liberty 
for the Christian working class, defence against usury 



and speculative finance, and the rest of a sound social 
programme. Sooner or later, these new ideas will issue 
in legislative enactments; or, if they do not, a worse 
thing may happen in countries which have to choose 
between the rule of productive industry and the despotism 
of capital wielded by a cosmopolitan and antisocial 
power." 



R2019 :page 189 

"THE LORD PRESERVETH THE FAITHFUL." 

"O love the Lord, all ye his saints: for the Lord preserveth the 
faithful, and plentifully rewardeth the proud doer. Be of good 
courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all 
ye that hope in the Lord."— Psa. 31:23,24. 

SINCE the publication of "Our Children in the 

Time of Trouble," in our issue of April 15, 

numerous requests have been received for a further expression 

concerning the probabilities of personal safety 

during the troublous times just ahead. 

One Brother writes:— "As the Lord almost invariably 
works through means, and as the 'prudent man 
foreseeth the evil and hideth himself (Prov. 22:3), 
I think it proper to seek of the Lord a way of escape. 
This question will force itself more and more upon God's 
people as the storm clouds gather and the thunders of 
his wrath become more appalling; and I believe it is of 
the Lord that his people should effectually hide themselves 
'until the indignation be overpast.' He has 
given them the exceeding precious knowledge of the 
truth that they may seek of him a place of safety. I 
have long believed with the brother to whose letter you 
replied in the above number that some remote place will 
be the safest. But we must not seek and inquire in 
fear and doubt of our loving Father's care, but in faith, 
because the fact that he has given us a knowledge of 

R2019 :page 190 

the coming trouble is proof that he intends we shall 
find a refuge. 

"This question is pertinent, not only to the children 
of the elect, but also to what you term the Elisha 
class.' My observations for a number of years have convinced 
me that the Elijah class' are not only few, but 
extremely few; and yet there are many Christians, devout, 
and unbendingly loyal to all the light they have, 
who do not know of the harvest time; and there are 
others who do know of it and are in full sympathy with 
the truth, who have confessed to me that they have no 
desire or hope beyond a home in the redeemed earth 
when Christ is King. Yet I perceive in them considerable 



of the spirit of Christ— meekness and loyalty. 
My observations convince me that these out-number 
the 'little flock' ten to one; and I am so glad that our 
Father will take care of them; but, as I said before, I 
believe he will use means." 

Another Brother says:— "Soon after I made my 
escape from Babylon you wrote me, in answer to a question 
respecting the time of trouble, that you understood 
the Scriptures to teach that the 'saints' would escape 
many of those things coming upon the world in the 
time of trouble. Now, will you kindly give me your 
opinion as to how a man in business will escape the 
financial crash? Is it by such a one foreseeing the 
trouble and withdrawing from business? or do you think 
that the saints who have families may continue in trade 
and have the Lord's special care which will bring us 
successfully through, up to the time of our change? 
I have had thoughts and conversations along this line, 
but have not become thoroughly convinced either way, 
and shall appreciate an answer either in the TOWER or 
by letter." 

A Sister wishes to know how Psa. 37:25,26 can be 
harmonized with the fact that some of the Lord's consecrated 
people have been in very poor circumstances, 
and whether this statement of the Psalmist is to be understood 
as a guarantee that throughout the trouble the 
Lord's people will not be reduced to beggary? 



The foregoing queries have been answered in part 
in the following WATCH TOWER articles: - 

"Your Safety in the Trouble. "-Oct. 1, '95, p. 229. 

"Come, My People. "-Mar. 15, '95, p.72. 

"The Time of Thy Visitation. "-Aug. 1, '95, p. 178. 

"Upon this Generation."— Sept. 1, '94, p. 285. 

Looking out upon the world of mankind we see 
them divided by the Word of God into two classes. 
(1) Those who believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; who 
have accepted him as their personal Redeemer from sin 

R2020 : page 190 

and its penalty, and who accordingly are seeking to 
avoid sin and to be acceptable to God through Jesus 
Christ, our Lord. (2) The vast majority of mankind 
who (whatever the length and breadth of the divine 
provision for all in Christ) are yet in their sins, who 
have not accepted a share in the ransom nor fled away 
from the sins which beset them as members of the fallen 
race, who for these reasons are still unreconciled to God, 
strangers and foreigners to his love and promises, and 
enemies through wicked works. 

Of these two classes only the first could reasonably 
hope for any favor at God's hands. And this class, 
although not large, may be subdivided into three 



classes, as below. 

(a) Those whose appreciation of the great divine 
gift has developed a reciprocating love to God and 
Christ, which has led them gratefully to consecrate to 
the divine service their little all;— time, money, influence, 
reputation, talents,— 

"To be used in joyful service 
For the glory of their King." 
Such rightly feel that to serve so good a King is an 
inestimable privilege; and hence, to them his word is 
law, and it becomes their very meat and drink to do his 
will. Thus, daily, these become more and more conformed 
to the image of God's dear Son (Rom. 8:29), 
and thus they are making their calling and election 
sure as his joint-heirs— to be like him and be with him 
and to behold and share his glory. These alone "walk 
worthy of the vocation" whereunto all living believers 
have been called;— "worthy of the Lord." (Eph. 4:1; Col. 1:10.) 
To these all of the exceeding great and precious 
promises of God's Word belong— help and strength for 
the present life, and glory, honor and immortality for 
the future, with Christ, the Lord. 

(b) Some, who started out with an appreciation of 
God's gift and their consequent reasonable service of 
full consecration to God's service, have been sidetracked 
and hindered, by "the cares of this life or the deceitfulness 
of riches" (sought, even if not secured). 

These do not love sin, nor delight in its practice; they 

love righteousness in word, thought and deed, and wish 

that circumstances were favorable to righteousness, and 

long for the time when Satan and sin shall be bound 

for the thousand years of Christ's reign, and pray fervently, 

"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth 

as it is done in heaven." Yet they are so in bondage 

to the customs of society, so fond of the approval of 

fellow creatures, and the spirit of Christ in them is so 

blended with the spirit of worldliness, that they are hindered 

from performing the sacrifice of earthly things 

and interests which they covenanted to do when flushed 

with their warm first love and appreciation of God's 

goodness and grace in Christ. They have lost much of 

their first love; and, consequently, self-sacrifices for the 

King and his cause are more painful and more difficult. 

At first they accounted it joy to be permitted to suffer 

for the truth and for right-doing with and like their 

Lord: now it is a painful duty which they shirk repeatedly, 

and repeatedly mourn over. They resolve 

that they will again take up the cross and find the old 

joy in bearing it; yet they do not do so. 

R2020 :page 191 

Their fault and hindrance began in dividing their 
hearts between heavenly and earthly interests. They 
listened to the voice of the world, the flesh and the devil 
(and the Nominal Church), saying, Be not an extremist 



in piety; take a moderate course, else you will be 
considered a religious fanatic, as Jesus, Peter, Paul and 
other ancient worthies were disesteemed. They thereupon 
dropped their full consecration, even unto death, 
and decided on a "moderate course" by which they 
could retain the esteem of their unconsecrated friends 
and associates, and, as they vainly supposed, exert over 
them a more powerful influence for good. They had 
no thought of abandoning their covenant of suffering 
and death with Christ, but intended merely to do their 
suffering and dying in a more moderate way than a full 
surrender— an out and out sacrifice, once and for ever, 
of earthly hopes, aims, friendships, etc. Alas! they 
did not realize that they could not sacrifice themselves, 
—that only the High Priest of our profession, Christ 
Jesus, can perform the great sacrifice by which we become 
dead to the world and alive toward God. He 
must lay his hands (power) upon those who would be 
joint-sacrifices; he must offer them.* And he offers none 
except the fully consecrated; nor would the Father accept 
upon his altar any others than these. In determining 
to sacrifice themselves piecemeal when and how 
they and their friends might please, was the primary 
mistake of (b). And the mistake continues; therefore 
their repeated determinations to "suffer joyfully" are 
always failures. 

The only way out of their difficulty is to do their 
first works (Rev. 2:5)— to commence over again by 
a full surrender of themselves to the Lord, that he may 
sacrifice them and give them grace to endure it joyfully 
and thus through full obedience restore them to class (a) 
as "overcomers" who shall "inherit all things." 

(c) This class is a large one, very inferior in its 
attainments. It includes, nevertheless, many who are 
highly esteemed amongst men as Christians. It is composed 
of those who have accepted Christ as their Redeemer, 
by accepting in faith their share of his great 
sin-offering. They desire all the blessings he has promised, 
but would like to give nothing or as little as possible 
in return. They hear God's voice through the 
apostle, urging them to present their bodies living sacrifices, 
and thus to suffer with Christ and by and by to 
share his glory, and they realize that it is but a reasonable 
service; but they do not heed the call, and will not 
be granted a portion of the great "feast," the "marriage 
supper," prepared for those who love their Redeemer 
with an intensity which delights to render life 
itself in his service. Consequently, so far as the present 
high calling is concerned, they have "received the 
grace of God in vain," in that they have not made even 
an attempt to learn of their calling, much less to make 
their election sure, by full consecration and a baptism 
into the sufferings and death of Christ.— Mark 10:38. 

Now amongst these three classes the favors of God 
must be understood to apply. The first (a) class undoubtedly 
is the one to whom as "overcomers" the 



promise applies,— "Watch ye that ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape all those things coming upon the world, 
and to stand before the Son of Man." They will escape 
(we believe) by being all gathered through death to 
glory before the terrible severity of the world's trouble 
will be permitted to come. 

The great time of world-wide trouble (40 
years) which began in October, 1874, is of two kinds. 
(1) Trouble, sittings, or fiery trials, upon the Church, 
that "every man's work [in the Church] may be tried 
so as by fire," and that the wood, hay and stubble of 
character or faith may be destroyed. (2) Trouble upon 
the world, financial, political and social, which will 
utterly wreck all present institutions and prepare for 
the rule of righteousness by the Kingdom of God. 
The first trouble will be specially upon the saints and 
all others who are in any degree subjects of divine favor. 
None who are truly God's sons will escape it. As it 
draws to a close, having selected, purified and proved 
the "overcomers," it will be followed by extreme trouble 
of a physical kind upon the world, in which those who 
were true children of God but whose lack of zeal did 
not permit them to be "accounted worthy" as "overcomers" 
(class b above), will suffer death,— not as sacrifices 
(for the acceptable day of sin-offerings, the "Day 
of Atonement," will be at an end), but, as the "scape 
goat," a destruction of the flesh that the spirit may be 
saved. These, "the great company," who must come 
up out of great tribulation and wash their robes white 
in the blood of the Lamb— these, surely, we cannot expect 
to see shielded from the very trouble which the 
Lord declares they need; and which in special mercy 
he will inflict for their perfecting.— Rev. 7:9,13-15. 

The third class described (c) remains for consideration. 
Can we expect that these who already have 
received the grace of God in vain, to the extent that 
they have refused to consecrate themselves fully to 
God— their "reasonable service,"— shall we expect that 
additional favors will be bestowed upon these, more 
than upon others who did not the Master's will, because 
they knew it not?— because the god of this world 
had blinded their minds? We incline to fear not! If 
they have not had a full opportunity, we doubt not 
they will yet receive it with the residue of mankind 
during the Millennium; but that God should specially 
protect these from the tribulations of the day of trouble 
does not seem to us to be reasonable or Scriptural. It 



*See TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES, Page 55. 

R2020 : page 192 

is those who knew the Lord's will and did it not who 
are to be "beaten with many stripes."— Luke 12:47. 



So far as we can at present see, the only ones promised 
"escape" from the coming storm are the overcoming 
class (a). Isaiah 26:20 should be understood as 
applicable to God's people throughout the past as well 
as in the present and so long as his "saints" shall be 
in the flesh and need divine protection. It does not refer 
to the severity of the coming catastrophe because 
the saints will all be gone before that time. 

We may, however, reasonably expect that divine 
protection will shelter two classes not recognized above. 
(1) The children of the Lord's consecrated people who 
will not have previously reached years of discretion and 
personal responsibility. (See 1 Cor. 7:14.) (2) Some 
whose eyes will get opened during the trouble, and who 
will promptly avail themselves of the grace of God and 
fully consecrate themselves to his service. These two 
classes will, we believe, be subjects of divine care in 
the day of trouble. And although they will not "escape" 
from it, as will the saints, they will, we believe, 
be preserved, guarded, provided for in the midst of it. 

We do not believe that efforts to escape the trouble 
by going into solitary places, etc., will be successful. 

R2021 : page 192 

It is the time for the building of the true antitypical 

Temple, the glorified Church; and, preceding it, "Before 

those days, there was no reward [hire] for man, 

nor any reward [hire] for beast; and for him that went 

out and for him that came in there was no peace, because 

of oppression: and I let loose all men, every one 

against his neighbor." (Zech. 8:10, Leeser's translation.) 

The trouble will be world-wide; there will be 

no place of safety except under divine providence; and, 

as we have seen, few can expect that protection. 

"Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth which 
have wrought his ordinances; seek righteousness, seek 
meekness: perhaps ye will be protected in the day of 
Jehovah's anger." (Zeph. 2:3.) This is the only safe 
course. Those who now seek according to this direction 
may yet make their calling and election sure, and 
be among the "overcomers" who shall "escape" the 
things coming upon the world. Those who do not 
"escape," but find themselves in the great trouble, can 
follow no better advice;— they may be hid or protected 
from at least some measure of the trouble. 

Hence, instead of seeking a place of safety (which 
cannot be found) for ourselves and our children, let us 
seek to bring ourselves and them into the above described 
condition of safety, by hearty obedience to the 
reasonable service set before us. 

The suggestions of Brother Clardy's letter, published 
on other page, we consider good. 



There is this to be said, however; although the 
great financial and social trouble has not yet come and 
will not come for some years, yet the great coming 
event casts its shadows before; and we have something 
to do with these present-time shadows, spasms and 
perplexities. While the hearts of the worldly-wise are 
failing them for fear (not from suffering) and for looking 
after those things coming (not things already experienced), 
God's people are to be in no such fear and 
perplexity. We know in whom we have believed and 
are persuaded that he is both able and willing to keep 
that which we have committed to his keeping. These 
thunderings and dark shadows only corroborate the divine 
Word which foreshows them all and the glorious 
results to follow. We will draw the nearer to the Lord 
and by faith shut about us the more closely the protecting 
door of our Lord's exceeding great and precious 
promises. 

But we are not to expect miraculous help except 
when necessary. We are to watch as well as pray, and 
to seek to order our course in life according to the leadings 
of divine providence for which we are to be constantly 
on the lookout. We are to look ahead (Prov. 22:3) 
and to use our best judgment accordingly, trusting 
in and looking for our Lord's providential guidance. 
This may mean a change of business or not, or even a 
failure in business. If you have done your best to "owe no 
man anything but love," and have used your best abilities 
diligently, and then fail, accept the result with resignation. 
With the consecrated the chief thought should not 
be ease, nor large profits, nor best wages, but best conditions: 
best conditions for personal development in Christian 
graces, and best conditions for rendering service 
to the Lord, his people and his truth. If you are married, 
the interests of your companion along these lines 
should have equal consideration; and if you have children, 
they and their interests, present and future, are a 
part of your charge. You will need divine help in 
weighing these interests, that you may give to each its 
proper share of consideration. If you have children, 
you brought them into the world, and are responsible 
to them and to God accordingly: you owe them not 
only religious instruction but secular education and a 
business or trade preparation, to fit them for and start 
them in life. If unprepared or unwilling to give them 
this reasonable start, you should not have begotten 
them. Having begotten them, they are a first-mortgage 
upon your time, influence and means; and in providing 
for them you will be blessed. Not even the 
gospel has a prior claim upon your time. 

But the interests of your children are a part of the 
Lord's providential care over you, if you are one of his 
fully consecrated ones. If, therefore, you see opportunities 
for teaching your children trades less liable to 
strikes, boycotts and wrangling than your own— more 
conducive to peace and the cultivation of the graces of 



R2021 :page 193 

the spirit, be willing to sacrifice something for their 
benefit, if the Lord providentially shows you a good 
opportunity to do so. 

Respecting present business trials: "Trust in the Lord 
and do good, and verily thou shalt be fed." "I have never 
seen the righteous forsaken [by the Lord] nor his seed 
begging bread." These promises are sure, and while 
doing good and trusting we may also rejoice. This 
does not imply that you will have no business trials and 
vexations and disappointments and discouragements. 
Such experiences may be just what you need to develop 
your Christian character— in meekness, patience, brotherly-kindness 
—Love. Your meal and oil may run low, 
as did those of the widow of Zarephath (1 Kings 17:12-16); 
but God knoweth it and will provide, with 
spiritual blessings accompanying, if you will but trust 
him and do what you can do. The Lord may provide 
the things needful through our own industry, or through 
the generosity of friends, or by public provision. While 
the former is to be desired and sought, the latter are 
not to be despised or rejected. None of these methods 
are begging. Accepting proffered help is not begging. 

R2021 : page 193 

WHAT WOULD JESUS DO? 



When the morning paints the skies, 
And the birds their songs renew, 

Let me from my slumbers rise, 
Saying, "What would Jesus do?" 

Countless mercies from above 
Day by day my pathway strew; 

Is it much to bless thy love? 

Father, "What would Jesus do?" 

When I ply my daily task, 

And the round of toil pursue, 
Let me often brightly ask, 

"What, my soul, would Jesus do?" 

Would the foe my heart beguile, 

Whispering thoughts and words untrue? 
Let me to his subtlest wile 

Answer, "What would Jesus do?" 

When the clouds of sorrow hide 
Mirth and music from my view, 

Let me, clinging to thy side, 

Ponder, "What would Jesus do?" 



Only let thy love, O God, 

Fill my spirit through and through; 
Treading where my Savior trod, 

Breathing, "What would Jesus do?" 
—Selected. 



R2021 : page 193 

RESTITUTION, FAITH CURES, PRAYER CURES AND 
THE GIFT OF HEALING. 

-(CONTINUED FROM OUR LAST.)- 

CONTINUING from our last the consideration 

of the necessity that our hearts be purified 

by faith and kept clean through the application of 

the Word, in order that we may progress in the divine 

life, let us consider the necessity for purity of heart 

and the purifying of the flesh in our approaches to God 

in prayer. 

"HAVING OUR BODY WASHED WITH PURE WATER. 



"Let us therefore draw near, with a true heart, 
and with the confidence of faith, being sprinkled as to 
our hearts, and pure from an evil conscience, and our 
body being washed with pure water."— Heb. 10:22. 
Syriac translation. 

Here the Apostle mentions five conditions, (1) 
Honesty of heart; (2) an undoubting faith; (3) a blood-sprinkled 
heart (Heb. 9:14), a heart or will that has 
been justified not merely through faith but also through 
the application of the blood, symbol of the merit of the 
ransom, given once for all by our Redeemer; (4) a clean 
conscience; (5) washed or purified bodies; i.e., with 
the outward man in process of cleansing by the purifying 
of the word of truth and grace. 

The purifying or cleansing of the heart through 
faith in the precious blood seems to be much better understood 
by Christian people than the purifying of their 
bodies, their flesh, through obedience in the application 
to themselves in daily life of the promises, precepts, 
warnings and illustrations of Scripture— as water or 
cleansing truths. 

It is true that God accepts us into his family as 
soon as our hearts (wills) have been consecrated through 
the application of Christ's merit, even before we have 
had time to cleanse ourselves from much of the filth of 

R2022 : page 193 



the flesh. But this merciful provision to meet the necessity 
of our case should not embolden us to expect to 
be continuously received at the throne in filthiness of 
the flesh not even attempted to be removed, yet for the 
gradual removal of much of which in the present life 
every preparation has been made. 

On the contrary, realizing God's holiness and purity 
of motive and deed, we should realize that sin and 

R2022 : page 194 

sinners are very obnoxious to him; and, while accepting 

his favor in Christ's robe of justification granted to 

us, we should begin at once earnestly to "cleanse ourselves 

from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit [mind], 

perfecting holiness in the fear [reverence] of the Lord." 

(2 Cor. 7:1.) The Scriptures give us no ground to 

hope that when we shall have finished the race we shall 

be absolutely clean and that holiness in us shall be perfected. 

No, no; when we shall have done all that we 

can do we must still confess that we are not servants 

who have brought our Master profit; we must still confess 

that in our flesh is no perfection; that still God 

could accept us only in the Beloved, covered by his imputed 

righteousness; for of all the sons of Adam "there 

is none righteous; no, not one;" nor will any be perfected 

in holiness until our Redeemer shall give us new, 

pure and perfect bodies, through which our purified 

hearts (wills, intentions) can find exercise. But, just 

the same, our hearts (wills), if they are pure and subject 

to the Lord's instructions, will be constantly seeking 

to come as near as possible to absolute purity of 

the flesh and spirit and to perfect holiness. 

And, as the cleansing process continues through 
the washing of the water of the Word, our appreciation 
of what purity is grows; so that what we would have 
thought almost spotless purity at first comes gradually, 
under our clearer spiritual sight, to appear quite sullied. 
At first, the only "filth of the flesh" which we noticed 
as such were the gross impurities of word and act; but 
after having progressed a while, these gross impurities 
become repulsive so that we hate them and have no 
sympathy with them; by that time another set of sins, 
less gross, that we did not see at first as sins, are demanding 
and having our efforts to purge them out; and, 
as they go, other impurities, still more subtle, still 
more refined, still more deeply entrenched in our poor, 
fallen bodies, are discovered and being by God's grace 
purged out. The "filth of the flesh," as at first seen by 
many, consisted of murders, drunkenness, debauch, 
adulteries, filthy language, etc.: as seen later, it includes 
selfishness in its various developments, hatred, malice, 
envy, strife, vain-glory; but, as seen from the advanced 
standpoint of those who for some time have been striving 
by the Lord's help toward perfect holiness, it is seen 
to include every thing short of meekness, gentleness, 



patience, brotherly kindness, love. And it is well that 

we should see that, while such results are to be aimed 

at and to be attained as fully and as rapidly as possible, 

yet our Lord, as our High Priest, knows our circumstances 

and peculiarities, and not only is not expecting 

impossibilities but stands ready to assist us to the possibilities 

to which he calls us by his gospel and its exceeding 

great and precious promises. And surely, "he 

that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself even as 

he [who called him] is pure."— 1 John 3:3. 

What we have said with reference to heart purity, 
the most important, applies also to physical cleanliness. 
Get the heart (mind) started toward purity, and the 
literal water will be used as well as the symbolical, and 
the outward man will soon be clean. 

PURIFICATION WITH FASTING AND PRAYER. 



Although not under the Law Covenant, we may 
with propriety look back to God's dealings with the 
ancient worthies and the typical arrangements of the 
past and draw therefrom some lessons of value. One 
lesson is in the fact that those who celebrated the Passover 
(typifying the Gospel Church which partakes of 
Christ, our Passover Lamb) were required to cleanse 
themselves and their houses and to put away all leaven 
(a symbol of sin) and generally to purify. See Exod. 12:19,20; 
13:7: John 11:55. 

On the great occasion of the giving to Israel of the 
Law Covenant, washings, purifying, etc., were strictly 
enjoined. (See Exod. 19:15.) The antitype of that 
is the institution of the New Covenant of grace at the 
hands of the greater Mediator, Christ. The appropriateness 
of the still greater purifying of all who accept 
the New Covenant must be evident. 

When Daniel the prophet sought the Lord in the 
special requests which God so specially answered, he 
"chastened" himself; that is, he sought by the practice 
of self-denial to bring himself into a special condition 
of heart and mind pleasing to God. (Dan. 10:2,3.) 
That his course was helpful to him and acceptable in 
God's sight is testified by the angel of the Lord— "O 
Daniel, a man greatly beloved [margin— "man of desires"], 
...fear not, Daniel: for from the first day 
that thou didst set thine heart to understand, and to 
chasten thyself before thy God, thy words were heard." 
Verses 11,12. Compare also Chapter 9:3,4-18,20,21. 

While the fastings, washings and purifyings of the 
Law Covenant represent conditions of self-denial and 
deadness to the world, which should be the attitude of 
all true believers at all times, yet we have good New 
Testament precedent for the observance of literal fasts, 
etc. Note the following:— 

Our Lord fasted forty days at the beginning of his 



ministry, when specially seeking divine leading and instruction 
for the work; and we know not how often he 
fasted in secret.— Matt. 4:2. 

"When ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad 
countenance,. ..that they may appear unto men to 
fast.. ..But thou, when thou fastest,. ..appear 
not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in 
secret,. ..and he shall reward thee openly."— Matt. 6:16-18; 
9:15. 

R2022 : page 195 

In the Church at Antioch were several of the 
brethren who served the Church, and prayed and fasted 
and sought to be and to do what would be most pleasing 
to God. It was from among these earnest seeking 
ones that God chose Paul and Barnabas for special 
service. What a suggestion there is in this for all who 
are desirous of being used and useful in the service of 
the same Master. The Church at Antioch seemed to 
feel the importance of the matter, too, for when sending 
them forth at their expense, as their representatives 
and the Lord's, they fasted first and then prayed 
and laid their hands upon the missionaries (as recognizing 
them as their agents and representatives) and 
sent them forth.— Acts 13:2,3. 

The Apostle mentions how he and his co-laborers 
approved themselves to the people of God, and among 
other items he mentions stripes, imprisonments and 
fastings. We are not to think of the Apostle as whipping 
and imprisoning himself, as do some of the monks 
and nuns, but as suffering these at the hands of unbelievers, 
on account of his faithfulness to the Lord, in 
declaring the good tidings of great joy— "Jesus and the 
resurrection"— of which he was not ashamed. So, likewise, 
some of his fastings may have been enforced fastings, 
because of his service of the truth; and, if so, no 
doubt they were all the more acceptable in God's sight. 
-2 Cor. 6:5; 11:27. 

To those who have written to us of their desire to 
abandon the use of tobacco, etc., or who find in themselves 
any weaknesses which they long to overcome, we 
advise not only the continual washing of their hearts with 
the truth and praying and watching unceasingly, but 
also additionally the frequent use of literal water in a 
physical bath and occasional fasting unto God as a sign 
to him of your earnestness of heart— as a proof to yourself, 
as well as to God, that your prayer is not merely 
a momentary fancy but a deep, earnest heart-desire. 

[CONCLUDED IN OUR NEXT.] 



R2022 : page 195 



"THE GLORY OF METHODISM." 



"THE increase of Methodism is one of the wonders 
of the age. Starting in 1739 with eight 
or ten persons. ..the number of its adherents has increased 
to millions and its influence encircles the globe. 
Its educational institutions are equal to those of any 
denomination of Christendom. It numbers among its 
adherents some of the foremost statesmen, financiers 
and professional men of the century. Its pulpits are 
filled by ministers the equal of any in ability and religious 
zeal. Taken as a whole, Methodism wields an immeasurable 
influence in the world, and has a tremendous 
responsibility. 

There is a growing danger that these outward material 
things should absorb our attention, causing us to 
forget the lowliness and purpose of our origin. When 
the king of Babylon looked upon the city that had risen 
to such grandeur under his fostering care, he said: 'Is 
not this the house of my power, and for the might of 
my power, and for the honor of my majesty?' His 
history is but another illustration of the proverb, 'Pride 
goeth before destruction,' and should stand as a warning 
to individuals, nations and churches, not to glory 
in material prosperity only. There may be much glitter 
and glare in the church to arrest the attention, and yet 
Tchabod' may be written upon her portals. 

"John Wesley said: 'In 1729 my brother Charles 
and I, reading the Bible, saw we could not be saved 
without holiness; followed after it, and incited others 
so to do. In 1737 we saw that this holiness comes by 
faith. In 1738 we saw likewise that men are justified 
before they are sanctified, but still holiness was our object, 
inward and outward holiness. God then thrust us 

R2023 : page 195 

out to raise up a holy people.' 

"Again, he says: 'This doctrine is the grand depositum 
which God has lodged with the people called 
Methodists; and for the sake of propagating this chiefly 
he appears to have raised us up.' 

"The glory of Methodism is, that its object was, 
'to raise up a holy people' and 'to spread Scriptural 
holiness over the (all) lands.' If that object is lost 
sight of, its glory will depart. Dr. Adam Clark says: 
If the Methodists give up preaching entire sanctification, 
they will soon lose their glory.' 

"The bishops in their quadrennial address in 1824 
said: If Methodists give up the doctrine of entire sanctification, 
or suffer it to become a dead letter, we are 
a fallen people. Holiness is the main cord that binds 
us together; relax this, and you loosen the whole system. 
This will appear more evident if we call to mind 



the original design of Methodism. It was to raise up 
and preserve a holy people.' The Centennial Conference 
of American Methodism which met in Baltimore, 
1884, reaffirmed this as our faith and purpose: 'We remind 
you, brethren, that the mission of Methodism is 
to promote holiness.' 

"That there may be no mistake as to what is meant 
by holiness in the above quotations, the General Conference 
of 1832 issued a pastoral address to the church 
and used the following words: 'When we speak of holiness 
we mean that state in which God is loved with 
all the heart and served with all the power. This is 
the privilege of the Christian in this life, and may be 
secured [commenced— EDITOR] instantaneously by an 
act of faith, as is justification.' 

"Hear then the conclusion of the whole matter: 
The germ of Methodism is holiness. The design of 
Methodism is to spread Scriptural holiness. The shibboleth 
of Methodism is holiness. The glory of Methodism 
is holiness. 

"Some of the greatest men that ever were connected 
with Methodism have told us, that when we 
cease to preach holiness, as above explained, our glory 
is departed."— Methodist journal. 

[Evidently the original glory of the "people called 
Methodists" was the true glory of the true Christianity. 
But alas! to how great an extent this glory has been 
lost by this as well as other denominations. It was the 
seeing clearly of the truths then due to be seen, that 
produced good effects and results in Wesley's day, although 
unpopular. It is the "present truth" that is 
needed to sanctify God's people to-day. "Sanctify 
them through thy truth, thy word is truth."— EDITOR.] 



R2023 : page 196 

FORGIVENESS OF INJURIES. 



"FORGIVENESS often seems to be more divine 
than any other virtue because it costs so 
much and is such an unmistakable proof of love. It 
cuts directly athwart that self-interest which is the 
gravest temptation, the deadliest danger, of our lives. 
He who can and does forgive in anything like God's 
own spirit and manner has taken a long step toward 
ideal righteousness. 

"We are to forgive those who have injured us, both 
for our own sakes and for theirs. For our own, because 
we need to learn to repress that indignant self -justification 
which is far too eager to exalt our own 
rights and belittle those of others; because we cannot 
consistently ask of them the forgiveness which we too 



often need unless we are willing to grant it in turn; and 
because we never can be sure that in their circumstances 
we might not have given offense, equal to, perhaps 
even greater than, theirs. 

"For their sakes, also, because they may have 
battled long and nobly with the temptation to wrong us 
before yielding, and deserve credit for it; because they 
need to be encouraged to begin again and do better; 
because they are our brothers and sisters before God; 
and because, if we continue implacable, they will have 
good reason to doubt whether our spirit is truly that of 
our heavenly Father, and such a doubt is an injury to 
them which we can prevent. 

"Moreover, forgiveness ought to be hearty and 
convincing, not merely that of the tongue, but evidently 
the glad renewal of confidence. And, if we are to imitate 
the divine example set us, it ought to be renewed 
in all its sincerity as often as needed, provided it be 
sought with equal honesty. Seventy times seven! That 
means indefinitely— if the offender be in earnest. 

"This suggests a limitation which is right and inevitable. 
He who seeks and receives forgiveness must 
prove his sincerity by the effort to avoid renewed offense. 
A merely formal request for forgiveness does not necessarily 
involve genuine penitence, and nobody has the 
right to impose upon one whom he has injured by pretending 
to be sorry when he is not sorry. Such a hypocritical 
wrongdoer must, for his own sake and for the 
general good, be refused forgiveness until he seeks it 
in the proper spirit. Travesties of penitence need rebuke, 
not pardon. Christian dignity, and the very dignity 
of God himself, must not be thus mocked. But 
with this exception it is both a sweet privilege and a 
solemn duty to forgive indefinitely, even as we hope to 
be forgiven." 

—The Congregationalist. 



R2023 : page 196 

ARE PUBLIC PRAYERS AUTHORIZED? 

A brother writes: "I have much enjoyed recent WATCH TOWERS. 
I see that the theme will be continued: Please say something in regard 
to Public Prayer. The brethren here are not one on that subject, some 
claiming that Christians should never pray in public. 

OUR Lord, after reproving the custom of the 
Pharisees, of standing on the street corners to 
pray, to be seen of men and to be thought pious, said, 
"But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet 
[private place], and when thou hast shut thy door, pray 
to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which 
seeth in secret shall reward thee openly." (Matt. 6:6.) 
From this, and from the fact that our Lord himself 



frequently retired for prayer to the mountain solitude, 
quite a few earnest souls have concluded that 
other than private prayers are disapproved if not sinful: 
and thus they have, we believe, done themselves injury. 

Our Lord himself set us the example of offering 
prayer in public; not only in the presence of his disciples 
frequently, but also in the presence of unbelievers 
at least once— at the tomb of Lazarus. (John 1 1:41,42; 
See Luke 10:21.) That which is generally termed 
"The Lord's Prayer" was not only uttered in the presence 
of the disciples, but is a sample of a collective 
prayer. It addresses "Our Father," not My Father; 
it requests forgiveness of "our sins," not my sins; 
as "we forgive" others, and not as I forgive others. 
It is a sample of a collective prayer, specially. 

The prayer recorded in the 17th chapter of John 
was evidently a public prayer, before the disciples at 
least, else it could not have been recorded by one of 
them as it is stated.— John 18:1. 

The apostles, guided by the same holy spirit, not 
only prayed to the Father in secret, but also prayed 
publicly before the Church and exhorted and instructed 
others respecting such public, congregational prayers. 

Frequent mention is made of the gathering of the 
Church for prayers, when it is not stated that they 
prayed audibly, and where the fact is not proved by 
the narration of the petition, but it is not reasonable 
to suppose that they gathered for prayer and that each 
then prayed privately and secretly. Besides, in some 
instances the prayers are recorded.— See Acts 1:14,24; 
12:5,12; 16:13; 20:36; 21:5. 

The Apostle Paul, writing to the Church at Corinth, 
clearly teaches that prayer and giving of thanks 
before the Church is to be done in an audible voice and 
in a common tongue, in order that the hearers of the 
prayer may be edified.— See 1 Cor. 14:14-17. 

However, we have no sympathy with the custom 
of some of pretending to pray to God, while really addressing 
the congregation. Although our prayers 
be distinct and intelligible to the audience, in order that 
the hearers may all be profited by being able to join 
sympathetically in a possibly more full and fluent petition 

R2023 : page 197 

than the majority could express, yet it should never 
be lost sight of that it is God, and not men, that is 
addressed. 

Neither have we any sympathy with the custom of 
opening Political Conventions, and Legislative Assemblies 
and Schools and Lodges with prayer. Since these 
are not meetings of the Church they can (as meetings) 
have no recognition from God. If delegates to a Convention 
or Legislature or Congress, or attendants at 
college or school be Christians they as such always have 
access to God by prayer, and they should not be found 



in any place where they could not ask and expect God's 
blessing with them. If a teacher be a Christian, he or 
she might without special impropriety offer an audible 
prayer, for wisdom and grace to instruct aright; and 
any of the pupils who are Christians might say, Amen. 
But school-children should not be taught to repeat the 
"Lord's Prayer:" It was given for no such purpose. 
Nor should teachers be required to offer prayer; 
for many are not Christians. And the children? Although 
innocent of personal crimes, they are still under 
Adamic condemnation, and are permitted to approach 
God only through faith, on the terms of the New Covenant; 
—except the children of such as have entered into 
covenant relations to God.— See 1 Cor. 7:14. 

R2024 : page 197 

The evil effect of promiscuous public praying is 
growingly manifest on every hand. Men who know that 
only as a great favor through influential friends could 
they gain an audience with the potentates of earth, and 
then only with great formality of dress, etc., have gotten 
the idea that anybody at any time and in any filthy 
rags of his own righteousness can rush into the august 
presence of the King of kings and have an audience 
with him. And Christians, ministers and educators, 
have sanctioned this hurtful folly. As a consequence, 
thousands do not truly come to God, but delude themselves 
that they are "all right" and "as good as the 
average Christian;" while really, not having come to 
God in his appointed way, they have neither part nor 
lot in his Church, nor in the exceeding great and precious 
promises made to it. 

"God heareth not sinners." (John 9:31; Job 27:9; 
Prov. 1:28,29; 28:9; Psa. 66:18; Isa. 1:15.) Christ 
is the way, the truth and the life, and no man cometh 
unto the Father but by him. (John 14:6.) While 
father Adam was created a son of God and then had 
access to his Father, yet this relationship and its privileges 
were cut off when he rebelled and was sentenced 
as a sinner to death;— all relationship was severed, all 
rights and privileges were forfeited. True, God has 
mercifully provided a great sacrifice for sin, and reconciliation 
through the precious blood of the Redeemer, 
and through him a return to all the privileges, communion 
and favors lost in Adam; but this provision is 
restricted: it is not for everybody; it is open only to 
those who, desiring to flee away from sin, come to a 
knowledge of the Savior and accept the favor of God 
on the conditions of the New Covenant. 

Provision is made for these, that they may divest 
themselves of the filthy rags of their own righteousness 
and put on the robe of Christ's righteousness through 
faith; and thus prepared they may be introduced to the 
Father as redeemed and restored sons— reconciled to God 
by the death of his Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord. Then, 



and not until then, should we expect that their prayers 
would be anything else than an abomination before 
God. None will be heard and accepted by the Father, 
while rejecting the New Covenant and the only name 
given under heaven or among men whereby we must 
be saved. 

But to those who realize their sins and, repenting 
of them, accept the Redeemer and the New Covenant 
as the only way back to sonship and fellowship with 
the Father, the Apostle says,— 

"Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, 
but fellow citizens with the saints, and of the 
household of God." "For through him [Christ] we 
both have access by one spirit unto the Father."— 
Eph. 2:18,19. 

"Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into 
the holiest by the blood of Jesus, ...let us draw 
near with a true heart in full assurance of faith." (Heb. 10:19-22.) 
"Let us therefore come boldly unto the 
throne of the heavenly grace, that we may obtain mercy, 
and find grace to help in time of need."— 
Heb. 4:16. 

Here, then, is what we hold to be the Scriptural line 
on this important subject. (1) Prayer is the privilege 
of "believers," reconciled children of God, only. (2) It 
is appropriate for such children of God to pray collectively 
as well as individually and privately. (3) At a 
meeting of God's children, the fact that unbelievers 
might be present would not make prayer improper, because 
it is a meeting of the Church and not a meeting 
of the unregenerate, nor under their control. (4) Prayer 
is wholly improper at Political, Legislative, Social, 
Educational, and other meetings which are not 
meetings of the Church of Christ. Even though some 
of the regenerated sons of God be present, the meetings 
are world-meetings, not directly amenable to the 
Word and Spirit of God. If Christians find it expedient 
to attend such meetings, let them attend as citizens 
and not as saints, and let their prayers be offered in secret. 

"Unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to 
do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take 
my covenant in thy mouth— seeing thou hatest instruction 
and castest my words behind thee?"— 
Psalm 50:16,17. 



R2024 : page 198 

ABSALOM'S REBELLION. 

-AUGUST 23.-2 Sam. 15:1-12.- 

Golden Text— "Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy 
days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God 
giveth thee."— Exod. 20:12. 



IN this account of Absalom's rebellion there are 
several important lessons to thoughtful minds. 
(1) First of all we notice in Absalom the sin of disrespect 
to parents. The experience and wisdom of riper 
years are, when heeded, the safeguards of youth, and 
specially in the case of parental experience and wisdom, 
which parental love is ever desirous of utilizing 
for the benefit of sons and daughters, to protect them 
from the ills of life of which they have learned either 
by experience or observation. Youth, alas! too often 
disregards this divinely provided safeguard until by and 
by it learns its folly by bitter experience. The 
hopefulness of youth naturally gilds the future with 
glory; and, with ardent spirits, undisciplined, unrestrained 
and self-conscious, it plunges into new schemes, 
sanguine of the success of its theories until, by and by, 
its bright visions fade before the stern realities of life. 

So it was with Absalom; and so it is with every 
youth who disregards the commandment of the Lord, 
"Honor thy father and thy mother;" and again, as expressed 
by the Apostle, "Children obey your parents." 
The duty to "honor" parents, however, extends far 
beyond the obligation to obey them, which specially 
applies to childhood, and not to mature years. The duty 
of honoring parents extends from the cradle to the 
grave, and when the last honors are paid to the lifeless 
forms of parents they should still hold an honored place 
in the archives of memory. Nothing is more beautiful 
in youth than preferment and deference to riper years, 
and specially to old age. "Thou shalt rise up before 
the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man." 
-Lev. 19:32. 

(2) We notice in Absalom the sin of disrespect to 
the God of his father, which was but the natural result 

of his lack of love and confidence in his father. He entirely 
ignored the facts that the kingdom was the Lord's, 
and that the Lord placed whom he would upon the 
throne, so that his youthful ambition plotted not only 
against his father, David, but also against God, who 
had anointed David to be king, and who also promised 
to establish his throne and to indicate his successor, 
and to subdue all his enemies. In his rebellion Absalom 
vainly thought not only thus to outwit his father, 
David, but also the Almighty Jehovah. How vain and 
foolish! what reckless folly! And yet, how many have 
repeated this folly, and few of the sons of men have 
paused to consider how puny is the arm of flesh when 
lifted in defiance of the Almighty! 

(3) We see how political intrigue stole the hearts 

of the people and made the cause of Absalom temporarily 
very prosperous, so that "the conspiracy was 
strong and increased continually with Absalom." But 
every successful step of the plot was only bringing the 
young man nearer to the height from which he must 
eventually fall. So it is in the temporary success of 



every evil device: the much sought elevation only adds 
force to the final disaster. In this view it is manifest that 
the truest friendship to the wayward is resolute, wise 
and well-planned opposition, which no flattery or political 
craft can overcome. Such friendship is seldom 
appreciated except by Him who reads the heart, though 
it does sometimes turn the sinner from the error of his 
way and save a soul from death. For such service how 
necessary is great sobriety, patience, faith, hope and 
love! especially in any efforts to assist fellow members 
of the prospective body of Christ, who are now on trial 
for eternal life and in the race for the prize of our high 
calling, lest any, becoming wayward, should fail of the 
grace of God. 

(4) We observe the progressive course of evil- 
how the sin of ingratitude and dishonor to a father 
brought on ambition and defiance of God; how this led 
to unscrupulous political intrigue, flattery and lying; 
and finally to a bold and wicked plot which was treason 
alike to the king and to God. In all this Absalom was 
cultivating that haughty spirit which goes before a fall. 

While thus noting the course of Absalom and its 
lessons to the young, there is also a hint of wisdom for 
parents which they would do well to heed. The example 
of David to his children was not a faultless one: 
the sins of his youth and of his later years yielded a 
most undesirable harvest. Not only had he violated 
the law of God in multiplying wives to himself (Deut. 17:14-17), 
but he had further transgressed by taking 
some heathen wives, the mother of Absalom being the 
daughter of the heathen king Talmai, king of Geshur 
in Syria; and the children of a polygamous household, 
living apart from their father with their several mothers, 
were necessarily almost without a father's influence 
and care, so that Absalom was brought up under the 
influence of a heathen mother and apparently with little 
reverence or respect for the true God. 

The sin of Amnon for which Absalom slew his 
brother was one deserving of punishment, and yet in 
view of his own sin with the wife of Uriah how could 
David become the avenger? The crime doubtless caused 
him sorrow and tears and bitter reflections upon the 
past, all of which he recognized as part of his own penalty 
but, remembering his own folly, he could not 
punish the offender. 

R2025 : page 198 

In the slaying of Amnon, whatever purposes of 
selfish ambition or personal hatred may have mingled 
with his indignation, Absalom was avenging the crime 
against his sister with only a lawful vengeance, the prescribed 
penalty being death. To David, who loved all 
his children, this was a terrible blow, and Absalom, 
fearing his indignation, fled to his maternal grandfather 
where for three years, unrecalled by his father, he remained, 



under the influence of that heathen land, no 

doubt restive under unfavorable conditions, with no indication 

of any favorable turn of affairs and chafing 

under a sense of injustice, since in avenging his sister 

he had merely executed the sentence of the Law (Deut. 27:22; 

Lev. 20:17); and, brooding over his misfortunes 

and magnifying all the faults and weaknesses of 

his father, it is no matter of surprise that the spirit of 

rebellion strengthened; for in the absence of any 

expression of his father's interest in him, how could he 

R2025 : page 199 

know of his heart yearnings? And when after three 
years he was permitted to return to the land, still he 
was not permitted to see his father's face, nor to know 
of his continued love for two more years. 

It is not, therefore, surprising that the experience 
of these five years fastened upon the mind of Absalom 
the conviction that his father no longer loved him or 
considered his interests; and this feeling rankling in 
his heart, he prepared to set at defiance his kingly authority, 
and in the fire of his youth, the self-consciousness 
of early manhood and his now dominant ambition, 
he also recklessly ignored the divine authority. 

This attitude of David toward his son was a great 
mistake on the part of David, the realization of which 
when it was too late to rectify it doubtless greatly 
deepened the grief which was subsequently expressed in 
the bitter and tearful lament, "O my son Absalom! my 
son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee. 
O Absalom, my son, my son!" For five years David 
had allowed the hard side of his nature to thoroughly 
conceal his tender emotions; and not only so, but in all 
that time he had been neglecting his opportunities for 
exerting a godly influence upon his son, and that at a 
time when he most needed such influence, and instead 
of which he was surrounded with the influences of a 
heathen land. It was a dear price for David to pay for 
his resentment, and in the light of his son's highest 
interests it was certainly very poor policy. Yet how 
often is the mistake of David repeated by fathers! 
Many seem to forget the temptations, trials and inexperience 
of youth, and so fail to be gracious, considerate, 
forbearing and studious of their highest interests. 
Kind, generous, self-forgetful interest will follow the 
son long after childhood has matured into manhood, 
and will make parental counsel very potent long after 
parental authority has ceased. 

There is probably no time in life more fraught with 
danger than when the young birds leave the home nest 
and launch out to try their own wings and to carve out 
their own fortunes. And if they can go with a father's 
and a mother's blessing; if every rebuff and misfortune 
they meet from a hard, cold world elicits home sympathy 
and prayers and loving encouragement; if father's 



house is felt to be the place of refuge in case of a sudden 
disaster; if they feel that loving forbearance there 
offsets the hard knocks of experience outside, what a 
power is there for good! It certainly is not a wise 
father that will long permit any pride of dignity or stiff 
reserve to forego the privileges of his position for the 
blessing of his offspring. 

Parents should heed well this lesson, that the bitter 
lament of David over a son whom kindness, forbearance 
and loving counsel and sympathy might have 
saved, may not be theirs; and in every relation of life 
let us all see to it that love not only exists, but also 
that it is made very manifest. 

In verse 7 the word "forty" evidently should be 
"four." It is believed to be a transcriber's error. 



R2025 : page 199 

ABSALOM'S DEFEAT AND DEATH. 

--AUGUST 30.--2 SAM. 18:9-17,32,33.- 

Golden Text— "The Lord knoweth the way of the righteous, 
but the way of the ungodly shall perish."— Psa. 1:6. 

THE successful conspiracy of Absalom, so artfully 
planned and skillfully executed, finally drove 
David from Jerusalem and planted Absalom there. But 
the victory of the conspirators was not yet complete 
while David, the rightful sovereign, lived. So Absalom 
and his counsellors conspired further against the 
life of the king. 

But the Lord raised up in Hushai a friend for 
David, and placed him among the counsellors of Absalom, 
and thus through his counsel brought to naught 
the foolish and wicked conspiracy. In the pride and 
wickedness of his heart, bent on the slaying of his 
father, Absalom placed himself at the head of a great 
army and went forth to fight. In contrast with this 
wickedness mark the father's love, even under these 
extremely trying circumstances, saying to his men as 
they went forth to meet Absalom, "Deal gently, for my 
sake, with the young man, even with Absalom." 

How suddenly God brought to naught the evil designs 
of this wicked young man: elated with his success 
and proudly riding to expected victory, he was 
suddenly caught by the head in the branches of a great 
oak; his mule passed on leaving him helplessly suspended, 
and the friends of David finished the work. 
Joab's trumpet of victory is blown, the conspiracy has 
come to naught, the usurper is dead and buried under 
a heap of stones, and those that were with him seek to 
hide their faces for very shame; and King David, the 
Lord's anointed, returned again to Jerusalem in 



peace. 

In the lesson which these circumstances afford let 
us mark well how short is the triumph of evil doers. 
Though their eyes stand out with fatness and they have 
more than heart could wish (Psa. 73:7); and tho now the 
world calls the proud happy and they that work wickedness 
are set up, and they that tempt God are even delivered 
(Mai. 3:15), yet soon they will all be as stubble 
under the feet of the righteous. (Mai. 4:1.) The 
time may indeed seem long to those burdened by oppression; 
but it is not long in God's estimation. He 
will bring forth judgment unto victory just as soon as 
the wisdom of his purposes will permit. If justice be 
delayed, it is only for the development of some greater 
good than could be accomplished by a speedy adjustment. 
In this confidence, therefore, let the Christian 
rest, assured that all things— even the seeming delays 
—shall work together for good to them that love God, 
to the called according to his purpose. (Rom. 8:28.) 
"Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, which hath 
great recompence of reward; for ye have need of patience 
that, after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive 
the promise."— Heb. 10:36. 



R2025 : page 200 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been thinking about 1 Thes. 4:16. 
As noted in DAWN [Vol. II, p. 146], the word "shout," as per 
concordance, means "a shout of encouragement." I believe the word 
from which "shout" is here translated does not elsewhere occur in the 
New Testament. In looking at the word rendered "Jubilee," I notice that 
the meaning is given as "time of shouting" or "shout." 

It has occurred to me that possibly the word "shout" in 1 Thess. 4:16 
might mean the same as jubilee, and that Paul, possibly, there 
conveys the idea of an antitypical jubilee. The jubilee of old, I believe, 
was ushered in by the priests, the trumpet and the shout. Might it not 
be a jubilee shout? Might it not be possible that this passage is a 
proclamation of the Great Antitypical Jubilee? In Psalm 89:15 we read, 
"Blessed is the people who know the joyful sound [shout]." (See concordance 
for this word "sound" and also "joyful sound.") "They shall 
walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance." Isaiah 27:13 says:— 
"And it shall come to pass in that day that the great trumpet shall be 
blown." Zech. 9:14 says:— "And the Lord shall blow the trumpet." 

Should there be any such connection between the "shout" in 
1 Thes. 4:16 and the word jubilee, then the other scriptures I have 
named would appear to be specially significant. 

In the type, if I am correct, the first day of the Jubilee year was 
also the Day of Atonement. "In the Seventh month, on the tenth day 
of the month, ye shall afflict your souls." (Lev. 16:29.) From this it 



would appear to be a day of sorrow rather than gladness. Is it not 
probable that the trumpet did not sound until evening? Then the afflicting 
of the soul was over, the great atonement completed, the High 
Priest had entered within the veil and returned alive, all transgression 
had been symbolically carried away. In the evening, therefore, joy and 
triumph might well be in order. 

Do the Scriptures indicate just when the trumpet was blown? 

On the supposition that the shouting and sounding of the trumpet 
took place in the evening, it might follow that the antitypical trumpet 
might be looked for later than 1874. If October 1874 is the date of 
the commencement of the Antitypical Jubilee, then when would the 
Antitypical Trumpet be due to sound? 

R2026 : page 200 

I have thought that possibly the Pentecost, or Feast of Weeks, 
might be a type of the thousand years or times of Restitution. Doctor 
Smith's Old Testament History says (pages 264, 265 and 258), "The 
Pentecost was the Jewish Harvesthome." "The Pentecost is the only 
one of the three great feasts which is not mentioned as the memorial of 
events in the history of the Jews." "It was doubtless after the sacrifices 
of that solemn day were ended, that the trumpet of Jubilee pealed forth 
its joyful notes," etc. I would be pleased to have your views regarding 
this in your own time and way. 

Your brother, C. C. KELLY. 

[We are in full agreement with the various propositions above set 
forth. The Gospel age has been the antitypical "Day of Atonement," 
in which Christ Jesus our Lord redeemed the world and in which, also, 
the Church as his body "fills up that which is behind" of his sufferings. 
(See TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES.) The Millennial 
age, we understand, was typified by the "Feast of Tabernacles." 
It will be a time of rejoicing but not a time of fixity, because that which 
is perfect will not fully come until the end of the Millennium, when the 
unfit who have neglected to hear the great Prophet, the Christ, will be 
destroyed from among the people, and the age of everlasting and fully 
established perfection amongst men will begin. The "harvest" (Oct. 
1874 to Oct. 1914) is the lapping time in which the Gospel age ends 
and the Millennial age begins. The Jubilee trumpet we identify as one 
with the Seventh Trumpet and Trump of God. (See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. II., page 197.) The Apostle Paul was a prophet as well 
as an Apostle and the "shout [of encouragement]" (1 Thes. 4:16) 
should be understood to be the people's response to the Jubilee trumpets 
blown by the priests.— EDITOR.] 



page 200 

Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Our number here is holding its own, 
and we have been quite successful in scattering the truth. A great 
many appear to see the reasonableness and scriptural authority of the 
"Plan," but Oh! so few are willing to sacrifice and must simply be 
driven by the fiery troubles to give up their love for the god of this 
world. Thanks be unto God who giveth us the victory; his kingdom 



for which we have prayed is coming, and his will will soon be done on 
earth as it is in heaven. It seems that if the people would only open 
their eyes and ears they could not fail to understand (see) the Christ 
presence casting Satan out of his high ruling position. Let us work on, 
fight on, suffer on; the time is not much longer; and he is faithful and 
just for whom we labor, and will reward us bountifully. J. C. GAULT. 



R2026 : page 200 

Alabama. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER:-From an article in a late TOWER 
I find I had anticipated your ideas, for I had been teaching the same to 
my children and had set forth the same sentiments to a few special 
friends, in regard to the perpetuation of the lives of children of Christian 
parents; holding out the idea to them, as gathered from the Scriptures, 
that they, above all others, would have the special protecting care of 
God in this great battle of the day of God Almighty which is now being 
waged. While I recognize that they will have special protection thrown 
around them, yet, if they would enjoy the full benefits of his grace 
or favor, and live over into the full of the Millennial kingdom, when 
none will die except for wilful sin, they themselves have a work to 
do, after arriving at the years of accountability; viz., it is necessary 
that they live a righteous life, and the only difference between their 
relationship with God, and that of the children of the unrighteous, consisted 
in the more abundance of grace supplied them, which would the 
better strengthen them, and support them in this hour of trial; that God 
could not, nor would not, look upon sin with any degree of allowance in 
any one; but by his grace or favor, for their parents' sake, in Christ, the 
Father would be more liberal in supplying his grace to the children of 
Christian parents. I have told my children in my talks to them that if 
they did not live on and on forever it would be because they resisted the 
leading of the spirit, and persisted in living an unrighteous life. 

Will you bear with me while I relate two instances in point, relating 
to my own family, in brief. My business called me from home. I 
received intelligence that my youngest child was dangerously ill. I 
immediately took it to the Lord in earnest prayer. This was about 8 P.M. 
The spirit's leading was so plain in the matter that next morning, 
before any further advice in regard to the condition of my child had been 
received, I wrote a card, saying that though the child had been very 
sick it was better and would be all right soon. The next evening I received 
a card from home which had been written before mine reached 
them stating that it was greatly improved and that there seemed to be a 
sudden change for the better about 8 o'clock the night previous. This 
is a matter of record. 

The second case is that of my daughter. When she was a child 
(she is now 18) her eyes became affected so she could not see her way, 
and had to be led about. I sent her to an oculist, and she remained 
there for about three months; she came home considerably improved. 
We continued his treatment for some time after her arrival at home, until 
finally the medicine seemed to lose its effect, and she became worse. 
I carried the case to God in prayer; and she is now comparatively well. 
While this case is not so well marked by immediate results, it is plainly 
the work of restitution. 

Your yokefellow in Christ, J. W. CLARDY. 



page 201 
