Benefit Fully From Meetings for Field Service
 1. How can meetings for field service help us?
1 Effective meetings for field service provide real encouragement and practical instruction before we go in the ministry. They enable us to share in group witnessing so that we can work along with others for mutual support and training. (Prov. 27:17; Eccl. 4:9, 10) What can we do to benefit fully from these meetings?
 2. What are some things the conductor might consider?
2 The Conductor: Specific information to be considered at these meetings is not normally outlined in advance. Therefore, good preparation is needed if you will be conducting. Do not automatically plan to consider the daily text, though you may choose to include it in the discussion if it directly relates to the ministry. Think about what will provide practical help for those witnessing that day. For example, you may want to discuss or demonstrate a presentation. You might choose to review something from the Reasoning book, the Ministry School book, or a recent Service Meeting part. At other times, you might consider how to deal with a challenge that may arise in your territory, or you might discuss how to cultivate interest and start Bible studies, especially if many will be making return visits. Regardless of what is considered, be enthusiastic and positive.
 3. How long should the meeting last, and what should be accomplished during that time?
3 Start the meeting on time, even if you know that some will be late. Use good judgment in organizing the groups, and provide territory to those who need it. The length of the meeting should be no more than 10 to 15 minutes and shorter if it follows a congregation meeting. Before you end the meeting, all should know with whom and where they are going to work. The meeting should be concluded with prayer.
 4. What will help all to benefit fully from meetings for field service?
4 You Can Help: As with congregation meetings, we show respect for Jehovah and consideration for others by arriving on time. Participate in the discussion. You may let the conductor assign you to work with someone, or you may choose to make your own arrangements in advance of the meeting. If you prefer to make your own arrangements, endeavor to “widen out” by working with a variety of publishers, rather than working with close friends each time. (2 Cor. 6:11-13) Once the meeting has concluded, avoid changing the arrangements, and depart promptly for the territory.
 5. What is the purpose of meetings for field service?
5 The purpose of meetings for field service is the same as that of congregation meetings. They are arranged so that we can “consider one another to incite to love and fine works.” (Heb. 10:24, 25) If we strive to benefit from these meetings, we will be helped to carry out our ministry​—a ‘fine work’ indeed!

