Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting October 9
Song 25
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the October 15 Watchtower and the October Awake! along with Kingdom News No. 37.
15 min: “Help Others to Become Friends of God.”a Invite the audience to comment on how the example of others and heartfelt prayer helped them to progress to the point of baptism.
20 min: Prepare to Distribute Kingdom News No. 37. Talk and audience discussion. Review arrangements for the campaign, as discussed in the September Our Kingdom Ministry. Urge all to have a full share. Encourage those with progressive Bible studies to consider whether their students qualify to share in the campaign as unbaptized publishers. Parents can also consider if their children qualify. Briefly outline the requirements from pages 79-81 of Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will.
Song 221 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 16
Song 84
10 min: Local announcements.
20 min: Benefiting From the Congregation Book Study. Talk and audience discussion based on Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, from the subheading on page 69 to the first subheading on page 72.
15 min: “What Do You Put First?”b Invite selected publishers to comment on how they have adjusted their schedule so as to put Kingdom interests first and on what blessings they have enjoyed as a result.
Song 172 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 23
Song 58
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the November 1 Watchtower and the November Awake! In one of the demonstrations, show how to handle the potential conversation stopper “Why do you people call so often?”​—See Reasoning book, p. 20.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Benefit Fully From Meetings for Field Service.”c When discussing paragraph 3, include comments on the September 2001 Our Kingdom Ministry Question Box, paragraph 4, regarding how matters should be handled on occasions when no qualified brothers are present to conduct the meeting.
Song 143 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 30
Song 207
10 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports and to include on the back the number of Kingdom News No. 37 that they placed.
15 min: How Can I Preach to My Schoolmates? Talk and audience discussion based on the March 22, 2002, issue of Awake! pages 10-12. Invite audience to relate good experiences they have had when preaching to schoolmates.
20 min: Experiences Offering Kingdom News No. 37. Ask publishers to relate encouraging results they have enjoyed in distributing Kingdom News No. 37. Report on how much territory has been worked thus far and what will be needed to complete coverage by November 12. Demonstrate making a return visit using the Bible Teach book. Remind publishers to return any copies of the Kingdom News that they will not be able to distribute before the end of the campaign so that others may use them.
Song 136 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 6
Song 146
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on pages 3-4 of the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer Learn From the Great Teacher during the second half of November. As time permits, invite the audience to comment on good results achieved from using the publication in the field or with their own family.
15 min: Increase the Joy and Dignity of Your Wedding Day. A talk by an elder based on the October 15, 2006, issue of The Watchtower, pages 28-31.
20 min: Preaching the Word Brings Refreshment. Talk and audience discussion based on the January 15, 2002, issue of The Watchtower, pages 8-9. Invite the audience to comment on how the ministry brings them refreshment. One or two comments may be arranged in advance.
Song 8 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

