What Do You Put First?
1 How would you answer that question? Of course, all of us desire to put Kingdom interests first. (Matt. 6:33) But we might ask ourselves, ‘Do the choices I make show that I am?’ The Bible encourages us: “Keep proving what you yourselves are.” (2 Cor. 13:5) How can we prove to ourselves that we are putting the Kingdom first?
2 Our Time: We could start by examining how we choose to spend our time. (Eph. 5:15, 16) How much time is spent each week socializing, watching television, surfing the Internet, or pursuing a hobby? If we write down how much time we spend on such things and compare that with the amount of time we spend in spiritual activities, we may be surprised. Do we spend long hours at work at the expense of sacred service just so that we can afford luxuries? How often do we sacrifice meetings or the ministry to take weekend trips for recreation?
3 Set Priorities: Most of us do not have enough time to do everything we would like. So to put Kingdom interests first, we need to assess our priorities and then schedule time for “the more important things.” (Phil. 1:10) These include studying God’s Word, sharing in the ministry, caring for one’s family, and attending Christian meetings. (Ps. 1:1, 2; Rom. 10:13, 14; 1 Tim. 5:8; Heb. 10:24, 25) Other activities, such as moderate exercise and wholesome recreation, are beneficial. (Mark 6:31; 1 Tim. 4:8) But these less important things must be kept in their place.
4 One young brother sought to put Kingdom interests first by entering the full-time ministry rather than pursuing higher education in preparation for a secular career. He learned another language and moved to serve where the need was greater. He said: “I am having the time of my life here. The ministry is so refreshing! I just wish that every young person would do something like this and feel what I feel. There is nothing better than to serve Jehovah with all we have.” Yes, putting the Kingdom first brings us blessings, but more important, it pleases our heavenly Father, Jehovah.​—Heb. 6:10.

