Costa Rica
NEARLY five centuries ago, a tall, well-built man with an aquiline nose stood on the deck of his ship, scanning the coastline of Central America in search of a passageway to the Indian Ocean. He found none. However, what he did discover in 1502 was the country christened Costa Rica, meaning “Rich Coast.”
The man was Christopher Columbus, an Italian sailing under the flag of Spain, on his fourth and last voyage to the New World. He and other explorers also hoped to strike gold in Costa Rica. Instead, the area yielded little in precious metals. Unknown to Columbus, however, the greatest riches would be its people, especially those who possess qualities that make them precious to Jehovah.
The land that Columbus discovered was already inhabited by Indians, who had settled on this neck of land joining North and South America at least by the year 1000. What is the land like today?
Flanked by the Atlantic Ocean (Caribbean Sea) on the east and the Pacific on the west, Costa Rica has a line of high, rugged mountain ranges stretching from the Nicaraguan border on the north to the Panamanian border on the southeast. Some of the highest peaks are active volcanoes. At the lower altitudes along the coast, where the climate is hot, tropical forests flourish. The majority of the population have settled along the cool, high, central plateau around the capital and largest city, San José, where coffee trees dress the hillsides encircling the city.
Today, 97 percent of the country’s estimated population of 2,600,000 is mestizos and whites, mainly of Spanish descent, with an Indian population of about 5,000. Spanish is the official language, and the state religion is Roman Catholicism, although non-Catholic religions also exist freely.
The late 1800’s saw many immigrants arriving in Costa Rica from Jamaica, Trinidad, and Barbados. These hardy folk came to work on the United Fruit Company’s prospering banana plantations along the Atlantic Coast. With them, of course, came their Protestant and Catholic religions and customs. Strong-willed and hardworking, these people for the most part were lovers of the Bible.
BIBLE TRUTH DISCOVERED
Thus, before the turn of the 20th century, a discovery more momentous than that by Columbus was made in Costa Rica​—Bible truth. How the Kingdom message was first brought to Costa Rica is a mystery. But Jehovah’s Witnesses in Jamaica report that two Jamaicans who had migrated to Costa Rica, H. P. Clarke and Louis Facey, found the truth there and brought the good news back to their Jamaican homeland.
Anna Reynolds, an eager Bible Student from Jamaica, landed in Costa Rica in 1904. Shortly after her arrival, the Society sent a pilgrim, Brother Condell, to join her in the colporteur work, or full-time preaching. As soon as Brother Condell returned to Jamaica and reported on the interest found, it was decided that another colporteur, Frank Hudson, should be sent to Costa Rica. He arrived in 1906 and aroused much interest among the English-speaking black population. The January 1, 1907, issue of The Watch Tower reported that, during 1906, Costa Rica was a fertile ground for Bible literature placement.
THE MESSAGE SPREADS
By the year 1914 the truth had penetrated into all parts of the Atlantic coastal zone. That was the year Henry Adamson organized the first ecclesia, or congregation, in Guácimo, a small town about 80 kilometers from Puerto Limón, the commercial center of this prosperous farming section. By then the message had even reached the capital city of San José, which was more than 160 kilometers from Puerto Limón. At least two English-speaking brothers lived there, but since San José had a Spanish-speaking population and the literature was in English, little progress was made for a number of years. Although meetings were held in private homes, they were not advertised.
Nevertheless, the work grew in other parts of the country to such an extent that it was necessary to appoint a local brother as a pilgrim (circuit overseer) and have him visit the brothers in all parts of Costa Rica, including San José. Victor Samuels was chosen.
EARLY CONVENTIONS
In the year 1914 a convention was held in the city of Puerto Limón, at which 11 were baptized. Around that time William and Claudia Goodin, Henry and Matilde Steele, the Wilsons, and the Williamses were all baptized. Children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren of these early workers have a part in the witness work in Costa Rica today. But more of this later.
At these early conventions, the Society did not provide talk outlines. So the assigned speakers chose their own subjects and prepared their own outlines, some even speaking without notes. Money and foodstuffs were generously contributed for the meals, which would be served free at the home of one of the brothers. Highly seasoned stewed chicken, accompanied by rice and peas cooked in coconut milk, and fried ripe plantain were a must on each occasion!
At the close of the conventions, it was the custom to celebrate what were known as love feasts, at which the brothers would sing religious songs and pass soda biscuits around to all in attendance. The songs were sung in four-part harmony with melodious rich voices.
SPECIAL FEATURES
Attired in white clothes, the brothers celebrated, in a somber manner, the annual Memorial of Christ’s death. Children were usually not invited, lest they interrupt and detract from the seriousness of the meal. All partook of the emblems of bread and wine, after which they would depart to their respective homes without speaking a word to one another.
Baptisms were especially arranged just before Memorial time. The brothers and sisters were encouraged to wear white suits and dresses for the occasion. In order to avoid curious onlookers, they would rise before dawn to get to the beach and complete the baptism ceremonies before the neighbors would realize what had happened. While those being baptized were dipped into the sea, the rest would harmonize in the background with songs.
The public talks were like garden talks. All the Witnesses would assemble at a prearranged place out-of-doors, and the speaker would give his Bible talk to those standing or sitting around him in a semicircle. The public also attended and joined in when the singing began.
One name applied to the brothers was the Old People’s Church because little or no effort was made to help their children spiritually, and most of those belonging to the organization were well up in years. Later, the brothers organized their own Sunday school for their children, and eventually they realized that the training of the children was the parents’ own responsibility. But Matilde Steele already appreciated that need. Josephine, Matilde’s seventh child, was born in 1918. When Josephine was only 40 days old, her mother took her to an assembly in Cahuita, a beach town south of Puerto Limón. It was no small venture to travel all day by train, boat, and mule in the hot, humid weather. The rugged trip did no harm to tiny Josephine. At the age of 17 she was baptized, and she continues faithfully serving Jehovah along with her family.
SEEDS OF DISSENSION SOWN
While the organization was in its infancy, Satan began to sow discord among the brothers with seeds of envy, pride, jealousy, and selfish ambition. The spirit of contention became manifest when different ones vied for positions of prominence in the congregations. Since these were controlled democratically, elections were held periodically, and elders were voted into their positions by the raising of hands by the majority. Ambitious brothers who thought they had a better understanding of the truth than the ones voted into these positions tried to undermine the congregations’ confidence in the brothers in charge. How did they do this? By raising questions and counterquestions during the meetings. The brothers took sides, and as a result, two different groups of congregation members began to meet in separate places in Puerto Limón.
NEFARIOUS INFLUENCE
More trouble was due to rain down on this small but divided group of Christians when the first president of the Watch Tower Society, Charles T. Russell, died in 1916. At world headquarters in Brooklyn, New York, there was a diabolical plot by selfish brothers to wrest supervision of the Society from the next president, Joseph F. Rutherford, and other appointed ones. But Jehovah did not allow his organization to fall into the hands of such unfaithful ones.
One ringleader of the opposition was Paul Johnson who believed, contrary to the Society’s explanation, that Jesus’ ransom would also be applied on behalf of Adam and Eve. He wrote letters and sent his written material to brothers in Costa Rica, telling them not to support Brother Rutherford. A few individuals favored Johnson’s teachings above the teachings of the Bible and divorced themselves from the organization.
FIRST VISIT FROM HEADQUARTERS
In 1917 Costa Rica was privileged to have its first visit by a representative from the Society’s headquarters in Brooklyn, Walter Bundy, accompanied by his wife. But why would the Society go to the expense of sending a representative all the way to Costa Rica? Well, the number of Bible Students was growing. By 1918 there were 73, which meant that Costa Rica had the fourth-largest number of Witnesses of all the countries in the world. Only the British Isles, the United States, and Australia exceeded it. The population of Costa Rica at that time was less than half a million.
SOME WERE SIDETRACKED
Satan got busy again in his efforts to stamp out the truth and tried to distract the brothers from their main purpose of upholding Jehovah’s name. A new organization known as the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) appeared on the scene among the black people in the Atlantic zone.
What was its purpose? As the name suggests, it aimed to improve conditions for black people. One of its campaigns was called the Back to Africa movement and was looked upon by the black population as something similar to the return of the Jews to Palestine.
Brothers not only showed interest in this organization but went so far as to misapply certain Bible texts to support its aims. The outcome? Some brothers became sidetracked from their work of preaching the good news of the Kingdom as the solution to man’s problems. Even the pilgrim Victor Samuels was swayed. He was appointed chaplain of the UNIA and would preach at their meetings instead of at the congregation. There is no doubt about the detrimental effect this had on the brothers.
About the year 1924, Victor Samuels traveled to Africa to help the African people. In a letter that he sent from Lagos, Nigeria, to one of the brothers in Costa Rica, he related that he had placed 2,500 copies of The Harp of God. A great deal of publicity was given the Kingdom message in Nigeria as a result.
PATHWAY TO UNITY
After Victor Samuels left Costa Rica, Henry Adamson, from the original congregation in Guácimo, was appointed by the Society in 1924 as a pilgrim and was put in charge of the work. Some brothers in Puerto Limón did not like the way Brother Adamson handled matters, so they rebelled. About two years later, the Society sent another representative from Brooklyn, George Young. His assignment: Unite the brothers in Puerto Limón and establish the preaching work on a proper footing again. First, under the light of a lantern, he gave a Bible lecture with slides in the Arrasty Theater in Puerto Limón. Afterward, he visited the brothers in San José to get the work going among the Spanish-speaking people in the capital.
Brother Young’s effort to unite the two groups in Puerto Limón proved unsuccessful, so he returned to the United States. Brother Adamson was transferred from Costa Rica to Panama in the early part of 1927. After their departure, the Society did not appoint another pilgrim to oversee the work until ten years later, in 1937. But the local brothers remained undaunted. They continued to preach in the four or five places where groups met, and they sent their field service reports directly to the Society in Brooklyn.
In 1931 the prayers of the faithful ones for unity were answered when the Society sent letters to all congregations and urged those who were in accord with the Society to adopt a new name​—Jehovah’s Witnesses. The resolution sounded the death knell for the rebellious, nameless group. They died out, bringing an end to the divisions in the congregation of Puerto Limón. The theocratic appointment of servants in 1938 further unified the brothers.
THE WORK FIRES UP AGAIN
Before Brother Adamson left for Panama, he organized a group in Río Hondo, a small village in the Atlantic zone. One of those baptized on November 17, 1926, was Albert Ezra Pile. He had first heard about the truth on the day he arrived from Barbados in 1918 at the age of 29, but little did he realize at the time that he was to have a major part in the history of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the years to come. On retiring for the night, Ezra asked his host for something to read and was given the first volume of Studies in the Scriptures. That night the spark of Bible truth ignited his love for Jehovah. He soon became a pioneer and now at the age of 99 associates with the Siquirres Congregation. But how did he influence the witnessing work?
In 1927 Brother Pile moved to the small town of Siquirres, where he met Frank Hudson, the colporteur who had come to this country in 1906 to get the work started. But by this time Brother Hudson’s zeal in the service had cooled off from discouragement. So Brothers Pile and Hudson decided to band together and fire up the work again in a more organized manner.
As war clouds hung over Europe in 1937, Brother Pile feared that the threat of war would cut off the supply of literature from headquarters to Costa Rica. So he wrote to Brooklyn and offered to take care of the Society’s stock of literature at his home. The Society agreed, and the literature was transferred from Puerto Limón to Siquirres. Brother Pile became the depot servant and would dispatch the literature to all parts of the country where Witnesses lived.
NEW FIELD OPENS
Up to now we have only discussed the events along the Atlantic Coast among the English-speaking population. But there was still no real effort being made to reach the Spanish-speaking people with the Kingdom message in this part of the country.
Siquirres is where the vast Spanish-language field opened up in the Atlantic zone when Florencio Pérez, a Nicaraguan, heard the truth from Frank Hudson in an unusual way. The year was 1932. A statue belonging to Brother Hudson is what whetted Florencio’s appetite for the truth. Brother Hudson had made a solid model of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream image with a head of gold, chest of silver, and legs of iron. He used to put this model on the porch of his house, and when any passersby stopped, he would explain its meaning. Sometimes he would set up a blackboard in the marketplace to explain Bible prophecies to the gathered people.
Frank Hudson spoke little Spanish, and Florencio spoke very little English. Despite this language barrier, he became interested in Hudson’s explanation of the Bible, even teaching himself how to read and write.
When Florencio read the booklet Home and Happiness, he was convinced that this was the truth and wrote the Society in Brooklyn, saying that he wanted to work with Jehovah’s Witnesses. The Society replied with a letter of encouragement and sent a Spanish Bible. From that moment on, he began to devote all his time to spreading the Kingdom message, using Bible literature from Brother Hudson. Finally, in 1938 Florencio was baptized at an assembly in Siquirres.
FIRST SPANISH PIONEER
A year before Florencio Pérez was baptized (although he had already made a dedication), he applied to the Society to enter the pioneer service. He was appointed on June 1, 1937, thus becoming the first Spanish-speaking pioneer appointed in Costa Rica. His first assignment was the Spanish-speaking population of the Atlantic zone. He was also assigned to work with the small Spanish-speaking congregation of San José.
Brother Pérez used a wide variety of methods to spread the Kingdom message. Sometimes he would tie booklets to tree branches along paths where passersby could find them. Or he would go to the airport in San José and place literature with overseas passengers and make them promise to pass the literature on to someone else. Trekking on foot through dense jungle, he would sleep wherever night found him, at times blanketed only by the stars and at the mercy of the mosquitoes. He often broke the silence of the night by strumming on his ever-present guitar. His roaming, evangelizing spirit traveled with him into Nicaragua, where he continued pioneering for many years.
SAN JOSÉ CONGREGATION
How had the Spanish-speaking congregation in San José been formed? Since the days of the first world war, English-language meetings had been held in the home of Brother Williams, who learned the truth in 1912 and later became the presiding overseer. He had formerly been a lay preacher in an Evangelical church where his wife played the organ. As there were few English-speaking people living in the capital at that time, growth was slow.
However, when Spanish literature was made available, preaching became easier. By 1931 a group of 10 or 12 Spanish-speaking people were meeting together in private homes. Felipe Salmerón was one of them. He also witnessed in the Pacific Coast port of Puntarenas. Finally, after more than 30 years, the truth had stretched from coast to coast.
Toward the end of 1941, Brother Pile was sent from Siquirres to San José to replace Brother Williams as an overseer. The congregation now met in the home of Flavio Romero, and the Society corresponded with them through the pioneer Florencio Pérez.
GILEAD GRADUATES ADD STRENGTH
When making his report to the Society about the condition of the congregation in San José, Brother Pile recommended that a brother firm in theocratic manner be sent to Costa Rica to supervise the work. The brothers did not have to wait long because on December 23, 1943, Theodore Siebenlist and his wife, Hermena, from the first class of Gilead, arrived. Costa Rica was one of the first four countries in the world to receive Gilead graduates.
Brother Siebenlist had a solid background with the organization. His father was baptized in 1913, two days after Theodore was born. His parents’ home was used for meetings, and he participated with them in tract distribution. He was baptized at the Washington, D.C., convention in 1935. At a convention in 1937, he met Hermena Deines and they married the following year.
The effects of World War II, which was still raging in Europe, were felt in Costa Rica. So when the Siebenlists arrived in San José, signs of austerity were seen everywhere. They searched for a month before they found suitable living quarters in a second-floor apartment with an adjoining room that could serve as the Kingdom Hall. It was conveniently located half a block off the main street and thus became a familiar address. The room continued to be used as a Kingdom Hall until 1956, when a branch office was built with an adjoining Kingdom Hall.
BRANCH ESTABLISHED
About three months after the arrival of the missionaries, Nathan H. Knorr, the third president of the Watch Tower Society, and his aide Milton Henschel visited. This was the first time that a president of the Society had set foot in Costa Rica. The literature depot had already been transferred from Siquirres to San José in January 1944, and now in March, Brother Knorr set up a branch office. This was a turning point for supervised direction of the witnessing work. During his visit, Brother Knorr arranged for a search to be made for a larger missionary home, as more help was to arrive. A home was found in the northwestern section of San José.
During the following two years, Charles and Lora Lea Palmer, Woodrow (“Woody”) Blackburn, Donald H. Burt, William Eugene Call, and Franklin and Emily Hardin, all graduates of the Gilead School, joined the missionary family. What a heap of fine help! Donald Burt stayed only a short time, since he was reassigned to Honduras and later to Peru, where he now serves as coordinator of the Branch Committee.
UNITY IN SAN JOSÉ
Besides the former divided group in Puerto Limón, another one existed in San José. What happened to that group in San José? Brother Siebenlist encouraged unity. His motto was, “Do it right, or don’t do it at all.”
Brother Siebenlist’s 1944 annual report to the Society glowed with progress. He wrote: “The Spanish brethren in Costa Rica, now numbering about 75, were divided when we arrived here in December and up until the preceding month had maintained two Kingdom Halls in San José. Immediately upon our arrival, the two groups were invited to unite and meet regularly in the same hall. At the first meeting both groups were present, numbering about 30 in all. Now, by the Lord’s grace, the local organization is working quite smoothly, and the group has grown to about 60.”
By the following April, there was a new peak in publishers​—223! What growth, considering that when the Siebenlists had arrived less than two years earlier, about 120 publishers made up the four English-speaking and the two Spanish-speaking congregations!
SERVANT TO THE BRETHREN
During his first year in Costa Rica, Brother Siebenlist served as a servant to the brethren (circuit overseer). He visited the six congregations and the isolated interested persons, even though the distances were far and travel was difficult. With the arrival of additional missionaries, more visits to congregations could be made.
One missionary, Brother Blackburn, after a three-week trip to the seven English-speaking congregations as a servant to the brethren, reported: “The zeal and the love for the Theocracy shown by these brethren is to be admired. The brethren are financially poor, yet they are very liberal in taking the Society’s servants into their homes and giving them the best they have to offer. They are meek and desire instructions. They are not complainers because of having to walk miles through the heat and mud to make backcalls [return visits] and Bible studies.”
Brother Blackburn still continues in the full-time service​—almost 40 years after he filed that report. He has served in Nicaragua, Honduras, and Mexico with his family.
The visits of the servant to the brethren were appreciated not only by the congregations but also by the local population. Franklin Hardin (better known as “Doc” because he was a chiropractor) and his wife, Emily, visited Puerto Limón in 1946. The local newspaper commented: “The distinguished visitor was accompanied by his very pleasant wife. They are two whom we have never seen before, but the brief moments in their presence readily furnishes charming and memorable impressions, and the essence of their speech enriches and delights us as if we had had their acquaintance for many years. We followed penetratingly the many scriptures he quoted in proof of his message.”
FIRST NATIVE CIRCUIT OVERSEER
The report on the circuit work in the early days would not be complete without mentioning Arnold Williams from Puerto Limón. He administered a commissary for the United Fruit Company, but as soon as he was able, he made arrangements to regular pioneer. In this he set an excellent example for the younger ones in putting Kingdom interests first. Because of his zeal and determination, he was trained as a circuit overseer in San José and in 1948 started circuit work. He married Mildred Gumbs (now Ortega), and they continued together in the circuit work until 1959. Since he was educated in both English and Spanish, he translated for Brother Knorr during that first visit. It was a sad loss to all when he died at a young age, leaving behind many “letters of recommendation.”​—2 Cor. 3:1.
PIONEER WORK SPREADS THE MESSAGE
Besides the valuable aid of the missionaries and circuit overseers, pioneers played a significant part in spreading the message out to new areas. At the beginning of 1944, there were two pioneers, but by August the group rose to nine.
There were 13 publishers meeting in Grecia, where Sisters Evelyn Ferguson (now Taylor) and Mildred Gumbs were assigned as the first special pioneers in the country. During the following year, 1945, Eugenia Dillon also joined the special pioneer ranks.
Berta Solera, an aged widow pioneering in San José, had a desire to return to her native province, Guanacaste, but had no money until she sold her only means of support, her little sewing machine, in order to pay for the trip. She and Anita Taylor made a preaching tour there in 1947 and found persons, in both Liberia and Filadelfia, whose interest in spiritual things moved them to open their homes to pioneers. By 1949 Berta, accompanied by her daughter, was assigned to Liberia as a special pioneer, where she was joined by two of the Swaby girls. Who are the Swaby girls?
PIONEERING SISTERS
Claudia Goodin, a tall, fair-skinned woman of Jamaican origin, had two daughters, Joy and Fe. At that time, Claudia was living with her fleshly sister Arelminta Swaby in Puerto Limón. Arelminta had four daughters​—Dorell, Calvie, Lila, and Casel. Dorell was the first of the Swaby girls to venture out as a pioneer. She and Corina Osorio (now Novoa) were assigned to Point Quepos, which is on the west coast. Dorell’s three sisters later joined the pioneer ranks too.
Claudia Goodin’s two daughters, Fe and Joy, started special pioneering in 1948 in Alajuela, where another congregation had been established. Dora Argentina Vargas (now Call) was also added to the pioneer force. In 1950 Dorell Swaby and Fe and Joy Goodin attended Gilead School and were assigned to Panama. Lila Swaby and Evelyn Ferguson went to Gilead in the spring of 1953 and Argentina joined the next class. Ever since the 1940’s, these diligent sisters have been busy planting many seeds of Kingdom truth.
THE HORSE AND THE BARBER
Around 1944 when the branch office was being established in San José, a follower of the Roman Catholic faith in San Carlos received through the mail the booklet Armageddon and passed it on to Naftalí Salazar, an Evangelical. Naftalí was so amazed by the things he read in the booklet that he showed it to the pastor of his church. The pastor became incensed and warned him against this “Russellite poison.”
However, Naftalí desired to meet someone from the Watch Tower organization, the publisher of the booklet. He had heard about an Italian barber who was also receiving the literature. The barber lived in Grecia, about a hundred kilometers away. Naftalí resolved to visit the barber. He figured that in order to travel to Grecia, he could sign up as a cattle driver for a three-day journey and on the return trip stop at Grecia.
Upon arrival in Grecia, one lead directed Naftalí to the home of an elderly couple who could not speak Spanish. He took out his cherished booklet and showed it to them. They could only say “Bible, Bible” and quickly point down the road to a hill. Disappointed, he mounted his horse and trotted off in that direction. At the top of the hill, Naftalí turned off the main route, entered a narrow track, and stopped by a gate. Naftalí opened the gate, and the horse turned around to help him close it. They were on someone’s farm. Naftalí and his mount trotted across the field to another gate. In front of the gate was a small hut with a man, his wife, and two small children sitting outside.
“What do you want?” asked the man.
“Excuse me, but my horse brought me here. I’m looking for an Italian barber.”
“That’s me, and who are you?”
“I’m Naftalí Salazar from San Carlos.”
Apparently having already heard about this man, the barber raised his hands and said, “Let Jehovah be praised. He has sent you here.” What a happy day that was for Naftalí!
MARRIAGES AND LOTTERIES
As the Kingdom work was branching out, there also was a need for moral cleansing. In 1946 Brother Knorr was accompanied on his second visit by Brother F. W. Franz, who proved to be a great help. The subject of legalizing marriages was brought to the local brothers’ attention. Leonard Hurst, who was not then legally married to the woman he was living with, recalls what Brother Knorr said. “All of you here tonight who are living with a woman but haven’t got your marriage legally arranged, I’m giving you some advice. Go to the Catholic Church and put your name down as a member because there you can practice these things. But this is God’s organization, and you can’t practice these things here.”
Leonard thought that Brother Knorr was talking directly to him, so in less than a month he obtained a divorce from his former wife and became legally married to the woman with whom he had been living.
The buying of lottery tickets was another matter that needed adjustment. Evelyn Ferguson always picked a certain lucky number and even prayed that her number would win. Why? So that she could pioneer. When she realized that this was not Scripturally correct, she was determined to stop buying lottery tickets.
The man from whom Evelyn bought the lottery tickets called as usual and insisted that she play her lucky number again. Evelyn, however, remained firm in her decision and was not a bit disappointed when her number won that very day. Soon after that incident, she did become a pioneer​—without the help of “the god of Good Luck.”​—Isa. 65:11.
“DUST TO DUST”
The Witnesses also stopped following traditional religious practices that were questionable. For example, at the funeral of a Witness, the brother in charge of the burial service concluded with a short prayer at the grave site. Because he did not follow religious tradition by parroting “ashes to ashes and dust to dust” and toss the customary handful of earth on the casket, the religionists present were highly incensed and did it themselves.
Some time later an elderly sister died. At her grave site, just before lowering the coffin, the brother giving the funeral talk opened his Bible and read the words, “For dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.” (Gen. 3:19, King James Version) Turning to the crowd that included those same religionists, the brother said without pausing: “Ain’t nothin’ said here about ashes. Lower the box, brothers.” Dumbstruck, the opposers did not throw their traditional handful of dirt.
What were the results of the circuit overseer visits, the influx of missionaries, and adherence to Scriptural laws? Unity and growth. Even before the 1950’s began, the thousand mark in publishers was passed, more than 850 Bible studies were being reported monthly, and 32 congregations were established.
ASSEMBLY IN RURALS
Up until 1950 most of the assemblies had been held in Puerto Limón and San José. But now sufficient interest had been aroused for an assembly to be held in a small settlement called Argentina de Tilarán.
It was not easy for Brother and Sister Siebenlist to get to Argentina de Tilarán. They traveled first by plane and then boarded an old bus, which took them along a bumpy road. At a fork where the road ended, the brothers were waiting for them with horses. The remainder of the trip was made on horseback. Only scattered farms surrounded the assembly site. The brothers, nevertheless, were very excited​—this was their first assembly. Some of them had traveled on foot over mountain trails for up to nine hours. When the count was taken on Sunday, almost 300 persons were in attendance. Some stood for the sessions and others sat on improvised benches made of wooden boards placed on top of sacks of rice.
During the assembly, a newly appointed Theocratic Ministry School overseer conducted the school. Before he began, the circuit overseer gave him detailed instructions on how to counsel the student speakers. For example, he was told that he should counsel each student on two good points and two weak points. The circuit overseer felt confident that the brother understood and that the school would run smoothly. To the circuit overseer’s chagrin, after the first student completed his talk, the school overseer stood up and nervously, yet sincerely, said: “Brother, you had two good points and two bad points. Try to do better next time.” Then, without another word of counsel, he introduced the next student.
FROM FISHERMEN TO FISHERS OF MEN
In 1940 Josephine Steele journeyed to Moín, just north of Puerto Limón. To begin her witnessing, she set up her phonograph at the train station in Moín. She wound the phonograph’s motor with a number of hardy turns of the crank, gingerly placed the needle on the first groove of a recording of Judge Rutherford, and flicked the starter switch. “Religion is a snare and a racket,” boomed the voice from the phonograph. A large group of men gathered. One of the group, Vincente Sanguinetty, sent for his fisherman friend, Silbert Spence. Silbert, with pants rolled up, approached the cluster of listeners, put his hands on his hips, looked at his friend Vincente, and asked: “Who’s that talking?”
“It’s the Judge, silly!” answered Vincente, referring to Joseph F. Rutherford, the Watch Tower Society’s second president.
Since Vincente had already read some of Brother Rutherford’s books, the two men kept Josephine busy all day with their Bible questions. Vincente told Sister Steele that one day at sea in the midst of a terrible storm he prayed to the Lord for help and promised to serve him if he survived. He still wanted to fulfill his promise to God, but the two “D’s” were bothering him​—damsels and drugs. A Bible study was started with these two men, and soon afterward, on September 21, 1940, both were baptized, as was Silbert’s wife, Valmina.
“My joy began to increase as I came to realize that Jesus’ words to Peter and Andrew were being fulfilled in me,” said Silbert. “I was now fishing for men.” Joshua Steelman, visiting as a special representative of the Society, asked Silbert: “When do you plan to go pioneering, when Armageddon is knocking at the door?” Silbert saw the urgency of the times. He and Valmina started pioneering November 1948.
Even though Silbert had a hard time speaking the Spanish language, he was assigned as the Spanish circuit overseer. At first, all his talks were in English, and someone would translate. One day a Spanish-speaking brother reassured Silbert with the words: “Brother Silbert, don’t be worried about your Spanish. We realize that you have trouble, but at the same time we learn the truth more easily from you.” Thus love has no language barriers.
Silbert’s wife worked faithfully with him in the circuit work until her death in 1974. He faithfully served as a member of the Branch Committee until his death in May 1985.
FIRST ASSEMBLY HALL
The increase in the number of Witnesses began having an impact on the religious leaders throughout the country. They put pressure on social organizations, thus making it more and more difficult to book places for circuit assemblies in Puerto Limón. So the local Witnesses decided to build a Kingdom Hall that could double as an Assembly Hall. On a lot just three blocks from the central market, a two-story frame building was erected. The Kingdom Hall was located upstairs, with the downstairs containing living quarters for the circuit overseer, as well as a kitchen and serving space for the assembly cafeteria. On Thursday, August 19, 1954, it was dedicated. In 1972, this building was rebuilt and at present is being used by three congregations and for the smaller English assemblies.
KINGDOM HALL BURNED
On the opposite coast, the Pacific, the brothers did not experience the same joy with their Kingdom Hall. A congregation of about 45 publishers met in the small rural community of Manzanillo de Ario. Opposition mounted against them until threats of violence bore ugly fruit.
One night, about midnight, the local Kingdom Hall suddenly went up in flames. It was so quickly consumed that nothing could be saved​—a great loss of material and spiritual goods for already poor people. Did this dastardly incendiary blow cripple the Kingdom work? No! Inactive publishers sprang to spiritual life; new ones began associating with the Witnesses. They moved their meeting place to a brother’s home and continued in their arrangements for the Memorial celebration.
Did this outrage affect the Memorial attendance? Yes, but for the good. There was an increase of nearly 300 percent over former years. True faith cannot be shaken by opposers, a fact marvelously demonstrated by Christ Jesus and the apostles and being imitated in this century by thousands of Witnesses who are proving the quality of their faith under test.​—1 Pet. 1:6, 7.
MOB ACTION STOPPED
Much of the opposition was clergy inspired. For example, in order to warn their flock whenever the Witnesses were in the neighborhood, the priests installed loudspeakers in the belfries of their churches. They printed signs stating: “We are Catholics. We do not accept Protestant propaganda.” Then the clergy sold the signs to their parishioners, who in turn would display them in the windows of their houses. Of course, the Witnesses ignored those signs.
Eugenia Dillon found that not all people were swayed by the clergy. One day when she was in field service, a mob gathered and followed her, shouting: “The virgin of the angels reigns here. Long live the sovereign pontiff! We are Catholics and don’t accept Protestant propaganda.” She quickly prayed to Jehovah for help. At the next door she called on, a man, spotting the mob, asked: “Are these people following you? Come inside, and I will defend you from this bunch of savages.”
Once Sister Dillon was inside, believing her prayer was answered, the man dashed into another room, grabbed his revolver, loaded it, and ran out of the house to the gate. There, waving his revolver, he shouted to the mob: “This girl is not of my religion, but I defend her and order this mob to break up if you don’t want to die.”
Immediately the mob dispersed. The man returned to the house with a smile, saying he was not really going to kill them but that the barrel of a gun was the only language that this gang of demonized savages would understand.
On another occasion, Brother Pile, toting his phonograph, took a large group of publishers with him to work Juan Viñas, west of Siquirres. The local priest began pealing the church bells, calling in his people. He instructed some of his supporters to go from door to door to tell others not to listen when the Witnesses called.
The priest must have gloated, thinking he was having success, until the jefe político, a sort of mayor-sheriff, summoned the brothers and other policemen into his office. Then the jefe político requested that Brother Pile play the phonograph message. After listening to the Kingdom records, the policemen accepted the literature. The sheriff could see nothing wrong with the witnessing work and told the brothers to continue preaching.
A triumph resulted when John Craddock gave a public talk in San Ramón at the park bandstand. A few local persons, the pioneers from San Ramón, and about six brothers that had accompanied Brother Craddock from San José were in attendance. (John and his wife, Emma Marie, graduates of the tenth class of Gilead, had joined the missionary family in 1949. Now, just a year and a half later, they were about to get a taste of the opposition.) A priest with a group of children mounted the bandstand behind Brother Craddock and started to heckle him. At the same time, a prearranged group of adults stormed from the far end of the city plaza and shouted, “Kill him, kill him!”
Apparently the mob only wanted to intimidate Brother Craddock because they passed right by without touching him. Unable to finish his discourse, John, accompanied by Marie and the others from San José, went to the bus stop, where the mayor of the city approached them and said how sorry he was that the discourse had been interrupted. The mayor pleaded that John come back to give another discourse and promised that police protection would be provided.
So it was, three weeks later, that a group of publishers returned to San Ramón and even advertised the talk all over the city with handbills. When the time arrived for the talk, the plaza was lined with policemen. This time there were no disturbances.
CIVIL WAR
The 1948 elections resulted in a revolution. This made moving about in field service difficult. Eugenia Dillon, while working a rural territory with her preaching partner, was stopped by soldiers. “Halt, who goes there?” barked the soldiers, with their rifles pointed at the sisters. “What political party do you belong to?”
“We are Jehovah’s Witnesses,” the sisters replied. “We are announcing God’s Kingdom by means of Christ Jesus, the only government that can bring real peace to mankind.”
While the soldiers searched their bags, the pioneers witnessed to them. The sisters were released and continued to preach to the people in the neighborhood, who were in anguish because of the war.
During the civil war, many of the false shepherds, the clergy, abandoned their flocks, fleeing for their lives. This gave the Witnesses an opportunity to preach to the sheeplike ones left behind. Now the populace were able to see that their clergy-shepherds had not been feeding them but only fleecing them. When the false shepherds returned, they found, to their dismay, many of their flock studying with the Witnesses.
TRANSPORT BY MULE CAR
Transportation is closely linked with the preaching work, and a variety of means have been employed in Costa Rica. Trains have been used. But not all trains are pulled by a mechanical engine. The mule car is a unique vehicle that rolls on a narrow-gauge track and is pulled by a mule. It can give you more thrills than a roller coaster.
The car consists of a platform mounted on wheels. The platform has benches that can seat 20 persons. As the mule car speeds along the track, the only brake consists of a wooden post mounted through a hole in the floor. The post pivots like a lever and presses against the wheel. Thus, downgrades spell danger for the mule if the driver does not prevent the rolling platform from crashing into the animal. The passengers are also sprayed with mud slung from the mule’s hooves, but that is the least of the problems. Derailments can fling passengers into the air, causing broken arms and legs upon landing.
Rivers are traveled in small boats with outboard motors or in dugout canoes with wooden paddles. For example, to reach Guanacaste on a preaching tour, Sister Solera took a train to Puntarenas, then crossed the Gulf of Nicoya by boat, and later rode an ox-drawn cart for 15 hours. No small feat for a woman in her 60’s!
BRANCH CHANGES
Theodore Siebenlist served as branch overseer from the forming of the branch in March 1944 until June 1952, when he and his wife left to prepare for the birth of their daughter Janet.
William Call, a graduate of the third class of Gilead who had been sent from Costa Rica to Nicaragua in 1946 to care for the branch there, returned to Costa Rica as branch overseer. He continued as such until 1954, when he married Dora Argentina Vargas, a Gilead graduate, who originally came from Guatemala. Their son Robert is now serving at Brooklyn Bethel. William Aubrey Bivens from Guatemala was next assigned as branch overseer. He and his wife, Bertha, had been in that country since graduating from the fifth class of Gilead. Later they were reassigned to Brazil, where he served as branch overseer until his death in 1969.
Since Brother Bivens had been reassigned to Brazil, Charles Sheldon acted as branch overseer until March 1964, when George Jenkins and his wife arrived. Health reasons forced Brother and Sister Jenkins to leave Costa Rica in 1966. The next branch overseer, Lorence A. Shepp, was still in Nicaragua. How did he get to Costa Rica?
Lorence had been in the full-time service since 1958 and had served in the circuit work in Canada and Alaska. When circuit overseers were invited to Brooklyn headquarters for a special Kingdom Ministry School, Brother Knorr asked if any were willing to accept an assignment as a missionary in a foreign country without attending Gilead School. Brother Shepp accepted the invitation. He was assigned to Nicaragua in 1961, where he married Juana Olimpia Guinart, a Cuban and a graduate of the 22nd class of Gilead. This was her third assignment, since she had already served as a missionary in Honduras and Mexico.
After Brother Shepp later attended a ten-month Gilead School, he and Olimpia packed their bags for their new assignment, El Salvador. First they decided to take a vacation in Costa Rica and immediately fell in love with that place. Little did they know that a letter changing their assignment to Costa Rica was already in the mail.
The Shepps arrived in September 1966, and at the international assembly in December of that year, Brother Knorr announced that Brother Shepp was appointed as branch overseer. At present he is the Branch Committee coordinator.
STIMULUS TO EXPAND
In December 1954 Brother Knorr visited Costa Rica again and announced the building of a new branch home and Kingdom Hall. Enthusiasm ran high. Arrangements were made to purchase a lot in the heart of San José. Then, early in January, just when the brothers were to begin construction, an invasion by armed forces moved in from the north. Despite towns and villages being machine-gunned by airplanes, the brothers continued witnessing from door to door to comfort the people with the message of God’s Kingdom. The January field service reports showed that the previous year’s peak had been passed. But April’s peak proved to be even greater! There was a 30-percent increase, with 2,078 publishers.
What about the new branch facilities? Were they delayed? The branch building was completed on January 25, 1956, just two days before the surprise visit of Brother Knorr and his wife, Audrey. It was dedicated on January 27, 1956.
FLAG-SALUTE PROBLEMS
In September 1959 the flag-salute issue came to the fore in the schools of Puerto Limón. Thirteen students, all Jehovah’s Witnesses, refused to participate in these ceremonies because that would violate their Christian conscience. Although they had not engaged in any disrespectful act and their conduct had been without reproach, the Witness children were charged with rebellion and insubordination and were expelled from school.
The local court denied permission for the children to be reinstated as long as they refused to salute the flag. The case was appealed to the Supreme Court of Costa Rica. There it was pointed out to the Court that the Constitution of Costa Rica guarantees freedom of worship and the right to be educated in the schools of the state. However, the Supreme Court upheld the decision of the lower court, saying that the law regarding freedom of worship had not been violated.
At the beginning of the next term, most of the students were readmitted to school but were expelled again when they failed to join in other flag-saluting ceremonies. A petition was then made to the Superior Council of Education, but on July 5, 1960, this petition was denied.
The flag-salute issue generated a great deal of publicity by both the press and the radio. The issue still exists in schools to this day, but many of the teachers recognize the excellent conduct of the young Witnesses and prefer to look the other way rather than make an issue of the children’s firm, conscientious stand. They realize that to expel these students would, in many cases, mean losing the cream of the class.
In one rural school, out of the 50 students enrolled, only 6 were not Jehovah’s Witnesses. So if these Witnesses were expelled, the school would have to close, and the teacher would be out of a job.
Many teachers thought that those expelled from school would not be able to make a success of their lives without a formal education. Milton Hylton, grandson of Francela Williams, proved them wrong. Although expelled from school, “this resulted in a blessing,” he remarks. “I first had the opportunity to prove my integrity to Jehovah and then to enjoy the benefits of over 13 years in full-time service.” When it became necessary for Brother Hylton to work full-time, he obtained a job as an office clerk and later received a position as private accountant with the same company, without neglecting his theocratic activities.
VOLCANOES IRAZÚ AND ARENAL AWAKE
On March 13, 1963, Irazú, one of Costa Rica’s many volcanoes, awoke from its 20-year siesta to a 2-year period of activity. The volcano, which sits about 32 kilometers from the capital, coughed up ash into the prevailing winds, which carried the volcanic ash from the crater and deposited it on San José, where about one quarter of all Costa Ricans live. The city of Cartago, nestled at the foot of the volcano, was relatively unaffected by this fallout, as the winds carried the ash high over the city. But Cartago was soon hit by a different kind of catastrophe.
On the night of December 9, 1963, heavy rains saturated the deep drifts of ash on the sides of the volcano. Overloaded, the sodden ash slid down the mountain and into the ash-clogged rivers, causing them to overrun their banks. One swollen river swept through the city of Cartago, carrying away homes along with their sleeping inhabitants, as well as livestock and wild animals. People lost their lives in this flood in spite of the fact that police cars with loudspeakers patrolled the streets ahead of time, warning of the approaching disaster. Either the victims did not take the warning seriously or they were unwilling to abandon their material possessions. They paid with their lives for their failure to listen.
For many years the people of Cartago had adopted a similar attitude toward the warning about the approaching war of Armageddon. No doubt they felt secure from harm because their city is home to the famous basilica where the image of the patroness “saint” of Costa Rica is housed. But after the disaster and after more than 30 years of preaching in this city, a congregation was finally established toward the end of 1964.
After Mount Irazú tired of spewing out death and destruction, another volcano, Arenal, after laying dormant for about 600 years, began a period of activity. When Arenal, located in the northern part of Costa Rica, began to erupt, there were some five congregations within the affected zone. Many of the brothers living in that area had no alternative but to flee. None of them lost their lives, but they did lose their material possessions. Quickly, the brothers in all parts of Costa Rica came to their aid with contributions of food, clothing, and money.
SLOWING DOWN DURING THE 1960’S
The years 1964 and 1965 brought no increase. Costa Rica’s annual report blamed the economic conditions. Many publishers had to leave Costa Rica to obtain secular work elsewhere. Another reason was also mentioned in the annual report: “Unfortunately, a large number of people had to be disfellowshipped for unclean living, but all are anxious to keep the organization clean for pure worship.”
The work limped along for three more years with no increase. This time allowed for the testing and maturing of spiritual men that would be needed for the spurt of growth that was to come. One such man was Andrés Garita. He served in the circuit and district work for 20 years. To what did he attribute his endurance? “My parents started studying in 1946, and we always faithfully attended meetings,” he said. “I was baptized in 1953 at the age of 14. The meetings and field service brought me in close association with circuit overseers, who always gave me special attention and encouragement to take up the full-time service.” In the spring of 1979, he was appointed as a member of the Branch Committee. He served faithfully as such as well as in the circuit and district work along with his wife, Mayra, and his six-year-old daughter, Andrea, until his sudden illness and unexpected death at the age of 48 on July 7, 1987. He was dearly loved and known by almost every Witness in Costa Rica, which was highlighted by the fact that more than 4,000 attended his funeral.
MORE MISSIONARIES SPUR THE WORK
The 1960’s brought to the fore more young “gifts in men.” (Eph. 4:8) Gilead has certainly added to Costa Rica’s spiritual growth and maturity. Alvaro Muñoz and Milton Hylton were Costa Ricans invited to Gilead and then reassigned back home. Their years in the circuit work were greatly appreciated, and they continue to be a source of refreshment as elders in their home congregations.
Douglas Little and Frederick Hiltbrand from the United States, graduates of the 45th class of Gilead, were assigned to Costa Rica in 1968. They both served in the circuit work. In 1972 Douglas Little married Saray Campos, who had already been pioneering for seven years. The missionary family grew when two more brothers arrived, John Griffin and Lothar Mihank.
In 1976 Frederick Hiltbrand married Mirtha Chapa, a missionary from the 55th class of Gilead. Presently Frederick is serving as a member of the Branch Committee.
EARTHQUAKE IN MANAGUA
Close ties have been maintained between the brothers in Costa Rica and those in Nicaragua over the years, not only because of being neighbors but because their theocratic growth has been related. The brothers in Nicaragua suddenly fell in need when a strong earthquake rocked the capital, Managua, in December 1972.
Immediately, arrangements were made in Costa Rica to supply relief to the brothers in Managua. Although radio contact had not been established with Managua, a vehicle was sent out with almost a ton of food. All of this was gathered in just 60 minutes from the time the brothers were first advised of the relief collection. The Nicaraguan consulate gave visas to the traveling brothers when they heard it was for aid from Jehovah’s Witnesses. All the bureaucratic doors swung open, so that relief could be taken directly to the brothers.
FAMILY UNITY BRINGS SUCCESS
Trino Rojas and his two brothers were the town brawlers of Guápiles. When Mark Taylor, a special pioneer, began visiting Trino’s parents, Trino did not like it and on one occasion even brazenly cracked his horsewhip after Mark. But Mark persevered in his visits, and gradually Trino picked up tidbits of the truth. Later, after Trino married Carmen, a neighbor lady gave them a Catholic book of Bible stories. Trino realized that these Bible stories coincided with what he had heard from Mark. When he told this to the Catholic lady, she was insulted and took the book back, thus whetting his appetite for more Bible knowledge. So Trino and Carmen started to study with the Witnesses and were baptized in 1950.
They had 11 children. One of them, David, reminisces about the example his father and mother set for the family. “It was their persistence in the truth that impressed us all. We never missed a meeting even though we were 11 children and times were hard. Papa bought a farm in Roxana, and we moved so as to help a group of interested persons there.”
David has been pioneering for more than ten years. “The backing our father gave us is what made it possible to pioneer,” he says. Noé, one of David’s younger brothers, recalls: “David became my example. When I was 13 years old, I would put in 100 hours in service. I dreamed one day that I would plant a cornfield, sell the corn, give the money to Papa, and go pioneering.” This he did.
Although their parents, Trino and Carmen, have died, the children remain firm in the faith.
MISSIONARY SPIRIT CONTAGIOUS
Costa Rica has an outstanding group of full-time servants who are children of former missionaries. Robert Conroy, who arrived with his partner John Alexander in 1959, later married and continued in the circuit work in Costa Rica. When his wife, Dina, was pregnant, Robert said, “My wife and I prayed to Jehovah for guidance in raising our children, realizing that this was also a blessing from Jehovah.” While the parents now engage in circuit work again after a pause of 20 years, their two children, Judy and Rodney, are presently serving at Bethel in Costa Rica.
Donald Fry, from the 22nd class of Gilead, saw his son, David, follow in his footsteps 50 classes later. David attended the 72nd class of Gilead and was assigned to the same country as his father​—Costa Rica. Why did David decide to become a missionary like his father? “My previous association with happy missionaries in Costa Rica, along with theocratic guidance from my parents, moved me to want to be like them,” he says.
Whether it has been possible to continue living in a foreign country or not, this contagious spirit permeates the families of many former missionaries. The Calls, the Sheldons, and the Blackburns have all raised their families with this wholesome spirit.
COSTA RICA SHARES ITS MISSIONARIES
In the past, some missionaries in Costa Rica were reassigned to other countries. In more recent times, John Alexander, who came to Costa Rica in 1959 from Gilead, and his wife, Corina, were reassigned to Panama in 1979. Later, in the spring of 1982, Lothar Mihank and his wife, Carmen, were asked to serve in Panama.
Did this weaken the preaching activity in Costa Rica? “While it is certainly true that we do miss the fine work that these faithful brothers have done,” answers Brother Shepp, the Branch Committee coordinator, “the gap that they leave is quickly filled by the mature local brothers. Take, for example, the district work. While a few years ago we depended upon the missionaries who served the district from the branch office, now local brothers are doing a fine job in filling the gap. This is also true of the circuit overseer work. Now the vast majority who serve in this responsible position are local Costa Rican brothers. So Jehovah always sees to it that the work does not depend on any one individual.”
TRAIN CONDUCTOR TO CIRCUIT OVERSEER
Guillermo Badilla had been a train conductor on the route from San José to Puntarenas for over 20 years. When he retired at the age of 50, he immediately entered the full-time service. One of the five congregations he helped form was in Cartago. When he arrived there, he found only one publisher, who “was like a block of ice,” recalls Brother Badilla. After ten months, though, a congregation was formed with nine publishers. Guiding people’s lives on a different route, he has helped over 90 persons to baptism. And at the age of 70, he was appointed as circuit overseer.
INTEGRITY TESTED BY THE BLOOD ISSUE
Jehovah’s Witnesses refuse blood transfusions for Scriptural reasons, even if their life is endangered. (Acts 15:29) But they are willing to accept alternate medical treatment. Some doctors cooperate with the Witnesses on this important medical matter, while others oppose them.
For example, Wilson Rojas was knocked unconscious by an explosion so powerful that it blew him through a storeroom wall, dropping him some 25 feet away. His partner was killed instantly. Wilson did not regain consciousness until eight days later, only to learn that he had lost the use of one eye, an ear, an arm, and a leg. Wilson staunchly refused a blood transfusion. His wife, Clarissa, backed him up in his decision. The doctor, not pleased, said: “Let him die. He has five days left to live, no more.”
Even though Brother Rojas signed a medical form freeing the hospital from all responsibility for treatment without blood, the hospital suspended all treatment except bandage changing. Almost miraculously, though, during the next two weeks, his condition slowly improved. Then came another sudden crisis. A blood clot in his left leg threatened to break free at any moment. A specialist took a keen interest in his case and was able to dissolve the clot with drugs. Soon after, on visiting Wilson at his bedside, the specialist asked why he had refused a blood transfusion. After Wilson explained, the specialist said: “The reason that blood clot didn’t break free and kill you was the low blood volume and the thinness of the blood. Had you accepted a blood transfusion, you would most likely be dead. Congratulations!”
“MAN WANTED”
Another means to reach the hearts and minds of sheeplike persons is through Christian conduct. In a factory where an elder works, the employees were protesting against the working conditions and demanding higher wages. During a meeting between management and these workers, a phone call came from the manager of another company. When told about the discontent among the employees, he boasted: “We don’t have that kind of problem with our workers, as the majority of them are Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
It was not long before this notice appeared in the nation’s most widely read newspaper: “MAN WANTED TO WORK IN OUR COMPANY. MUST BE ONE OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES, DEDICATED, BAPTIZED. PREFERABLY AN ELDER OR A MINISTERIAL SERVANT.” Apparently no other qualifications were necessary.
MORE EFFORTS TO REACH OUT
During the 1970’s, efforts were made to reach smaller towns with the good news. So it was that in 1972 Brother and Sister Siebenlist returned from the United States and settled in the town of Tres Ríos, 10 kilometers from San José.
In this town, a teenage boy had spearheaded a small sect called The Jehovah’s Worshipers. The sect used the Society’s literature. Because of divisions within this group, the Gutiérrez family broke off its association with the group and contacted the branch office to ask for a Bible study. Douglas Little was assigned to help them. He gives the following description of what happened:
“A study was started immediately with the Gutiérrez family, Miguel, Inés, and their three young boys. The parents had a working knowledge of the truth, since they had been reading the Society’s publications diligently for months. Having been among the group’s ‘12 apostles’ and leaders in ‘field service,’ they had come to recognize that only one people enjoys Jehovah’s blessing, which truth, at first, was not appreciated by other members.
“Sometime after the Gutiérrez family separated from the sect, the branch was contacted by the remaining members. They too wanted to study, and I was assigned to care for their needs. Arrangements were made for me to visit the whole group and conduct a demonstration Bible study. To my surprise, I found some 15 people seated in a semicircle, with answers underlined in the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life and with New World Translations open and ready. All 15 adults present that night, besides many of their relatives and friends, have dedicated their lives to Jehovah and now serve in his one earthly organization.” Today, there are two congregations in Tres Ríos.
“UNITED IN WORSHIP”
Persecution in Cuba has united the brothers in Costa Rica with their spiritual brothers from Cuba. After the closing of the immigration route from Cuba to the United States in 1980, Costa Rica became one of the countries used by Cubans as way stations en route to other countries. Cubans arrived in Costa Rica voluntarily or because of governmental pressure or because their prison sentence would be canceled if they left Cuba.
Over a hundred Cuban Witnesses have entered Costa Rica. One of them, Ubaldo Fernández, a Cuban brother who served as an elder in the congregation of Santo Domingo, spoke in behalf of the Cuban brothers. “All the brothers who have arrived here are grateful to Jehovah for having been freed and very thankful to the Costa Rican brothers for the hospitality and the Christian love they have shown in every instance. So we continue as one people united in worship to the only true God, Jehovah.”
UNEXPECTED MISSIONARIES
Help is always appreciated, and as Jesus said: “The harvest is great, but the workers are few. Therefore, beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.”​—Matt. 9:37, 38.
Help came in the form of missionaries from the Gilead Extension School in Mexico. Juan and Rebecca Reyes and Arnoldo Chaves graduated from the first class and were assigned to Nicaragua. This assignment in Nicaragua was short-lived, as they could not get permission to stay and were told to go to Costa Rica to try to solicit residence from there, which has proved unsuccessful. They have remained in Costa Rica in the circuit work.
Saturday, March 20, 1982, was the day 19 missionaries were expelled from Nicaragua​—more unexpected guests. Nine of them were deported across the Costa Rican border by road. The other ten were sent by plane to Panama. Kevin and Ruby Block crossed the Costa Rican border by noon. By six o’clock that evening the other seven, with all the possessions they could pack in a suitcase, found themselves sitting under the stars along a deserted road inside Costa Rican territory. Soon brothers with vehicles arrived and drove them to the town of Liberia, where the Jorge Meléndez family had a hot meal and sleeping accommodations ready for them. The following day they were taken to the branch in San José. (On Tuesday the ten missionaries deported to Panama also arrived in Costa Rica.)
WITNESS THROUGH NEWS COVERAGE
By Saturday night the spotlight of world news began shining on the expelled missionaries. Over 41 newspapers and radio and TV stations telephoned the branch from all over the world, seeking interviews with the missionaries. Wednesday morning, Rodrigo Fournier, a noted Costa Rican news commentator, requested an early-morning roundtable discussion with the deported missionaries. Reiner and Jeanne Thompson and Ian Hunter were interviewed on a nationwide TV program that lasted 40 minutes. Highlighted during the program were our neutral position toward all earthly governments, our interest in God’s Kingdom, and how our teaching bolsters family unity. The program became the talk of the country and opened up many opportunities to witness.
Arrangements were made for this close-knit missionary group to stay at the Bethel home. In a few weeks, new assignments arrived from Brooklyn, and the missionaries were dispersed to Belize, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras, except for Brother and Sister Thompson and Brother Edward Errichetti. They were assigned to stay in Costa Rica, and Brother Thompson was appointed a member of the Branch Committee.
Bill and Mavis Rogers were not expelled with the other 19 missionaries, so they remained for another five months in Nicaragua. After being held under “house arrest” for two weeks in a hotel, they were deported to Costa Rica in August. They too were interviewed on TV. When asked what they were doing in Nicaragua to merit being deported, Bill told the TV audience, “Only preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom.” Next, on the same program, the archbishop of Costa Rica was interviewed. He was asked what he thought Christians should be doing today. He was obliged to reply, “Preach the gospel of the Kingdom.” Brother and Sister Rogers eventually left for their new assignment in El Salvador.
BETHEL FAMILY INCREASES
The Bethel family consisted of four members in 1977. But because of the surge in the number of publishers, by 1982 there were six working at Bethel to supply the needs of the congregations in both Costa Rica and another territory assigned to the branch. In 1980 the 5,000 mark in average publishers was passed, and 1981 saw an astounding peak of 6,183 publishers. By 1981, 118 congregations comprising six circuits reported and in 1982 this count jumped to 138 congregations in seven circuits.
One of the monthly jobs of the branch office is to provide Our Kingdom Ministry to each publisher. Although it was printed in Brooklyn, New York, in 1965 Costa Rica began editing its own Our Kingdom Ministry, allowing for more localized announcements to be included. Then another step forward came in January 1982, when Costa Rica began local printing of Our Kingdom Ministry on its own offset press. In the summer of 1983, an IBM Composer was purchased to make the small press more versatile, and by 1984 more than ten workers were needed in Bethel to care for the needs of the congregations.
WHY A CHANGE?
For many years, a complacent, contented attitude existed among the populace. Many were religiously proud and refused to discuss the Bible. But as the worsening world conditions, in fulfillment of Bible prophecy, touched more people’s lives, their hearts began to wonder what it all meant. Economic crises, terrorist activities, and refugees​—all these conditions opened the way for a more responsive house-to-house ministry, resulting in more Bible studies. Thus, what have the years 1982-87 brought? A cause for rejoicing! The peak of publishers increased from 6,611 to 10,374.
Another reason for the increase is that the total number of pioneers has more than doubled to 792. Ever since 1984, the number of home Bible studies has surpassed the number of publishers.
NEW BRANCH FACILITIES
In January 1984 an all-out effort toward the construction of new branch facilities started. In 1955 the branch had been built in the center of San José. Then in 1977 it was remodeled. Within just a few years, the branch building seemed to be bursting at its seams. The library was occupied by four desks, and at times office workers used their own rooms because of lack of office space. The hallways served for storage, and the shipping-room table doubled as an auxiliary bed. The conference room was converted into the printery. Was it time to expand?
For over a year, members of the Branch Committee searched for suitable land. Finally, with the help of Brother John Craddock, who had acquaintances in the business sector, an ideal place was located: sixteen acres of fertile land in a rural setting, just off the Pan-American Highway between the Juan Santamaría Airport and San José. The property is surrounded by three major cities and yet is large enough to allow for future expansion. It is a peaceful setting, with a daily panorama of strikingly beautiful rainbows and changing clouds sloping over volcanoes.
By May 1984 the property was purchased. Over 4,200 square meters of floor space was planned, in comparison to the 550 square meters of the former branch. Help came from Bethelites, all the country’s circuit overseers, and many of the special pioneers, pioneers, and congregation publishers. Added to these were the many professional construction workers from the United States, Canada, the Netherlands, Germany, Finland, Guatemala, and Panama. The foreign workers totaled over 300, and their stay ranged from days to several years.
By the time the construction was finished, almost 5,000 publishers from most congregations had participated in the actual construction. The rest had a share by their earnest prayers, encouragement, and contributions. All this effort was extended because Jehovah’s people trust in his promise to ‘make it grow.’​—1 Cor. 3:7.
THE DATE WAS SET
Dedication, January 4, 1987! The whole country was invited. Brothers Swingle and Underwood from Brooklyn Bethel gave Scripturally encouraging talks, and then Milton Henschel, also from Brooklyn Bethel, expressed the purpose of the occasion: to dedicate the facilities to Jehovah and His interests. As the sun set in the west, all 13,311 in attendance thanked Jehovah for his spirit and guidance during the two-year construction project.
Even during the construction period, it was evident the increase was on. Twenty-four new peaks in publishers had been reached since the construction had started. With new peaks of 10,374 publishers and 13,425 home Bible studies, it is obvious that the new facilities will soon be used to the full. The new branch will serve the needs of those future witnesses of Jehovah who are among the 30,534 that attended the Memorial in 1987.
WHAT HAPPENED TO THE GIRLS OF THE ’40’S
Remember the pioneer girls of the 1940’s? Where are they now? Did these sisters tire out? By no means! All are still active. Six sisters attended Gilead, and four are still missionaries. Five are special pioneers, and three are pioneering after raising their families or making adjustments in their schedules.
Why have they kept so busy in the Kingdom preaching work? Lila Swaby answers: “Working with the older anointed sisters when we were young built us up. We are no longer young, but their example continues as an inspiration to us.”
A RICH COAST INDEED!
It was apropos when the land was named Rich Coast by Christopher Columbus but for reasons beyond his imagination. Now, over 80 years since the truth reached these shores, the treasures of Costa Rica have proved to be its people whose God is Jehovah. A refining of these riches came with the visits of Brother Knorr and other special representatives from the Society’s headquarters. The presence of the missionaries spearheaded the preaching work, as well as stabilized the congregations that in turn have produced more riches​—praisers of Jehovah. Indeed, Costa Rica is a coast of spiritual riches!
[Map/​Pictures on page 199]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
COSTA RICA
NICARAGUA
Caribbean Sea
  DISTRICT OF SAN CARLOS
  Liberia
  Guápiles
  Grecia
  Guácimo
  Puntarenas
  Alajuela
  Siquirres
  Puerto Limón
  SAN JOSÉ
  Cartago
  Cahuita
  Point Quepos
  San Isidro
  Golfito
PACIFIC OCEAN
PANAMA
[Pictures on page 202]
Early zealous preachers, baptized around 1914: (top, left to right) Claudia Goodin, Lea Wilson; (bottom) Ina Williams
[Picture on page 204]
Henry Steele and wife, Matilde, baptized around 1914, shown with family. Many of their children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren are active Witnesses today
[Picture on page 209]
Albert Ezra Pile, baptized in 1926, helped fire up the work
[Picture on page 213]
First group of missionaries. Front row, left to right: Charles Palmer; Lora Lea Palmer; Hermena Siebenlist; Theodore Siebenlist, branch servant from 1944 to 1952. Back row, left to right: William Eugene Call, Donald Burt, and “Woody” Blackburn
[Pictures on page 217]
“Doc” and Emily Hardin served in the circuit work and did a lot of traveling by train
Arnold Williams, first native circuit overseer, quit a promising job to preach the good news
[Picture on page 218]
Evelyn Ferguson (now Taylor), special pioneer since 1944, shown with her phonograph
[Pictures on page 225]
Silbert Spence, moved by the recording by Brother Rutherford “Religion Is a Snare and a Racket,” started pioneering with his wife, Valmina, in 1948. Member of the Branch Committee until his death in May 1985
[Picture on page 233]
Lorence Shepp, who has served as Branch Committee coordinator since 1966, with his wife, Olimpia
[Picture on page 239]
Frederick Hiltbrand, shown here with his wife, Mirtha, helped establish the printing operation
[Picture on page 250]
Aerial view of new branch, with reception circle to the fore; printing, shipping, and offices to the left; and residence to the right
[Picture on page 252]
Pioneer girls of the ’40’s still have the pioneer spirit. Left to right: Jenny Taylor; Evelyn Taylor; Mireya Ortega; Jenny Dillon; Corina Novoa; Lila Swaby

