
SECTION 5
Appreciating God’s Matchless Qualities




THE Holy Scriptures reveal God’s many wonderful qualities, enabling us to get to know him. For instance, the Scriptures tell us of God’s four main attributes​—power, justice, wisdom, and love. Let us consider each of them.



Limitless in Power





God is mighty in power



Jehovah told Abraham: “I am God Almighty.” (Genesis 17:1) His power is matchless, limitless, and inexhaustible. By his power, God created the entire universe.
God never misuses his power. He always uses it in a controlled and purposeful way. He perfectly balances his use of power with his justice, wisdom, and love.
Jehovah generously uses his power in behalf of his faithful servants. “His eyes are roving about through all the earth to show his strength in behalf of those whose heart is complete toward him.” (2 Chronicles 16:9) Are you not drawn to this powerful yet caring God?



A God of Justice

“Jehovah is a lover of justice.” (Psalm 37:28) He always does what is right and fair according to his own perfect standard.




God is impartial



God hates injustice. He “treats none with partiality nor accepts a bribe.” (Deuteronomy 10:17) He opposes those who oppress others, and he acts in behalf of the vulnerable, including “any widow or fatherless boy.” (Exodus 22:22) God views all humans without prejudice. “God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.”​—Acts 10:34, 35.
Jehovah’s justice is perfectly balanced. He is never too lenient, never too harsh. He punishes unrepentant wrongdoers but extends tender mercy to repentant ones. “Jehovah is merciful and gracious, slow to anger and abundant in loving-kindness. He will not for all time keep finding fault, neither will he to time indefinite keep resentful. He has not done to us even according to our sins; nor according to our errors has he brought upon us what we deserve.” (Psalm 103:8-10) God also remembers and rewards the faithful acts of his loyal servants. Does not the God of such justice merit your trust?



A God of Wisdom





The Holy Scriptures contain God’s wisdom



Jehovah is the Source of all wisdom. “O the depth of God’s riches and wisdom and knowledge!” (Romans 11:33) His wisdom is unrivaled and infinite.
God’s wisdom is clearly seen in physical creation. “How many your works are, O Jehovah!” exclaimed the psalmist. “All of them in wisdom you have made.”​—Psalm 104:24.
God’s wisdom is also revealed in the Holy Scriptures. King David wrote: “The reminder of Jehovah is trustworthy, making the inexperienced one wise.” (Psalm 19:7) Just imagine​—you can draw on God’s boundless wisdom! Will you take advantage of that opportunity?



“God Is Love”

Jehovah’s principal attribute is love. “God is love,” the Scriptures tell us. (1 John 4:8) Love motivates and guides all he does.
God shows his love for us in countless ways. He gives us good things. “He did good, giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling your hearts to the full with food and good cheer.” (Acts 14:17) Indeed, “every good gift and every perfect present is from above, for it comes down from the Father of the celestial lights.” (James 1:17) Through the priceless gift of the Scriptures, God reveals the truth about himself and teaches us his loving laws and principles. “Your word is truth,” said Jesus in prayer.​—John 17:17.




God’s creative wisdom inspires awe



God also helps us in our trials. “Throw your burden upon Jehovah himself, and he himself will sustain you. Never will he allow the righteous one to totter.” (Psalm 55:22) He forgives our sins. “You, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive; and the loving-kindness to all those calling upon you is abundant.” (Psalm 86:5) And he even offers us everlasting life. “He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.” (Revelation 21:4) How will you respond to God’s love? Will you love him in return?



Draw Close to God





Praying and meditating on God’s qualities will draw you closer to him



God wants you to know him well. His Word urges you: “Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you.” (James 4:8) God called the faithful prophet Abraham “my friend.” (Isaiah 41:8) Jehovah wants you to be his friend too.
The more you learn about God, the closer you will feel to him and the happier you will be. “Happy is the man” whose “delight is in the law of Jehovah, and in his law he reads in an undertone day and night.” (Psalm 1:1, 2) Therefore, keep on studying the Holy Scriptures. Meditate on God’s qualities and works. Show your love for God by applying what you learn. “This is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments; and yet his commandments are not burdensome.” (1 John 5:3) Pray, then, as did the psalmist: “Make me know your own ways, O Jehovah; teach me your own paths. Make me walk in your truth.” (Psalm 25:4, 5) You will find that God “is not far off from each one of us.”​—Acts 17:27.



What Do You Think?
  Which of God’s qualities especially appeals to you? Why?

  How can you draw close to God?




