
SECTION 9
Learning From Messiah the Leader




GOD foretold that he would appoint the Messiah as the Leader for all peoples. God knows what kind of leader we really need and chose the best Leader possible. What sort of Leader did the Messiah prove to be? A mighty general? A skilled politician? A wise philosopher? According to the Holy Scriptures, the Messiah was a very special prophet​—Jesus Christ.​—Matthew 23:10.
God made sure that Jesus was born perfect, holy. Further, Jesus resisted Satan’s every effort to corrupt him. In word and deed, Jesus flawlessly reflected God’s perfect use of power, as well as God’s justice, wisdom, and love. Consider how we can learn from Jesus’ example.




Jesus generously helped others



He used his God-given power to help others. Jesus really cared about people, and he generously used his power to fill their needs. “I feel pity for the crowd, because . . . they have nothing to eat,” he said. (Mark 8:2) Then Jesus miraculously fed the large crowds that had come to hear him teach.
Jesus also traveled about, teaching and “curing every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity among the people.” (Matthew 4:23) Understandably, multitudes followed him, and “all the crowd were seeking to touch him, because power was going out of him and healing them all.” (Luke 6:19) Indeed, Jesus came, “not to be ministered to, but to minister, and to give his soul a ransom in exchange for many.” (Matthew 20:28)a How many human leaders show such a self-sacrificing spirit?




Jesus loved children



He reflected God’s justice. Jesus adhered to the letter and the spirit of God’s law. As the Scriptures had foretold, he said, in effect: “To do your will, O my God, I have delighted, and your law is within my inward parts.” (Psalm 40:8) Jesus treated all​—rich and poor, male and female, children and adults—​with dignity, respect, and impartiality, as God does. Once, Jesus’ disciples reprimanded parents who were bringing their children to Jesus. But Jesus said: “Let the young children come to me; do not try to stop them, for the kingdom of God belongs to suchlike ones.”​—Mark 10:14.
He displayed divine wisdom. Jesus had keen understanding of people. “He himself knew what was in man.” (John 2:25) When Jesus’ enemies sent men to arrest him, even these acknowledged: “Never has another man spoken like this.” Where did Jesus get his wisdom? He explained: “What I teach is not mine, but belongs to him that sent me.”​—John 7:16, 46.




Jesus compassionately healed the sick



He showed godly love. Jesus also had tender compassion for people. A man who was “full of leprosy” begged him: “Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean.” Moved with pity, Jesus “stretched out his hand and touched him, and said to him: ‘I want to. Be made clean.’ And immediately the leprosy vanished from him.” (Luke 5:12, 13; Mark 1:41, 42) Jesus truly desired to relieve that poor man’s suffering.
Does Jesus care about you too? Jesus himself answers: “Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and you will find refreshment for your souls.”​—Matthew 11:28, 29.
Jesus is the best Leader we could possibly have. As such, he urges us: “Learn from me.” Will you accept his heartwarming invitation? Doing so will lead to a happy life.



For a discussion of the ransom, see lesson 27 of the book Enjoy Life Forever!

How Would You Answer?
  What position did God give Jesus?

  What qualities did Jesus display? Which qualities appeal most to you?

  What invitation does Jesus extend to us?




