
SECTION 13
Real Faith Leads to Everlasting Happiness




“THE righteous one​—by means of faith he will live,” say the Holy Scriptures. (Romans 1:17) These words contain a thrilling promise that involves you. In what ways?
After completing his work on earth, Jesus, the Messiah, ascended to heaven to be with God. As his disciples looked on, “he was lifted up and a cloud caught him up from their vision.” (Acts 1:9) In heaven, God appointed him as a mighty heavenly King. In the near future, Jesus, “the Son of man,” will arrive “in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne. And all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.” (Matthew 25:31, 32) When will this occur?
The Holy Scriptures foretell a period of worldwide trouble that would be the sign that the Messiah’s judgment of the nations was imminent. Jesus explained what that sign would include: “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there will be great earthquakes, and in one place after another pestilences and food shortages; and there will be fearful sights.”​—Luke 21:7, 10, 11.




Today’s problems show that the Messiah will soon judge the nations



Today, we can clearly see Jesus’ words being fulfilled. Soon, Jesus will come to destroy the wicked. Finally, even Satan will be destroyed! Earth will become a global paradise. All people will live in peace with one another and even with the animals. “The wolf will actually reside for a while with the male lamb, and with the kid the leopard itself will lie down, and the calf and the maned young lion and the well-fed animal all together; and a mere little boy will be leader over them. They will not do any harm or cause any ruin.” (Isaiah 11:6, 9) “No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’ . . . At that time the eyes of the blind ones will be opened, and the very ears of the deaf ones will be unstopped.” (Isaiah 33:24; 35:5) Even the dead will be resurrected. “Jehovah will certainly wipe the tears from all faces,” and “death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.” (Isaiah 25:8; Revelation 21:4) God’s original purpose for the earth will then be fulfilled. What a wonderful prospect!



Keep Growing in Faith

What sort of people will God reward with life in Paradise? People of faith​—real faith!
Remember that real faith is based on accurate knowledge of God’s Word. Therefore, continue to get to know God and Jesus better!




People of faith will enjoy Paradise forever!



Real faith is backed up by righteous works. God’s Word states: “Faith without works is dead.” (James 2:26) By doing such good works, you will reflect God’s marvelous attributes​—power, justice, wisdom, and love. Keep on striving to develop these godly qualities!
Cultivating real faith will bring you rich rewards. Indeed, it is your key to a happy life​—both now and on into an everlasting future!



How Would You Answer?
  Where is Jesus now?

  How do we know that Jesus will soon come to judge the nations?

  When Jesus arrives, what will he do?

  How can you keep building your faith?




