
SECTION 11
Showing Real Faith Today




MANY people today claim to have faith. But Jesus taught that few people would have real faith. He said: “Broad and spacious is the road leading off into destruction, and many are the ones going in through it; whereas narrow is the gate and cramped the road leading off into life, and few are the ones finding it.”​—Matthew 7:13, 14.
How do people today show that they have real faith? “By their fruits you will recognize them,” Jesus said. “Every good tree produces fine fruit, but every rotten tree produces worthless fruit.” (Matthew 7:16, 17) Thus, real faith produces “fine fruit.” It motivates people to display godly qualities. How do they do so?



Make Proper Use of Power

People who have real faith use their power and authority to honor God and to benefit others. Jesus taught: “Whoever wants to become great among you must be your minister.” (Mark 10:43) Similarly, men of faith are not tyrants, neither outside nor inside the home. They cherish their wives, assign them honor, and lovingly respond to their needs. The Scriptures say: “You husbands, keep on loving your wives and do not be bitterly angry with them.” (Colossians 3:19) “Husbands, continue dwelling in like manner with them according to knowledge, assigning them honor as to a weaker vessel, the feminine one, since you are also heirs with them of the undeserved favor of life, in order for your prayers not to be hindered.”​—1 Peter 3:7.
On the other hand, a wife who has real faith “should have deep respect for her husband.” (Ephesians 5:33) Wives should “love their husbands” and “love their children.” (Titus 2:4) Fathers and mothers who have faith spend time with their children and teach them God’s laws and principles. In the home, workplace, and elsewhere, they treat others with dignity and respect. They follow the Scriptural counsel: “In showing honor to one another take the lead.”​—Romans 12:10.
God’s servants observe the Scriptural injunction: “You are not to accept a bribe.” (Exodus 23:8) They never abuse their position for selfish gain. Rather, they look for opportunities to help others, especially those in need. They heed the advice: “Do not forget the doing of good and the sharing of things with others, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.” (Hebrews 13:16) Therefore, they experience the truth of Jesus’ words: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”​—Acts 20:35.



Uphold Godly Justice

People of faith willingly obey God’s laws, and for them “his commandments are not burdensome.” (1 John 5:3) They know that “the law of Jehovah is perfect . . . The orders from Jehovah are upright, causing the heart to rejoice; the commandment of Jehovah is clean, making the eyes shine.”​—Psalm 19:7, 8.
Real faith also moves them to reject all forms of prejudice. They do not elevate one race, country, or social class above another, but instead, they imitate God. “God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.”​—Acts 10:34, 35.
Real faith moves people to “conduct [themselves] honestly in all things.” (Hebrews 13:18) A person who has faith also avoids harmful gossip and slander. About the sort of person whom God approves, the psalmist David wrote: “He has not slandered with his tongue. To his companion he has done nothing bad.”​—Psalm 15:3.



Reflect Godly Wisdom

Those who have real faith base their beliefs solely on the Holy Scriptures. They believe that “all Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.” (2 Timothy 3:16) In their relationships with others, they reflect “the wisdom from above,” which is “chaste, then peaceable, reasonable, ready to obey, full of mercy and good fruits.” (James 3:17) They shun ungodly traditions and spiritism and “guard [themselves] from idols.”​—1 John 5:21.



Show Genuine Love

The prophet Moses said: “You must love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul and all your vital force.” (Deuteronomy 6:5) People of faith show that kind of love for God. They respect God’s name, Jehovah. They “give thanks to Jehovah” and “call upon his name” in faith. (Psalm 105:1) God’s servants also heed his command: “You must love your fellow as yourself.” (Leviticus 19:18) They reject violence and strive to “be peaceable with all men.” (Romans 12:18) Figuratively, they “beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears.” (Isaiah 2:4) As a result, they “have love among [themselves]” and enjoy a global brotherhood. (John 13:35) Can you identify such people today?



How Would You Answer?
  What identifies people who have real faith?

  How do people of faith reflect God’s qualities in regard to power? justice? wisdom? love?





