
SECTION 12
Show That You Have Real Faith!




GOD warns his servants to expect tests of faith. His Word says: “Be watchful. Your adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.” (1 Peter 5:8) How might Satan try to destroy your faith?




Have you experienced this kind of opposition?



Satan may use others, even your loved ones, to pressure you not to look into the Holy Scriptures. In this regard, Jesus foretold: “A man’s enemies will be persons of his own household.” (Matthew 10:36) Well-meaning family members and friends may be unaware of the wonderful truths found in God’s Word. Or they may fear what others think. However, the Scriptures say: “Trembling at men is what lays a snare, but he that is trusting in Jehovah will be protected.” (Proverbs 29:25) If you stop learning from the Scriptures in order to please men, will that please God? Certainly not! On the other hand, when we show real faith, God helps us. “We are not the sort that shrink back to destruction, but the sort that have faith to the preserving alive of the soul.”​—Hebrews 10:39.
Recall the experience of Dumas, related earlier. At first, his wife mocked him for his faith. But later she joined him in learning from God’s Word. Likewise, if you persevere in doing what is right, you may influence your friends and loved ones to do the same. In many cases, an unbelieving family member has been “won without a word through the . . . chaste conduct” and “deep respect” of one who shows real faith.​—1 Peter 3:1, 2.
Satan also tries to make people think they are too busy to study the Scriptures. He would like the pressures of life​—personal concerns and worries about money—​to “choke the word” in your case so that your faith “becomes unfruitful.” (Mark 4:19) Reject such a shortsighted view! The Scriptures say: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) Yes, continuing to learn more about God and Jesus, the Messiah, is essential to gaining everlasting life in Paradise!




Pray for God’s help



Think of Moses, who was a member of Egypt’s royal household. He could have pursued wealth, fame, and power. Yet, Moses chose “to be ill-treated with the people of God rather than to have the temporary enjoyment of sin.” Why? “He continued steadfast as seeing the One who is invisible.” (Hebrews 11:24, 25, 27) Yes, Moses had strong faith in God. He put God’s interests ahead of selfish pursuits, and God blessed him richly. If you do the same, God will bless you too.
Satan may try to prey on you in a variety of ways. But you need not become his victim. God’s Word urges us: “Oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.” (James 4:7) How can you oppose him?
Keep studying the Holy Scriptures. Read God’s Word every day. Study its teachings. Apply its counsel. By doing so, you will “take up the complete suit of armor from God,” with which you can resist Satan’s attacks.​—Ephesians 6:13.
Associate with people who have real faith. Search out others who read, study, and apply the Holy Scriptures. Such ones “consider one another to incite to love and fine works, . . . encouraging one another.” They will help you to grow in faith.​—Hebrews 10:24, 25.




Associate with others who have faith



Draw close to Jehovah. Pray for God’s help, and trust in him. Never forget, God wants to help you. “Throw all your anxiety upon [God], because he cares for you.” (1 Peter 5:6, 7) “God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear, but along with the temptation he will also make the way out in order for you to be able to endure it.”​—1 Corinthians 10:13.
Satan taunts God, saying that no one will continue to serve Him if it means suffering trials. But you have the opportunity to prove that Satan is a liar! “Be wise,” God says, “and make my heart rejoice, that I may make a reply to him that is taunting me.” (Proverbs 27:11) Yes, be determined to show that you have real faith!



How Would You Answer?
  How might Satan try to undermine your faith?

  How did Moses show real faith?

  How can you endure trials of faith?




