
SECTION 4
Who Is God?




PEOPLE worship many gods. But the Holy Scriptures teach that there is only one true God. He is unique, supreme, and eternal. He created everything in heaven and on earth, and he gave us life. Therefore, he alone is worthy of our worship.




The Law was given through the prophet Moses as “the word spoken through angels”



God has many titles but only one personal name​—JEHOVAH. God told Moses: “This is what you are to say to the sons of Israel, ‘Jehovah the God of your forefathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you.’ This is my name to time indefinite, and this is the memorial of me to generation after generation.” (Exodus 3:15) The name Jehovah appears some 7,000 times in the Holy Scriptures. As Psalm 83:18 says about God, “you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.”




Ancient Dead Sea Scroll scripture manuscript showing God’s name



No human has ever seen God. God told Moses: “You are not able to see my face, because no man may see me and yet live.” (Exodus 33:20) God lives in the heavens and is invisible to human eyes. It is wrong to make or pray to an idol, picture, or symbol of God. Jehovah God commanded through the prophet Moses: “You must not make for yourself a carved image or a form like anything that is in the heavens above or that is on the earth underneath or that is in the waters under the earth. You must not bow down to them nor be induced to serve them, because I Jehovah your God am a God exacting exclusive devotion.” (Exodus 20:2-5) Later, through the prophet Isaiah, God said: “I am Jehovah. That is my name; and to no one else shall I give my own glory, neither my praise to graven images.”​—Isaiah 42:8.
Some people believe in God but may view him as unknowable and unapproachable, someone to fear rather than to love. What do you think? Is God interested in you personally? Can you really get to know him, even draw close to him? Let us see what the Scriptures say about God’s personal qualities.



How Would You Answer?
  Why should we worship God?

  What is God’s name?

  Why should we not use idols or symbols to worship God?

  How does God use his holy spirit and angels to accomplish his will?




God’s Holy Spirit and His Angels
  How does God accomplish his will? One way is by sending forth his holy spirit. God’s spirit is, not a conscious being or an angel, but his invisible active force, the limitless energy that he projects to accomplish whatever he chooses. God used this force to create heaven and earth. “By the word of Jehovah the heavens themselves were made, and by the spirit of his mouth all their army.” (Psalm 33:6) Genesis 1:2 explains that when the earth was still covered with water and God was preparing the earth for human habitation, “God’s active force was moving to and fro over the surface of the waters.” God then used his holy spirit to create all forms of life on earth.
  God also uses angels to carry out his will. God created them to live in heaven with him. Angels are very powerful. They convey divine messages and perform other important tasks. For example, the Scriptures refer to the Law given through the prophet Moses as “the word spoken through angels.” God’s angels also help his servants on earth. In fact, the Scriptures call God’s angels “spirits for public service, sent forth to minister for those who are going to inherit salvation.”​—Hebrews 1:14; 2:2.


