From Our Readers
Columbus  I just finished reading the series of articles “‘The New World’​—500 Years Old.” (March 8, 1992) I have to admit that I have always had trouble digesting history, and I found the introductory material difficult. But I really liked the application made in the article “The Real New World Awaiting Discovery.” It helped me appreciate the blessings God will soon bring.
N. Z., Italy
I am 13 years old. In school we were studying about sailors, and we were asked to write an essay on the subject. As we got little information from our history teacher, I used details from the articles in Awake! about Christopher Columbus. I got top marks and was also able to place many copies of the magazine in class.
M. D., Germany
The Womb  I’ve never written to a magazine in my life. But I was so touched by the beauty of the article “The Womb​—Our Marvelous First Home” (April 8, 1992) that I just had to write. I found myself in awe of God’s powers. Every word was written so lovingly.
B. J., United States
Recently I had a problem with my uterus. But when the doctor tried to explain what my problem was, I did not understand. Having read and reread your article, I now understand what is happening to me. It will be easier for me to talk with my doctor.
S. G., Brazil
I want to compliment you on the attractive way in which the article was written, along with the interesting illustrations that accompanied it​—a combination that makes Awake! lively reading. Had I read the same information in a scientific publication, I would not have understood anything and would have found it very boring.
S. P., Italy
Your well-​polished opening sentences immediately caught my attention, and I became absorbed in the article. As I read it, I realized that youngsters who engage in sexual misconduct are making a grave mistake. It is truly foolish to abuse the body that Jehovah, in his great wisdom, has made for us.
M. S., Japan
Dingo Dogs  I am planning to move to Australia, so any information pertaining to that land is of interest to me. I was therefore impressed by your article “Meet the Controversial Australian Dingo.” (October 8, 1991) Before reading this article, I had some prejudice against the dingo, believing it to be little more than a domesticated “dog” that became wild. Your article has given me a deeper respect for the dingo, and I look forward to encountering this magnificent animal some day.
A. S., United States
Pep Rallies  I truly appreciated the article “Young People Ask . . . Should We Go to the Pep Rally?” (February 8, 1992) I am not in school anymore, but I can look back and remember getting caught up in our school rally. We beat a replica of the opposing school’s mascot to pieces! The Bible’s words applied in my case: “Bad associations spoil useful habits.”​—1 Corinthians 15:33.
L. S., United States
I have attended pep rallies but never actively participated in them. However, I did have doubts about attending, though I never acted upon my doubts. Since attendance is optional, I’m determined not to attend them anymore.
B. K., United States

