Announcements
● Literature offer for July and August: One of the following 32-page, magazine-size brochures may be offered for a contribution of 30¢: Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, or The Government That Will Bring Paradise. As an alternate offer, congregations having a supply of any of the following publications may offer two for $1.00: Choosing the Best Way of Life, Commentary on the Letter of James, God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good, or Is the Bible Really the Word of God? Additional copies of Commentary on James may be ordered from the Society. Congregations should not order the other three books mentioned, since they are out of stock. Use only those books that are available locally. (For obtaining credit, see the guidelines in the Society’s letter of December 21, 1988, to all bodies of elders.) September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? for a contribution of $3.00. Small-size books are $1.50. October: Subscription to either Awake! or The Watchtower or to both. One-year subscriptions are $5.00 each. Six-month subscriptions and one-year subscriptions to monthly magazines are $2.50. There are no six-month subscriptions to monthly editions.
● Anyone making plans to begin regular pioneer service on September 1, 1989, should fill out an application promptly and submit it to the elders for review. After the application is approved and signed by the Congregation Service Committee, it should be mailed to the Society by the early part of August. By forwarding approved applications early, requests for retroactive appointments can be avoided.​—See August 1986 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, paragraphs 21-26.
● An adequate supply of forms for use during the 1990 service year is being sent to each congregation. These forms should not be wasted. They should be used only for their intended purpose.
● A supply of Medical Document and Identity Cards is being shipped to the congregations along with the yearly supply of congregation forms. These cards are not to be given out immediately upon their receipt but should be held until further direction is given on issuing them to the brothers at the end of the calendar year. Publisher identification cards (S-65) may be issued according to what was stated in the February 1989 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4.
● Beginning in September, circuit overseers will give the public talk “How to Conquer Evil With Good.”
● The Society is now accepting orders for reprinted Watchtower bound volumes in English for the years 1975 through 1979. Congregations and individuals desiring to have these volumes for their library should determine the total number of volumes they need for each year and submit their requests through the congregation. The total quantities should be entered on the Literature Order form (S-14) and SUBMITTED DURING THE MONTH OF JULY 1989. (See Cost List, paragraphs 7-10.) Please do not place orders for years other than 1975 through 1979. Since the Society will not stock these reprinted volumes, we urge all to consider the matter carefully and place orders for the 1975 through 1979 volumes that are needed. Later orders will only be filled as long as existing supplies last. These reprinted volumes are controlled stock items and are to be paid for by the congregation upon receipt. The price will be $6.00 each.
● New Publications Available:
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Hebrew
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Cakchiquel, Hmong
Tract No. 15​—Vietnamese

