Meetings Benefit Our Children
1 In the nation of Israel, even little children were included in meetings for worship. (Deut. 31:12) Likewise today, the congregation meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses benefit the children.​—Ps. 148:1, 12.
2 Of course, children may be easily distracted. They need to be taught to listen attentively to what is said. They also need help in understanding some of the material presented.
PREPARE FOR MEETINGS
3 Proper training at home will help children to appreciate the privilege of assembling with others to worship Jehovah. They should be helped to understand that obedience in this regard brings benefits. Even very young ones can be helped to understand that Christian meetings are for them too.​—Ps. 133:1; Isa. 48:17; Matt. 19:14.
4 It is helpful if children have their own Bible, songbook, and other study literature to use during the meetings. Parents should help younger ones prepare at least a part of the lesson for each meeting. (Heb. 10:23) This can be done in harmony with the child’s ability to understand and participate in the meetings.
5 Some children are benefited by having special assignments during meetings. Very young children may enjoy noting the number of times God’s name, the Kingdom, or a certain Bible subject is mentioned and something said about it. Children who are a little older could be assigned to list the scriptures that are read or quoted. Whatever the assignment, the children will benefit the most if they are commended for their effort. They may also be given the opportunity later to comment on points learned or to relate how they enjoyed points presented at the meeting.
6 All children who can read should be encouraged and helped to have a personal program for privately reading the Society’s publications. Depending on the child’s ability, it may include reading through the Bible Stories, Great Teacher, and Youth books, as well as selected articles in the magazines. Such a program should eventually enable a youth to keep up with all the current theocratic publications.
DRESS AND DECORUM
7 Often, visitors are impressed when they see the respectful way our young ones are dressed at Christian meetings. It has been observed that the way a child is dressed for meetings usually has a bearing on his attitude and conduct at meetings. When visiting the Society’s headquarters in Brooklyn or any of the branch offices, it is appropriate for children and adults alike to dress as they would for a Christian meeting.​—om p. 131.
8 The fine behavior of our children at meetings also brings praise and honor to Jehovah’s name. Therefore, parents should recognize that close supervision at meetings is vital. Concerned parents will arrange for the family to sit together during meetings and see to it that their children maintain proper decorum at all times. For additional helpful suggestions, parents can talk to others who are having good success with their little ones.
9 It is our desire for children to share fully in worship at our Christian meetings and ‘incite others to love and fine works.’ (Heb. 10:24) In Jehovah God’s arrangement, meetings are for children too.

