Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JULY 3
Song 43
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage those who are thinking about becoming regular pioneers in September to fill out application and submit it to the elders for review 30 days in advance, if possible. Briefly demonstrate presentation of current magazines, and encourage all to share in magazine witnessing on second Saturday.
20 min: “Serving With a Complete Heart.” Talk and discussion of article with questions. Include demonstration of July brochure offer when discussing paragraph 4.
15 min: Discussion with audience of questions from article “Do You Remember?” in April 15, 1989, Watchtower.
Song 128 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 10
Song 151
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Donation acknowledgments.
20 min: “Seize Every Opportunity to Witness​—Part 2.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. When covering paragraph 4, include local experiences and a brief demonstration of informal witnessing.
15 min: Talk based on “Independence,” pages 187-91 of the Reasoning book. Highlight our dependence on Jehovah and the disastrous consequences of following an independent course. Adapt to needs of the congregation.
Song 63 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 17
Song 183
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Review highlights of April service report. Commend congregation on local accomplishments in the field. Encourage all to share in magazine work on fourth Saturday of month.
20 min: “Meetings Benefit Our Children.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Use a few minutes at end of part to interview exemplary parents and children who have applied the suggestions in the article. Draw parents out on how they got started helping the children to prepare for meetings, what they presently do to help them, and the personal benefits that they have experienced as a result.
15 min: Local needs, or talk on “Appreciation for Our Brothers,” based on article in October 1, 1988, issue The Watchtower.
Song 65 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 24
Song 130
 5 min: Local announcements, including field service arrangements.
10 min: Service overseer discusses meetings for service. Consider the  act that these meetings should be brief and primarily for the purpose of organizing groups. What preparation is required? What can publishers do to contribute to the effectiveness of the meetings? Briefly review Question Box in Our Kingdom Ministry of February 1989, the article “More Meaningful Meetings for Service” in Our Kingdom Service of January 1979, and the Question Box in Kingdom Ministry of June 1967.
10 min: “Keep Watching How You Walk.” Encourage all in congregation to make plans to attend the circuit assembly. Discuss helping the elderly and the infirm in your congregation who need assistance. Make practical suggestions.
20 min: Christian Women​—Respected and Respectful Members of the Congregation. Talk by elder from Reasoning book, pages 431-5. Commend sisters for living up to the role outlined for them in the Bible. Song 82 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 31
Song 192
 8 min: Local announcements. Discuss talking points from current magazines. Conclude with encouragement for congregation to support first Sunday of the month field service arrangements.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Using the House-to-House Record.” Questions and answers. Read paragraphs as time permits. Outline proper use of house-to-house records for both not-at-homes and return visits. Review with audience information that should be placed on the records, and explain why. Emphasize keeping a record of not-at-homes even in seldom-worked territory. Remind all to have house-to-house records with them while in field service.
12 min: Starting Bible Studies With Brochures. Discussion. It is not enough to place brochures. Bible studies must be conducted to fulfill our objective of making disciples. Show audience how studies can be started using brochures. (See August 1986 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8.) Demonstrate starting studies with brochures. Interview publishers who have had success starting studies with brochures. Or relate experiences found in the 1986 Yearbook, pages 11-13, and 1987 Yearbook, page 48. Emphasize the positive approach of publishers and the good results they have experienced.
10 min: Learning From Pictures on Theocratic Calendar. Talk. Use July 1, 1989, Watchtower article “‘Woe to You, Chorazin!’​—Why?” along with 1989 calendar to highlight benefit of using corresponding calendar picture when reading article. Remind brothers of corresponding articles in the January 1, March 1, and May 1, 1989, issues of The Watchtower. Soon we will be ordering calendar for 1990, which will feature additional instructive pictures from Bible lands.
Song 32 and concluding prayer.

