Part 2​—Seize Every Opportunity to Witness
1 Hundreds of thousands of people have become acquainted with the truth through informal witnessing. If this means of witnessing is fully utilized, millions more will be reached with the message of the good news. As Jehovah’s servants, we must let our light shine continually. How can we personally do this more fully?​—Matt. 5:15, 16; Phil. 2:15.
2 There are various ways that we can create opportunities to give an informal witness. During a lunch break, while waiting in an office, or when using public transportation, some brothers make it a practice to read the Bible or one of the Society’s magazines or books. By being alert to the reaction or any interest shown by those seated nearby, a conversation may result if we simply share a thought from what we are reading.
3 Usually it is not difficult to start a conversation with someone on a general matter of local interest. If we pray for Jehovah’s help and then make the effort, we can enjoy fine results. A very simple way to give a brief and informal witness is to offer one of our tracts. This is especially practical in situations where there is not much time for a conversation. Tracts are small and easily carried but contain a powerful message. Most of us could use them more frequently.
USE REASONING BOOK
4 A practical aid for all features of Kingdom preaching is the Reasoning book. Many of the introductions on pages 9-15, as well as the information under “Conversation Stoppers” on pages 15-24, can be adapted to informal witnessing and be used to start conversations. For example, one introduction on page 11 says: “Did you read this in the newspaper this week? (Show appropriate clipping.) What do you think . . . ?” How simple, and yet how effective for starting a conversation! Or we could ask if the person has noticed how the news media have quoted prominent people who use the term “Armageddon” in reference to all-out nuclear war. We could then ask what he thinks Armageddon will mean to mankind. The material on page 9 can be adapted to the conversation.
5 Whenever we engage in informal witnessing, it is good to allow the other person the opportunity to express himself. We should be courteous and respectful at all times. If we listen carefully to what the other person has to say, we may be able to determine what his interests are and then speak words that will whet his spiritual appetite. (Prov. 25:11) If possible, we should obtain the names and addresses of those who show interest so further contact can be made to cultivate the interest. Likewise, we should also keep a record of the time spent in informal witnessing so this can be reported accurately.
6 If you feel that you have not been successful at giving an informal witness, do not be discouraged. Your efforts to sow seeds of Kingdom truth through informal witnessing may bear fruit later. Often, it is an accumulation of truth sown through informal witnessing that produces good results. Even if we have no Bible literature to place with people, the oral witness can accomplish a great amount of good. There are millions of people that we can reach if we seize every opportunity to give an informal witness.

