Presenting the Good News​—Using the House-to-House Record
1 “I have thoroughly preached the good news about the Christ.” (Rom. 15:19) These words of the apostle Paul indicate how diligent he was in carrying out his commission to preach, teach, and make disciples.
2 We want to be just as thorough in witnessing within our assigned territory. The time we are living in is most critical-lives are at stake. Failure to warn the people will incur bloodguilt. (Ezek. 3:18, 19) Like the apostle Paul, we want to be able to say that we are “clean from the blood of all men.” (Acts 20:26) How can we be more thorough in working our territory? Proper use of the House-to-House Record form can help.
WHEN NO ONE IS HOME
3 A complete and accurate record of not-at-homes is indispensable in covering our territory effectively. This is true whether the territory is seldom or frequently worked. So we must be persistent in trying to reach someone at every home. When there is no response, we should make appropriate notations on a house-to-house record. Then we should be sure to return and try to give a witness to someone in that household.
4 To reach those who were not at home on the initial call, some have used their house-to-house record, calling back right after door-to-door activity the same day. Or they try calling on a different day or at a different time of the day. Many find that calling in the evening brings good results. Shut-ins have had success making telephone calls or writing letters when repeated visits to certain homes are unsuccessful.
WHEN INTEREST IS FOUND
5 When you find an appreciative ear, keep a record. Write down the person’s name, address, and any other information that will help in following through on interest shown. If you do not contact the interested person again after several tries, perhaps a change in the day or time you call would help. Do not be quick to give up on someone who has shown interest.
6 The apostle Paul set a good example for us. He “thoroughly bore witness” in his assigned territory. Using the house-to-house record properly will help us to bear thorough witness in our assigned territory. And what joy we will have as many more become disciples of Jesus Christ! Thus, we will be able to repeat Paul’s words: “I am clean from the blood of all men.”​—Acts 20:21, 26.

