Serving With a Complete Heart
1 David set a fine example of serving Jehovah with a complete heart. His lead had a profound effect upon the entire nation of Israel. It was with a complete heart that they too made voluntary offerings for the building of Jehovah’s temple.​—1 Chron. 29:9.
2 Why is serving Jehovah with a complete heart so important now, just as it was in ancient Israel? Simply stated, Jehovah favors those who serve him with a complete heart.​—2 Chron. 16:9.
SUPPORT KINGDOM WORK
3 We can serve with a complete heart today by supporting the work of Kingdom preaching. (Matt. 24:14) Giving financial support to this work is important, but using our strength, time, abilities, and power of speech in spreading the good news to others is of even greater value. (2 Cor. 9:7) Are you experiencing the joy that comes from serving with a complete heart?
4 During July we are encouraged to make heartfelt appeals to righteously disposed people as we talk about the Source of true peace and security and present one of the brochures included in our literature offer. In this way, we can show that our heart is complete toward Jehovah and direct meek ones to the real Source of peace.
COULD YOU PIONEER SOON?
5 Can you take advantage of the additional daylight hours to increase your field service time? July may be an excellent month for you to increase your activity in the field so as to qualify for pioneer service.
6 Now that summer is here, many are building up their field service with a view to becoming regular pioneers at the beginning of the new service year in September. If you would like to do that and pioneer service is within your reach, go to Jehovah in prayer and ask for his help and direction. (Prov. 16:3) Talk to the elders about your prospects for regular pioneer service. If you see that your circumstances would allow you to become a regular pioneer, be sure to turn in your application at least 30 days before you wish to begin.
7 Young or old, may all of us show that we are serving Jehovah with a complete heart. We must never let our heart become divided. (Mark 12:30) Our zealous support of the Kingdom-preaching work will aid us in maintaining a complete heart toward Jehovah.

