Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting March 12
Song 153
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the March 15 Watchtower and the March Awake!
15 min: When a Loved One Leaves Jehovah. A talk by an elder based on the September 1, 2006, Watchtower, pages 17-21.
20 min: “Keep Doing This in Remembrance of Me.”a When considering paragraph 3, include comments from the March 2006 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 1, paragraph 3, on how the Bible Teach book may be used to explain the Memorial observance to interested ones we invite.
Song 168 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 19
Song 45
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Review main points from the box “Memorial Reminders” on page 3.
20 min: Ways to Expand Your Ministry. Talk and audience discussion based on chapter 10 of Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will.
15 min: “How Would You Answer?”b Present a brief demonstration of how this feature might be used on occasion during a family study.
Song 216 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 26
Song 115
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for March. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the April 1 Watchtower and the April Awake! along with the special Memorial invitation.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: What Should I Do With My Life? A talk based on the Awake! of July 2006, pages 23-5. Include an interview with one or two persons who pursued full-time service upon graduation from high school. Why did they choose full-time service? What blessings have they enjoyed?
Song 148 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 2
Song 177
10 min: Local announcements. Review the invitation found on the back cover of the April 1, 2007, Watchtower, and encourage publishers to invite interested persons to the special public talk that will be given on April 15.
20 min: Continue to Assist Those Who Attended the Memorial. Talk by an elder. Announce the attendance for the local Memorial, and give an estimate of the number of interested ones who were present. Relate any outstanding experiences regarding those who accepted the special Memorial invitation or approached the attendants after the program to request a Bible study. Offer suggestions on how to give further spiritual assistance to those who attended. (See km 3/06 p. 1, par. 5; km 2/05 p. 4, par. 9; km 2/04 p. 5, par. 16.) Encourage publishers to follow through promptly.
15 min: Make Good Use of the 2007 Yearbook. Talk and audience discussion. Review the main points from “A Letter From the Governing Body.” Point out highlights from the “Worldwide Report.” Arrange in advance for a few publishers to relate reports and experiences that they have found especially upbuilding and faith strengthening. Encourage families to read the entire book progressively during the year. Suggest ways we can use the book to direct new ones to Jehovah’s organization and to encourage them to attend meetings.
Song 179 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

