“How Would You Answer?”
 1. What challenges do many of us face?
1 Do you love God’s Word but find it difficult to remember details about Bible accounts or where specific statements are recorded in the Scriptures? Would you like your children to have a firm grasp of basic Bible facts and teachings? The feature “How Would You Answer?” published each month on page 31 of Awake! can help both young and old to become better acquainted with God’s Word.​—Acts 17:11.
 2. How can the various sections of the “How Would You Answer?” feature be used?
2 How can you make the best use of this feature? The January 2006 issue of Awake! made the following suggestions: “Take a moment to look at page 31 . . . Some sections of the page will appeal to young readers; others will challenge the memory of more advanced Bible students. The section ‘When in History?’ will help you build a time line showing when Bible characters lived and when major events happened. While the answers to the section ‘From This Issue’ will be found throughout the magazine, the answers to most of the other questions will appear on a designated page in the same issue, where they will be printed upside down. Why not do some research before you read those answers and then share with others what you learn? You might even use this new feature, ‘How Would You Answer?’ as a basis for family or group Bible discussions.”
 3. How have some families benefited from this feature, and which sections do you enjoy most?
3 Indeed, many families enjoy using this feature as a basis for family study. One mother writes: “My husband and I thought it would be a good idea to incorporate the ‘Children’s Picture Search’ into our family study to keep it lively and interesting for our three-year-old daughter. It is so much fun watching her excitedly take her personal copy of Awake! and flip through each and every page until she finds what she’s looking for.” A father in Brazil says: “My seven-year-old son and I like this feature in Awake! very much. It has helped Moises to pay attention, to look up Scriptures, to appreciate pictures, and to understand dates.” Ashley, age eight, writes: “Thank you for the ‘How Would You Answer?’ in the back of Awake! I learn a lot about the Bible from it.”
 4. How could a family use this feature to supplement their family Bible study?
4 Why not consider using “How Would You Answer?” occasionally as a part of your family study? You could use the Index or Watchtower Library on CD-ROM to look up the answers to some of the more difficult questions. By doing so, you will be teaching your children how to do research. If you have older children, why not assign them the challenge of researching the answers to “Who Am I?” or “When in History?” prior to the family study? They could then share the fruits of their research during the study. Using this page effectively is one way parents can inculcate God’s Word in their children, helping them to know “the holy writings” from infancy.​—2 Tim. 3:15; Deut. 6:7.

