VOL. XXXIII MARCH 15 No. 6 
A.D. 1912-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

"The Resurrection of the Just and of the 
Unjust" 91 

Resurrection of the Church 91 

Resurrection of the World 91 

Degrees of Sin and Their Punishment 93 

Who Are Thieves and Murderers? 93 

God is Training the Judges Now 94 

A Judge Must Possess Perfect 

Self-Control 94 

"Ye Are The Light of the World" 96 

Love of the Brethren a Crucial Test 98 

Causes of Friction Increasing 98 

Jesus' Soul Resurrected 99 

Which Day is Sabbath? 100 

Man's Seventh Day 101 

The Church's Sabbath Day 101 

Why Men Fear the Second Coming of Christ 101 

Questions Re Atonement 102 

page 90 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. 
Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please 
address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 



reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R4997 : page 90 

BRO. RUSSELL'S SOUTHERN ITINERARY FOR APRIL 

Fri. April 19 Lv. New York 12:30 a.m. Penn. R.R. 
Sat. " 20 Ar. Montgomery 10:40 a.m. W. of Ala. 

20 Lv. " 10:05 p.m. L. & N. 
21 Ar. New Orleans 7:50 a.m. " 

21 Lv. " 9:00 p.m. " 
22 Ar. Birmingham 12:10 noon " 

22 Lv. " 10:30 p.m. Frisco 
23 Ar. Memphis 7:30 a.m. " 

23 Lv. " 9:30 a.m. C.R.I.P. 

23 Ar. Little Rock 1:30 p.m. " 
24 Lv. " 8:45 a.m. " 

24 Ar. Memphis 1:05 p.m. " 
25 Lv. " 6:00 a.m. N.C. & St.L. 

25 Ar. Nashville 1:32 p.m. " 
25 Lv. " 9:30 p.m. Tenn. Cent. 

26 Ar. Knoxville 6:45 a.m. Southern 

27 Lv. " 1:45 p.m. " 

27 Ar. Chattanooga 5:55 p.m. " 
28 Lv. " 3:00 a.m. N.C. & St.L. 

28 Ar. Atlanta 7:10 a.m. " 
28 Lv. " 9:55 p.m. S.A.L. (E. Time) 

Mon. " 29 Ar. Richmond 5:05 p.m. " 
Tue. " 30 Lv. " 4:50 a.m. R.F. & P. 

" " 30 Ar. New York 2:00 p.m. Penn. R.R. 



Sun. 
Mon 
Tue. 

Wed 
Thu. 



Fri. 
Sat. 

Sun. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR APRIL 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
April follow: (1) 165; (2) 130; (3) 91; (4) 82; (5) 89; (6) 
227; (7) 300; (8) 47; (9) 145; (10) 313; (11) 109; (12) 110; 



(13) 78; (14) 331; (15) 325; (16) 12; (17) 107; (18) 27; (19) 
307; (20) 229; (21) 127; (22) vow; (23) 209; (24) 301; (25) 
240; (26) 245; (27) 93; (28) 27; (29) 160; (30) 291. 



R4989 : page 91 

"THE RESURRECTION OF THE JUST AND OF THE UNJUST" 

THE RESURRECTION of the just could not 
mean a resurrection of those who had been 
perfect, for there are none perfect, none 
just, "no, not one." "The resurrection of 
the just," then, must mean the resurrection 
of those who have been justified; and the 
justified are those referred to in the Scriptures 
of whom Abraham was an example. 
Abraham believed God, and was justified 
by faith. It was the faith that justified, 
and the works corroborated the faith. 

So with the Church of this Age. The Apostle says, 
"Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through 
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom, also, we have access by 
faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in 
hope of the glory of God." (Rom. 5:1,2.) We are not 
only justified out of sin, but are also brought by operation 
of our faith into the glorious standing of members of 
Christ; and we may hope to participate with Christ in the 
glories of His Kingdom in the future. It is one thing 
to be freed from guilt, and another thing to be raised 
to the position of sons of God, heirs of God and joint-heirs 
with Christ, our Lord. 

The resurrection of the dead is similarly spoken of in 
John 5:28,29, where we read, "Marvel not at this, for 
the hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves 
shall hear His voice, and shall come forth." The Lord 
does not mean merely all the good, for He also includes 
in this all that are in their graves. We read in the context 
that they that have done good shall come forth "unto 
the resurrection of life"; those who have done evil shall 
come forth to "damnation." The word damnation, in 
the Greek, signifies a crisis, a turning-point, a decision. 

THE RESURRECTION OF THE CHURCH 

Those whose faith enables them to stand through evil 
report and through good report, and who thus fulfil the 
Divine requirement, are character-likenesses of Jesus. 
These now pass from under the condemnation condition to 
the life condition. As the Apostle says, "We know that 
we have passed from death unto life, because we love the 
brethren." (I John 3:14.) This passing from death 
unto life is not in the full sense in the present time. By 
faith we are reckoned dead with Christ, counted members 
of His Body. That future life is reckoned to us. We 



are counted as having it; and this is our condition because 
we have the Divine approval. 

Since there is none good, the only sense in which one 
could "do good" would be by coming into accord with God 
by obedience, as under the Covenant which prevailed 
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, or under the still higher 
Covenant that prevails with the Church in this Gospel 
Age. We have this testimony, that we are pleasing to 
God, who indicates His pleasure by begetting us of the 
Holy Spirit. In contradistinction, the world are aliens, 
foreigners. (Eph. 2:19.) By this Holy Spirit, this 
"unction from the Holy One," therefore, we have the 
evidence of acceptance with the Father. 

The outcome will be, that those having this approval 
of God, having passed the trials and testings which they 
have received— for He receiveth no son whom He does 
not scourge (Heb. 12:6)— and having proved faithful to 
the end, will be raised by the Lord to the very highest 
place— glory, honor and immortality. This is the crown, 
or very highest pinnacle of life that could be imagined. 
So, then, those who will have part in this First Resurrection 
will reign with Christ a thousand years. This 
is the first class mentioned by the Apostle. They are 
approved; they shall come forth to "life resurrection." 

What is the significance of "life resurrection"? We 
answer that these shall come forth to perfect life instantly. 
As St. Paul says, "It is sown in dishonor, it is 
raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in 
power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spirit 
body." Thus instantaneously these blessings come to 
them. They have their trial in the present time and, 
therefore, theirs will be the chief resurrection. 

THE RESURRECTION OF THE WORLD 

But all will have a resurrection. How will the resurrection 
of the world differ from that apportioned to the 
Church? The world has not had the Divine approval; 
the heathen have not had the Divine approval. The 
Apostle says, "How shall they believe in Him of whom 
they have not heard?" (Rom. 10:14.) They are not fit 
for heaven. They are not fit to be with the angels or with 
the saints, no matter how they came to be in this condition. 
They came into this condition because of heredity, 
as children of Adam. But they could not have the same 
kind of resurrection that those will receive who have 
God's approval now, at the time of their death: "Be thou 
faithful unto death and I will give thee a crown of life." 

So with the majority of those in Christian lands. 
They could not be thought to be fit for heaven or to have 
God's approval in any sense of the word. And they know 
it. They confess it themselves. Nobody could deny that 
nine hundred and ninety-nine out of every thousand are 
living "after the flesh." They are not saints, but have 

R4989 : page 92 



the Divine disapproval, some having heard more of the 
Word of God, and some having heard less. 

THE GENERAL RESURRECTION TO BE GRADUAL 

"Those who have done evil" will come forth to the 
resurrection of "damnation" (Greek, krisis), resurrection 
of trial, resurrection of testing. What kind will it be? 
The Scriptures show us that it will be a gradual resurrection. 
During the thousand years of Christ's reign the 
people will be awakening from the sleep in the tomb. 
This awakening will be a preparatory work, not the full 
resurrection, which will require the entire thousand years. 

But the Divine provision is that the account will have 
been settled for the whole world, so that when they shall 
come forth from the tomb in the future they will be in 
the hands of the Redeemer, whose Kingdom will be worldwide. 
They will have the opportunity of being raised 
again to that which was lost. Human perfection was lost, 
which includes not only perfect physical health, but perfect 
mental power; for mental power depends upon the 
brain, is affected by the brain, as well as by the body, so 
that men are now in a dying condition, mentally, morally 
and physically. 

None will be fully raised, from imperfection to perfection, 
until the end of the thousand years. All who will 
respond to the beneficent arrangements will secure that 
which Father Adam enjoyed at first— perfect manhood. 
Those who will not be obedient to the requirements of 
Christ's Kingdom will be cut off in the Second Death. 
They will be destroyed as brute beasts, having had the full 
measure of Divine favor.— 2 Pet. 2:12. 

"And the rest of the dead lived not again until the 
thousand years were finished." (Rev. 20:5.) When the 
sentence came upon Father Adam he was thrust out of 
Eden. All of his children have been born dying, and are 
still in a dying condition. Therefore, the raising of man 
out of sin and death will be the bringing of him to full 
perfection— perfect life. This will be a gradual process. 
They will be made more alive and more alive, and less 
dead and less dead, as the thousand years progress, and 
none will get the resurrection life until they are raised 
to the condition of perfection— perfect life in the image of 
God, which was lost by Adam. 

BURNING OF THE WORLD SYMBOLICAL 

The Scriptures declare that "the earth abideth forever" 
and that "God formed it not in vain; He made it 
to be inhabited." (See Eccl. 1:4; Isa. 45:18.) It has 
not yet reached the blessed condition when it will blossom 
as a rose, although it is in process of completion. At 
the end of the thousand years of Christ's reign, the whole 
earth shall have been brought to perfection. In the 



R4990 : page 92 

prophecies, mountains are symbolical of kingdoms. In 
2 Peter 3:12 the Apostle's words signify that there will 
be a great conflagration and that the heavens also will 
be on fire, but that, nevertheless, there will be a new order 
of things, to take the place of the old order; and under 
this new order of things there shall come a blessing to 
all in the earth. The word "fire," in this sense, signifies 
destruction of the present order of things, of the kosmos— 
not the ge, the earth, but the social system, society as at 
present organized. 

We not infrequently hear people say, "Well, matters 
are getting pretty hot!" Yes, the battle between capital 
and labor is getting hotter, as is evidenced lately in the 
labor troubles, particularly in Great Britain and the United 
States. But the time of conflagration will be such a "time 
of trouble" that it will entirely consume the present order 
of things, a time of trouble, therefore, that will be Epoch-making 
and the new Epoch will be introduced immediately 
thereafter. 

MOUNTAINS SYMBOLIZE KINGDOMS 

We remember riding over the mountains once with an 
Adventist. The Adventist brother said, "Do you not think 
it will be a glorious time when these mountains will be 
brought down to a level?" We said, "Dear brother, the 
mountains are very beautiful, very useful." He said, 
"You cannot raise corn on this mountain." "Well," said 
we, "go to the prairie if you want to raise corn." Then 
he said, "What do you think the Scriptures mean when 
they say that the mountains shall be brought low, and 
when they speak about the melting of the earth"? We 
said, "Dear brother, the 'mountains' there are kingdoms. 
We read that 'the Mountain of the Lord's house shall be 
exalted in the top of the mountains'; it will be the chief 
Mountain or Kingdom."— Isa. 2:2. 

THE RESURRECTION WILL LEVEL ALL CLASSES 

The Psalmist tells us that "the mountains shall be removed 
and carried into the midst of the sea," mountains 
being symbolical of the kingdoms, of the governments of 
the earth, and society in general, the elements which support 
the governments. (Psa. 46.) St. Peter also speaks as 
though the whole world will be consumed by fire. These 
things are symbolical, implying that the people who are 
now in a low condition will be brought up, and that those 
who are high will be brought low. Thus there will be a 
leveling process. 

We remember the statement of the Scripture in 
Zephaniah, "Wait ye upon Me, saith the Lord." Here 
Jehovah is speaking to the Church, telling us that we 
should not be dissatisfied, that we should not be anarchists 
and strife-breeders: I shall attend to this matter Myself. 



You can rest with the present order of things. 

"Wait ye upon Me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise 

up to the prey; for My determination is to gather the nations, 

that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon 

them Mine indignation, even all My fierce anger; for all 

the earth shall be devoured with the fire of My jealousy." 

That this fire is not literal is shown in the next sentence: 

"Then will I turn unto the people a pure Message, that 

they may all call upon the name of the Lord to serve Him 

with one consent."— Zeph. 3:8,9. 

WHEN "THE SPIRIT AND THE BRIDE SAY, 'COME'" 

It will be the work of the thousand years of Messiah's 
reign to thus make known the pure Message of God, the 
pure Word of God. We all see, as we look back, that a 
pure Message of God has not been declared to mankind, 
but creed contradicting creed, making confusion worse 
confounded. The Lord, however, will pour out His Spirit 
upon all flesh, and the knowledge of the Lord shall cover 
the earth as the waters cover the great deep. (Isa. 1 1:9; 
Hab. 2: 14.) As the Revelator puts it, "the river of the 
water of life" will flow freely.— Rev. 21:6; 22:1,2. 

We see that there is no Throne yet established and that 
there is no Bride now. We are waiting for the time to 
come when the Throne will be established and when "the 
water of life" will flow out. In the future it will be "a 
river of the water of life." This cannot take place until 
the second coming of our Lord; consequently, it will be 
after that, in the glorious time of Messiah's Kingdom, 
when the Spirit and the Bride will say, "Come!" The 
election of the Church of God will then have been completed; 
and every creature will come to a knowledge of 

R4990 : page 93 

the Truth and will have the opportunity of attaining to 
the full perfection made possible by the redemptive work 
of Christ. 

THE RELATIONSHIP OF THE CHURCH TO EARTHLY 
SOCIETY 

The spirit condition is spoken of as a heavenly condition 
in the sense that the words heaven and heavenly in 
the Scriptures are used to signify higher. So the heaven 
to which the Church will be taken is this higher condition. 
But the mission of the Church in the next Age is in connection 
with humanity. We are, then, to understand that 
the Lord and the Church will be present, operating through 
human, earthly agents; supervising, overruling. 

We have an example of this invisible power in Satan, 
who has been ruling here for over six thousand years, 
through his agents. His work is a deceptive work. He 
has ruled mankind through ignorance, superstition, etc. 
But the rule of Christ will be the scattering of error, superstition. 



The world shall know the Truth that the Truth 

may make them free. Those who will receive the Truth 

will receive the freedom and will eventually attain the 

liberty which belongs to the sons of God. Men will be 

quite visible to The Christ, but they will be invisible to 

men. It is in respect to these that the Lord said that the 

twelve Apostles shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging 

the twelve tribes of Israel— that the Apostles shall be associates 

with Him in judging and ruling the world. 

Then there is another class: "Ye shall see Abraham 
and Isaac and Jacob and all the Prophets in the Kingdom 
of God"; but our Lord does not say a word about their 
seeing Himself or His Apostles. He and His Apostles 
will be in the invisible phase of the Kingdom. So it is 
written, "Instead of Thy fathers shall be Thy children, 
whom Thou mayestmake Princes in all the earth." (Psa. 45:16.) 
The patriarchs will be considered the children. 
A father is a life-giver. While in one sense of the word 
Abraham and Isaac, etc., might be considered fathers, yet 
by virtue of Christ's redemptive work He will give them 
life and they will be His children; for whoever gives life 
is the father and whoever receives life is the child. They 
will be Princes in all the earth, not on the heavenly plane, 
but on the earthly plane, having obtained the "better resurrection" 
because they were faithful. Each one of them 
will be a sample of perfect manhood; and each one of them 
will be a prince or ruler. Their wisdom will be a wisdom 
superintended by the Church in glory. 

THE OBJECT OF THE INDIVIDUAL TRIAL OF MANKIND 

Mankind will need to be put on trial to see whether or 
not they will accept God's Plan with the knowledge they 
will have received. If they accept they will be adjudged 
worthy of everlasting life. If they fail to come into harmony, 
they will be adjudged worthy of everlasting death. 
But this judgment will be passed by Christ and His Bride. 

So, then, we see that there is a great judgment or trial 
coming to the world to give them the opportunity of 
deciding whether or not they will come into harmony with 
the arrangements of Christ's Kingdom. In the work of 
judging, the Church will be associated with Christ. We 
read that God "hath appointed a day, in which He will 
judge the world in righteousness by that Man whom He 
hath ordained" (Acts 17:31), Christ, the Head, and the 
Church, His Body. Again, "Know ye not that the saints 
shall judge the world?" (I Cor. 6:2.) Therefore our 
own judgment or trial takes place in advance, that we 
may be prepared to try or judge the world; and by the experiences 
through which we have passed, we may be assistful 
to them, as they shall be on trial and under our 
control. 



R4990 : page 93 



DEGREES OF SIN AND THEIR PUNISHMENT 

THE QUESTION is often asked, "Is there 
any special punishment for thieves, murderers 
and other criminals, or will they, if 
repentant, be received into the Kingdom 
along with those who have tried to do 
right throughout their lives?" 

This question can be viewed from two 
standpoints. God Himself is the great 
Determiner of right and wrong. Everything 
that is right God approves; everything 
that is wrong God disapproves. The things that 
God approves are those things that are good, helpful and 
favorable for everybody. The things that God disapproves 
are the things that are wrong, unjust, injurious 
to every one. Therefore God has condemned certain 
things as sin, because He would have us free from 
those things that are unjust or injurious to ourselves or 
to others. Whoever, therefore, commits sin, violates, 
first of all, a Divine command, and to that extent has a 
certain penalty attached to him for that wrong doing. 

We speak of certain persons as "sowing their wild 
oats." What does this expression signify? It means 
that they are now contracting habits which are injurious, 
not only to their own health and happiness, but probably 
to that of others. As a result of practising sin they are 
sure to bring upon themselves a degradation of both mind 
and body. Thus sin brings its own reward in a natural 
way. Whoever sins will suffer, is the general Law. But 
aside from that Law, there is a God, who has given certain 
commands and certain penalties that go with those 
commands. 

R4991 : page 93 

WHO ARE THIEVES AND MURDERERS? 

God's standard of righteousness is much higher than 
is man's present standard. Our Lord gave very fine 
meanings to the words "thief," "adulterer," and "murderer." 
He taught that anyone who is angry with his 
brother without a cause is in danger; that he who looks 
upon another's wife with impure desire has committed 
adultery. (Matt. 5:22,28.) These are very fine distinctions. 
Moreover, we must all admit, as Shakespeare has 
said:— 

"Who steals my purse steals trash; 



But he that filches from me my good name 
Robs me of that which not enriches him, 
And makes me poor indeed." 

Many people have been guilty of stealing the good 



name of others; many have been guilty of murder in the 
sense that they hate others. When it comes to the point 
of deciding who are the most guilty murderers and 
thieves, we are not competent to judge, for we are not 
able to know the qualities of mind and the weaknesses 
with which each person was born. God only could tell the 
degree of wrong in any of these cases. There are some 
people who are, we might say, naturally good; others 
seem to have been born with less patience. Some who, 
naturally, would not get angry with their brother, nor 
with any one, as soon as some one else would, may never 
be in danger of committing murder, either literally or 
figuratively; for they are born with the quality of 
forbearance. 
As these may not manifest any special patience 

R4991 : page 94 

more than that with which they were born, so others may 
manifest special qualities because of the condition in 
which they were born. 

The world has learned the necessity of restraining 
those who are injurious to others. The judgment of the 
people of the State of New York is, according to the 
law, that no murderer shall be at large. He shall be confined; 
for a murderer is not a safe person to permit in 
society. Therefore, he is put into prison or is executed. 
This is the general judgment, outside of God's judgment. 
The best thing for him and the world in general is that he 
go down to hades, sheol— the great state of death, where 
he cannot murder anyone else. The Scriptures agree 
with the laws of the State of New York, that if a man 
commits heinous crimes he should be punished. 

GOD IS TRAINING THE JUDGES NOW 

But so far as taking the position of a judge is concerned, 
we are not capable of doing this. God alone, at 
the present time, knows how much more worthy of punishment 
some are who are in prison than some who are 
out of prison would be for something else. The offense 
of the prisoners might outwardly be the greater crime; 
that of those who are not confined might be just as great 
a crime from the Divine standpoint; for they might be 
sinning against greater light and ability. No one but God 
could tell. Therefore, "Judge nothing before the time." 
-I Cor. 4:5. 

When is "the time"? People are always glad to get the 
chance to judge others. Someone may ask, "When may 
we have the chance to judge? We would like to have it 
now." We reply, "Yours is the wrong spirit. Get rid of 
it or you will never be a judge at all. God is selecting 
another class to be judges— a saintly class that will be 
fully satisfied to judge nothing before the time, but to 
leave everything to Him. He says, "This is the kind I 
want. I will select them." The Apostle says, "Know ye 



not that the saints shall judge the world?"— I Cor. 6:2. 

We shall judge the world, not now, under present 
conditions, but after we shall have been changed in the 
First Resurrection, changed in a moment. The Apostle 
explains what that change will mean to us— "Sown in 
weakness, raised in power; sown in dishonor, raised in 
glory; sown an animal body, raised a spirit body." (I Cor. 15:42-44.) 
When we reach that condition of bodily 
likeness, as well as character-likeness to our Lord, we shall 
be His associates, His Wife, the Royal Priesthood. Then 
there will be plenty of time for us to judge the world. 
All the lessons we get now will only develop us for that 
time. All the experiences we have with ourselves— you 
judging yourself and I myself— the better we shall be 
prepared for the opportunity which God will give us by 
and by. 

A JUDGE MUST POSSESS PERFECT SELF-CONTROL 

Whoever has not learned to rule his own spirit, is in 
no condition to rule others. Whoever has not learned to 
judge his own heart motives and has not put a restraint 
on them to the best of his ability, is not prepared to sit in 
judgment upon another. Those who are now being 
selected of the Lord are not by nature free from imperfections, 
but have many of the same weaknesses that 
others have. 

Nevertheless, they are seeking to judge themselves, to 
be transformed by the renewing of their minds, to get 
self-control, or as the Bible says, to "overcome." All 
those who will be with the Lord in Kingdom glory and 
power and the work of the Millennial Age will be "more 
than conquerors through Him that loved us" and bought 
us with His own "precious blood."— Rom. 8:37; 
I Pet. 1:18,19. 

Various qualities of murder, lust, covetousness, etc., 
are more or less seen in the unbalanced mental and 
moral conditions resulting from the fall. We see how 
this is operating in the whole world. Some are so mentally 
unbalanced they are put into asylums. Some are so 
morally unbalanced they are not permitted to be at large, 
but must of necessity be put into prison. Others are able 
to be about in the world and have their liberty, but they 
are not sound of mind. "There is none righteous; no, 
not one" (Rom. 3:10), is the Bible declaration. 

Since we have learned to appreciate the Bible teaching, 
to see that a great fall came upon our race six thousand 
years ago, and that all are born in sin and "shapen 
in iniquity and in sin did our mothers conceive us" (Psa. 51:5), 
it gives us a great deal of sympathy for many 
poor people; and as we have more strength of character, 
mentally and morally, than some of them, we thank God 
and say, "Who hath made thee to differ?" 

We were, perhaps, born differently from many; and 
what we did not get by heredity, we got through grace; 
so our strength of character is not of ourselves. It is all 



by God's grace that we are better than others; and it is 
not for us to glory, but to give thanks. So we have sympathy 
for murderers, thieves and vagabonds in general; 
and we believe the Lord has. 

This does not mean that we have the kind of sympathy 
which would say, "Open wide the prison doors and 
let every one out!" No, no! Some who have received 
the Truth while in prison have asked us to intercede in 
their behalf, that they might be released; and we have 
answered that we were not sure but that they were better 
where they are; for in prison there is less temptation 
than in the world. Liberty is a good thing; but it 
brings a responsibility and additional trials as well. 

SIN AND DEATH ARE HEREDITARY 

As we consider the weakness and sinfulness of humanity, 
the question naturally arises, "Why is this so?" 
The Scriptures, not the Evolution theory, give us a satisfactory 
answer to the question. 

When God placed our first parents in the Garden of 
Eden, He made this proposition to them: "If you do 
right, as I command, you may continue to live; but if 
you do wrong, contrary to My command, you shall die." 
Our first parents disregarded the Divine command and 
were disobedient. God immediately sentenced them to 
death. Death was the penalty of disobedience. In other 
words, God said, "If you are a sinner I will not permit 
you to live. Those to whom I wish to grant eternal life 
are those who will gladly obey My Law." For, as Jesus 
said, true worshippers will "worship the Father in spirit 
and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship 
Him. "--John 4:23. 

But in addition to having the death sentence passed 
upon him— whether that death come sooner or later- 
Father Adam received other punishment, aside from that 
penalty. Ejected from the Garden of Eden, he was 
brought into contact with thorns and thistles; he labored 
with sweat of face; he had the sorrows and troubles that 
come with the decaying body. All these things were the 
result of sin. 

But so far as God was concerned, the penalty 
of sin was the death sentence merely. In effect God 
had said, "You are not fit to live; you are not fit for 
everlasting life; you shall not have everlasting life." 
But through the sacrifice of His human nature, Jesus, by 
the grace of God, has tasted death for the whole world 

R4991 : page 95 

of mankind— Adam and all his children, all of whom will 
ultimately be redeemed from God's sentence. They will 
be redeemed from death in order that Jesus may, during 
His Messianic reign of one thousand years, lift them up 
out of sin and degradation. 



THE TRANSGRESSOR MAKES HIS OWN WAY HARD 

But do you ever think to what extent man degrades 
himself? To that extent he will be more degraded than 
is necessary; and whenever the time comes for his uplifting, 
the lower he is, the more difficulty there will be in 
getting him up again. Since God's arrangement for lifting 
mankind out of the death condition is that he must 
help himself, each man must labor to rise from his degradation, 
and must be assisted in his labor. But by his own 
efforts he must get out of the difficulty. No man will 
get out by saying, "I would rather be out of this and 
have life." The way back to perfection will be an up-hill 
way. It will not be the narrow way of the present time- 
darkness on every hand, a strait gate, etc.— but a highway, 
an upward way, something favorable to the person 
going up. He cannot roll up, but will be required to put 
forth some effort to get up. He will not be required to 
put forth so much effort in a month or in a year or in 
ten years, as we have to put forth, but he will have a 
good share of the thousand years of Christ's reign in 
which he can gradually rise up out of his imperfection. 

R4992 : page 95 

We, on the contrary, are required to turn from sin to 
righteousness and to make a full sacrifice of ourselves to 
the Lord. Then we must walk in the Narrow Way to 
the best of our ability. In this we have the Master to 
help us; but ours is a short, sharp period of fiery trial; 
and if our trial is hard, we have the assurance that there 
is a great reward to those who come off victorious in 
this battle against self and sin. 

In a word, then, when people die, that is the end of 
things, in one sense of the word, and not an end in another 
sense of the word. When a man is dead he has 
come under the full sentence of the Law, for the Law 
said, "Thou shaltdie." 

THE WORLD'S HOPE IS THE RESURRECTION 

A junk heap represents the condition of humanity, as 
well as it can be represented. Some people will go to a 
junk pile and find a great deal of value there; they can 
do something with this, that and the other thing. Our 
Lord is the greatest Restorer ever known. When His 
Kingdom is set up, He will take over the world of mankind, 
approximately 20,000,000,000 of humanity-Adam 
and his children, all in their broken, fallen condition; 
and then the great work of refreshing and restoring will 
begin. The sawing, the hammering and the filing, if 
you please, will continue during the whole thousand years 
of the Millennial reign. 

So, you see, the condition into which a man gets himself 
now has a great deal to do with his future. Many will 
be so degraded that when they come forth from the tomb 



they will have a very difficult time. Some of these are 
mentioned in the Scriptures. We are told that some will 
come forth to shame and lasting contempt. There are 
many people who will come forth to shame. After they 
had died, many have been found to have been defaulters; 
many people have been found to have indulged in very 
criminal acts; yet perhaps no one knew it while they 
lived. These things came out after their death, and some 
things may not have come out yet; but we may be very 
sure that when the Lord's time shall come for the general 
opening up, there is nothing hidden that will not be 
disclosed. Therefore, keep your records as clear as possible. 
Whatever is there will surely be made manifest, 
is the Lord's declaration of the matter. 

When the world's history shall all be known, some that 
we have thought to be very honest, just people, we may 
find to have been just the reverse; and others who may 
have been thought to be dishonest may be found to have 
been very honest. The judgment of the world is not 
always right. This is one reason why the Lord warns His 
people not to judge at the present time. We are not 
competent now. The Lord will judge in the future. 
When that time comes and the whole world of mankind 
are brought forth to have their trial before the "Great 
White Throne," the books will be opened. Then some 
will have shame, and some will have great contempt, which 
will last just as long as they are contemptible. How long 
will they be contemptible? Just as long as they remain 
in the wrong state of mind. But if they will obey the 
terms and regulations of the Messianic Kingdom they 
will rise daily out of their degradation and meanness, 
coming back more and more to the perfect likeness of 
God in the flesh, as represented in Adam. 

As mankind rise from their fallen condition, so this 
contempt will pass away. At that time people will perhaps 
say, "Well, you know he was a very wicked man in his 
time. He suffered contempt when it was first realized 
what a degraded character he was." Or, "She was a 
wicked woman, but now see what a change has come 
over her! See how well she has gotten along! See 
what effort she is putting forth! See what character she 
is developing!" And all will rejoice to see the change. 

By the end of the Millennial Age, one who was in 
shame and contempt at the beginning will, if he has 
taken the right course, have been lifted up above it. We 
see the principle illustrated in the Scriptures. Saul of 
Tarsus was in shame and contempt because he was a 
murderer and blasphemer. But we do not hold him in 
contempt. Neither do we hold St. Peter in contempt 
because he denied the Lord. At that time it will be said 
of the world just as we say of the Apostles when we 
see what wonderful characters they were afterwards. 
When the world shall have been brought to a knowledge 
of God and His righteousness under the favorable conditions 
of the Kingdom, restitution will take out of them 
all imperfections and give them all the good qualities 



that God originally gave to the perfect man, when God 
said that he was "very good." 

WHO MAY ENTER THE KINGDOM 

But do not the Scriptures say that no murderer shall 
enter the Kingdom of God? Yes. The Scriptures state 
that murderers will not be in the Kingdom, that they will 
be outside— have no part in it— "without are murderers," 
etc. (Rev. 22:14,15.) This statement does not signify 
that a man who has once been a murderer might not 
reform and become a saint and an heir of the Kingdom. 
We have already referred to one murderer mentioned in 
the Scriptures, guilty of the murder of St. Stephen, Saul 
of Tarsus, who afterward became one of the most notable 
Apostles. He was a murderer, the responsibility of 
Stephen's death lay at his feet. He was a member of the 
Sanhedrin and approved of the stoning of Stephen, without 
which approval the latter could not have been stoned. 

So when we read that no drunkard or murderer of 
robber shall enter the Kingdom, the New Jerusalem, how 
shall we understand it? In this way: that when during 
the Millennial Kingdom all mankind shall have the opportunity 
of coming into harmony with God, those who 
maintain a sympathy or love for unrighteousness of any 
kind will not have Divine approval. They will not be 

R4992 : page 96 

permitted to enter within the gate of the City, which 
symbolically represents the Kingdom and the Divine favor. 
Originally, Jerusalem represented the Church. "I will 
show thee the Bride, the Lamb's Wife"; and "the wall 
of the City had twelve foundations [foundation stones], 
and in them the names of the twelve Apostles of the 
Lamb." (Rev. 21:9-14.) But into that City there would 
be brought the good only. 

So all the world of mankind who will come into 
harmony with God will come into that City, into the 
New Jerusalem and Kingdom of God, and outside of 
that City will be found all impure characters. We have 
them pictured in this statement, that liars and murderers, 
etc., shall have their portion in the "lake which burneth 
with fire and brimstone." This "lake of fire and brimstone" 
is as symbolical as is the City. As the City is not a literal 
city of gold, neither is the lake a literal lake of fire and 
brimstone. That City was pictured by Jerusalem, and 
the "fire" by Gehenna. As the offal of the literal city of 
Jerusalem was put into the Valley of Hinnom for destruction 
and for the purification of the city, so all the offal 
of the Millennial Kingdom will be destroyed and be kept 
outside of the Golden Jerusalem. That will be a glorious 
Kingdom, free from anything that would be a blight or 
blemish or sin; and all who love unrighteousness, in any 
sense of the word, will be destroyed in "the lake of fire," 
which is, we are told by the Revelator, the Second Death. 



-Rev. 21:8. 

R4992 : page 96 

"YE ARE THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD" 

"Let your light so shine before men that they may see 
your good works, and glorify your Father which is 
in heaven."— Matt. 5:16. 

WE NOTICE that our Lord's statement in this 

text draws a particularly sharp line of 

demarcation between the Church and the 

world. He is not their Father, but our 

Father; it is not their light, but our light. 

The Lord was addressing the Apostles in 

particular and all the "overcomers" of that 

time. But He gives us elsewhere to understand 

that we who believe the testimony of 

the Apostles are counted in as the same 

class, so that these words are applicable to us also today. 

This statement implies that the class which the Lord 

acknowledges as His disciples have some special light that 

marks them out as light-bearers. This light that has come 

to us is the illumination referred to by the Apostle Paul in 

other places. This illumination that we have received is 

the light of the Holy Spirit. 

One does not receive this light when he says, "I will 
lie no more; I will cheat no more; I will blaspheme no 
more." If anyone were in a state of alienation from 
God it would be very proper for him to turn from these 
sins. But turning from sin would not make one a child 
of God. We know a great mistake is generally made in 
the world by thinking thus. There is only one way of 
coming into this relationship of sons, and that is the way 
that the Scriptures set forth— faith in our Lord Jesus 
Christ, full confidence in the Divine arrangement of which 
He is the Center, a faith which works, a faith which 
would lead us to the point of full consecration— baptism 
into His will. It is the strait gate and narrow way. 

THE LIGHT IS THE HOLY SPIRIT 

No one is in the family of the Lord at the present time 
unless this person has entered through the strait gate into 
the narrow way. Such begin to be marked by the Holy 
Spirit, which illuminates their hearts and minds, giving 
them a clearer light on things in harmony with righteousness. 
This illumination, this light which is in us, the 
Lord says we should be careful lest we lose it. If 
that light should go out, we would be in greater darkness 
than we were before. 

In another place it is written, "Quench not the Spirit." 
(I Thess. 5:19). It could be extinguished entirely. We 



are, therefore, to keep it as an evidence that we are children 

R4993 : page 96 

of God. And if this light be in us we should not keep 
it secret, not put it under a bushel. We should not say, 
"We know not the Man"— we know not Jesus. For if 
any one is ashamed of Him, He will withdraw the light 
from such a one. One who is ashamed of Him and His 
cause is ashamed of everything that is right. Such have 
no right to be in the Church; for the Church are to be the 
Body of Christ and joint-heirs in the Kingdom of glory 
and in the work of judging and uplifting mankind. 

So, then, we must not be ashamed and hide our light 
from the masses of men. We have a new illumination. 
We are to set our light upon a candlestick that all within 
the house— our own family, our own household, our 
neighbors— may see it burning; that they may all know 
that we have a light upon the character and Plan of God; 
that we see the difference between sin and righteousness, 
justice and injustice. 

OUR LIVES SHOULD CONFORM TO OUR PROFESSION 

Whoever holds up a light must of necessity confess the 
light he is holding. Of some our Lord said that they 
confess with their mouths, but deny in their lives. We 
are to let our light so shine that it will bring honor to the 
Father's name. This means that our whole lives are to be 
in conformity with the professions we are making, so that 
others will see and say, "Well, that man believes what he 
preaches. It is good that such a person lives in our neighborhood. 
They may not always prefer us for companions, 
for wherever the children of the light go, it has a 
reproving influence. 

Let us not be surprised, then, if when our neighbors 
have a reception and entertainment they say, "We will 
omit their names, for we shall have some wine and some 
good times, and we do not want them in." We are not to 
expect the world to love us. We are not to marvel if it 
goes to the other extreme. Yet not all of the world will 
hate us. Some will criticize and find fault; others will 
notice a consistency and say, "It looks to me as though 
this is genuine." 

We are living epistles, "known and read of all men." 
(2 Cor. 3:2.) The light is conspicuous because the darkness 
is general. We are not to consider this text as being 
in conflict with that which says we are not to let our left 
hand know what our right hand does, nor do our good 
deeds to be seen of men. There is a difference between 
doing our good deeds to be seen of our neighbors, and in 
doing them to be seen of our Father. The person who is 
doing his good deeds to be seen of men will be noticed 
by people in general, who will say, "Well, I do not believe 
that he means half he says. He is a hypocrite." 

But the person who is living to glorify the Father will 



not do good to win applause for himself. Whatever he 
does in the way of charities, or in visiting the sick, etc., 
he will prefer to do it in an unostentatious manner, making 
as little show about his good deeds as possible. Consequently, 
the result will be beneficial to himself and to 

R4993 : page 97 

the person to whom he ministers, for he does these things 
for the glory of God. 

HOW THE WORLD CAN GLORIFY GOD 

The latter part of the text says, "and glorify your 
Father which is in heaven." It was not the Master's 
expectation that the little light which the disciples would 
let shine would have a convincing effect upon the world, 
and that they would all fall down and bow before the 
Father. Even if the whole world knew about the narrow 
way, only a few would be willing to undertake to walk 
in it. Therefore the Lord hides these things from the 
world, and reveals these secret things respecting the great 
"high calling" to the meek, to the humble, to those 
to whom the knowledge would be most advantageous. 

How do the world, then, glorify the Father which 
is in heaven? How would men glorify our Father? We 
answer that there is a difference between vicious, worldly 
people and well-meaning worldly people. We are inclined 
to believe that the majority of mankind, who are in alienation 
from God and who have no ear to hear the message 
of the "narrow way," have, nevertheless, an appreciation 
of righteousness. And if without too much cost they 
could be righteous, just, generous and all that would be 
noble, as represented in perfect humanity, they would like 
to be so. Many of the world have an appreciation of 
nobility in others. They would like to have it themselves. 
The difficulty is that the cost of righteousness is more 
than they are willing to pay. 

This class say, "We approve the righteous way, but at 
the present time it is too difficult. To walk in it would 
mean the blighting of all our hopes and prospects. We 
would have to consider whether we could make such 
transactions as would bring us prosperity. These things 
are too difficult now. If there was just as much reward 
to do right as to do wrong, we would prefer it. We honor 
God. We honor the principles of righteousness. We see 
some of the principles of righteousness exemplified in 
these peculiar people. They are of God. We appreciate 
these things. Indeed, it is the ideal life. They glorify 
God. Evidently God is a righteous God; and we hope He 
will not do too much harm to us. But we cannot let go 
of the things of this world. Perhaps we may become 
saints before we die. Who knows?" So they have the 
idea that they will be neither too saintly, nor too bad! 

ST. PAUL'S LIGHT SHONE BEFORE RULERS 



The influence of light is christianizing, civilizing, 
uplifting and produces a regard for right, an appreciation 
of right and wrong, a respect for God. But we are not to 
think that the building of cathedrals, etc., has had an 
enlightening influence in the world, nor that the members 
of these institutions have the light. They admit, themselves, 
that they are not saints. Only a small number 
in the world have been saints. 

But this minority has had an influence all down 
through these eighteen hundred years— and it is having 
an influence today. Look at Jesus and the Apostles! 
See how the light from their lives and conduct has had 
an enlightening influence upon the world in leading men 
to honor our Father! Every one of the Body of Christ 
all down the Gospel Age has had light, has had influence 
to some extent and has had something to do with scattering 
the darkness and inculcating reverence for the 
Heavenly Father. 

We see an illustration of this in the Apostle Paul, who 
was suffering for righteousness' sake. He was before the 
Roman Governor; and as St. Paul reasoned of righteousness, 
temperance and the coming judgment, or retribution, 
Felix trembled. He apprehended; he was convinced. He 
said, "Here is a man who is living in harmony with these 
principles of righteousness. The life of this man Paul 
shows what right is, and that my life is wrong. And if 
the Lord is to reward right-doing and punish wrong-doing, 
this Paul will get good things from God. But what 
shall I get?" So he trembled. 

There is a natural dread in mankind because they 
know that they deserve punishment. The Scriptures tell 
us that there will be a righteous recompense of reward. 
St. Paul's words were a great blessing to Felix, for that 
light which was shining out of Paul's life and words led 
Felix to see his wrong condition. He might have thought, 
"It will be altogether right for God to give me some 
punishment for my sins." 

Again, as the Apostle was reasoning before Agrippa 
and Festus, Agrippa said, "Almost thou persuadest me to 
be a Christian." St. Paul said, "I would to God that, not 
only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both 
almost and altogether such as I am, except these bonds." 
(Acts 26:28,29.) Having the thought pass before his 
mind, however, did not make Agrippa a saint. But he 
had heard the things which led him to appreciate his own 
fallen condition. He saw that St. Paul was suffering for 
right-doing and that he was suffering for wrong-doing. 
He saw that God is a God of justice. 

GOSPEL AGE THE CHURCH'S DAY OF VISIT ATION-THE 
MILLENNIUM THE WORLD'S 

Another Scripture somewhat along the same line reads, 
"Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles 
that.. .they may glorify God in the day of visitation." 



(I Pet. 2:12.) This shows us a distinction between the 
day of their visitation and the day of our visitation. This 
Gospel Age, the present life, has become the day of our 
visitation, when in the Divine favor it is the time of forgiveness 
of our sins and of our being brought into relationship 
with the Father. 

No one can have these blessings now except he can 
exercise faith; otherwise he does not have his day of 
visitation now. "We who believe" and "enter into rest" 
are having our "day of visitation." God has come to us 
now, and has adopted us into His family. And His Plan 
is that if it so be that we are willing to suffer with our 
Lord, we shall also reign with Him in glory. This is our 
visitation day of honor. 

Will the remainder of mankind have a day of visitation 
and honor? Most assuredly so; they will have opportunity 
to avail themselves of the redeeming work of our 
Savior. If their ears are not open now to hear and their 
eyes to see, the day will come when this will be so; if not 
now, in the blessed opportunity we have, then it will come 
by and by. But if we have our day of visitation and 
neglect these things; if after having put our "hand to the 
plow" and having received of the good Word of God, we 
look back; and "if we sin wilfully after that we have 
received the knowledge of the Truth, there remaineth no 
more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for 
of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour 
the adversaries" of the Lord.— Heb. 10:26,27. 

But those who do not share in this "day of visitation" 
will have an opportunity of coming into harmony with 
God later. If they cannot be reached by the gentle 
methods mentioned and the visitation by which God is 
calling out the special class now, they will have an opportunity 
in the next Age, when judgment will be laid to the 
line and righteousness to the plummet; when all the 
righteous recompense of reward will be brought to bear, 
to give each one according to his course. 



R4994 : page 98 

LOVE OF THE BRETHREN A CRUCIAL TEST 

"Behold, how good and pleasant it is for brethren 
to dwell together in unity."— Psa. 133:1. 

PSALM 133 is evidently prophetic and seems 
to refer to the brethren in "the Church, 
which is the Body of Christ." This thought 
is implied in the second verse, which says, 
"It is like the precious ointment upon the 
head, that ran down upon the beard, even 
Aaron's beard, that went down to the skirts 
of his garments," which is a picture of the 
Holy Spirit running down over the Body of 



Christ, the Church. 

The Psalm seems to be specially applicable to our day, 
although it has always been a pleasant sight to see 
brethren dwelling together in unity. In times of persecution 
there would be greater unity, because there would be 
fewer likely to attach themselves to the Church; outside 
persecutions would be likely to deter all but the truly 
consecrated. Such persecutions all would be likely to feel, 
and only those who had common interest and common 
cause would be drawn together. 

But as persecution would cease and as more would 
come into the Church, who were not so zealous, the opportunities 
for differences would seem to increase. Although 
today there is much opposition to the children of light, 
there is, apparently, little persecution. The Truth has attracted 
a number, some of whom, probably, are not all 
that they should be. In fact, none of them are what they 
desire to be— copies of God's dear Son; but each and all 
should be striving to attain to the standard. 

CAUSES OF FRICTION INCREASING 

It might at first seem strange that there would be any 
friction between these favored children of God. One 
would suppose that their hearts would be so filled with the 
Holy Spirit that there would be no room for the weeds of 
hatred, envy, strife, jealousy, and that these would be 
crowded out by the fruits of the Spirit. Perhaps such 
was the condition when we first made our consecration; 
and there was no room for these works of the flesh. But 
it seems that the causes of friction are increasing rather 
than diminishing. It is proper, therefore, that we should 
note the source of the difficulty and thus be enabled to 
ward off the danger and to be peacemakers amongst the 
brethren. "Ye that are strong ought to bear the infirmities 
of the weak." (Rom. 15:1.) If this standard be the 
measure, there are not so many strong as we might have 
hoped; therefore, it behooves each of us to become strong 
and helpful to the weak brethren in the Church. 

One thing to be considered is that there is more opportunity 
for friction amongst those who are spirit-begotten 
New Creatures than there is amongst the world, as a 
whole; that is to say, a company of people in the nominal 
Church would find it easier to live together in unity and 
peace than would a company of people more thoroughly 
enlightened, energized by the Truth. This statement 
might seem strange at first, but becomes more apparent 
as we examine. In the nominal Church religion is more 
a matter of form. With nominal Christians it is customary 
to dress up and attend meetings, to sit quietly and 
then to return home. Pleasant things are noticed, as, for 
instance, the sunshine, the flowers, the bonnets. Thus 
the day passes. But with those more enlightened there is 
a greater activity of mind, of thought. We, too, love the 
flowers, and all things provided for us by our Heavenly 
Father. We discuss these— and there is much opportunity 



for discussion; for as no two persons look exactly alike, 
so no two persons think exactly alike. 

Some of the Lord's people boast that they do their own 
thinking. But the wisest course is for us to do our own 
believing. Some subjects are matters of inference and 
not of knowledge. We are taught of God. He tells us 
thus and so in His Word, and, if we accept these propositions 
as they come from the Lord, we can do so without 
too much discussion. It is pleasant, of course, for us to 
philosophize on the teachings of God's Word; it is our 
privilege to believe that which the Lord has stated to us. 
But whatever philosophizing we do should be kept in 
restraint and in harmony with the Divine statement. And 
when we remember that while we are philosophizing each 
other one is philosophizing also, we see where comes in 
the doctrinal difficulty. 

These different doctrinal matters are drawn from the 
Scriptures. But as soon as we begin to reason about the 
things not written, there is danger of conflict. Whoever 
sticks most closely to the Word of God will thereby not 
only do himself good, but will also be able to avoid controversy 
with other brethren and their philosophies. We 
presume that the Lord would not be averse to our having 
certain reflections along certain lines. We are, nevertheless, 
to remember that if we have a thought and present it 
to the brethren, and it does not seem logical to them, we 
are not to force it upon them, nor are they to force their 
views upon us. The difficulty seems to be that there is 
a tendency in such matters to fight each thought to the 
finish, to want everybody to agree with us, whereas 
the proper way is to be content and let the matter rest. 

Each brother has a right to his own opinion. We have 
no right to make our own views tests. The things that 
are tests are the things given us in the Scriptures; as, for 
instance, it is a test with us and as to our standing with 
the brethren that we should believe that Jesus Christ is 
the Anointed One and the Savior of the world; that we 
are to be joint-heirs with Him and share in His inheritance; 
that we are bought with a price; that we are to 
have share with our Lord in the sufferings of this present 
time and in the glories to follow. 

Such plain Scriptural statements are to be the ground 
of our belief, and not any fanciful interpretations put 
on them by some others. Some see the more general outlines; 
some see the details and fail to see the general 
outline. While those who possess the different casts of 
mind are to be neither blamed nor praised, yet they 
must grasp the thought that we are to be willing to suffer 
for the Truth— in our loyalty to God, to the brethren 
and to the Truth in general. 

THE TRUTH ATTRACTS STRONG CHARACTERS 

We are to remember that these brethren who find it 
so difficult to dwell together in unity have this difficulty 
in part because of their real intrinsic worth, or character. 



There are some people whose characters are like putty; 
there are others in whom you can make a momentary 
dent, as in a rubber ball; still others are like diamonds. 
The class that are diamond-like have attained a firmness 
of texture, of character. If we put a number of balls of 
putty, a number of rubber balls and a number of diamonds 
into a pan and shake them well, the diamonds will 
scratch everything with which they come in contact, 
because they are so hard. The Lord is not looking for 
the rubber ball class now nor for the putty class. In due 
time the Lord will deal with all classes— the people who 
are of the putty kind and the people who are of the 
rubber ball kind. But we know that the Truth is appealing 
now only to the jewel class, the diamond class. 

When learning that there is danger of stumbling each 
other, wounding each other, the knowledge should give 

R4994 : page 99 

us wisdom. We should be appreciative of the fact that 
these brethren have real characters, and that they are not 
of the putty kind. Even their differences show character. 
We should try to appreciate the fact and so to exercise 
ourselves as not to irritate them. We are to counsel 
them, and to remember that they, as New Creatures, are 
just as desirous of pleasing the Lord as we are. We 
must, therefore, have patience with each other. There 
is one text in the New Testament which declares, "We 
know that we have passed from death unto life, because 
we love the brethren." (I John 3:14.) The intimation 
is that some of the brethren would be hard to love, and 
that, unless we had passed from death unto life, we would 
be unable to love them. 

The Truth seems to take hold on the stronger characters 
rather than on the weaker ones. The former 
have in their flesh more of the firmness, grittiness and 
combativeness than have many others, who are too pliable 
and "wishy-washy" to be acceptable to the Lord 
as members of the "little flock" of overcomers. Thus we 
see that the very quality which makes us acceptable to 
the Lord and which is one qualification of the overcoming 
position, is a serious disadvantage in some respects, when 
a number of these come together as a Church. 

Even a diamond surrounded by mud would cut nothing, 
would scratch nothing; but place a dozen diamonds together, 
and the more you get rid of the mud element 
the more gritting, scouring and cutting there is likely 
to be. So it is with the Lord's jewels— the more they 
come together, the more they get wakened up, the more 
opportunities there will be for friction, and the greater 
necessity there will be that all be thoroughly imbedded 
in and covered with the Holy Spirit, which, like oil, is 
smooth and unctuous and tends to prevent friction. 



R4994 : page 99 

JESUS' SOUL RESURRECTED 

--I CORINTHIANS 15:1-1 l.-APRIL 1 .- 

Text:— "This Jesus hath God raised up, 
whereof we are all witnesses."— Acts 2:32. 

TODAY'S STUDY leaves the words and 

works of Jesus and, appropriate to the 

Easter season, we are to consider our 

Lord's resurrection. At the very outset 

we are confronted with certain errors which 

have gradually crystallized around the central 

truths of God's Word. One of these 

errors is the supposition that the resurrection 

of the dead, which the Scriptures hold 

forth as the hope of the Church and of the 

world, is to be a resurrection of the bodies which go down 

into death. 

This mistake has given ground for Infidelity to sneer 
at this precious doctrine of the Bible. We are asked, 
How could the dust which once constituted the bodies of 
thousands of millions of humanity ever be re-collected 
and rearranged so that we could say that those bodies 
were resurrected? The infidel urges that many of humanity 
have been eaten by fishes and animals, and many 
other corpses have been absorbed by vegetation, which 
in turn has been eaten time and again by man and beast, 
entering into the many organisms. The proposition is 
manifestly unanswerable, yet it does not refute the Bible 
teaching of the resurrection, but merely our creedal misapprehensions 
of the Bible teaching. What the Bible does 
teach is that the real man is the soul, the being, and that 
he persists while gradually his body keeps changing— 
sloughing off. 

Scientists estimate that the human body undergoes a 
complete change every seven years, so that a man fifty 
years old will have lost seven different bodies through 
natural wastes. None of those bodies was the man himself, 
for he is the soul, the intelligent personality, which 
used those different bodies. According to the Bible, the 
process of rejuvenation would have continued everlastingly 
had man by obedience continued in Divine favor 
and in the enjoyment of the everlasting life promised. 
It was sin, therefore, that brought the death penalty— the 
death of the soul. It was Adam's soul that sinned, it 
was Adam's soul that died. "In the day that thou eatest 
thereof thou shalt surely die"; "The soul that sinneth, 
it shall die." 

The result of this Divine sentence upon man would 
have been extinction— he would have been on the same 
plane as the brute, without a provision for eternal life, 
had not God in great mercy provided a redemption— that 
Jesus Christ by the grace of God should taste death for 



every man. The death which Jesus experienced was exactly 
the same kind as the one which destroyed Adam— 
the soul of Jesus died, as the ransom price for the soul of 
Adam (including Adam's posterity). Thus we read of 
Jesus, "He poured out His soul unto death"; "He made 
His soul an offering for sin." 

It is by virtue of this corresponding price which Jesus 
paid that ultimately Adam and all of his posterity, every 
soul of man, will be granted a release from the death 
penalty— a resurrection from the dead. It will be a resurrection, 
not of the dead bodies, but of the dead souls. 
In the resurrection God will give to each soul a body as 
it has pleased Him.— I Cor. 15:38. 

The few during this Age who have become followers 
of Jesus, begotten of the Holy Spirit, will be granted 
spirit bodies like to the Savior's. The remainder of mankind, 
not having been begotten of the Holy Spirit, will 
in the resurrection be granted human bodies, the same 
as they previously had; and their raising up will bring 
them eventually to all the perfection of the first Adam, 
unless they refuse the grace of God, in which event they 
will die the Second Death, from which there is to be no 
resurrection. 

It is because God has provided for such a resurrection 
of the souls of men that the Scriptures speak of humanity 
as not being dead in the same sense that the brute beasts 
are dead— actually. On the contrary, they speak of the 
souls of men as being asleep— awaiting the resurrection, 
when they shall be quickened to life, in conjunction with 
the bodies which God will supply at that time— earthly 
bodies to mankind in general, heavenly bodies for the 
saintly few who will receive the Kingdom. 

JESUS' SOUL RESURRECTED 

St. Peter on the Day of Pentecost declared that the 
Holy Spirit then bestowed came as a result of our Redeemer's 
death and resurrection and ascension on high. 
It proved that He had appeared in heaven on behalf of 
those who desired to be His followers, His Bride class. 
St. Peter argues backwards to prove that while the sacrifice 
of Jesus, finished at Calvary, was to pay for Divine 
reconciliation, nevertheless there could have been no 
reconciliation if Jesus had remained dead. Hence he 
laid stress upon the fact of His resurrection, and he reminds 
us that this was foretold. The Prophet David declared, 
"Thou wilt not leave My soul in sheol, nor suffer 
Thine Holy One to see corruption."— Acts 2:27. 

R4994 : page 100 

St. Peter's quotation of this, in the Greek, substitutes 
the word hades for sheol, showing that the two words 
have the same meaning— the tomb, the state of the dead. 
St. Peter points out that the Prophet could not have used 
the word respecting himself, because his soul was left in 



hades, and his flesh did see corruption. St. Peter said, 
"David has not ascended into heaven, and his sepulcher 
is with us to this day." (Acts 2:34,29.) He proceeds to 
point out that the words were a prophecy of the resurrection 
of Jesus, that His soul, poured out in death as the 
redemption price for Adam's soul and for the race, was 
not left in death, in sheol, in hades, but He was raised 
from the dead. 

St. Paul tells us that "He was put to death in flesh, 
but quickened in spirit." He declared that Jesus, in His 
resurrection, was exalted to a higher than human nature, 
to a higher than the angelic nature— far above angels 
and principalities and powers— the divine nature. 

OUR DIFFICULTY SOLVED 

Many have supposed that the fact that our Lord appeared 
as a man to His disciples after His resurrection 
proves that He is still a human being, "a little lower than 
the angels." This is a great mistake. He was the 
Church's Forerunner, and St. Paul explains the Church's 
resurrection, saying, "It is sown in weakness, it is raised 
in power; it is sown an animal body, raised a spirit 
body." Hence the resurrection of Jesus must have been 
as a Spirit Being. Again we read, "Now the Lord is that 
Spirit. "-2 Cor. 3:17. 

In considering the Lord's eight appearances to His 
faithful ones after His resurrection, we should remember 
that He had two purposes to serve: (1) He wished 
them to know that He was no longer dead. (2) He also 
wished them to know that, resurrected, He was a Spirit 
Being of the highest order, with all the privileges and 
powers that spirit beings like the angels exercise. As 
angels could materialize and appear in the flesh and then 
disappear, and had done so in the past, so did Jesus. In 
order that they might not misunderstand He appeared in 
different forms; on two of the occasions, in forms representing 
the Crucified One; on the six other occasions, 
in various forms, as the gardener, the sojourner, etc. 

In the last verse of our study the Apostle sums up the 
essence of his preaching, saying, "So we preach and so 
ye believe." This, in the first verse of our study, St. 
Paul calls the Gospel; and the word "Gospel" signifies 
"good tidings," which St. Paul and the other Apostles 
preached, namely, that God, in His own due time, four 
thousand years after sin had entered the world, had provided 
a Redeemer, who had died a ransom price for the 
man Adam. The Redeemer had risen that He might, as 
Jehovah's Anointed One, the Messiah, confer upon the 
human race the blessed opportunity for restitution to all 
that was lost in Adam, and redeemed at Calvary. 

But before this could be accomplished, the Church, the 
Bride class, must be selected from amongst mankind, to 
be the Second Adam's Bride, on the same plane of glory 
as the Second Adam, for the regeneration of all the willing 
and obedient to human perfection— all that was lost. 



R4995 : page 100 

WHICH DAY IS SABBATH? 

--MARK 2:23-3:6. -APRIL 14.- 

Text:— "The Sabbath was made for man, 
and not man for the Sabbath."— Mark 2:27. 

THAT THE BIBLE teaches some important 

lessons respecting the Sabbath is undisputed, 

but what that lesson is is much 

questioned. The fourth commandment of 

the Decalogue refers to the seventh day 

and requires its observance as a day of 

rest, and no more. The Ten Commandments, 

as a whole, were the basis of the 

Law Covenant, compulsory upon every Jew. 

The Jew keeping all of those commandments 

was promised everlasting life. Failure to keep 

them all condemned him afresh. There can be no doubt 

on this point. 

However, in our Lord's time, Jewish religionists had 
become to a considerable degree formalists, and greater 
stress was laid upon the literal commandments than on 
their real spirit, their real meaning. Jesus reproved this 
on several occasions, saying to the Doctors of the Law, 
"You bind heavy burdens upon the people." For instance, 
to hunt for a flea on the Sabbath was construed to be a 
violation of the fourth commandment, a breaking of the 
Sabbath, for it was claimed that the man was hunting as 
truly as though it were a buffalo or a lion. 

Similarly, as mentioned in this lesson, fault was found 
with our Lord's disciples because, passing through a wheat 
field, they rubbed out some of the grains in their hands 
and ate them. This was construed as a violation of the 
Sabbath because it was threshing, winnowing, whether 
the amount was small or great. Jesus did not violate the 
Sabbath ordinance nor teach men so. He was a Jew and 
bound to keep the Sabbath law to the full. He did object 
to such nonsensical misinterpretations as we have 
mentioned. In this study He shows that the Sabbath was 
ordained for man, and that it is a mistake to suppose, as 
some then and some now seem to suppose, that God made 

R4996 : page 100 

man simply to keep the Sabbath. One day of rest to six 
of work was intended for man's comfort and protection, 
and at the same time to symbolize a certain great lesson, 
which we shall note hereafter. 

Jesus, knowing the mental attitude of His hearers in 
respect to ancient customs, supported His teaching by 



citing them to what David did— that in an emergency he 

ate some of the show bread, unlawful except for the 

priests, and that doing so he was not punished, not considered 

blameworthy. Jesus, as the Son of Man, was 

Lord of the Sabbath, and had a right to explain its true 

import. 

Later Jesus went into the synagogue where there was 
a man who had a withered hand and they watched Him 
to see if He would heal him on the Sabbath day, that they 
might accuse Him. Addressing them, Jesus said, "Is it 
lawful to do good on the Sabbath, or to do evil, to save 
life or to kill?" They made no answer. The Savior was 
grieved and angry with a righteous indignation that men 
should so seriously mistake and misrepresent the Divine 
arrangement as to think it sinful to relieve human distress 
on the Sabbath. Then He said to the man, "Stretch 
forth thine hand!" It was healed. But the Pharisees, 
more zealous for their theory than for the truth, for the 
letter of the Law than for the spirit of the Law, were 
angry and took counsel with the Herodians how Jesus 
might be destroyed— be killed. 

LORD OF THE SABBATH 

No commandment was given by Jesus or the Apostles 
to the Church respecting the Sabbath day. The early 
Church evidently did observe the Jewish seventh day in 
many places, and in some places the first day of the week, 
the anniversary of the Lord's resurrection; and sometimes 

R4996 :page 101 

they observed both of these days. But their observance 
was not that of law or command, for the Apostle wrote, 
"Ye are not under law, but under grace." They had the 
privilege of keeping either or both of those days holy, 
sacred to the Lord, resting from earthly affairs and giving 
themselves peculiarly to spiritual matters. 

So with us today. We are glad that one day in the 
week is so generally observed as a day of rest or Sabbath 
(Sabbath day signifies rest day). We are glad that the 
day so generally set apart is the first day of the week, because 
it so beautifully commemorates the Christian's 
hope, attested by our Lord's resurrection from the dead 
on that day. And if God's people had two Sabbaths, or 
seven of them in the week, we believe they would have 
that much more of blessing. 

Indeed, to the Christian, every day is Sabbath, every 
day should be used as holy to the Lord, and nothing should 
at any time be done contrary to the Divine will or the 
principles of the Divine Government. Jesus' declaration 
that He was Lord of the Sabbath reminds us afresh of 
St. Paul's declaration that God the Father rested from 
His own work on the Seventh Day; He left the work entirely 
for Jesus to do. The Seventh Day of Jehovah's 
rest was one of the great Days of the Creative Week, 



each seven thousand years long. Six of these great days 
had passed and man's creation was in the end of the sixth. 

Having established His human son in Eden as the god 
or ruler of the earth, Jehovah rested or ceased from His 
work during the Seventh Day or seventh period of seven 
thousand years. Six thousand years of this seventh period 
have already passed and Jehovah God has rested, ceased 
from His work— He has not interfered to assist man or 
lift him out of sin and degradation. Another thousand 
years of the seven remains, but God will not personally 
engage in man's rescue even then. Why not? Because it 
is a part of the Divine Program to leave fallen man and 
his rescue entirely in the hands of Jesus. He is Lord of 
this Great Seventh Day. 

MAN'S SEVENTH DAY 

This entire period of seven thousand years which constitutes 
the great Seventh Day or Sabbath, with God, is 
divided with man into seven great Days of a thousand 
years each, in six of which he has been under a reign 
of sin and death, toil and suffering; but the Seventh, or 
Sabbath of a thousand years, has been appointed for his 
rescue and uplifting and blessing. In that glorious Seventh 
thousand-year period Jesus is to be Lord. It will 
be the great Antitypical Sabbath, and the great Antitypical 
Jubilee for mankind. The six days of toil will terminate 
in the great Sabbath of Messiah's glorious reign 
and the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

THE CHURCH'S SABBATH DAY 

St. Paul clearly intimates that to the Church, the New 
Creation, every day is a Sabbath day, in the sense that 
God's consecrated people rest as God rests, in faith, in 
hope, in trust that Jesus will eventually deliver the groaning 
creation and bring them into a glorious Sabbath, Rest. 
St. Paul says, "We who believe do enter into rest." Literally, 
we who believe have a perpetual Sabbath. Seven 
days in the week, and fifty-two weeks in the year our 
hearts rest in the Lord and take comfort in the glorious 
promises of His Word through faith. Thus we rest from 
feelings of responsibility and worry on account of the 
world's salvation in exactly the same way that the heavenly 
Father rests. 

We, like the heavenly Father, have the fullest confidence 
that the Redeemer will yet accomplish the blessing 
of all the families of the earth, and bring all the willing 
and obedient into the great Rest Time of the future— the 
thousand years of the Messianic Kingdom, in which the 
world will be released from the slavery of Satan, sin and 
death— in which the groaning creation "will be delivered 
from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty 
of the sons of God"— so many as are willing and obedient. 

But while the Church is thus resting by faith and 
now enjoy a Sabbath, even though, according to the flesh, 



we are passing through tribulation hoping to attain a 

share in Messiah's Kingdom, the Apostle points out that 

"There remaineth a rest for the people of God"— still a 

different one from that which we now enjoy. The actual 

rest or Sabbath will be not merely that of faith and rest 

of heart, it will include also a rest from all labor, while 

our works will follow with us. In other words, the resurrection 

change will bring us full relief from the trials, 

the toils of the way, and usher us fully into the glorious 

blessings of the resurrection state. 



R4996 :page 101 

WHY MEN FEAR THE SECOND COMING OF CHRIST 

ALL MEN realize that they come short of 
perfection. Additionally, nearly all realize 
that in the past of their lives lie crimes 
more or less serious. In the majority of 
minds fear is instinctive. Under proper 
limitations it is a healthy condition. "Let 
us fear lest a promise being left us of entering 
into His [Divine] rest, any of you 
should seem to come short of it." The 
fear [reverence] of the Lord is the beginning 
of wisdom. "-Heb. 4:1; Psa. 111:10. 

But the Adversary has taken advantage of this proper 
and wholesome fear through what the Apostle terms 
"doctrines of devils." Thus from infancy an abnormal, 
irrational fear has obtained a lodgment in nearly every 
mind, heathen and civilized. Of this fear the Lord, 
through the Prophet, says, "Their fear toward Me is 
taught by the precepts of men." (Isa. 29:13.) These 
"precepts of men," or human traditions, have grossly misrepresented 
God and His Word; and alas! many, even 
Bible students, are seriously handicapped by these devilish 
theories established in a period of ignorance and superstition, 
but supposed to be based upon the Divine Word. 

THE TIME OF RESTITUTION IS THE DAY OF JUDGMENT 

Amongst other false theories respecting the second 
coming of Christ we have the view held by our Adventist 
brethren, that the moment of the Lord's coming will be 
the "crack of doom" to the world and the inhabitants 
thereof— marking the end of hope for all not previously 
brought into relationship with God through Christ, as 
saints. And Adventists are not alone in this theory. 
Practically the creeds of all denominations teach the same 
thought, which is the very reverse of the Scripture 
presentation. 

St. Peter describes the time of the second advent and 
the blessings that will then come to mankind. He says, 
"Times of refreshing [greenness— springtime] shall come 



from the presence of the Lord; and He shall send Jesus 
Christ, which before was preached unto you, whom the 
heaven must receive [retain], until the Times of Restitution 
of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth 
of all His holy Prophets since the world began."— 
Acts 3:19-21. 

The Scriptures teach that Christ Jesus and His glorified 
Church will together "judge the world." (Acts 17:31; 
I Cor. 6:2.) The judging of the world is commonly supposed 

R4997 : page 102 

to signify a condemning, or damning of the world. 
The real thought, however, is that having condemned the 
whole world through one man's disobedience, God has 
arranged that the entire race of Adam shall have a full 
fair, personal trial for life or death everlasting, as a result 
of the redemption accomplished by our Lord Jesus. If 
God had shown no mercy, there would have been no 
redemption and no future judgment. The trial of Adam 
six thousand years ago had its result and its penalty, 
under which sin and death have reigned for six thousand 
years. 

Having provided the Redeemer, God is about to establish 
the Messianic Kingdom for the very purpose of 
giving to all humanity a special, personal opportunity for 
reformation, uplift, sanctification and the attainment thus 
of life everlasting. Only the preliminary steps of this 
great plan have yet been taken: 

(1) The Redeemer has died, the Just for the unjust. 
-I Pet. 3:18. 

(2) He has appeared in the presence of God for us, 

the Church, and thus, as our Advocate, has made it possible 
for us to become His Bride, or, under another figure, 
"members of His Body."-Heb. 9:24; 2 Cor. 11:2; 
I Cor. 12:12. 

(3) This offer, or opportunity for the Church, has 
separated from the world all those who accept this High 
Calling. They become Spirit-begotten children of God 
and, prospectively, joint-heirs with Jesus. They now 
share with the Redeemer in sacrificing the earthly life 
and, if faithful, will by and by be granted a share with 
Him in the glorious work of His Kingdom— the judging 
of the world— the giving of the world a fair, impartial 
trial for life everlasting or death everlasting.— Rom. 8:17. 

"WHO SHALL STAND WHEN HE APPEARETH?" 

However, there is another side to this question. The 
Scriptures indicate that at His Second Coming only the 
saintly ones will be ready to receive the Master with joy; 
that at that time the masses of mankind will be so associated 
with sin and injustice that, instead of being worthy 
of His approval, their course in life will come under 
reprobation and stripes. Hence, it is written, "Go to now, 
ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall 



come upon you"; "Woe unto you that are full now."— 
Jas. 5:1; Luke 6:25. 

Babylon the Great is to fall; and the wonderful institutions 
of civilization, which are partly good and partly 
bad, will be found only partly satisfactory to the new King 
and the rulers of His Government. This will mean that 
many who are now stewards of wealth, influence, position, 
honor of men, etc., will be called to account and dispossessed 
of their stewardship. Their realization of their 
losses is figuratively represented in the Scriptures as wailing 
and howling and misery, as that class will suffer the 
loss of practically all upon which they are now setting 
their affections. 

We are not saying that the poor are more righteous 
than the rich, but this class are more numerous; and 
those who have little of this world's goods and who are 
used to trials and scarcity will probably feel less the great 
time of trouble impending than will some who have long 
rested in the lap of luxury. 

Under various symbolic figures the Bible graphically 
pictures this day of trouble which is approaching— as a 
whirlwind, as a fire, as a tempest, as a flood, as a "time of 
trouble such as never was since there was a nation." That 
this great day is near, and "hasteth greatly," has been distinctly 
shown recently and is shown again today in the labor 
disturbances of Great Britain. There a startled world 
has been given a glimpse of the fires of passion and anger 
and resentment which are smouldering beneath the surface 
and which will shortly envelop the world in a fiery 
trial, the like of which the past has never known.— 
Dan. 12:1. 

"HE SHALL JUDGE THE WORLD IN RIGHTEOUSNESS" 

From this standpoint the apprehensions of mankind 
are well based in respect to the Great King's disapproval 
of much that is carried on in the world in the name of 
civilization, yea, in the Master's own name! But let us 
not dwell too much upon this side of the question. "Sufficient 
unto the day is the evil thereof." Let us rather 
point men to the glorious silver lining to that dark cloud 
which draws daily nearer and nearer. Let us point men 
to the glorious blessings of Messiah's Kingdom, and teach 
them to pray, "Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done," 
and to strive to understand and appreciate the principles 
governing that Kingdom; peradventure they may pass 
through the time of trouble with the less injury. 

Hearken to the words of the Prophet (referring not at 
all to the Church, which is accounted worthy to escape 
those things coming upon the world, but speaking to 
mankind in general and exhorting the better element of 
the world), "Seek righteousness, seek meekness; it 
may be that ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord's 
anger." (Zeph. 2:3.) It surely will be true that the 
more meek and more righteous men may be the better 
they will be prepared for the awful shock and terrible distress 



of that day of trouble, which as a plowshare will 
prepare the hearts of mankind to receive the good seed- 
the Message of Divine Truth and Grace, which then 
will be made known to every creature. 



R4997 : page 102 

QUESTIONS RE ATONEMENT 

A DEAR BROTHER asks some questions, the 
answers to which, we believe, will be helpful, 
both to himself and to others— either 
by confirming their understanding of the 
Truth or by correcting misunderstanding. 
We trust that the answers will be helpful 
to many of our readers:— 

Question.— Would it be right to say that 
all the merit of our Lord's sacrifice is 
imputed to each and every individual when 
Scripturally he becomes a believer? 

Answer.— No; the entire merit of our Lord's death 
was already in the hands of Justice when Jesus ascended 
up on high, but it was not applied in any degree nor to 
any person. According to the Divine intention that merit 
is to be applied for Adam's original sin and for all the 
sins of his children, which are the result directly or indirectly 
of original sin. Thus we might say that every 
member of Adam's race has a personal, individual interest 
or share in that redemptive merit, coming to him by 
Divine arrangement. 

Our Lord left the early Church with the instruction 
that they should tarry at Jerusalem for the anointing of 
the Holy Spirit, the evidence of their forgiveness of sins 
and of their adoption as children of God. He ascended 
on high and appeared in the presence of the Father— for 
the entire Church of the First-borns. The imputation of 
His merit was for them all, as well as for the representative 
few of the Lord's followers who waited for the 
blessing in the "upper room." 

R4997 : page 103 

Question.— You have pointed out that no less than 
the full merit of Christ would be sufficient for the sins 
of any individual of the human family. How, then, shall 
we think of sub-dividing this merit amongst these various 
individuals composing the Church of the First-borns and 
amongst the individuals who will compose the restitution 
class of the future? 

Answer.— The placing of the entire merit of Christ 
in the hands of Justice guarantees to Justice a full satisfaction 
for all the Adamic weaknesses of all mankind- 
even before that merit is specifically appropriated. And 
since the Church was a part of the world, for whom the 



sacrificial merit is a sufficient price, God could be just in 

imputing to each one coming in the name and merit of 

Jesus a sufficiency of His merit to make up for the imperfections 

and shortcomings; and so of this entire class 

—"the Church of the First-borns." The imputation of this 

merit to the Church as separate and apart from the world 

engages and obligates that merit for awhile in making 

good the imperfections of the flesh of the Church, so as to 

permit this class to offer to God a justified, and, therefore, 

an acceptable sacrifice. 

But this is merely imputed or loaned to the Church, 
because the Church does not wish to keep the earthly rights 
of Jesus. The Church wishes to sacrifice its all and thus 
to follow the example of Jesus. And the great High 
Priest imputes to them enough of His merit to make the 
Church's offering acceptable when offered by the High 
Priest. When all of the Church of the First-borns shall 
have attained to the rewards of the spirit nature, all of 
the merit of the High Priest, Jesus, will be released, so 
far as they are concerned— the whole amount will again 
be free in the hands of Justice, as it was when Jesus 
ascended up on high. 



R4998 : page 103 

Question.— Would it be correct to say that the merit 
of Christ cannot be compared to a garment or robe until 
after consecration? 

Answer.— A robe is a covering. The wedding robe of 
the parable represents our Lord's merit imputed to His 
people as a covering for their blemishes or imperfections 
of the flesh. This robe takes cognizance of the Church 
as the prospective Bride who acknowledges the Headship 
of Jesus her Lord. Another figure represents the members 
of the Church as wearing white robes and hoods or bonnets, 
the illustration of the under-priesthood. In this 
figure the priests represent the brethren or Body members 
and indicate that they are not independent, but under and 
subject to the Headship of Jesus. 

The robe of Christ's righteousness imputed to the 
Church as a covering for her blemishes and to make 
her acceptable gives place to or becomes transformed 
into a robe of her own righteousness, in the resurrection. 
As our Lord Jesus is represented as robed in white linen, 
so the Bride is pictured as arrayed in fine linen, "the 
righteousness of the saints." The imputed robe merely 
covers our fleshly blemishes and imperfections in the 
present time. 

The new body which God will give us in the 
resurrection will be perfect of itself and need no imputation 
of the merit of Jesus. The spirit body of those 
who will attain to the "first resurrection" will be absolute, 
complete, perfect, as was the resurrection body of Jesus. 
The robe of Christ's righteousness, imputed to cover our 



fleshly imperfections, we will need no more, because we 
will no longer have the fleshly imperfections. 

The new robe is said to be embroidered. And this 
figure carries with it our endeavors at the present time 
to develop the character-likeness of Jesus— to perfection, 
in the spirit. As we read, "It (the New Creature, the 
soul) is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is 
sown in dishonor, raised in glory; it is sown an animal 
body (needing the imputation of Jesus' merit); it is raised 
a spirit body" (in full possession of a merit of its own). 



Question.— Will any of those found worthy of a place 
in the Bride company wear Christ's robe of righteousness? 

Answer.— We understand that all who make the consecration 
do so and are accepted, in one hope of their 
calling, and that that one hope is the hope of being a 
member of the Bride class and joint-heir with Christ. 
The fact that there will be a "great company" is a special 
favor ordained of the Lord in the interest of those who do 
not prove sufficiently zealous to be counted in with Jesus 
as "more than conquerors." 

The "great company" of Revelation 7:9 is composed of 
such as fail to come up to the highest standard of sacrifice 
required of the Lord, but who, nevertheless, will 
prove not unfaithful in their final test. These are said 
to have not kept their garments unspotted from the world; 
hence the requirement that they shall wash them in the 
blood of the Lamb— prove their loyalty under discipline 
and stress, having failed to prove it by voluntary obedience 
unto sacrifice. Thus both the Bride and her virgins who 
follow her all wear the Bridegroom's robe (justification) 
in the present life. And all in the future life will attain 
perfection on their own account. 

This imputed robe will not be needed by the "great 
company" after they shall have experienced their "change" 
to the spirit condition; for they, too, will be changed, in 
a moment and thereafter possess an individual perfection 
of their own. 



Question.— Will not the Church when she shall have 
passed under the veil have all the merit of Christ in her 
hand to put on the mercy-seat? 

Answer.— No; the Church has nothing whatever to do 
with atoning for sin, even as the under-priests had nothing 
whatever to do with the presentations of the Day of 
Atonement blood on the propitiatory. 

A correct view of the matter, we believe, is this: The 
High Priest, Jesus, ascended on high and made imputation 
of His merit to the Church. Those who waited in 
the "upper room" for the Pentecostal blessing had presented 
themselves before God, desiring to be accepted of 
Him as sacrifices. They did not sacrifice themselves, 



they merely presented themselves for sacrifice. Thus 
we read, "I beseech you, brethren, that you present your 
bodies living sacrifices." The presentation matter is ours, 
not the Lord's; the acceptance of the offering as a sacrifice 
is wholly the Lord's— the High Priest's work. With the 
acceptance of our flesh as a sacrifice we cease to be as 
men and thenceforth in the sight of God and of each 
other we are living members of the Anointed One— the 
High Priest. 

The High Priest accepted the Church as a whole 
through its presentation at Pentecost. And in harmony 
with the Scriptures we come into this favor or 
grace, which remains open until the last member of the 
Body of Christ shall be perfected and pass beyond the 
veil. The work beyond the veil will not be ours as under-priests. 
It will be the work of the High Priest to sprinkle 
the blood of the Lord's goat as He sprinkled the blood of 
the bullock. The figure of the "Bride" is to be distinctly 
eliminated in any thought of sacrifice, and is to be merely 
associated with the Redeemer and Bridegroom, as joint-heir 
in His Kingdom. The figure of the under-priests 
is the one which applies to the Church in respect to all 
sacrificial matters. 



page 105 


