“I’m Not Interested”​—Why?
“I’M NOT interested.” Have you ever said that when one of Jehovah’s Christian witnesses called at your door? As a matter of fact, that was my own first reaction when visited by Jehovah’s witnesses. But what was it that did not interest me? What moved you to say, “I’m not interested”?
What is it that Jehovah’s witnesses want to talk about when they call at one’s home? They want to share good news of how God’s kingdom in the very near future will make this earth a grand Paradise. Gone will be all unrighteous persons, all doers of evil, all fomenters of war and violence. Yes, the Witnesses want to tell people how they can enjoy lasting peace and security, and attain to perfect health and everlasting life in an earth-wide Eden.
Is this too hard to believe to be of interest to you? Well, most people have some interest in even what they view as unbelievable things. Why do they see fanciful films at the movies and on TV and read fiction in books and magazines? They like to escape from reality into an imaginary world. So it cannot be merely because the message presented by the Witnesses seems unbelievable that they say they are not interested.
Is it because they do not need the grand things that God’s Word promises? Well, think about that for a moment. Do we not all need peace, and freedom from evildoers? Do we not need security? Do we not need good health and, above all, a sound basis for hope as to the future? The time comes in the life of everyone when he becomes keenly aware of such needs. Thus, the need is there, and a need is a basic want. So, basically, people want these things too.
But even if everyone wanted God’s crime-free, war-free new order of things with its hope of living forever in vibrant health, could it be that they are not interested in the means to realize it all? But does that seem likely? To illustrate: If our car has run out of gasoline on a solitary road, are we not interested in almost any offer of a ride to the nearest gasoline station​—in a truck, a tractor, even an oxcart? Yes, we want the ride, and we do not ask for extravagance, convenience, not even a normal means to get there. The important thing is to use the means at hand, which can really take us where we need to go and want to go.
So, as far as good sense is concerned, there is no real reason for the “I’m not interested” attitude. There must be some hidden motivation behind it.
Prejudice​—a Hindrance to Investigation
A reason for saying “I’m not interested”​—one that I feel was partly true in my case—​has to do with prejudice. We all want to be accurately informed so as to make correct decisions and be considered experienced and competent. But how scrupulous are we in the field of information?
For instance, do we really assure ourselves of the truthfulness of the information we have, when there is an opportunity? Or are we inclined to accept unhesitatingly what esteemed persons or popular books, magazines and newspapers say? Do we easily form our outlook on things according to the conventional, popular attitude, like following the fashions? And when confronted with a different outlook, are we really willing to consider the arguments and reasons behind it before judging it? Are we not apt to hold fast to the mental picture, the “image” of things, we already have created within us?
For example, when a witness of Jehovah calls at their home, many persons follow the same pattern of behavior. As I did, they answer, “I’m not interested,” because they have their “image” ready, they believe they know what it is about, what sort of people those Witnesses are and for what they stand. But, how do they know?
Experience shows that they often think they know, because they have been told by other persons who thought they knew because they had been told by other persons who thought they knew, and so on and on. So, when the Witness suddenly appears at their door, they quickly recollect their “image” of the Witnesses. They think their “image” is the right one, and, as people are apt to remember and pass on to others the disparaging things they hear, this “image” is often unfavorable enough to motivate an immediate rejection. “I’m not interested, that’s all, thank you.”
Prejudices are very hard to eradicate because they are so deep rooted. The bearer is convinced that these prejudices do not even exist. Even if he were asked why he is not interested, a prejudiced person seldom is willing to explain, but often irritatedly terminates the visit by closing the door.
The Easiest Way Out
Other persons may say, “I’m not interested,” because they feel it is the easiest way out.
A discussion with a Witness might demand a mental effort that they are not ready and willing to expend. They might feel pressed too because they have their mind set on other things at the moment and do not want to be tuned in to another wavelength. So they resort to an excuse that is only a more polished way to postpone a decision or to withdraw completely. They do not want to experience the unpleasantness of saying a firm “No.”
Why There Is Fear of Something New
Many persons do not readily accept new ideas, new ways of thinking. They have been conditioned to behave in the old ways. They are bound by tradition. Established habits are “natural,” and the old ways are easy ways to them. Familiar things are normally considered safe things. Even if many are tired of the old, they fear the new and prefer to stick to the old. Their church may well seem lacking and uninspiring, boring to them, but it is still their “old church” and therefore they feel they should stick with it. So, why bother about something new?
Even if the Witness would explain to them that the religion he advocates is older than the oldest church in the community, it still seems new because it is something unfamiliar to them. Thus, their “I’m not interested” actually means: “I have my church. I stick to it, come what may. Please, leave me alone.”
Feeling of Inferiority
Some people feel inferior and hesitate to enter a discussion on a certain subject because they think they lack the knowledge and experience needed.
For example, they may not be well acquainted with religious matters, and they think that a discussion with a Witness would show up their ignorance. Man’s inclination to assert himself and retain a respected standing with those around him often makes him reason that discretion is the better part of valor. So instead of getting involved in something that he has not mastered, he decides to withdraw at once by saying: “I’m not interested.”
A Way That Interested Me
Of course, there are many other explanations behind the “I’m not interested” attitude, such as an excuse of not having time, feeling sick, indisposed or being afraid of what the neighbors would think or say. When I myself raised that same objection years ago, the Witness kindly asked me: “Please, tell me honestly, what is it you are not interested in?”
At first I was a little startled at the question but answered: “In Jehovah’s witnesses.”
“Well,” said the Witness, “let us then talk about something else, something I know you as a young lad must be greatly interested in.”
“And what could that be?” I asked.
“Your future,” was the answer.
“So what do you know about my future?” I replied.
“That it could be very happy. Please, give me a few minutes to show you from the Bible. . . .” And so the discussion began.
The Witness appealed to something I just could not deny was of interest to me. He did not press me to do anything, and he did not raise any objection to my objection. Instead he awoke curiosity, and that caught my interest.
So, are you interested in your future? Then listen to what the Christian witnesses of Jehovah have to tell you from the Bible. They speak promises of “everlasting life” that come from Almighty God and about a grand future you can have. And because these promises come from the God “who cannot lie” you can have confidence in them.​—Titus 1:2; Rev. 21:3, 4.
Yes, the sure hope of a Paradise earth with radiant health and life everlasting can be yours. However, you need to know that the Bible calls for action​—now, in order for you to enjoy a happy future. This is because little time remains for this system of things before it crashes in total ruin at the “great tribulation,” which Jesus Christ foretold. (Matt. 24:21; Mark 13:19) Why not let Jehovah’s witnesses help you to attain the happy future you seek while there is still time?​—Contributed.

