An Aged Man Whose Faith Was Rewarded
ANTICIPATION was running high. The time was drawing close for one of the grandest happenings of human history. This event had been foretold centuries in advance. What was it? The appearance of the Messiah, or the Christ.
The prophecy of Daniel indicated that the Messiah would arrive sixty-nine weeks of years after the command to rebuild the walls of the city of Jerusalem. (Dan. 9:25) Calculating from Nehemiah’s rebuilding of those walls, this pointed to what is now known as the year 29 C.E.
So toward the close of the first century B.C.E. there was little prospect for aged Jews to live long enough to see the fulfillment of their cherished hope regarding the Messiah. Yet certain aged men and women looked forward to it in faith and with the fervent desire to witness it. Among them was Simeon. The Bible describes him as “righteous and reverent, waiting for Israel’s consolation.” (Luke 2:25) Though Simeon doubtless died before Jesus was anointed by God’s spirit and thus became the promised Messiah, or Christ, his unshakable faith that the Messiah would come was rewarded. How?
Jehovah God took note of Simeon’s outstanding faith and favored him with a special revelation. By means of his spirit, the Most High made known to him that he would not die before actually seeing the Christ. (Luke 2:26) What a thrilling prospect!
One day, under the impelling power of God’s spirit, Simeon came into the temple area. It just so happened that a poor married couple, with an infant, also arrived. From outward appearance, the man, his wife and the baby boy were nothing special. The situation seemed quite ordinary, for a Jewish mother was required by law to offer sacrifice at the conclusion of a forty-day purification period after the birth of a male.​—Luke 2:27.
In actuality, though, something remarkable had taken place, something that Simeon viewed as ample reward for his faith. The full significance of this was made manifest to him through holy spirit. The infant was none other than the one who was destined to be the Messiah, the Christ. With joy Simeon accepted the babe into his arms and, compelled by God’s spirit, said: “Now, Sovereign Lord, you are letting your slave go free in peace according to your declaration; because my eyes have seen your means of saving that you have made ready in the sight of all the peoples, a light for removing the veil from the nations and a glory of your people Israel.”​—Luke 2:29-32.
By reason of the privilege extended to him, Simeon felt an inward peace or tranquillity. He now knew for a certainty that God’s marvelous means of salvation had been provided. He had seen the child with his own eyes and felt it with his own hands. Simeon’s prophetic words that enlightenment would come even to the nations that were in darkness, without knowledge of God and in sin, harmonized fully with the Hebrew Scriptures. For example, regarding the Messianic “servant,” Isaiah 42:6 states: “I myself, Jehovah, have called you in righteousness, and I proceeded to take hold of your hand. And I shall safeguard you and give you as a covenant of the people, as a light of the nations.”
Next, Simeon blessed Joseph and Mary, evidently wishing them God’s blessing in fulfilling their responsibilities toward the child. Directing his attention particularly to Mary, Simeon continued: “Look! This one is laid for the fall and the rising again of many in Israel and for a sign to be talked against (yes, a long sword will be run through the soul of you yourself), in order that the reasonings of many hearts may be uncovered.” (Luke 2:34, 35) Yes, the appearance of Messiah would affect his own people in radically different ways.
As had been pointed to earlier in prophecy, there would be many who would stumble over him, remaining unrepentant and unbelieving. The prophet Isaiah recorded these words: “He must become . . . as a stone to strike against and as a rock over which to stumble to both the houses of Israel, as a trap and as a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And many among them will be certain to stumble and to fall and be broken, and to be snared and caught.” (Isa. 8:14, 15) To unbelievers, Jesus would be as a “sign” or object of contempt, someone to revile and reproach. Others, however, by putting faith in him were to be ‘lifted up’ from a state of being dead in trespasses and sins, to enjoy a righteous standing with God.
The actions that people would take toward the Messiah would reveal just what was in their hearts. As Simeon said: “In order that the reasonings of many hearts may be uncovered.”​—Luke 2:35.
The fact that Jesus would be rejected by the majority would have an especially distressing effect on Mary. Simeon directed attention to this, saying: “A long sword will be run through the soul of you yourself.” (Luke 2:35) How painful it must have been for Mary to see Jesus nailed to a stake like a criminal of the worst kind! This was comparable to having a sword run through her.
Truly Simeon was highly favored in being able to see the infant Jesus and, then, to be inspired to utter prophecy that would be especially strengthening to Mary as she witnessed these indignities brought upon her firstborn son.
For us today God’s dealing with Simeon should be faith-strengthening. During his lifetime, a person may not see the complete fulfillment of all his cherished hopes based on Jehovah’s unfailing promises. Nevertheless, he can rest assured that the Most High will not forget his efforts to serve in faithfulness. Whatever blessings and guidance he does receive during his life of loyal service will be enough to show that he has a sure prospect of a resurrection from the dead, with eternal life in view.
The unchangeable God cares just as much about his faithful servants today as he did for Simeon. Hence, the Bible urges: “Throw all your anxiety upon him, because he cares for you.” (1 Pet. 5:7) Like the aged Simeon, we can look forward to a rich reward for our faith. What fine encouragement this is for all of us to continue living in harmony with our God-given hope, proving ourselves to be “righteous and reverent” as was Simeon!

