Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● What is meant by the petition, “Do not bring us into temptation”?​—Matt. 6:13.
This is a request that God might remember us in time of trial, calling to our minds the strong warnings of his Word so that we do not yield to temptation. It is really a petition to be strengthened by the Most High to endure and not be permitted to succumb to a trialsome circumstance.​—P. 516.a
● How should we approach Jehovah God in prayer?
This should be in the name of Jesus Christ and with deep respect, free from needless repetitions, appreciating that Jehovah is the almighty Creator and Supreme Sovereign.​—P. 547.
● At 2 Corinthians 10:4, what kind of warfare did Paul have in mind when he wrote that “the weapons of our warfare are not fleshly”?
As shown by the context, Paul was discussing spiritual warfare carried on in the congregation to protect its members from destructive, false reasonings and teachings. In such warfare no fleshly weapons​—cunning, trickery or high-sounding language—​are used. The main weapon is the “sword of the spirit,” God’s message or word.​—Pp. 585, 586.
● What makes our “sacred service” complete?
We must both declare the “good news” contained in the Bible and live in such a way as to bring glory to Jehovah God.​—P. 598.
● Why were early Christians persecuted by the Roman ruling authorities?
The early Christians gave Jehovah God exclusive devotion and refused to worship the emperor. This was regarded by the Roman authorities as meaning that Christians were politically disloyal and, therefore, deserved the severest punishment.​—P. 634.
● What is the source of the idea that the human soul is immortal?
This is not the Bible, which plainly teaches that the soul dies. (Ezek. 18:4, 20) Christendom’s theologians got this teaching from the thinking of the Greek philosopher Plato, who, in turn, adopted it from mystery religions originating in ancient Babylon.​—Pp. 652, 653.
● What is signified by the fact that the “wild beast” of Revelation 13:1 ascended “out of the sea”?
As is evident from Isaiah 57:20, 21, the “sea” represents humanity alienated from God, humanity that, because of dissatisfaction, is as restless as the sea. Hence, the “wild beast,” or political rule as a whole, is shown to be of human, not divine, source.​—P. 657.
● How can true Christians defend themselves against defamers?
By maintaining praiseworthy conduct and continuing to make a calm, positive presentation of the Bible’s teaching.​—P. 703.
● What makes one a practicer of sin?
As long as a person is committing serious wrongs or has not come to the point of repentance, he is living in sin. His record of sin stands against him.​—P. 726.
● What is the “city having real foundations” that Abraham was awaiting, and how will he attain it?
It is God’s government. Abraham will attain it upon being raised from the dead, thereby coming under the absolute rule of that city, God’s kingdom by Christ.​—P. 746.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1976.

