





YOUNG PEOPLE ASK
How Can the Bible Help Me?—Part 3: Get the Most From Your Bible Reading


When you look inside the Bible, you will notice a lot of text. Don’t be overwhelmed by that! Instead, think of the Bible as a fully stocked buffet table. You can’t eat everything you see. But you can select enough for a satisfying meal.
To benefit fully from a Bible “meal,” you need to concentrate on what you read. This article will help you do that.
In this article
Why concentrate on what you read in the Bible?

How can you benefit fully from Bible reading?

What your peers say


Why concentrate on what you read in the Bible?
The more you put into your Bible reading, the more you will get out of it. Think of this comparison: You can dip a tea bag in hot water briefly and get some flavor. But you will get more if you let it steep for a while.





It’s similar with Bible reading. Instead of dipping in and out quickly, let your mind and heart dwell on the material. That is what the writer of Psalm 119 did. Regarding God’s law, he said: “I ponder over it all day long.”—Psalm 119:97.
Of course, that doesn’t mean that you literally need to devote an entire day to reading and thinking about the Bible. Here’s the point: The psalmist took time to think about God’s Word. Doing so helped him to make good decisions.—Psalm 119:98-100.
“My mother once told me, ‘You have seven days in a week, and during that week you do many things for yourself. Why not give some time to Jehovah? It’s only fair!’”—Melanie.

When you think about Bible principles, you’ll be better able to make good decisions—for example, when you are choosing friends or when you are confronted with temptation to do something wrong.
How can you benefit fully from Bible reading?
  Make a plan. “Establish a routine for Bible reading,” suggests a teenager named Julia. “Know what you will read, when you will read, and where you will read.”












Tip: Start with a brief session—perhaps 10 or 15 minutes—and then see if you can gradually increase that time.


  Create the right environment. “Find a quiet place,” suggests a young woman named Gianna. “Also, let others in your family know about your Bible reading schedule so that they won’t interrupt you.”





If you are using an electronic device, turn off all notifications. You could even try using a printed Bible. In fact, research shows that reading from a printed publication can improve your comprehension. In contrast, it can be harder to focus deeply when you read from a screen.
“I find reading on a screen to be distracting. My device gets notifications or the battery is low or the Internet goes down. With a printed book, all I need to worry about is having enough light.”—Elena.








Tip: Try reading aloud softly to yourself. (Joshua 1:8) Researchers say that doing so can help you recall the information.


  Pray first. Ask Jehovah to help you to understand, remember, and benefit from the portion of the Bible you intend to read.—James 1:5.





To act in harmony with your prayer, dig deeply into the account you’re reading. How could you do that? If you’re using the JW Library app or reading the Bible online, you can click on a verse to find additional research and articles about it.


  Ask questions. For example: ‘What does this account tell me about Jehovah? Does it highlight a quality of his that I can imitate?’ (Ephesians 5:1) ‘What lesson do I learn from this account that I can apply in my life?’ (Psalm 119:105) ‘Can I use what I have read to help others in some way?’—Romans 1:11.





Also ask yourself, ‘How does what I have read relate to the theme of the Bible?’ That question is especially important. Why? Because everything in the Bible—from Genesis to Revelation—relates in some way to a central theme: How Jehovah will sanctify his name by means of his heavenly Kingdom and prove that he has the right to rule and that his way of ruling is best.



What your peers say





“If you like history, study time lines or archaeology of the nations in the Bible. If you enjoy learning about personalities, study people like David. There’s something for everyone. You just have to think of what you would like to explore.”—Judah.






“As I read a Bible account, I like to analyze each character—good or bad—and ask, ‘What happened to this person? What attitude did he or she display, and what were the results?’ Then I ask myself, ‘How can this account benefit me?’”—Mackenzie.






“I try to research the context of a Bible account. For example, when was it written? Who wrote it, and what is the overall purpose of that Bible book? Many accounts can be applied to our day, but digging deeper allows me to appreciate the impact of the account in its original setting.”—Elle.






“When I’m reading the Bible, I imagine that I will have to explain the material to someone. How could I help that person understand it? How would I illustrate the main point? Thinking about the answers to those questions helps me understand better what I read. As the saying goes, ‘The best way to learn is to teach.’”—Owen.



Review: How can you get the most from your Bible reading?
  Make a plan. Know what you will read, when you will read, and where you will read.

  Create the right environment. Find a quiet place. Turn off notifications on your devices to reduce distractions.

  Pray first. Ask Jehovah to help you to understand, remember, and benefit from the portion of the Bible you will read.

  Ask questions. Perhaps most important, ask yourself how what you have read relates to the theme of the Bible.




