





YOUNG PEOPLE ASK
Should I Get Baptized?—Part 2: Preparing for Baptism


If you’re living up to the Bible’s standards and cultivating a friendship with God, it’s only natural for you to be thinking about baptism. How do you know if you’re ready for that step?a
In this article
How much do I need to know?

What should I be doing?

What your peers say


How much do I need to know?
Preparing for baptism doesn’t involve memorizing facts, as a person might do to pass a school exam. However, you will need to use your “power of reason” to strengthen your conviction that what the Bible teaches is the truth. (Romans 12:1) For example:
  Are you convinced that God exists and that he deserves your worship?
The Bible says: “Whoever approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.”—Hebrews 11:6.
Ask yourself: ‘Why do I believe in God?’ (Hebrews 3:4) ‘Why do I owe him my worship?’—Revelation 4:11.
Need help? See “Creation or Evolution?—Part 1: Why Believe in God?”

  Are you convinced that the Bible’s message comes from God?
The Bible says: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.”—2 Timothy 3:16.
Ask yourself: ‘Why do I believe that the Bible is more than a book of human ideas?’—Isaiah 46:10; 1 Thessalonians 2:13.
Need help? See “How Can the Bible Help Me?—Part 1: Exploring Your Bible.”

  Are you convinced that Jehovah uses the Christian congregation to accomplish his will?
The Bible says: “To [God] be the glory by means of the congregation and by means of Christ Jesus to all generations forever and ever.”—Ephesians 3:21.
Ask yourself: ‘Do I view what I learn from the Bible at Christian meetings as coming from humans or from Jehovah?’ (Matthew 24:45) ‘Do I attend meetings even when my parents cannot (if they permit you to do so)?’—Hebrews 10:24, 25.
Need help? See “Why Attend Meetings at the Kingdom Hall?”


What should I be doing?
You don’t have to be perfect to get baptized. However, you should be showing that you really want to “turn away from what is bad and do what is good.” (Psalm 34:14) For example:
  Are you living according to Jehovah’s standards?
The Bible says: “Maintain a good conscience.”—1 Peter 3:16.
Ask yourself: ‘How have I shown that my “powers of discernment” are “trained to distinguish both right and wrong”?’ (Hebrews 5:14) ‘Can I think of specific instances when I have resisted negative peer pressure? Do my friends encourage me to do what is right?’—Proverbs 13:20.
Need help? See “How Can I Train My Conscience?”

  Do you accept responsibility for your actions?
The Bible says: “Each of us will render an account for himself to God.”—Romans 14:12.
Ask yourself: ‘How honest am I, with myself and with others?’ (Hebrews 13:18) ‘Do I admit my mistakes, or do I tend to hide them or to blame others for them?’—Proverbs 28:13.
Need help? See “How Can I Deal With My Mistakes?”

  Are you maintaining a friendship with Jehovah?
The Bible says: “Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you.”—James 4:8.
Ask yourself: ‘In what ways am I drawing close to Jehovah?’ For example, ‘How often do I read the Bible?’ (Psalm 1:1, 2) ‘Do I pray regularly?’ (1 Thessalonians 5:17) ‘How specific are my prayers? Are my friends Jehovah’s friends?’—Psalm 15:1, 4.
Need help? See “How Can the Bible Help Me?—Part 2: Make Bible Reading Enjoyable” and “Why Should I Pray?”


TIP: To help you prepare for baptism, read chapter 37 of the book Questions Young People Ask—Answers That Work, Volume 2. Note especially the worksheet on pages 308 and 309.

a Read the article “Should I Get Baptized?—Part 1,” which discusses the meaning and importance of dedicating yourself to God and getting baptized.

What your peers say





“The worksheet about baptism in the Young People Ask book helped me to see areas where I needed to improve before getting baptized. It also helped me to set goals that I wanted to accomplish after baptism. Dedicating yourself to Jehovah is a huge responsibility, but it’s also the greatest privilege a person can have.”—Gabriella.






“In the Bible, Timothy was told: ‘Continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe.’” (2 Timothy 3:14) “Take time to study God’s Word so that you’re convinced in your heart that what it teaches is true. You dedicate yourself to Jehovah—not to other people—so make Jehovah’s feelings your primary concern when you’re thinking about baptism.”—Caleb.



Review: How can I prepare for baptism?
Examine your beliefs. Are you convinced that God exists? That he deserves your worship? That the Bible is God’s inspired Word? That Jehovah uses an organization to accomplish his will?
Examine your conduct. Are you living according to Jehovah’s standards? Do you accept responsibility for your actions? Are you maintaining a friendship with Jehovah?


