





YOUNG PEOPLE ASK
Should I Get Baptized?—Part 1: The Meaning of Baptism


Each year, many young people who are being raised as Jehovah’s Witnesses get baptized. Are you thinking of taking that step? If so, first you’ll need to understand the meaning of dedication and baptism.
What is baptism?

What is dedication?

Why is baptism important?

What your peers say

Myths and facts


What is baptism?
The baptism referred to in the Bible is complete immersion in water—not just a sprinkling of water—and it has rich symbolic meaning.
  Going underneath the water during baptism shows publicly that you will no longer live to do just what pleases you.

  Being raised out of the water shows that you have started a new life focused on doing what pleases God.


By getting baptized, you publicly acknowledge that Jehovah has the authority to set the standard of right and wrong, and you officially make known your promise to conform voluntarily to what he wants you to do.
To think about: Why should you want publicly to commit to a life of obedience to Jehovah? See 1 John 4:19 and Revelation 4:11.
What is dedication?
Before you get baptized, you should privately dedicate yourself to Jehovah. How?
In a personal prayer, you tell Jehovah that you promise to serve him forever and that you will do what he wants no matter what situation arises and no matter what others choose to do.
Baptism is a public expression of that private dedication. It tells others that you have given up ownership of yourself and that you now belong to Jehovah.—Matthew 16:24.
To think about: Why does your life get better when you belong to Jehovah? See Isaiah 48:17, 18 and Hebrews 11:6.
Why is baptism important?
Jesus established baptism as a requirement for his disciples. (Matthew 28:19, 20) Therefore, baptism is still a requirement for Christians. In fact, the Bible says it’s necessary for salvation.—1 Peter 3:21.
However, your motive for getting baptized should be your love and appreciation for Jehovah. Your attitude should be like that of the psalmist, who wrote: “With what will I repay Jehovah for all the good he has done for me? . . . I will call on the name of Jehovah. I will pay my vows to Jehovah.”—Psalm 116:12-14.
To think about: What good has Jehovah done for you, and how can you repay him? See Deuteronomy 10:12, 13 and Romans 12:1.

What your peers say





“Dedication involves a promise that you make to Jehovah, and that’s serious. But life as one of Jehovah’s dedicated servants is full of blessings. After all, he can take better care of us than we can take care of ourselves.”—Mijin.






“Jehovah has already shown his love for you. By getting baptized, you can show your deep love for him. Being baptized is a huge privilege and a great blessing!”—Ember.






“Deciding to dedicate yourself to God and get baptized is the most important decision a person can make. But that shouldn’t scare you. If you are prepared and are doing it for the right reasons, it’s the best decision you will ever make.”—Julian.



Myths and facts
MYTH — Only adults have the maturity needed to get baptized.
FACT — Maturity is determined, not primarily by age, but by a person’s love for Jehovah and readiness to obey him. While still young, Joseph, Samuel, and Josiah showed such maturity. Many young ones today are doing the same.
The Bible says: “A child is known by his actions, whether his behavior is pure and right.”—Proverbs 20:11.
MYTH — If your friends are getting baptized, you should get baptized too.
FACT — The decision to make a dedication and to get baptized is a personal one that should come from a willing heart. It is not a rite of passage or a coming-of-age custom that you should take part in just because others have done so or because you think others expect it of you.
The Bible says: “[God’s] people will offer themselves willingly.”—Psalm 110:3.
MYTH — If you are not baptized, you are not accountable for your actions.
FACT — You become accountable to Jehovah, not when you get baptized, but when you know what is right and what is wrong in his eyes.
The Bible says: “If someone knows how to do what is right and yet does not do it, it is a sin for him.”—James 4:17.
TIP: If the responsibility of being a dedicated, baptized Christian seems overwhelming, why not take steps to confront and address your fears? You can do so by reading Chapter 37 of the book Questions Young People Ask—Answers That Work, Volume 2.


Review: Why is baptism important?
  Jesus required that his disciples be baptized.

  Baptism is necessary for salvation.

  It is a great privilege to serve Jehovah as a dedicated and baptized Christian.




