





YOUNG PEOPLE ASK
What Will I Need to Do After Baptism?—Part 2: Maintain Your Integrity


The Bible says that “Jehovah will not hold back anything good from those walking in integrity.” (Psalm 84:11) What does “walking in integrity” mean? It means living in a way that shows you are keeping the promise you made to Jehovah when you dedicated yourself to him. (Ecclesiastes 5:4, 5) How can you walk in integrity after your baptism?
In this article
Keep enduring problems

Keep resisting temptation

Keep strengthening your zeal


Keep enduring problems
Key scripture: “We must enter into the Kingdom of God through many tribulations.”—Acts 14:22.
What it means: Realistically, all Christians will face challenges in life. Some of the problems you will face, such as ridicule or opposition, directly result from being a Christian. Others, like money problems or sickness, can affect all of mankind.





What to expect: Now and then, your circumstances in life will change, and sometimes in ways you don’t like. The Bible says that bad things can happen to anyone—Christians and non-Christians alike.—Ecclesiastes 9:11.
What you can do: Since you know that you will have challenges, you can prepare to face them. View challenges as an opportunity to strengthen your faith and to rely more heavily on Jehovah. (James 1:2, 3) In time, you will be able to say from experience, as did the apostle Paul: “For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.”—Philippians 4:13.
TRUE STORY. “Soon after I got baptized, my brothers abandoned our Christian beliefs, my parents got sick, and then I got sick too. It would have been easy for me to give up—to forget that when I dedicated myself to God, I promised to make his worship the most important thing in my life. Yet, my dedication is precisely what helped me deal with those challenges.”—Karen.

Tip: Get to know Joseph. You can read about his life in Genesis chapters 37 and 39 through 41. Consider: What unexpected hardships arose, and how did he deal with them? How did Jehovah help Joseph?
Need more help?
  Read:
“How Can I Deal With Tragedy?”
“How Resilient Am I?”
“How to Deal With Change”

  Download:
“When a Parent is Sick”


Keep resisting temptation
Key scripture: “Each one is tried by being drawn out and enticed by his own desire.”—James 1:14.
What it means: At times, all of us are tempted by desires that if not controlled can lead us to do what is wrong.





What to expect: After baptism, you will still experience “the desires of the flesh.” (2 Peter 2:18) You may even feel tempted to have sex before you are married.
What you can do: Make up your mind now—before you are tempted—so that you will not let your desires make your decisions for you. Remember, Jesus stated: “No one can slave for two masters.” (Matthew 6:24) You can choose who your master will be. Let it be Jehovah. No matter how strong a wrong desire might be, you can choose not to act on it.—Galatians 5:16.
What your peers say





“People without Jehovah have no real hope. I could see that when I looked at my schoolmates’ faces. Their happiness was often a facade, and their smiles were gone the next day. I’m convinced that nothing this world has to offer is worth sacrificing my relationship with Jehovah.”—Kaitlyn.



Tip: Learn to identify your strengths and weaknesses. Choose friends who bring out the good qualities in you. Avoid people, places, and circumstances that make it more difficult for you to do what is right.—Psalm 26:4, 5.
Need more help?
  Read:
“How Can I Resist Temptation?”
“How Can I Keep My Mind Off Sex?”
“How to Resist Peer Pressure”
“Are You Making Jehovah’s Thoughts Your Own?”


Keep strengthening your zeal
Key scripture: “Show the same industriousness . . . down to the end, so that you may not become sluggish.”—Hebrews 6:11, 12.
What it means: One who doesn’t focus on his work can easily slow down and become sluggish.





What to expect: You were likely excited and full of zeal after you got baptized. You were full of love for Jehovah. But after a while, you may find it difficult to continue obeying Jehovah in everything, and that can discourage you and cause your zeal to diminish.—Galatians 5:7.
What you can do: Continue to do the right thing, even if for a time your heart doesn’t seem to be in it. (1 Corinthians 9:27) Meanwhile, draw closer to your heavenly Father by getting to know him better and by talking to him in prayer often. Also, continue to build close friendships with those who love serving Jehovah.
What your peers say





“Finding friends who set a good example encouraged me. I could see how applying Bible principles made them truly content. Observing their joy made me want to strengthen my own friendship with Jehovah.”—Adria.



Tip: Remember that Jehovah loves you very much and is ready to help you. Do not conclude that he is upset with you if you have a temporary lack of zeal. The Bible says: “He gives power to the tired one and full might to those lacking strength.” (Isaiah 40:29) In time, he will bless your efforts to regain your zeal.
Need more help?
  Read:
“Young Ones—Keep Working Out Your Own Salvation”
“How Can I Make Worship of God Enjoyable?”

  Watch:
What Your Peers Say—The Best Life Ever


The bottom line: If you walk in integrity, you will make Jehovah’s heart rejoice! (Proverbs 27:11) He will be happy that you choose to be on his side, and he will give you everything you need to resist Satan’s attacks.

Review: How can I keep walking in integrity after baptism?
  Keep enduring problems. View challenges as an opportunity to strengthen your faith and to rely more heavily on Jehovah.

  Keep resisting temptation. Make up your mind before temptation occurs that you will not let your desires make your decisions for you.

  Keep strengthening your zeal. Draw closer to Jehovah through study and prayer. Continue to build close friendships with those who love serving Jehovah.




