





YOUNG PEOPLE ASK
What if I Can’t Stand School?


Strict teachers. Peer pressure. Nerve-racking exams, and an avalanche of homework. If you say you don’t like school, it’s understandable.a A teenager named Rachelb says:
“I would rather be anywhere than at school. I would rather be at the beach or with my friends or even helping my parents cook or clean!”

If you feel similarly to Rachel, your school years might seem like a prison sentence that you just have to endure until you’re released at graduation. Is there a better way to look at your time spent at school?
Did you know? When you cultivate a better view of school, you take control of the situation and you stop seeing your schooling as a test of endurance. In a sense, school becomes a tool that you use to sharpen the skills you’ll need as an adult.
To develop a better view of school, try to focus on the following:





Your education. The more you learn, the better you’ll be able to solve your future problems at work and in other areas of life instead of always relying on others. Ask yourself, ‘Even if there are things about school that I don’t like, what benefits am I receiving from my education?’
Bible principle: “Safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability.”—Proverbs 3:21.

For more information, see the article “What if I’m Failing at School?”






Your habits. The school routine can teach you how to manage your time, become self-disciplined, and develop a solid work ethic—qualities that you will need as an adult. Ask yourself: ‘In what ways is the school routine helping me to become self-disciplined and a good worker? What improvements can I make in these areas?’
Bible principle: “There is benefit in every kind of hard work.”—Proverbs 14:23.

For more information, see the article “How Can I Manage My Time?”






Your social skills. Interacting with your classmates at school can help you develop empathy and respect for others. “Learning how to communicate with people is as important as learning history and science,” says a young man named Joshua. “It’s a skill that you’ll use throughout your life.” Ask yourself, ‘What lessons have I learned at school about getting along with others—even those whose backgrounds or beliefs differ from mine?’
Bible principle: “Pursue peace with all people.”—Hebrews 12:14.

For more information, see the article “How Can I Improve My Conversation Skills?”






Your future. School can help you to recognize your abilities and set goals accordingly. A young woman named Brooke says: “You might even be able to get training in a specific field, as I did, so that when you graduate, you’re qualified for a job.” Ask yourself: ‘How will I support myself after I graduate from school? How can I tailor my education toward that kind of work?’
Bible principle: “Know where you are headed.”—Proverbs 4:26, Contemporary English Version.

a Many of the principles discussed in this article will also help young ones who are homeschooled.
b Some names have been changed.

What your peers say





“In group projects, I had to work with different types of people. By doing that, I learned how to listen to individuals whose backgrounds and lifestyles were different from mine. My classmates were generally pleasant and respectful toward me because they knew I was kind and not critical of them.”—Madison.






“I learned how to have a balanced view of my classmates. Many of them were trying to be good people. So I looked for ways to share something encouraging with them from the Bible.”—Ryan.






“School helps you develop social skills. You’re with your classmates throughout the day, so you learn what to say and what not to say, how to be patient, and how to share. In physical education classes, you play group sports, and that teaches you to work as a team—something you can’t learn on your own.”—Brooke.




