From Our Readers
Economy
It was a joy and a pleasure to read the articles in the April 22 issue, “The World Economy​—Where Is It Heading?” I am a secretary for eight senior officers of a Federal Reserve bank. I have a four-year college degree and have worked at this bank for four years without being able to figure out exactly how the Federal Reserve system works. My questions were answered in your magazine! I took the magazine to work and asked the senior vice-president to read it. I asked him if he had found any inaccuracies in the report. His answer was “No,” with some small explanations. I also asked him if anyone without the slightest inkling of economics and the money system could learn anything from reading the articles, and his answer was “Yes,” with some small explanations. I appreciate the effort to make it simple enough for even the “educated” to understand.
M. R. M., Virginia
Yoga
After I realized that I was getting involved in something that was clearly connected with false religion, I stopped the yoga class. (February 22, 1983) My problem then was what sort of exercise could I use instead. I went to the local library and found two books that contained exercises that were very similar to the stretching exercises of yoga, but that are based on sound medical research and have the same beneficial therapeutic effects but not with the yoga connections. So this problem has been solved.
I. H., England
When They Leave Home
I am writing to thank you for the February 8 issue, “When They Grow Up and Leave Home.” It talked about the problems my husband and I face from our family and in-laws. Both sides can give us trouble at times. I hope both sides will read the issue and understand that we still love them, but we just want to live our own lives and make our own decisions.
V. E. W., Michigan
During the year our only daughter got married and left home. This is not easy to cope with. At first you think you have lived your life and are now ready for the scrap heap. But you are correct that afterward your marriage can become even better. I have also often wondered just how I should conduct myself toward our child and our new son-in-law. I would like to thank you for the fine suggestions you made.
R. S., Federal Republic of Germany
Titanic
This is the fifth time I have read “I Survived the Sinking of the Titanic,” (October 22, 1981) and, believe me, each time I read it, the experience looks so new and real. For the first time in my life I have seen the truth about world conditions. You see, I could never have believed, before now, that our spaceship, the world, is gradually ‘sinking’ as the Titanic did. Not many people realize this and it’s most unfortunate that they, like the proud passengers of the Titanic, may realize it only when it is too late.
K. I. T., Nigeria

