Population Control and World Government
ONE world government, God’s Kingdom! That is a major theme of the Bible. Its seat of government is in heaven. And Jehovah God will use it to resolve our present crises competently, including those aggravated by the population explosion.
Can we trust God’s heavenly government to provide good rulership? Yes, for the Bible states: “The kingdom of the world did become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will rule as king forever and ever.” (Revelation 11:15) Humans are limited, Jehovah is not. Can you think of anyone more qualified to rule than the Sovereign Lord Jehovah and his Son, Christ Jesus?
Since the Kingdom of God is located in heaven, will it show genuine interest in earth’s problems? Yes. Jesus Christ exhorts his followers to pray: “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.” (Matthew 6:10, Authorized Version) As a man, Jesus was known for his empathy and truthfulness. He would not fool people with imaginary hopes.​—Matthew 14:14; 1 Peter 2:22.
Jesus was born into a family of little means. (Compare Luke 2:24 with Leviticus 12:8.) Joseph, his foster father, worked as a carpenter and raised his family in a city of no great importance. Jesus became part of a large family of at least nine: his mother and foster father; his four half brothers, James, Joseph, Simon and Judas; at least two half sisters, and himself. (Matthew 13:55, 56; John 1:46) Therefore, Christ Jesus is a ruler well acquainted with family feelings and needs. The human population, rich and poor, can find with this King a sympathetic ear for their problems.
Almighty God as Creator brought into existence the first human pair. Therefore, Jehovah as supreme King displays loving interest in mankind and in solving their problems. One step he will take in this regard is ridding the earth of every government that exploits and menaces his honest-hearted children. (Daniel 2:44) In this way the natural resources of the entire earth can be used, aiding all of mankind, because God’s Kingdom will allow no self-interest groups in His worldwide family.​—Isaiah 11:3-5; compare 65:21, 22.
How long will it be before mankind sees these benefits? It will be soon. The catastrophic events beginning with World War I and the threatening phenomena of this century are convincing evidence. Sincere Bible students see in these events the nearness of their deliverance by means of the Kingdom.​—Luke 21:10, 11, 25-28.
Then overpopulation will not be a problem. Why? Because God’s original purpose for the earth will be fulfilled. The Bible clearly tells us: “Further, God blessed them and God said to them: ‘Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving upon the earth.’”​—Genesis 1:28.
Note the divine mandate is to fill, not overflow, the earth. The earth is destined to be comfortably filled with mankind in proportion to its capacity for food production, ecological balance and reasonable population density. It is reasonable to conclude that when that point is reached the Creator of the human procreative power will regulate its use as far as the earth is concerned.
Then obedient and grateful mankind will be willing to cooperate with whatever new requirements may be expressed. (Compare Revelation 20:12.) There will be no population explosion to threaten mankind’s future existence. Only by God’s wisdom, as expressed through his Kingdom, can such a transformation be satisfactorily accomplished so that this earth will remain a beautiful “jewel in space.”​—Isaiah 55:8-11; Romans 16:27.
[Picture on page 10]
Offspring of Adam and Eve will comfortably fill the earth under God’s Kingdom

