
CHAPTER THREE
What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?

What is God’s purpose for mankind?

How has God been challenged?

What will life on earth be like in the future?






 1. What is God’s purpose for the earth?
GOD’S purpose for the earth is really wonderful. Jehovah wants the earth to be filled with happy, healthy people. The Bible says that “Jehovah God planted a garden in Eden” and that he “made to grow . . . every tree that was pleasing to look at and good for food.” After God created the first man and woman, Adam and Eve, He put them in that lovely home and told them: “Be fruitful and become many, fill the earth and subdue it.” (Genesis 1:28; 2:8, 9, 15) So it was God’s purpose that humans have children, extend the boundaries of that garden home earth wide, and take care of the animals.
 2. (a) How do we know that God’s purpose for the earth will be fulfilled? (b) What does the Bible say about humans living forever?
2 Do you think that Jehovah God’s purpose for people to live in an earthly paradise will ever be realized? “I have spoken,” God declares, “and I will also carry it out.” (Isaiah 46:9-11; 55:11) Yes, what God purposes he will surely do! He says that he “did not create [the earth] simply for nothing, but formed it to be inhabited.” (Isaiah 45:18) What kind of people did God want to live on the earth? And for how long did he want them to live here? The Bible answers: “The righteous will possess the earth, and they will live forever on it.”​—Psalm 37:29; Revelation 21:3, 4.
 3. What sad conditions now exist on earth, and what questions does this raise?
3 Obviously, this has not happened yet. People now get sick and die; they even fight and kill one another. Something went wrong. Surely, however, God did not purpose that the earth should be as we see it today! What happened? Why has God’s purpose not been fulfilled? No history book written by man can tell us because the trouble started in heaven.



THE ORIGIN OF AN ENEMY

4, 5. (a) Who actually spoke to Eve by means of a serpent? (b) How might a formerly decent, honest person become a thief?
4 The first book of the Bible tells of an opposer of God who showed up in the garden of Eden. He is described as “the serpent,” but he was not a mere animal. The last book of the Bible identifies him as “the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth.” He is also called “the original serpent.” (Genesis 3:1; Revelation 12:9) This powerful angel, or invisible spirit creature, used a serpent to speak to Eve, even as a skilled person can make it seem that his voice is coming from a nearby doll or dummy. That spirit person had no doubt been present when God prepared the earth for humans.​—Job 38:4, 7.
5 Since all of Jehovah’s creations are perfect, however, who made this “Devil,” this “Satan”? Put simply, one of the powerful spirit sons of God turned himself into the Devil. How was this possible? Well, today a person who was once decent and honest may become a thief. How does that happen? The person may allow a wrong desire to develop in his heart. If he keeps thinking about it, that wrong desire may become very strong. Then if the opportunity presents itself, he may act upon the bad desire that he has been thinking about.​—Read James 1:13-15.
 6. How did a powerful spirit son of God become Satan the Devil?
6 This happened in the case of Satan the Devil. He apparently heard God tell Adam and Eve to have children and to fill the earth with their offspring. (Genesis 1:27, 28) ‘Why, all these humans could worship me rather than God!’ Satan evidently thought. So a wrong desire built up in his heart. Eventually, he took action to deceive Eve by telling her lies about God. (Read Genesis 3:1-5.) He thus became a “Devil,” which means “Slanderer.” At the same time, he became “Satan,” which means “Opposer.”
 7. (a) Why did Adam and Eve die? (b) Why do all of Adam’s offspring grow old and die?
7 By using lies and trickery, Satan the Devil caused Adam and Eve to disobey God. (Genesis 2:17; 3:6) As a result, they eventually died, as God had said they would if they disobeyed. (Genesis 3:17-19) Since Adam became imperfect when he sinned, all his offspring inherited sin from him. (Read Romans 5:12.) The situation might be illustrated with a pan used for baking bread. If the pan has a dent in it, what happens to each loaf of bread made in the pan? Each loaf has a dent, or an imperfection, in it. Similarly, each human has inherited a “dent” of imperfection from Adam. That is why all humans grow old and die.​—Romans 3:23.
8, 9. (a) What challenge did Satan evidently make? (b) Why did God not destroy the rebels immediately?
8 When Satan led Adam and Eve into sinning against God, he was really leading a rebellion. He was challenging Jehovah’s way of ruling. In effect, Satan was saying: ‘God is a bad ruler. He tells lies and holds back good things from his subjects. Humans do not need to have God ruling over them. They can decide for themselves what is good and what is bad. And they will be better off under my rulership.’ How would God handle such an insulting challenge? Some think that God should simply have put the rebels to death. But would that have answered Satan’s challenge? Would it have proved that God’s way of ruling is right?
9 Jehovah’s perfect sense of justice would not allow him to put the rebels to death right away. He decided that time was needed to answer Satan’s challenge in a satisfying way and to prove that the Devil is a liar. So God determined that he would permit humans to rule themselves for some time under Satan’s influence. Why Jehovah did that and why he has allowed so much time to pass before settling these issues will be discussed in Chapter 11 of this book. Now, though, it is good to think about this: Were Adam and Eve right to believe Satan, who had never done anything good for them? Was it right for them to believe that Jehovah, who had given them everything they had, is a cruel liar? What would you have done?
10. How can you support Jehovah’s side in answer to Satan’s challenge?
10 It is good to think about these questions because each of us faces similar issues today. Yes, you have the opportunity to support Jehovah’s side in answer to Satan’s challenge. You can accept Jehovah as your Ruler and help to show that Satan is a liar. (Psalm 73:28; read Proverbs 27:11.) Sadly, only a few among the billions of people in this world make such a choice. This raises an important question, Does the Bible really teach that Satan rules this world?



WHO RULES THIS WORLD?






How could Satan have offered Jesus all the kingdoms of the world if he did not own them?




11, 12. (a) How does a temptation of Jesus reveal that Satan is the ruler of this world? (b) What else proves that Satan is the ruler of this world?
11 Jesus never doubted that Satan is the ruler of this world. In some miraculous way, Satan once showed Jesus “all the kingdoms of the world and their glory.” Satan then promised Jesus: “All these things I will give you if you fall down and do an act of worship to me.” (Matthew 4:8, 9; Luke 4:5, 6) Think about this. Would that offer have been a temptation to Jesus if Satan was not the ruler of these kingdoms? Jesus did not deny that all these worldly governments were Satan’s. Surely, Jesus would have done that if Satan was not the power behind them.
12 Of course, Jehovah is the almighty God, the Creator of the marvelous universe. (Revelation 4:11) Yet, nowhere does the Bible say that either Jehovah God or Jesus Christ is ruler of this world. In fact, Jesus specifically referred to Satan as “the ruler of this world.” (John 12:31; 14:30; 16:11) The Bible even refers to Satan the Devil as “the god of this system of things.” (2 Corinthians 4:3, 4) Regarding this opposer, or Satan, the Christian apostle John wrote: “The whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.”​—1 John 5:19.



HOW SATAN’S WORLD WILL BE REMOVED

13. Why is there a need for a new world?
13 With each passing year, the world is becoming more and more dangerous. It is overrun with warring armies, dishonest politicians, hypocritical religious leaders, and hardened criminals. The world as a whole is beyond reform. The Bible reveals that the time is near when God will eliminate the wicked world during his war of Armageddon. This will make way for a righteous new world.​—Revelation 16:14-16.
14. Whom has God selected to be Ruler of His Kingdom, and how was this foretold?
14 Jehovah God selected Jesus Christ to be Ruler of His heavenly Kingdom, or government. Long ago, the Bible foretold: “A child has been born to us, a son has been given to us; and the government will rest on his shoulder. His name will be called . . . Prince of Peace. To the increase of his government and to peace, there will be no end.” (Isaiah 9:6, 7, footnote) Regarding this government, Jesus taught his followers to pray: “Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.” (Matthew 6:10) As we will see later in this book, God’s Kingdom will soon remove all the governments of this world, and it itself will replace all of them. (Read Daniel 2:44.) Then God’s Kingdom will usher in an earthly paradise.



A NEW WORLD IS AT HAND!






15. What is the “new earth”?
15 The Bible assures us: “There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to [God’s] promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.” (2 Peter 3:13; Isaiah 65:17) Sometimes when the Bible speaks of “the earth,” it means the people who live on the earth. (Genesis 11:1) So the righteous “new earth” is a society of people who receive God’s approval.
16. What is a priceless gift from God to those whom he approves, and what must we do to receive it?
16 Jesus promised that in the coming new world, those approved by God would receive the gift of “everlasting life.” (Mark 10:30) Please open your Bible to John 3:16 and 17:3, and read what Jesus said we must do to receive everlasting life. Now consider from the Bible the blessings that will be enjoyed by those who qualify for that wonderful gift from God in the coming earthly Paradise.
17, 18. How can we be sure that there will be peace and security everywhere on earth?
17 Wickedness, warfare, crime, and violence will be gone. “The wicked will be no more . . . But the meek will possess the earth.” (Psalm 37:10, 11) Peace will exist because ‘God will bring an end to wars throughout the earth.’ (Psalm 46:9; Isaiah 2:4) Then “the righteous will flourish, and peace will abound until the moon is no more”​—and that means forever!​—Psalm 72:7.
18 Jehovah’s worshippers will live in security. As long as the Israelites in Bible times obeyed God, they lived in security. (Leviticus 25:18, 19) How wonderful it will be to enjoy similar security in Paradise!​—Read Isaiah 32:18; Micah 4:4.
19. Why do we know that food will be abundant in God’s new world?
19 Food shortages will not exist. “There will be an abundance of grain on the earth,” sang the psalmist. “On the top of the mountains it will overflow.” (Psalm 72:16) Jehovah God will bless his righteous ones, and “the earth will give its produce.”​—Psalm 67:6.
20. Why can we be sure that the whole earth will become a paradise?
20 The whole earth will become a paradise. Lovely new homes and gardens will occupy land that had once been ruined by sinful humans. (Read Isaiah 65:21-24; Revelation 11:18) As time passes, parts of the earth already subdued will expand until the whole globe is as beautiful and productive as the garden of Eden. And God will never fail to “open [his] hand and satisfy the desire of every living thing.”​—Psalm 145:16.
21. What shows that peace will exist between humans and animals?
21 There will be peace between humans and animals. Wild and domestic animals will feed together. Even a little child will have nothing to fear from animals that are now dangerous.​—Read Isaiah 11:6-9; 65:25.
22. What will happen to sickness?
22 Sickness will vanish. As Ruler of God’s heavenly Kingdom, Jesus will do healing on a far grander scale than when he was on earth. (Matthew 9:35; Mark 1:40-42; John 5:5-9) Then “no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”​—Isaiah 33:24; 35:5, 6.
23. Why will the resurrection bring joy to our hearts?
23 Dead loved ones will be restored to life with the prospect of never dying. All those sleeping in death who are in God’s memory will be brought back to life. In fact, “there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.”​—Acts 24:15; read John 5:28, 29.
24. How do you feel about living in Paradise on earth?
24 What a marvelous future awaits those who choose to learn about our Grand Creator, Jehovah God, and to serve him! It was to the coming Paradise on earth that Jesus pointed when he promised the criminal who died alongside him: “You will be with me in Paradise.” (Luke 23:43) It is vital that we learn more about Jesus Christ, through whom all these blessings will be made possible.



WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
            God’s purpose to make the earth a paradise will be fulfilled.​—Isaiah 45:18; 55:11.

            Satan now rules this world.​—John 12:31; 1 John 5:19.

            In the coming new world, God will bestow many blessings on mankind.​—Psalm 37:10, 11, 29.




