From Our Readers
Adolescence  Thank you for the series “Meeting the Challenges of Adolescence.” (July 8, 2004) Recently I entered adolescence and have had some problems that made me feel bad. Thanks to these articles, I have received the needed counsel that will help me to remember my Grand Creator. I hope to go through adolescence without the pains that succumbing to this world brings.
R. R., Albania
When I was a child, I had many friends my age. But as we got older, we stopped talking to one another. After Christian meetings, I would sit in the car without associating. I was relieved when I read that it is common for adolescents to experience a wide range of emotions and that one of the best ways to counteract loneliness is to reach out to others—including those not part of your peer group. That day at the meeting I spoke to others, regardless of their age, and this made me happy.
M. K., Japan
I am 15 years old, and I needed this information very much. The young people quoted helped me to understand that I am not the only one dealing with painful emotions and that these feelings can be conquered. This strengthened and encouraged me!
L. R., Ukraine
Thank you for this series. It is good to see that it is possible to cope with this turbulent period. I hope that these articles will help other young ones to deal with this phase of life in a balanced way.
R. V., Italy
This series is just what I have been looking for. I have emotional ups and downs, and sometimes I feel very insecure and lonely. I always thought that it was my fault that I was having these feelings. But the last article in the series stated: “Jehovah God wants you to be happy—really happy. That involves far more than the mere facade of fun that is simply a mask for underlying misery.” When I read these words, my tears flowed. The article also said that in time these disturbing feelings can pass. This really, really comforted me. I got renewed strength. Thank you very much!
H. T., Japan
When I saw this magazine at the Kingdom Hall, I immediately started looking through it. Reading it at home, I couldn’t put it down. I was very disappointed with the ending, though, because I didn’t want the article to stop! Keep writing articles like this!
K. C., United States
Keyboards  I am 12 years old. Thank you for the article “A World of Music at Your Fingertips.” (July 8, 2004) I bought a book on musical instruments, which included explanations of keyboard instruments. The details of the keyboard are explained but not as well as in Awake! I have been looking for such an article for quite some time! The ability to play a musical instrument is indeed a wonderful gift from our Creator!
D. G., Germany
Mobbing  Recently, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses gave me the magazine with the series “Victimized at Work—What Can You Do?” (May 8, 2004) Because of workplace bullying (mobbing), an acquaintance of mine quit his job. In Germany, that means no unemployment benefits for three months. I did what I could for the young man. But it is especially thanks to your magazine, which I enclosed with a letter to the employment office, that the young man got his benefits three days later!
R. S., Germany

