The Valley of Blossoming Beauty
BY AWAKE! WRITER IN UKRAINE
WHEN spring arrives in this tiny valley nestled in the Carpathian Mountains, the fertile ground gradually becomes covered with a carpet of white blossoms. The best time to visit here is during late spring, when a sweet aroma drifts over the alpine meadow, coaxing visitors to take a closer look.
Where is this beautiful display? In the Valley of Narcissi—a nature reserve near Khust, in Western Ukraine. Here vast fields of wild narcissi are found. Although more than 400 plant species grow in the valley, the narcissus is king.
In fact, the reserve is named after the flower, which is also known as the narrow-leaved narcissus, or daffodil. This bulbous plant, with its long thin leaves and trumpet-shaped crown surrounded by white or yellowish petals, is also found throughout the Alps and the Balkans.
The narcissus has been praised for centuries by poets and musicians alike. One species, in fact, is named Narcissus poeticus, or poet’s narcissus. But poets aren’t the only ones who have taken note of its beauty. In ancient Rome rulers once used yellow narcissi to salute their victorious warriors. And in Prussia, the narcissus was a symbol of love and happiness. Today, communities throughout the world continue to laud the beauty of the flower at annual festivals and celebrations.
However, the narcissus is much more than a pretty flower. The name narcissus is related to the Greek word narkaʹo, meaning, “to be stupefied.” Could narcissi actually produce such an effect? When these flowers are in bloom in the Valley of Narcissi, visitors can be somewhat overpowered or even feel slightly intoxicated!
The narcotic effects of the scent have led some to attribute curative powers to the flower. The Arabs used narcissus oil to treat baldness, while the French used it to treat epilepsy and hysteria. Today, narcissus oil is used in perfumes and, in its purified form, in aromatherapy.
Will It Be Preserved?
The narrow-leaved narcissus is considered a high-mountain flower. It usually grows between 3,000 and 6,800 feet [1,100 and 2,060 m] above sea level. But the elevation of the Valley of Narcissi is 650 feet [200 m] above sea level, making it the lowest valley where this particular flower grows.
In order to preserve this wonder of nature, the Valley of Narcissi was made a reserve in 1979. Some 20 years later, the Council of Europe declared the narrow-leaved narcissus a protected species.
Initially, there was a prohibition against cutting grass in the Valley of Narcissi after the flowering season. However, within a few years, the number of flowers decreased. Why? Scientists learned that when allowed to grow unabated, the grass choked the young flower sprouts. Once the mowing restriction was lifted, though, the valley returned to its natural balance. So now the valley is beautiful in the spring, and it supplies hay throughout the winter for livestock.
This amazing floral beauty is a reminder of the potential for our earthly home. Indeed, many Bible students look forward to the time when, under the rule of God’s Kingdom, “the wilderness and the waterless region will exult, and the desert plain will be joyful and blossom” with beauty. (Isaiah 35:1) Then, beauty similar to that of the Valley of Narcissi will be reflected throughout the entire earth as the earth is brought to a paradisaic state like that originally found in Eden.—Genesis 2:8-15.

