What “the Only True God” Promises
JEHOVAH GOD placed the first human couple in a paradise on earth—the garden of Eden. He instructed them to have children and to ‘subdue the earth,’ which would involve expanding their Paradise home as their family grew in numbers. (Genesis 1:26-28; 2:15) Will God’s purpose for humans to enjoy an earthly paradise ever be fulfilled?
Indeed, it will! According to Bible prophecy, “[Jehovah] will actually swallow up death forever” and “will certainly wipe the tears from all faces.” When this occurs, “one will certainly say: ‘Look! This is our God. We have hoped in him, and he will save us. This is Jehovah. We have hoped in him. Let us be joyful and rejoice in the salvation by him.’”—Isaiah 25:8, 9.
The Bible’s last book describes the conditions on earth after this present world, or system of things under Satan’s rule, is removed. Regarding the “new earth” made up of humans who love God, the Bible says: “The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his peoples. And God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”—Revelation 21:1-4.
What marvelous promises! Can we believe them? Consider how Jesus’ sacrificial death and the miracles he performed provide a basis for confidence that God will accomplish whatever He promises.—2 Corinthians 1:20.
Jesus’ Life as a Ransom
When Satan induced Adam to disobey God and sin, all of Adam’s offspring inherited his sin. “Just as through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin,” the Bible says, “death spread to all men because they had all sinned.” Yet, the Bible account continues: “Through the obedience of the one person [the perfect man Jesus] many will be constituted righteous.” (Romans 5:12, 19) As noted in the first article of this series, Jesus is “the last Adam,”—the one “out of heaven”—the one who provided his life as “a ransom in exchange for many.”—1 Corinthians 15:45, 47; Matthew 20:28.
So all who exercise faith in Jesus can receive “the release [from sin] by ransom” and can enjoy everlasting life. (Ephesians 1:7; John 3:36) Surely we can rejoice that Jehovah God loved the world of mankind so much that he gave his Son as our Savior! (Luke 2:10-12; John 3:16) An examination of what Jesus did in behalf of suffering mankind in the first century provides insight regarding the future. And what Jesus did was truly amazing!
Foregleams of a New World
Jesus could heal every sick and ailing person who was brought to him. There was not a one whom he was unable to restore to health, regardless of their ailment or infirmity. Moreover, he miraculously fed thousands with only a few fishes and loaves of bread, and he did so on more than one occasion.—Matthew 14:14-22; 15:30-38.
When Jesus restored sight to a man born blind, neighbors and acquaintances acknowledged the miracle, but Jewish religious leaders were skeptical. So the man whose sight had been restored reasoned with them: “From of old it has never been heard that anyone opened the eyes of one born blind. If this man were not from God, he could do nothing at all.”—John 9:32, 33.
During Jesus’ ministry his cousin John the Baptist, who had been imprisoned, sent messengers to confirm reports about Jesus. “In that hour,” the Bible says, Jesus “cured many of sicknesses and grievous diseases and wicked spirits, and granted many blind persons the favor of seeing.” Then Jesus told the messengers: “Report to John what you saw and heard: the blind are receiving sight, the lame are walking, the lepers are being cleansed and the deaf are hearing, the dead are being raised up.”—Luke 7:18-22.
Think of it: If something good occurred in the past, would that not give you confidence that it could happen again? By means of his miracles, Jesus demonstrated on a small scale what he will do on a grand scale during his rule as King of God’s Kingdom. His miracles serve as proof that he was sent by God and that he really was God’s Son.
During the rule of God’s Kingdom, there will be a literal fulfillment of prophecies of marvelous things. As foretold, blind eyes will be opened, deaf ears will be unstopped, the lame will leap as a deer, and no one will be sick. There will also be peace and security everywhere on earth. Even animals that are now dangerous will be at peace with man.—Isaiah 9:6, 7; 11:6-9; 33:24; 35:5, 6; 65:17-25.
Would you like to live forever under the rule of God’s Kingdom, surrounded by such conditions? Jesus showed what you must do when he said in prayer to his father: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) May you allow nothing to prevent you from continuing to take in such life-giving knowledge.
[Picture on page 10]
This is what God promises for the earth

