
FEATURE
Apostle Paul’s Ministry




COMMISSIONED by Jesus to be an apostle to the nations, Paul zealously carried out his assignment. (Ro 11:13) His first missionary trip took him through Cyprus and into Asia Minor. He was thrown out of cities by angry mobs, even stoned and left for dead. But he returned to strengthen those who had become disciples.
On his second trip, he reached into Macedonia and Greece. Here he was able to give a witness at the Areopagus in Athens.





On Paul’s third trip, he preached for some three years in Ephesus, a crossroads of the Roman world. Then he went on to Macedonia and Greece to build up the congregations there.
When being held prisoner by the Roman government, Paul used his time well to write inspired letters that are part of the Bible today.




First trip: Ac 13:1–14:28


Second trip: Ac 15:36–18:22


Third trip: Ac 18:23–21:19








MAP: Paul’s First Missionary Trip







MAP: Paul’s Second Missionary Trip







MAP: Paul’s Third Missionary Trip







Damascus, the street called Straight. After his conversion, blinded Saul was led to a home on this street (Ac 9:3-16)







Theater in Ephesus where worshipers of Artemis (inset) rioted in protest against Paul’s ministry (Ac 19:29-41)







Ruins of Antioch in Pisidia. After Paul had witnessed effectively in the synagogue here, he was thrown out of the city by an angry mob (Ac 13:14-50)







Traditional site of Paul’s prison in Philippi. Paul was beaten and imprisoned in this city, but the jailer and his household became Christians (Ac 16:19-34)







Wall of ancient Thessalonica. After Paul had reasoned from the Scriptures with the people here, an angry mob threw the city into an uproar (Ac 17:1-9)







Ruins of ancient Corinth, with Acrocorinth in the background. Paul endeavored to fortify Christians here in Corinth against the immoral way of life that surrounded them







Athenian Acropolis as it now appears. In the right foreground is the Areopagus, where Paul spoke




To Rome as a prisoner: Ac 23:11–28:31








MAP: Paul’s Trip to Rome







Paul was kept under guard in a house in Rome for two years; during that time he wrote five inspired letters to fellow Christians



