
FEATURE
Assyrian Empire




ASSYRIA was an empire whose record was dominated by military conquest, frequently coupled with sadistic treatment of captives. One of the foremost influences in Assyrian life was religious, and war was viewed as a true expression of their religion. Historian W. B. Wright reports: “Fighting was the business of the nation, and the priests were incessant fomenters of war. They were supported largely from the spoils of conquest, of which a fixed percentage was invariably assigned them before others shared, for this race of plunderers was excessively religious.”​—Ancient Cities, 1886, p. 25.
Both the Bible and secular history report repeated contacts between Israel and Assyria. In time Israel was forced to pay tribute to the king of Assyria. Then in 740 B.C.E., Samaria, the capital of the northern kingdom, was conquered, and thereafter thousands were sent into exile. The fact that Jehovah allowed this to occur reflects the low level to which apostate Israel had sunk. But when Sennacherib attempted to add Jerusalem to his list of conquests, an angel of Jehovah annihilated 185,000 of Assyria’s troops in one night. (Isa 36:1–37:38) As Jehovah’s prophets foretold, Assyria in time became a desolate ruin, and Babylon succeeded it on the world scene.​—Isa 23:13; Zep 2:13.



PROMINENT CITIES
Nineveh: Primary capital of the empire, made architecturally magnificent by Sennacherib but a “city of bloodshed.”​—Na 3:1
Calah: Later known as Nimrud; chosen by Ashurnasirpal II as his royal city and military capital
Khorsabad: A secondary capital, built by Sargon II but deserted soon after he died
Asshur: Ancient religious capital of the empire; Sennacherib listed 34 temples there
Babylon: Commercial and administrative center of southern Mesopotamia






MAP: Assyrian Empire







Painting by archaeologist A. H. Layard depicting the grandeur of the palace of King Ashurnasirpal II at Nimrud (Calah)







This huge winged bull with a human head once adorned the palace of Sargon II







From a wall at Ashurnasirpal II’s palace in Nimrud. Lion hunting was a sport of Assyrian kings; Nineveh itself was referred to as “the lair of lions” (Na 2:11)







A court scene of King Ashurnasirpal II with an attendant and a protective spirit; from the palace at Nimrud (Calah), displayed in the British Museum. Religion played a key role in Assyria’s politics







King Ashurnasirpal II shown rushing into battle with his god Asshur flying ahead of him and also shooting arrows. Displayed in the British Museum







King Ashurnasirpal II surrounded by symbols of his gods. The helmet with horns is said to represent Asshur; the winged disk in this case stands for the sun-god Shamash; the crescent is the emblem of the moon-god Sin; the forked line is the thunderbolt of Adad; and the star signifies Ishtar







Sennacherib’s representative taunts Jehovah and demands Jerusalem’s capitulation







The Sennacherib Prism (Taylor Prism in the British Museum), one of the king’s final annals in which he boasts about his invasion of Judah but makes no mention of the calamity that befell his troops







Assyrian brutality as depicted on their palace walls. Left, Chaldeans flayed alive and tongues pulled out. Bottom and right, Lachish captives flayed alive and impaled







True to Bible prophecy, Nineveh (the mound of Kuyunjik in the foreground) became “a city laid waste” (Na 2:10)







A tablet from the Babylonian Chronicle relates details of the Babylonian sacking of the once great city (Babylonian Chronicle B.M. [British Museum] 21901, also known as The Gadd Chronicle or The Fall of Nineveh Chronicle)



