BALSAM, BALSAM OF GILEAD
The term “balsam” applies to any of the many plants, shrubs, and trees producing an aromatic and, commonly, oily and resinous substance. The same word applies also to the substance produced. There are balsamiferous trees among the fir, spruce, poplar, and other tree families. The balsamic oil is used medicinally (usually containing benzoic or cinnamic acid) and as a perfume.
Balsam plants and trees were always highly prized by the peoples of the Orient. The first mention of “balsam oil” (Heb., boʹsem, beʹsem, or ba·samʹ) occurs at Exodus 25:6 with reference to its use as an ingredient in the holy anointing oil of the tabernacle. (See also Ex 35:8, 28.) The Hebrew word is sometimes translated as “perfumes,” “sweet,” or “spice,” according to the context. (Ex 30:23; Ca 4:10, 14, 16; 5:13; 6:2; 8:14) At Isaiah 3:24 its aromatic fragrance is contrasted with “a musty smell.”
The balsam used for the tabernacle service in the wilderness evidently came from outside of Palestine, perhaps from Egypt. During King Solomon’s reign the preciousness of balsam oil caused it to be ranked along with the gold and precious stones among the treasures that the queen of Sheba brought as gifts; it was also included in the tribute paid by the kings of many lands to the wise king in Jerusalem. (1Ki 10:2, 10, 25; 2Ch 9:1, 9, 24) It was among the precious things stored in the king’s treasure-house that Hezekiah unwisely showed to the emissaries from Babylon. (2Ki 20:13; 2Ch 32:27; Isa 39:2) It was used in the embalming (though not in the Egyptian way) of King Asa’s body. (2Ch 16:14) The English word “embalm” appears to be originally derived from the Hebrew ba·samʹ. Esther was massaged with aromatic balsam oil during the final six-month period prior to her appearance before King Ahasuerus.​—Es 2:12.
The “balsam [Heb., tsoriʹ] in Gilead” appears to have been of a unique quality and possessed of special medicinal properties. (Jer 8:22; 46:11) This balsam is first mentioned as among the articles carried by the caravan of Ishmaelites from Gilead, E of the Jordan, and to whom Joseph was subsequently sold. (Ge 37:25-28) Jacob later included it in with “the finest products of the land” when sending a gift to Egypt with his returning sons. (Ge 43:11) According to Ezekiel 27:17, the wealthy merchants of Tyre imported it from the kingdom of Judah.
References to the healing virtues of balsam, chiefly as a cure for wounds, are common in ancient literature. All references to such healing properties in the Scriptures are made by Jeremiah. He uses these, however, in a figurative sense, first when lamenting the spiritual breakdown in Judah (Jer 8:14, 15, 21, 22; compare Jas 5:14, 15), then in chiding Egypt as to her vain efforts to avoid defeat by Babylon (Jer 46:11-13), and finally in pronouncing God’s judgment of calamity against Babylon.​—Jer 51:8-10.
Identification of the specific plants or trees represented by the Hebrew words boʹsem and tsoriʹ is not definite. The name “balsam of Gilead” has been applied to a shrublike evergreen tree called Commiphora opobalsamum (or, Commiphora gileadensis). Its greenish-yellow oily resin is gathered by making incisions in the stem and branches, and the little balls of sap that form are later collected. While this particular tree is found chiefly in S Arabia, the Jewish historian Josephus indicates that it was cultivated around Jericho in Solomon’s time, and the Greek geographer Strabo records that in Roman times it was also grown beside the Sea of Galilee.
It has been suggested that tsoriʹ may refer to the mastic tree (Pistacia lentiscus), which produces a pale-yellow fragrant gum called mastic, as well as an oil used for medicinal purposes obtained from the bark, leaves, and berries. The tree is common in Palestine, and its name in Arabic is very similar to the Hebrew tsoriʹ.

