BARACHIAH
(Bar·a·chiʹah) [Jehovah Has Blessed].
Father of the Zechariah who was murdered “between the sanctuary and the altar.”​—Mt 23:35; Lu 11:50, 51.
As to the words “son of Barachiah,” they are not found in Luke’s account, and they are omitted from Matthew’s account in the Codex Sinaiticus (original scribe). It has been suggested that Jehoiada, the father of a Zechariah who was murdered, may have had two names, as is the case with other persons in the Bible.​—Compare Mt 9:9 and Mr 2:14; Mt 10:2, 3.
It is generally understood that Jesus here referred to Zechariah “the son of Jehoiada the priest.” (2Ch 24:20-22) This is the most logical conclusion, since Chronicles is listed last in the traditional Jewish canon, thereby making Abel the first and Zechariah the last righteous man recorded in the Hebrew Scriptures as having been murdered. According to 2 Chronicles 24:21, Zechariah was murdered “in the courtyard of Jehovah’s house.” The altar of burnt offering was in the inner courtyard, outside of and in front of the entrance to the sanctuary. This would correspond with Jesus’ location of the incident “between the sanctuary and the altar.”
Concerning both Abel and Zechariah a reckoning for the shedding of their blood was foretold. (Ge 4:10; 2Ch 24:22) Also, there is a strong parallel between the circumstances and events in the days of Zechariah the son of Jehoiada and those of the generation living when Jesus spoke these words. As Zechariah was dying he said: “Let Jehovah see to it and ask it back.” Very soon his prophetic words began to be fulfilled. A small Syrian force came up, and Jehovah delivered a great military force of Judah into their hand, the princes of Judah being greatly ruined and despoiled. The Syrians executed acts of judgment on Jehoash and left him with many diseases, after which he was murdered by his servants. (2Ch 24:23-25) After describing the bloodguilt of those to whom he was talking, Jesus said: “All these things will come upon this generation.” (Mt 23:36) Jesus’ prophecy was fulfilled on Jerusalem and Judea in 70-73 C.E.

