BIG TREE
[Heb., ʼe·lahʹ; ʼe·lohnʹ], Massive Tree [Heb., ʼal·lahʹ, ʼal·lohnʹ].
These Hebrew words are variously rendered “oak,” “elm,” and “teil tree” in the King James Version, also “terebinth” in the American Standard Version. However, many authorities acknowledge that these words may have been applied in Bible times simply to big trees in general.
At Amos 2:9 the Amorite people were likened to the cedar for height and to “massive trees” for vigor. These “massive trees” were especially abundant in Bashan, E of the Jordan, and are used in comparisons along with the cedars of Lebanon. (Isa 2:13; Zec 11:1, 2) Oars were fashioned from their wood. (Eze 27:6) Deborah was buried under such a tree at Bethel, resulting in the name Allon-bacuth, which means “Massive Tree of Weeping.” (Ge 35:8) The location of such trees on hills and high places made them popular places of shade under which false worshipers would engage in idolatrous practices.​—Ho 4:13.
Doubtless the massive trees of Bashan included the oak. Renowned for their sturdiness and strength, oak trees live to a very great age. Several kinds of oaks continue to grow in Bashan as well as in the lofty parts of the Hauran, Gilead, Galilee, and Lebanon. Some of them are evergreen, while others are deciduous (that is, losing their leaves each fall). Their fruit, the acorn, is set in a cup and is rich in tannin. It is believed that the color for the “coccus scarlet” material used in the sanctuary (Ex 25:4; 26:1) was obtained from a scale insect that infects the branches of a species of oak.​—See DYES, DYEING.
A tree considered likely to be among “the big trees” of the Bible is the terebinth, or turpentine tree (Pistacia palaestina or Pistacia atlantica). (Ge 12:6; 14:13) It is a common tree in Palestine and has a thick trunk and widespreading branches. Some varieties may attain to heights of as much as 15 m (50 ft), providing excellent shade. By making incisions in the bark, one can obtain a perfumed resin from which turpentine is produced.

