ELATH
(Eʹlath) [possibly, Ram; or, Place of the Ram], Eloth (Eʹloth [plural]).
A site first mentioned in Moses’ recapitulation of the Israelites’ 40-year trek through the wilderness. (De 2:8) Elath is mentioned along with Ezion-geber and lay on “the shore of the Red Sea in the land of Edom.” (1Ki 9:26) This points to a location on the NE arm or branch of the Red Sea known as the Gulf of ʽAqaba. Scholars basically agree with Jerome, of the fourth and fifth centuries C.E., who identified Elath with the city then known as Aila, associated with the Nabataeans. This would place Elath at or near the present-day Arab city of ʽAqaba situated at the NE corner of the gulf (the modern Jewish city called Elat being at the NW corner).
Elath was part of the Edomite domain when the Israelites passed through the region on their way to Canaan. Seals bearing the Edomite name of “Qosʽanal, servant of the king,” dated by archaeologists as from the seventh century B.C.E. have been found in the Elath area.
Evidently as a result of David’s conquest of Edom, Elath and neighboring Ezion-geber came under Judean control (2Sa 8:13, 14), and they are mentioned in connection with Solomon’s shipbuilding activities. (1Ki 9:26; 2Ch 8:17) The fact that Ezion-geber is referred to as “by Eloth” may indicate that Elath (Eloth) was the more prominent of the two sites, at least at that time.
Control of Elath evidently reverted to Edom during the reign of Jehoram of Judah. (2Ki 8:20-22) In the following century the city was restored to Judah and rebuilt by King Uzziah (Azariah). (2Ki 14:21, 22; 2Ch 26:1, 2) Then, during the rule of Ahaz (761-746 B.C.E.), it was wrested from Judah by the Syrians and was reoccupied by the Edomites, thereafter never returning to the Judeans. (2Ki 16:6) The Masoretic text here reads “Syria” or “Aram” (Heb., ʼAramʹ) instead of “Edom” (ʼEdhohmʹ). Most current scholars, however, accept the latter reading, in the margin, believing that a scribe confused the Hebrew letter daʹleth (ד) with the similar-shaped letter rehsh (ר).
Essentially an oasis, Elath was a stopping point on the caravan route leading from S Arabia to Egypt, Canaan, or Damascus. Along with Ezion-geber, it was also located at the gateway for the “ships of Tarshish” that plied the waters to and from Arabia, East Africa, and possibly India. (1Ki 10:22; 9:26, 27) Aramaic writings, such as wine receipts from the period of the Persian Empire, have been found in the area, also remnants of high-quality pottery of Grecian style, perhaps intended for transshipment to Arabia.

