HIRED LABORER
One who (in contrast with a slave) received a wage for his work.
The Law required that such laborers be paid at the end of the workday. (Le 19:13; De 24:14, 15) At least by the first century C.E., it appears that the wages were agreed upon before the laborers ever began their work, that the workday was 12 hours long, from about six in the morning to six in the evening, and that the customary day’s wage for vineyard workers was evidently a denarius (74 cents). (Mt 20:1-13) The Scriptural reference to “years of a hired laborer” seems to indicate that the duration of the work agreement, or contract, was also fixed.​—Isa 16:14; 21:16.
Evidently in Israel many of the hired laborers were uncircumcised, for the Law prescribed that they not partake of the Passover, although circumcised slaves could do so, being viewed as members of an Israelite family. Likewise, while the hired laborers of a priest could not eat of the holy things, no such prohibition rested on circumcised slaves, as these were also actually members of the priest’s household.​—Ex 12:43-45; Le 22:10, 11.
An Israelite who, because of financial reverses, had to sell himself into slavery to a fellow Israelite, or to an alien resident, a settler, or a member of the alien resident’s family, was to be treated, not tyrannically, but with due consideration like a hired laborer. Then, if in his case it had not been possible to take advantage of the right of repurchase, he was to be set free from servitude either in the seventh year of his servitude or in the Jubilee year, depending upon which came first.​—Ex 21:2; Le 25:39, 40, 47-49, 53; De 15:12; see SLAVE.
At times hired laborers were subjected to abuses from their employers. Through his prophet Malachi, Jehovah warned that He would become a speedy witness against those acting fraudulently with the wages of a wage worker.​—Mal 3:5; see also Jas 5:4; HIRE, WAGES.
The hired laborer generally was anxious to see the close of the workday and to receive his wages. (Job 7:1, 2) He often did not properly have the interests of his employer fully at heart, as is evident from Jesus Christ’s statement that, unlike the hired man who flees in the case of danger, he, as the Fine Shepherd, would surrender his soul in behalf of the sheep.​—Joh 10:11-15; see also Jer 46:21.

