IVORY
The creamy-white tusks of the elephant, hippopotamus, walrus, and other animals. Though hard, and having a density about three and a half times as great as seasoned cedarwood, it is highly elastic and is easily carved or tooled. Its fine grain gives it a pleasing touch and finish that has remarkable durability. The intersecting layers of dentin, alternating in shade, add to its utility a beauty all its own. “Ivory” is designated in Hebrew by the words shen (literally, tooth) and shen·hab·bimʹ (rendered “elephants’ teeth” in the Greek Septuagint). The Greek term e·le·phanʹti·nos means “made of ivory.”
Ivory has been associated with the luxuries of life​—fine art, elegant furnishings, treasured riches. Solomon’s ships, once every three years, brought great quantities of ivory from faraway places. (1Ki 10:22; 2Ch 9:21) Befitting his glory and greatness, Solomon “made a great ivory throne and overlaid it with refined gold.” (1Ki 10:18; 2Ch 9:17) The Psalms mention “the grand ivory palace” in connection with stringed instruments of music. (Ps 45:8) In the lovely Song of Solomon the writer uses ivory as a metaphor and a simile to express beauty: “His abdomen is an ivory plate covered with sapphires,” “Your neck is like an ivory tower.” (Ca 5:14; 7:4) King Ahab also built himself a palace using costly ivory, making it a veritable “house of ivory.” (1Ki 22:39) In the days of Amos houses and couches were constructed with ivory. (Am 3:15; 6:4) Archaeological findings confirm the rather extensive use of ivory by the nation of Israel and her neighbors.
Egypt too used this natural “plastic” in making such things as combs, fan handles, dishes, ointment boxes, chair legs, game boards, statuettes, and sculptured works of art. The city of Tyre, in her great sea commerce, inlaid the prows of her ships with ivory. Ivory is also listed among the costly things of ancient Tyre’s traders, as well as in the stock of “the traveling merchants of the earth” who weep over Babylon the Great’s fall into destruction.​—Eze 27:6, 15; Re 18:11, 12.

