LIBYA
(Libʹy·a), Libyans (Libʹy·ans).
Ancient Libya occupied an area of northern Africa W of Egypt. Its inhabitants are generally thought to have been designated by the Hebrew term Lu·vimʹ. (2Ch 12:3; “Libyans,” LXX, NW, RS) If Lu·vimʹ is a variant of Leha·vimʹ (Lehabim), this may indicate that at least some of the Libyans descended from Ham through Mizraim. (Ge 10:13) The traditional Jewish view found in the writings of Josephus (Jewish Antiquities, I, 130-132 [vi, 2]) makes the Libyans descendants of Ham through Put. (Ge 10:6) Also, the Greek Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate read “Libyans” in Jeremiah 46:9, Ezekiel 27:10, and 38:5 where the Hebrew text says “Put.” It is possible, of course, that descendants of both Put and Mizraim settled in the geographic region of northern Africa that came to be called Libya. This would mean that the designation “Libyans” is more comprehensive than the Hebrew term Lu·vimʹ.
Egypt’s King Shishak, regarded as the founder of the “Libyan dynasty,” captured numerous cities when he invaded Judah in the fifth year of King Rehoboam (993 B.C.E.). His powerful force of chariots and horsemen included Libyans. Although Jerusalem itself was spared, Shishak stripped the city of its treasures. (1Ki 14:25, 26; 2Ch 12:2-9) About 26 years later (967 B.C.E.), the Libyans were represented among the troops of Zerah the Ethiopian, which penetrated Judah but suffered humiliating defeat. (2Ch 14:9-13; 16:8) In the seventh century B.C.E., the assistance of the Libyans and others was seemingly of no avail in saving the Egyptian city of No-amon from calamity at the hands of the Assyrians. (Na 3:7-10) It was foretold that the Libyans and Ethiopians would be at the “steps” of the “king of the north,” implying that these former supporters of Egypt would come under his control.​—Da 11:43.
In the year 33 C.E., among the Jews and proselytes at Jerusalem for the Festival of Pentecost were persons from “the parts of Libya, which is toward Cyrene,” that is, the western part of Libya. Likely some of these were baptized in response to Peter’s discourse and later carried the message of Christianity back to the land of their residence.​—Ac 2:10.

