LOINS
The abdominal region and the area about the hips. The Bible uses both the Hebrew words chala·tsaʹyim (loins) and moth·naʹyim (hips) to refer to this area. (Isa 5:27; 2Ki 4:29) The Greek o·sphysʹ is also applied in the ordinary sense in describing John the Baptizer as clothed about the loins with a leather girdle.​—Mt 3:4.
The section of the body designated by the word “loins” contains the reproductive organs; therefore offspring are said to ‘come out of the loins.’ (Ge 35:11; 1Ki 8:19; Ac 2:30) Paul uses this fact when showing that Jesus’ priesthood according to the manner of Melchizedek is superior to Aaron’s, in that Levi, Aaron’s forefather, was in the loins of Abraham, and in that sense paid tithes to Melchizedek. (Heb 7:5-10; Ge 14:18-20) Paul also argued similarly at Romans 7:9, saying: “I [Paul the Jew, in his forefathers’ loins before the Law was given] was once alive apart from law; but when the commandment arrived, sin came to life again, but I died.”
To “gird up the loins” meant to gather up the ends of the robes under the sash to facilitate physical activity and came to be used as an expression denoting preparation for vigorous mental or spiritual activity, and at times, it conveyed the idea of strengthening.​—Lu 12:35; compare 1Pe 1:13, “Brace up your minds [literally, “Gird up the loins of your mind”] for activity.”
At Ephesians 6:14, Christians are told to have their “loins girded about with truth,” that is, strengthened by the truth of God’s Word as an essential support, just as a tight girding of the physical loins protects them against damage due to extreme stress.
Jehovah foretold the pain and distress of Jerusalem by the figure “every able-bodied man with his hands upon his loins like a female that is giving birth.”​—Jer 30:6.
The Hebrew word keʹsel (loins) appears several times at Leviticus 3:4-15, referring to communion sacrifices. It is also used at Job 15:27 and Psalm 38:7. It is translated “flanks” and “loins” in the King James Version.

