
FEATURE
Medo-Persian Empire









THE Medes and the Persians are referred to repeatedly in the Scriptures because they pursued a policy of religious toleration that served to fulfill Bible prophecy.
Jehovah had permitted the Jews to be taken into captivity by Babylon, a nation that did not release captive peoples. Yet, God also had foretold Jewish restoration to their homeland. (Jer 27:22; 30:3) Medo-Persia, referred to in the Bible symbolically as a bear (Da 7:5), served Jehovah’s purpose in this regard.
Shortly after Babylon’s fall, Persian King Cyrus decreed that the formerly captive Jews could return to their homeland and rebuild Jehovah’s temple. (Ezr 1:2-4) Darius I later honored this decree. (Ezr 6:1-11) King Ahasuerus (evidently Xerxes I), when properly informed, signed a decree that thwarted a scheme to exterminate the Jews. (Es 7:3–8:14) In 455 B.C.E., King Artaxerxes Longimanus granted permission for Nehemiah to rebuild Jerusalem’s walls, thus beginning the prophetic countdown to the appearance of the Messiah.​—Ne 2:3-8; Da 9:25.



PRINCIPAL LOCATIONS
Pasargadae: An early Persian capital
Shushan: Former Elamite capital that became administrative center of the Medo-Persian Empire
Persepolis: A royal city built by Emperors Darius I, Xerxes I, and Artaxerxes Longimanus
Ecbatana: Summer capital of the empire; it had been the capital of Media
Babylon: A royal city of the empire; because of the torrid summer weather, the city seldom served as more than a winter capital
Gaugamela: Site of the defeat of Persia’s vast army under Darius III by Alexander the Great in 331 B.C.E., thus marking the end of the empire






MAP: Medo-Persian Empire







Relief work showing Medes (with round hats) and Persians (with fluted hats)







Modern Hamadan (in Iran), the site of ancient Ecbatana. Here Cyrus the Great had a palace. His policy of religious toleration greatly benefited the Jews







The Cyrus Cylinder, a nine-inch long (23 cm) clay document that records Cyrus’ capture of Babylon and the liberation of exiles







Cylinder seal of Darius I and its impression, showing him on a lion hunt and his god Ahura Mazda in the sky above. Darius upheld the Jews in their temple-rebuilding work in Jerusalem







Ruins from ancient Persepolis. Here Darius I, Xerxes I, and Artaxerxes Longimanus built palaces







Ruins from ancient Persepolis. Here Darius I, Xerxes I, and Artaxerxes Longimanus built palaces







Ruins from ancient Persepolis. Here Darius I, Xerxes I, and Artaxerxes Longimanus built palaces







Ruins from ancient Persepolis. Here Darius I, Xerxes I, and Artaxerxes Longimanus built palaces







Excavations of ancient town area in Shushan







Decorations typical of those that adorned the palace audience hall at Shushan







Mordecai and Esther before King Ahasuerus (evidently Xerxes I)



