PORCH
In the Hebrew Scriptures the word for porch, ʼeh·lamʹ (or ʼu·lamʹ), is not used in regard to an architectural portion of individual homes, private houses. Whether Israelite homes had a porch of some sort is difficult to determine. But the archaeological remains of some houses in Megiddo indicate that they were built around a courtyard and that “one ground floor room served as an entrance vestibule.” (The Biblical Archaeologist, May 1968, pp. 46, 48) In the Scriptures ʼeh·lamʹ is applied to two of the public buildings Solomon constructed, the front part of Solomon’s temple, and to certain parts of the gateways and temple that Ezekiel was shown in vision.
Porch of Pillars. One of the official buildings Solomon constructed in the temple area sometime after he completed the temple was the Porch of Pillars. (1Ki 7:1, 6) Since mention of the Porch of Pillars is made between comments about the House of the Forest of Lebanon and comments about the Porch of the Throne, it is quite possible that the Porch of Pillars was S of the temple and between these other two official buildings. Thus, one coming from the S might pass through or around the House of the Forest of Lebanon and then enter the Porch of Pillars, walking through it into the Porch of the Throne.
The building was 50 cubits (22.3 m; 72.9 ft) long and 30 cubits (13.4 m; 43.7 ft) wide. Its very name suggests that it was made up of rows of impressive pillars. First Kings 7:6 mentions another porch in front with pillars and a canopy. Perhaps this means that one first came to a porch having an extending canopy supported by pillars. Then this porch merged right into the Porch of Pillars proper. If the dimensions given apply just to the Porch of Pillars, then the size of the canopied portion is not given.
This building may have served as a grand entranceway to the Porch of the Throne and as a place where the king conducted the ordinary business of the kingdom and received some visitors.
Porch of the Throne. Another building that Solomon constructed after the temple was completed was the Porch of the Throne. (1Ki 7:1, 7) “The porch of judgment” referred to in the text seems to be synonymous with “the Porch of the Throne.” So “the Porch of the Throne” evidently was where Solomon placed his ornate ivory and gold throne and did judging.​—1Ki 10:18-20.
The entire description of this building is: “He made the porch of judgment; and they covered it in with cedarwood from the floor to the rafters.” (1Ki 7:7) The Masoretic text actually says, “from floor to floor,” leading some to believe that there was cedar from the floor of this building to the floor of the Porch of Pillars mentioned in the preceding verse. However, the Syriac Peshitta reads “from floor to ceiling,” and the Latin Vulgate says “from floor to top.” So, certain translators believe that the cedar was some sort of splendid paneling from the floor of the Porch to its rafters or ceiling. (NW, RS, JB, Ro) Though other architectural details are lacking, this would suggest a building not having open pillars on a side or sides, as may have been the case with the House of the Forest of Lebanon and the Porch of Pillars.
Since the Porch of the Throne is listed right after the Porch of Pillars, it is possible that this latter building served as a grand entrance to the Porch of the Throne. A person coming from the S may have had to walk through the Porch of Pillars to enter the porch of judgment.
Solomon’s Temple. While the primary portions of the temple were the Holy and Most Holy compartments, in front of the Holy (toward the E) there was a massive porch that served as an entranceway to the temple. The porch was 20 cubits (8.9 m; 29.2 ft) long (running along the width of the temple) and 10 cubits (4.5 m; 14.6 ft) deep. (1Ki 6:3) It was 120 cubits (53.4 m; 175 ft) high. Second Chronicles 3:4 presents the height of the porch in the context of other measurements for the house, measurements that are generally accepted and that harmonize with those in First Kings. (Compare 2Ch 3:3, 4 with 1Ki 6:2, 3, 17, 20.) Thus the porch would have appeared as a tall, evidently rectangular, tower that extended high above the rest of the temple building. In front of it stood two massive copper pillars named Jachin and Boaz. (1Ki 7:15-22; 2Ch 3:15-17) The porch also had doors (King Ahaz closed these up, but his son Hezekiah later opened and repaired them). (2Ch 28:24; 29:3, 7) Especially in the morning when the sun rising in the E shone directly on it, the lofty temple porch must have been a most impressive sight.
Ezekiel’s Temple Vision. Quite a number of porches are mentioned in the vision Ezekiel had of a temple sanctuary. The temple building itself had a porch in front (toward the E), as did Solomon’s temple. However, this porch was 20 cubits (10.4 m; 34 ft) in length and 11 cubits (5.7 m; 18.7 ft) in width; the height is not stated. (These measurements are based on the long cubit of about 51.8 cm [20.4 in.]; see Eze 40:5, ftn.) This porch had pillars as well as side pillars, and there was a wood canopy, probably near the top. (Eze 40:48, 49; 41:25, 26) Each of the three elaborate outer gateways (approaching from the E, S, and N) incorporated a porch with windows of narrowing frames. Apparently, one ascending the stairs into the gateway passed three guard chambers on each side and then, by crossing a threshold, came into the porch before entering the outer courtyard. (Eze 40:6-17) Each of the three inner gateways also had a porch, perhaps just as one ascended the steps and entered the gate. The porch in the gateway approached from the N contained four tables for slaughtering the whole burnt offering.​—Eze 40:35-42.

