QUARREL
A dispute (De 17:8), controversy (Jer 25:31), or case at law (Jer 11:20).
The Scriptures counsel against becoming involved in quarrels, or disputes, without cause. (Pr 3:30) Says the proverb: “As one grabbing hold of the ears of a dog is anyone passing by that is becoming furious at the quarrel that is not his.” (Pr 26:17) The speech of stupid ones readily leads them into quarrels, and foolish ones do not exercise the needed restraint to avoid quarreling. (Pr 18:6; 20:3) Since “the squeezing out of anger” results in quarreling (Pr 30:33), slowness to anger has the opposite effect.​—Pr 15:18.
Quarreling destroys a peaceful atmosphere (Pr 17:1) and may cause even the meekest of persons to lose self-control. For example, Israel’s quarreling about there being no water at Kadesh prompted Moses and Aaron to act rashly, thereby losing the privilege of entering the Promised Land. Israel’s unjustified quarreling with Jehovah’s representatives actually constituted a quarrel with Jehovah. (Nu 20:2, 3, 10-13; 27:14; Ps 106:32) Those who become similarly involved in quarreling or violent controversies with God’s servants are in a very serious position, one that can lead to death.​—Compare Isa 41:8, 11, 12; 54:17.
Because of the detrimental effect of quarreling, the proverb counsels: “Before the quarrel has burst forth, take your leave.” (Pr 17:14) Abram (Abraham) set a good example in this regard. Concerned that there be no disputes between his herdsmen and those of his nephew Lot, Abram suggested that they separate. Unselfishly he gave Lot the opportunity to choose the area where he would pasture his animals. (Ge 13:7-11) On the other hand, unfaithful Israelites in the time of Isaiah did not act like their forefather Abraham. Of them, it is said: “For quarreling and struggle you would fast.” Even during the fast they were engaged in quarreling.​—Isa 58:4.
The Mosaic Law covered cases of quarreling resulting in bodily injury. It prescribed paying compensation to the injured party for time lost from work.​—Ex 21:18, 19.
Murmuring. Murmuring discourages and tears down. The Israelites, not long out of Egypt, murmured against Jehovah, finding fault with the leadership that he provided by his servants Moses and Aaron. (Ex 16:2, 7) Later their complaints so discouraged Moses that he asked to die. (Nu 11:13-15) Murmuring can be a deadly danger to the murmurer. Jehovah counted the things said by murmurers about Moses as actually being a rebellious complaint against His own divine leadership. (Nu 14:26-30) Many lost their lives as a result of faultfinding.
Accordingly, the Christian Greek Scriptures draw on the ancient examples to warn of the destructiveness of murmuring, or complaining. (1Co 10:10, 11) Jude tells of those who ‘disregard lordship and speak abusively of glorious ones,’ describing such ones as “murmurers, complainers about their lot in life, proceeding according to their own desires, and their mouths speak swelling things, while they are admiring personalities for the sake of their own benefit.”​—Jude 8, 16.
Jesus condemned the faultfinding attitude when he said: “Stop judging that you may not be judged. Why, then, do you look at the straw in your brother’s eye, but do not consider the rafter in your own eye? . . . Hypocrite! First extract the rafter from your own eye, and then you will see clearly how to extract the straw from your brother’s eye.”​—Mt 7:1, 3-5; compare Ro 2:1.

