
FEATURE
Roman Empire









ROME was depicted in Bible prophecy as a beast that was “fearsome and terrible and unusually strong,” with teeth of iron. (Da 7:7) It was this empire that Jehovah permitted to bring Jerusalem to ruin in 70 C.E.
Rome tolerated almost any sort of religious practice, as long as those who held to it would also share in worship of the emperor. Such emperor worship was viewed as an important factor in uniting the empire. So any who refused to share in it were considered to be enemies of the state. Christians did not join in such worship. Thus, although they were honest citizens, Christians often became the objects of vicious persecution. Among those who instigated such persecution were Emperors Nero, Domitian, Marcus Aurelius, and Diocletian. Pontius Pilate, a Roman governor of Judea, when pressured by religious leaders of the Jews, even ordered the execution of Jesus Christ, doing so as an act of political expediency.



PRINCIPAL CITIES
Rome: The western capital of the empire; after 395 C.E., the empire was divided, with emperors in both Rome and Constantinople; the Eastern Empire lasted nearly a thousand years after the Western Empire
Constantinople: Constantine transferred the capital of the empire from Rome to Byzantium, which he renamed to honor himself






MAP: Roman Empire







Augustus Caesar. Jesus was born during his rule







Tiberius Caesar, as depicted on a coin. The execution of Jesus took place during Tiberius’ reign







Claudius Caesar, who banished Jews from Rome







Caesar Nero, before whom the apostle Paul was tried







Vespasian. During his rule Jerusalem and its temple were destroyed







Titus, son of Vespasian, as shown on a Roman coin. Nine years after destroying Jerusalem, he became emperor







Domitian. Official persecution of Christians reached a peak during his rule, evidently resulting in the exile of the apostle John







Ruins of Roman aqueduct at Caesarea. This seaport city, built by Herod the Great, was an official residence of Roman procurators who governed Judea







These columns at the site of ancient Samaria testify to Roman influence there







A picture of the Tower (Fortress) of Antonia. This tower was situated at the northwest corner of Jerusalem’s temple court and was used by the Romans to police activities in the temple area







A model of the hippodrome built in Jerusalem, evidently by Herod the Great. In Roman style, there were chariot races here and condemned men were made to fight wild beasts







The Arch of Titus in Rome commemorates the victory of Rome over Jerusalem in 70 C.E.







Arch of Titus. A relief on an interior panel shows Roman soldiers carrying off sacred vessels from the temple







Ruins of the Colosseum in Rome. It stands as a reminder of the brutal entertainment that was popular in ancient Rome







An altar devoted to the worship of Caesar. Because Christians would not burn incense to the emperor, they became objects of vicious persecution



