SHESHBAZZAR
(Shesh·bazʹzar).
An appointee of King Cyrus over the first exiles returning from Babylon. As he led the Jews back, Sheshbazzar brought with him the gold and silver utensils that Nebuchadnezzar had looted from the temple. On arrival in Jerusalem, he laid the foundations of the second temple.​—Ezr 1:7-11; 5:14-16.
Opinion is somewhat divided as to whether Sheshbazzar was the same person as Governor Zerubbabel or was some other individual. Shenazzar the son of King Jehoiachin mentioned at 1 Chronicles 3:18 is suggested by some in view of the resemblance between the two names, as well as Sheshbazzar’s title “prince of Judah” appearing in some versions of Ezra 1:8. (AS, RS) This theory is very weak, however, for the resemblance in names is not great, and Zerubbabel, a grandson of Jehoiachin, had just as much claim to the title “prince [“chieftain,” NW] of Judah” as an offspring of the first generation.
Some modern scholars, in attempting to identify Sheshbazzar and Zerubbabel as separate individuals, say that Cyrus first appointed Sheshbazzar as governor but that later Sheshbazzar was succeeded by Zerubbabel during the reign of Darius, and therefore the building of the temple is credited to Zerubbabel.
A greater likelihood, it appears, is that Sheshbazzar is the same as Zerubbabel, and the majority of scholars and reference works so connect the names. Note these points of comparison: In general, what is attributed to Sheshbazzar in the two passages where he is mentioned by name is elsewhere in effect credited to Zerubbabel. Both are called by the title “governor.” (Ezr 1:11; 2:1, 2; 5:2, 14, 16; Hag 1:1, 14; 2:2, 21; Zec 4:9) Zerubbabel is acknowledged as leader of the returning exiles; the name “Sheshbazzar” is not even found in this list.​—Ezr 2:2; 3:1, 2.
The name Sheshbazzar seems to have been an official or Babylonian name given to Zerubbabel, as Daniel and others were given official court names. (Da 1:7) “Sheshbazzar” is more typically Chaldean than “Zerubbabel.” In Ezra 5:14-16 an official letter is quoted, and in Ezra chapter 1 the official edict of Cyrus has just been quoted, perhaps giving rise to the use of such a possible official name in these passages.

