From Our Readers
Driving  I appreciated the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Convince My Parents That I’m Ready to Drive?” (March 22, 1989) I am 14 years old and have been talking to my mother about driving, but she has been very skeptical about the whole thing. I was beginning to think that I wasn’t going to drive until I was 30! Now I know that I can start doing things to build my mother’s confidence in me so that when the time comes, she will know I can handle the responsibility. Thank you so much!
J. D., United States
Pets  I managed a pet store for several years and feel I am qualified to express an ‘educated opinion.’ Your article on pets (June 8, 1989) had many good points. But when it came to hygiene, you backed off on the whole point of responsible ownership. A responsible pet owner will see to it that the animal is kept clean, healthy, and parasite free so that the pet can be welcomed into the home. Regular visits to the veterinarian should be routine and should be allowed for in the family budget. The article ought to have mentioned the importance of daily cleaning feces from the yard, litter box, or cage. You cannot blame an animal for being dirty, parasite ridden, or unhealthy if that’s the condition the owners allow it to live in.
L. T., United States
These points are well-taken. The article, though, was not intended to be an in-depth discussion of pet care. Rather, it served to help readers decide if they are prepared to take on the weighty responsibility of pet ownership.​—ED.
Verbal Abuse  Your article (June 8, 1989) helped me appreciate that parents are under intense pressure. Today I was spoken to hurtfully and felt extremely miserable. I was very angry with my parents. But it truly helped that I had read this article thoroughly just the day before. When I thought about their good side instead of dwelling only on my parents’ bad points, my heart and my thinking became much, much happier. Thank you very much.
E. T., Japan
I am 15 years old and have been so downhearted and depressed lately because of the verbal abuse I was receiving from my father. This article was spiritual food at the proper time. It has really been a source of encouragement to me and my mother.
H. T., United States
Crime  The April 22, 1989, issue contained advice that alarmed me. Regarding coping with muggers, the statement was made: “Look the person in the eye, and try to hold his gaze.” I lived for many years in high crime areas and was taught not to look assaultive persons in the eye, since they might feel you were trying to identify them for future criminal charges.
R. L., United States
We agree that, under certain circumstances, staring at a potentially hostile individual could provoke violence. Nevertheless, some authorities believe that maintaining eye contact during a mugging is preferable to looking about wildly or gazing down at the ground​—behavior that might indicate fear or panic.​—ED.
Worse Than AIDS  I was raised as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. But I wanted to be liked and got in with the wrong company. I have been helped to get back on the right road before it was too late. The article about the AIDS victim (April 22, 1989) will help me stay on that road. He was brave to change, as so many would have given up. His experience shows that the world has nothing to offer us and that without Jehovah’s love and favor, we are dead.
D. C., New Zealand

