Answering the Call of the Micronesian Islands
NAMES like Truk, Yap, Ponape, Guam, and Saipan may sound somewhat familiar to you. But what about Belau, Rota, Kosrae, Nauru, or Kiribati? These and others are all part of the more than 2,000 islands and atolls scattered over some three million square miles of the Western Pacific and known collectively as Micronesia, or small islands.
Within this vast expanse, approximately the size of Australia or the continental United States, Jehovah’s Witnesses are busy proclaiming the Kingdom good news. (Mark 13:10) Currently, this work is being done by about 740 Kingdom publishers in 13 congregations. Indeed, there is a great need for more workers to bring in the harvest in these faraway islands of the sea.​—Compare Jeremiah 31:10.
Over the last 20 years or so, individuals from Hawaii, the Philippines, Canada, the United States, and Australia have answered the call and taken up missionary service in the Micronesian islands. When the first of them arrived in 1965, there were only 76 Kingdom publishers in all of this vast territory. In 1987, however, a total of 4,510 persons attended the Memorial of Jesus Christ’s death. Clearly, Christian labors of love over the years had been richly blessed.
Today, there are 49 missionaries serving out of 14 missionary homes scattered among the islands, all working under the supervision of the Watch Tower Society’s Guam branch. Their love for Jehovah and for their Micronesian neighbors has moved them to answer the missionary call. What experiences have they had while serving in these remote islands? In terms of new languages and customs, what challenges have they had to overcome? And what has helped them to stay in their assignments? Let us hear from some of them about their work in these islands.
The Challenge of New Languages
There are eight or nine major languages in Micronesia. But because these are not considered written languages, it is difficult for the new missionaries to find books to use in learning them. Still, they work hard at it. One effective method, they were told, was to try to use what had been learned immediately in the preaching work. Well, they still remember the many hilarious​—and embarrassing—​situations that developed when they tried to do that.
Roger, a native of Hawaii, recalls one such situation when he first came to Belau 13 years ago. “When one householder said, ‘I’m a Catholic,’ the only Palauan word I knew to answer with was ‘Why?’” The householder then went into a long explanation. “I did not understand a word she said. At her conclusion, I said the only other word I knew, ‘Thank you,’ and left!”
Salvador, who came to Truk with his wife, Helen, ten years ago, remembers trying to ask a Trukese lady if she wanted to be happy (pwapwa). Instead, he asked if she wanted to be pregnant (pwopwo). And Zenette, who came from Canada with her husband, David, recalls the time when she tried to say “Thank you” (kilisou) but wound up saying “Horsefly” (kiliso). Needless to say, they know those words well now.
When James was transferred to the island of Kosrae after serving four years in Ponape, he had to start all over again. He especially remembers trying to befriend one householder. But instead of asking, “How are you?” he told him, “You are a freak”! Now, after ten years, he confesses: “At first, it was hard to say some of the Kosraean words because they sounded so much like swear words in English.”
Such experiences, however, never discourage these missionaries from pressing on with their language studies. “There is little one can do to help the people without learning the language,” said one missionary. “This provides real incentive to study diligently.”
Customs and Superstitions
To the newcomers, many of the local customs seemed amusing. For instance, David met a man who had named his three sons Sardine, Tuna, and Spam. Later, he was introduced to three men named Desire, Sin, and Repent. Zenette found it strange that people call their grandparents Papa and Mama and their parents by their first names. When Sheri first came from Hawaii, she thought it was most amusing that people use their nose to point out directions. And it took some time to get used to this custom: When a woman enters a public gathering, she “walks” on her knees to her “seat” on the floor to show respect for the men.
Many, too, are the superstitious beliefs. In the Marshall Islands, for example, when someone dies the family will put food, cigarettes, and flowers on the grave for the deceased. Or when a bird flies around the house singing, this is taken to mean danger and imminent death for someone in the family.
Some in the islands are also deeply involved in spiritism. Jon was one of them. Once an elder in a Protestant church, he was able to expel demons by prayers and by using medicine prepared from coconut oil.
“One day an ugly face of a demon as wide as a door appeared at the entrance of my room,” Jon related. At first Jon thought he was dreaming but soon realized that he was fully awake.
“The demon told me that he was the source of my magical powers. This shocked me and caused me to wonder why the demons would work through me, a deacon in the church, and why the minister himself sought my demonistic services.” Jon was soon contacted by the Witness missionaries and started to study the Bible.
“It brought me great joy to learn the truth about the demons and about how to identify the true religion,” Jon recalled. He withdrew from his church and discontinued his practice of demonism. Today he warns others to avoid all demonistic practices.​—Deuteronomy 18:9-13; Revelation 21:8.
Reaching the Smaller Islands
Taking the good news to people on the small outer islands is a real challenge. Often the only way to reach them is to book passage on a copra ship. As the ship stops at each islet for a few hours or days to pick up cargo, the missionaries and other Kingdom publishers busy themselves in witnessing to the islanders. Weekly radio broadcasts are another way of bringing the good news to them.
Residents of the outer islands often travel to the main island centers for food, medical attention, and schooling. While there, they may be contacted by Jehovah’s Witnesses and may obtain Bible literature. Interest is followed up by mail or when publishers visit their island. One couple was contacted this way in Majuro in the Marshall Islands and then returned to their home island of Ailuk, 250 miles away. They began making progress in their understanding of the Bible. Soon they severed ties with their church, legalized their marriage, and got baptized. Now both preach zealously on their isolated island, frequently serving as auxiliary pioneers.
Missionaries in Ponape, Truk, and Belau use their own boats for island witnessing. Since there are no docking facilities at most places, they often have to wade ashore in mud up to their knees. Most residents are friendly and welcome the visitors by spreading out woven floor mats for them and serving them cool coconut water. The entire family is summoned and will listen attentively. Because many do not have money, it is not uncommon to see publishers returning after two or three days with their boat loaded with fruit received in exchange for Bible literature.
Sacrifices and Rewards
For the missionaries, life in the islands is not what it was back home. They have to get used to frequent power failures and water shortages, depending on rainwater for their supply. On some islands, there are no power, water, or sewage systems, no paved roads, and no automobiles. But the missionaries have learned to be adaptable. “When I see the local brothers living in houses built out of discarded lumber and flooring, we feel empathy for them, and this tends to keep us balanced in our needs and wants,” observes Julian, who has served faithfully for 17 years in Guam and the Marshall Islands.
Rodney and Sheri came to Truk from Hawaii. He admits: “Frankly, I experienced a culture shock.” Now, ten years later, he writes: “We have a very satisfying work to do here. We have our ups and downs; at times we feel discouraged and lonely. But we want to continue to pursue our purpose in life in missionary work here.” And Sheri cheerfully adds: “Self-sacrificing people are happy people.”
Indeed, their sacrifices are richly rewarded. Clemente and his wife, Eunice, who came to the Marshall Islands ten years ago, now conduct 34 weekly home Bible studies. “Fourteen of the students have symbolized their dedication to Jehovah by water immersion,” he reports, “and others are progressing toward baptism. Such lifesaving work is of great value in our eyes.” James, a missionary for more than ten years, states: “To see the endurance of our Kosraean brothers year after year is a real blessing.” Over in Belau, Roger comments: “We have been blessed with a new Kingdom Hall and a loyal group of publishers.” And looking back over the years, Placido says: “Jehovah’s direction and holy spirit have been evident in our lives. This has helped us to draw very close to him.”
Such experiences have encouraged the missionaries to remain in their assignments. Many of them can look back and remember the formation of the first congregation in their area. Like the apostle Paul, they have the unique joy of ‘not building on another man’s foundation.’ (Romans 15:20) Their feeling is well expressed by this comment: “There is still much work to be done. I believe Jehovah will yet open up many opportunities to bring in more sheeplike ones in the islands, and we are privileged to share in it.”
“The blessing of Jehovah​—that is what makes rich, and he adds no pain with it,” says the Bible at Proverbs 10:22. Those who have answered the missionary call of the Micronesian islands have truly experienced this blessing along with the joy and satisfaction that come from serving Jehovah.

