Have You Ever Wondered—
Do We Really Need God?
MANY persons will immediately answer, ‘No, God is not necessary in this modern scientific age.’ They point to the great accomplishments of science in recent years. Thus, many have concluded that science, the product of higher education, is what is important and that we really do not need God in our daily lives. However, . . .
HAS SCIENCE SOLVED LIFE’S PROBLEMS?
Higher education and scientific studies have obviously brought many conveniences into our homes. The homes of people in many lands bulge with appliances to entertain us or make our housework easier. But have these advances created happier families? The shocking rise of divorce, child abuse, battered wives and husbands and domestic murder give the sad answer.
Because of highly developed communication systems and rapid transportation networks, in a matter of hours we are made aware of what is happening on the other side of the globe. But is the world more united because of these scientific achievements?
On the other hand, are not some scientific advances the source of real fear for the existence of humankind? For instance, consider the awesome nuclear arms race. Think, too, of the pollution some scientific developments have produced that has poisoned much of our air, land and water. So with all the achievements of science, is the human society better off physically, mentally, spiritually and morally?
True, some may say that common sense is needed to guide how these advances of science are used. But how reliable is man’s ability to use common sense? One writer referred to the two world wars and said that these came about because men “tired of common sense and civilization.” No, man’s common sense cannot guarantee the right direction. It is just as the Bible says: “It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.”​—Jer. 10:23.
HOW CAN GOD HELP US?
The order and design in our universe argue for the existence of a Great Designer. It is also apparent that our bodies were designed not merely to exist but to enjoy life. Our eyes see in color, not just black and white. Hence, we enjoy the color of flowers, a sunset or a rainbow. Our senses of taste and smell add delight. So our original Life-Giver wanted us to get the best out of life. But what is needed to realize such lasting happiness?
Suppose someone gave you an expensive camera without any instructions for its use. Now, the camera is capable of taking excellent pictures. However, even if you could put the film in without instructions, you may spoil the entire roll because of not knowing how to use the camera. You need instructions from the maker of the camera.
It is similar with our need for God’s direction and instructions. We need to know how to direct our lives, how to make wise decisions so that we can get real satisfaction from the life we have received from God. Trying the trial-and-error method ends up in many emotional scars and wounds​—and often in a wasted life.
But where are such instructions from God to be found? By an investigation, many persons become thoroughly convinced that such information is contained in the world’s best-seller​—the Bible. The material contained therein was produced by inspiration of God and contains his thoughts.​—2 Tim. 3:16.
DOES GOD’S HELP REALLY WORK?
Earth wide, many thousands of persons who have sincerely followed Bible guidance answer, ‘Yes, it does!’
One place where guidance and help are especially needed is in family life. The famous writer Goethe stated: “He is the happiest, be he king or peasant, who finds peace in his home.” If a person’s homelife is not peaceful, he is usually miserable, regardless of his wealth or station in life.
This was the case with a young American woman who had already had one disastrous marriage and was having serious difficulties with her second one. When approached by Jehovah’s Witnesses, who urged her to use the Bible, her attitude was: “I don’t need the Bible. Show me why I should have any confidence in it.”
The Witnesses showed her the Bible principles that can create a happy marriage. They encouraged her to put these principles to the test by following them. She agreed and began following them.
Her homelife immediately began to improve! This built up her confidence in the Bible. Soon, she began applying the Bible’s counsel to be an industrious housewife, not partaking of “the bread of laziness.” (Prov. 31:27) She began disciplining and training her children. (Prov. 22:6, 15) The whole family beamed with love and warmth. The woman was convinced. Now she and her husband have a rich family life. God’s help was needed, and it worked.
There are many other personal problems that God has an answer for. He provides needed help to cope with any problem a person may face. But how can you show that you value such help?
HOW CAN YOU SHOW YOU NEED GOD?
First, by taking time to study his book of instructions​—the Bible. Second, by complying with what you learn to be God’s requirements. Jehovah’s Witnesses will help you, free of charge, to get acquainted with Jehovah and his Word. As you try hard to follow God’s directions, he will bless your efforts and guide your steps so that you will enjoy your life to the full.

