From Our Readers
FAMILY LIFE
We want to express our appreciation for the wonderful articles regarding parents and children. The many practical suggestions and Scriptural principles will prove a blessing for any who seek to apply them. Thank you for your concern.
G. S., New York
Thank you very much for having spoken out about marriage in such a positive way.
C. H., Germany
INCEST
I just read the article “Incest​—The Hidden Crime.” As a woman who went through that awful experience, I thought no one would understand or be able to help me. Thank you for your insight, understanding and tremendously compassionate handling of such a sensitive problem. The hope that you pointed out has kept me sane and given me hope that Jehovah will eventually remove the scars left behind.
Name withheld, California
I appreciated the “Awake!” article on incest. By the time I was three my father raped both my sister and me. I tried telling my mother but she didn’t believe me. Then we got older and it was turned in to the police. But by that time I didn’t trust anybody. I still have a lot of insecurities, but with time and Jehovah’s love and understanding I know that they will pass.
Name withheld, California
I just want to express my appreciation for the “Awake!” on “Incest​—The Hidden Crime.” This is something I had to cope with when I was a child. This article came out just when I needed it most. You will never know how much this article has helped me to realize what happened to me and how to cope with my problems.
Name withheld, Illinois
My husband and I agreed to discuss the article “Incest​—The Hidden Crime” with our two children. After our study, our eight-year-old daughter told us about an incident involving her uncle. We would never have thought this possible, but here it was right in our own family. The situation was bad, but without this communication with our children it could have been much worse. Who knows how long this could have gone on?
Name withheld, Virginia
SMOKING
Your articles on smoking are marvelously informative and will be a great help to my patients. It is time more was done to help people to understand the disadvantages of smoking and how to overcome the habit. With many thanks for your contribution.
H. D. L., Health Clinic, England

