The Two-Day “Miracles”
THESE KINGDOM HALLS ARE NOT PREFABRICATED. THEY ARE BUILT TO 90% OF COMPLETION FROM MATERIALS BROUGHT TO A PREPOURED CONCRETE SLAB
AS HE drove by a neighboring field, Bill hardly noticed the cluster of people surrounding a bare wood-and-block foundation. It was early morning. Little did he realize the shock he would face on his return trip.
Four hours later, as Bill neared the same field, he saw it. His mouth dropped open. There, on top of that foundation, stood a building! Though it was not completely finished, it had in place a shingled roof, siding and windows. The shock caused him to lose control of his truck as he turned, and it pitched off the road. Only his quick response kept it out of a ditch.
Bill saw the beginning stages of a two-day “miracle.” A Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses was being built by a swarm of eager workers who would almost complete it​—inside and out—​in just two days. Soon the whole town of Grafton, North Dakota, knew about this feat. “They moved in a building during the night!” said one person. “Impossible,” declared another. “No, they actually built it!”
One man in Memphis, Tennessee, who read of another of these projects, said that the report provided “a ray of hope for the human condition.” Why so? Certainly when you look at the human condition today it is not a pretty picture. Why would a construction project have such far-reaching implications? You will see.
Just One of Many
One of the organizers, Stanley Peck, estimates that over 60 “instant” Kingdom Halls have been built, starting with a hall 10 years ago at Webb City, Missouri. There in two days a crew of 50 put up the walls and roof of a hall. “It seemed then that if we really organized things properly we might do the whole job in a weekend,” reflected Peck. “That’s where the idea started.” Each additional hall was brought a little closer to completion within the two days. “During the last 20 or so halls we got it to 90 percent of completion,” stated another organizer, John Langan.
“Ninety percent” usually includes a bricked, fully insulated, air-conditioned building, and occasionally a landscaped lot. Often it is painted, wallpapered and decorated with a striking handpainted wall mural, which blends beautifully with the colors of a new carpet. They are not prefabricated, nor simply “thrown up.” Some have been as large as 60 feeta by 70 feet and able to seat 250. Each has its own design, with multiple rooms, including rest rooms, a library and an auditorium. They are also fully wired for sound amplification. One in Oklahoma even has a fireplace! Usually, they are appraised at three times their original cost or more.
“I Don’t Believe It!”
When one watches the operation​—and there are plenty of onlookers from the neighborhood—​the coordination is amazing. Work starts at seven Saturday morning. After an hour the walls are up! The frames for the roof then follow. Women begin bringing sheeting to cover the outside of the walls and this is nailed into place. The electricians begin running wire. Within three hours the first brick is laid. Those with air conditioning and heating equipment wait to begin installation. Everything just falls in place. “I see it,” said one of the workers, “but I don’t believe it.” Yet, something else makes it an even greater “miracle.”
“Not a dime has been paid for their labor of love,” wrote a Tulsa, Oklahoma newspaper reporter. People working this hard, yet not receiving a cent in wages, is nothing short of a “miracle.”
Doubtful about the quality of the work, several people in Guymon, Oklahoma, called the city inspector. “I told them that if they wanted to see something done right, they ought to visit the hall!” said the inspector. “You people are even doing correctly what will be hidden and not seen!”
Yet many of the workers are not professional builders. These are given on-the-job training. Among the nonbuilders at one project were a pharmacist, a college instructor, a professional photographer, two doctors and a gardener. However, to ensure the safety of all, a Witness acquainted with building safety patrols the site looking for any potential dangers.
But do things always go as smoothly?
‘We Felt Defeated’
A critical part of the operation is the finishing off of the ceiling and inside walls. A crew works on this all Saturday night. Suddenly, while these men were rushing to finish the sheetrocking at Elk City, Oklahoma, about 3 a.m. there was a loud bang. All the lights went out. Soon another explosion touched off a huge fireball, completely devastating the transformer on the public electricity pole outside the hall. City electricians said: “No lights till morning!” Time was ticking by. If they did not finish before morning the whole project would be crippled.
“It was really disheartening,” said one of these sheetrockers. “We just felt totally defeated when the lights went out.” But one of the men remembered his recreational vehicle parked next to the hall. It had its own power generator! Within minutes a light was connected. It was all they needed to finish on time.
“Occasionally, not all the material we need will be there right at the start,” mentioned Harold Cheek, another organizer. “Sometimes it seems to come right down to the wire before we get it, but we have never had to stop or cancel a project.”
Working with Self-sacrificing Love
“I don’t know much about this type of work, but I’ll do whatever you want,” explained the owner of a large welding business, who flew to the location in a private plane. Others feel the same way. He ended up with the messy job of mixing and carrying mortar. Whole families worked together. A legally blind worker was busily wiring the sound system​—mostly by touch. Several helpers served as his “eyes.” Children kept the floor clean of scrap materials and also passed out refreshments.
“There is no way we would have worked today for money​—no way!” exclaimed one of those at Vinita, Oklahoma, when the temperature and wind made it feel like −14° F (−26° C)! Some had icicles on their mustaches as they worked! On the other hand, with the temperature soaring over 115° F (46° C), the same basic crew built the hall in Purcell, Oklahoma. At times rain will pour down for the whole two-day period, as it did at Monmouth, Illinois. “Not a single brother left the site,” said Harold Cheek. “They just worked right on through.”
Yet, why do all of these do it time after time? One observant teenager pinpointed the reason. Though not a Witness, she said to the family with whom she traveled to the site: “Something just dawned on me. We don’t know any of these people. We’re never going to their hall. Yet we’re doing all this hard work. Hey, we’re really sacrificing for somebody else. This is something good!”
Yes, they are moved by self-sacrificing love. It is this type of love that Jesus said would identify his genuine followers, for they were to love one another ‘as he loved them.’ Jesus put their interests ahead of his own. He even died for them.​—John 13:34, 35.
Self-sacrifice is reflected in the distances some travel. “We try to keep within five or six hundred milesb from our homes in Oklahoma, for this usually is a day’s drive,” stated Cheek. However, one family traveled over 1,600 miles round trip. Another, 920 miles just to get there! On one project workers came from 10 states. Normally, those who come are not reimbursed for travel expenses. To prevent any being overburdened, John Langan keeps a file of the names and addresses of over 800 volunteers and thereby can give consideration to those who live closest to the upcoming project.
But is this two-day “miracle” just the result of devoted people and skillful organization?
“God’s Hand at Work”
In Dumas, Texas, a couple asked to see the interior of the new hall. “As I look around,” said the woman, “I can see the effect of God’s hand at work.” A couple who observed the work at Elk City, Oklahoma, agreed. “This is like nothing we have ever seen! Of course, we’re not Jehovah’s Witnesses, but we know these workers are motivated by God’s spirit. How else could they accomplish so much?”
Yes, instead of the workers proudly boasting of their “almost impossible” task, talk among the group was of “the evident demonstration of Jehovah’s blessing on our efforts.”
Was It Worth It?
At one new hall on Sunday evening all paused to enjoy the first meeting. Just a few years ago, one of the local elders had been the only Witness in the area. He had seen things progress to the point of their now having a brand-new “instant” Kingdom Hall. Already much interest had been stirred up in the community by its construction. This elder was asked to offer prayer at the conclusion of the meeting. During the prayer he broke down and cried. He was overwhelmed with thankfulness. This hall would be such an asset as that small congregation spreads the good news of God’s kingdom. (Matt. 24:14) The brevity of the construction time saved many hours that could now be spent in the preaching work.
Usually, there is an increased zeal on the part of those attending meetings at the hall. As one Witness said after their hall was completed: “Now we have to get busy and talk to others and fill it up!” Fine Bible discussions have resulted from neighbors’ observing these two-day “miracles.”
But what caused the previously mentioned observer to say that these projects provide “a ray of hope for the human condition”?
“A Ray of Hope”
It was because he had read that in an all-black neighborhood in Memphis, Tennessee, “black and white, young and old” were working together like one large family. After observing the hall construction, one well-known businessman in Grafton, North Dakota, said: “This was really completely different. I could see unity, brotherly love. I thought in my heart, ‘That’s the way people really should be.’” He was so impressed that he began taking steps to become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Yes, “the way people really should be.” For instance, among the workers is an American Indian who previously hated whites. “If a white man bumped into me, I’d knock him cold,” stated this hefty six-foot man. Now he has worked close to many whites on several halls​—giving and receiving love. How much better our world would be if all had such unity!
“If I got a hundred different craftsmen together,” said one non-Witness contractor, “in 30 minutes they’d all be cussing and fighting with one another.” He was impressed to see carpenters, bricklayers, sheetrockers and electricians all working side by side.
Instead of showing cold efficiency, one organizer took the time from his demanding schedule to care for a totally paralyzed woman who wanted to see for herself the building of the Kingdom Hall. He would carry her from the car, move her, or make her more comfortable. Such kindness will never be forgotten, for she watched with tears streaming down her face.
Teaches a “Much Larger Lesson”
“Thank you for this small story of humble people working together for good and the much larger lesson it teaches for all of us who live in a world that needs all the help it can get,” concluded the Memphis, Tennessee, man in his letter to the newspaper. The example of people working together in real peace “teaches” much.
“Today people are tired of so much talk. So many nice-sounding theories just don’t work. People want to see something,” commented one Witness who has been to scores of these projects. “Well, when you see 200 persons, no matter what their race or background, working their hearts out, despite being cold or uncomfortable, and everyone caring for the other, this shows something. It’s something that’s tangible, visible evidence that ‘Hey, the Bible really works!”’
One man who came to help was not a Witness, though he was quite familiar with their teachings. “For some years I had heard about the Truth, but now for the first time I saw it!” said this man, who now has become an active Witness.
Such cooperation is also a foregleam of something else. The Bible teaches that soon God will correct today’s “human condition” by removing wickedness and enabling “meek ones” who obey the Bible to live on earth in peace. (Ps. 37:10, 11, 34) Whatever building work is needed in that new order of righteousness will reflect worldwide the same loving cooperation as that seen in these Kingdom Hall projects. “It warms your heart,” said one worker, “to think that this is the way we’ll work together in the new system.” Yes, the loving teamwork so evident makes that hope all the more realistic.​—2 Pet. 3:13.
One young man had truly been moved by what he saw during the two days. After loading his car for the long ride home, he took one last look around. Unable to express his feelings with words, he threw his hat into the air, did two cartwheels and then jumped into the car where his laughing family waited. Driving off, he left behind a brand-new 2,800-square-foot Kingdom Hall that took the dedication and love of 150 men, women and children​—and two days to build it.
[Footnotes]
1 foot equals .3 meter.
1 mile equals 1.6 kilometers.
[Box on page 19]
COMMENTS FROM OFFICIALS
  “May I . . . express to you the sincere admiration of the Citizens of Purcell for the beautiful Kingdom Hall and the manner in which it was built.”​—City Manager, Purcell, Oklahoma.
  “I found the electrical system was very neatly and adequately wired with the best of electrical material.”​—Electrical Inspector, Lake Charles, Louisiana.
  “Having worked on and seen first hand the construction of several buildings by these people, I can say that the construction will meet and exceed most Building Codes.”​—Director of Public Works, Borger, Texas.
  “I feel you had some real craftsmen working on the job and it shows in the quality of your building.”​—Chief Building Inspector, Craig, Colorado.
[Pictures on page 17]
7:00 A.M. SAT.
10:00 A.M. SAT.
6:00 P.M. SUN.
[Picture on page 18]
THE NEWS MEDIA TAKE NOTE OF THESE “INSTANT” HALLS. IN MEMPHIS, TENNESSEE, FILM CREWS FROM TWO TV STATIONS COVERED THE CONSTRUCTION. IN TULSA, OKLAHOMA, A NEWSPAPER REPORTER SPENT TWO DAYS WORKING WITH AND OBSERVING THE PROJECT
[Picture on page 20]
WITNESSES OF DIFFERENT RACES WORK SIDE BY SIDE IN A LABOR OF LOVE
[Pictures on page 21]
MEN AND WOMEN​—YOUNG AND OLD—​WORKING ON AN “INSTANT” HALL. NOT ONE RECEIVED A PENNY IN WAGES

