Announcements
◆ Literature offer, January through April: Watchtower subscription, with three booklets, for $1.50, or subscriptions for both Watchtower and Awake! in semimonthly editions, with six booklets, for $3.00.
◆ On March 30 all congregations will schedule a special public talk on the subject “Who Is Jehovah, so that All Should Worship Him?” A manuscript will be sent to the congregations in advance, but speakers may outline that material and deliver the talk from an outline if they prefer. This talk may be given the following week if a circuit overseer’s visit or circuit assembly is scheduled for March 30.
◆ The Memorial for 1975 will be held Thursday, March 27, after 6 p.m. standard time. Memorial invitations may be ordered in lots of 250 for 25c, 500 for 50c, or 1,000 for $1. Please remit with order.
◆ After January 1, 1975, congregations may begin ordering the Watch Tower Publications Index for 1974; 10c each. Orders will be charged to your congregation literature account.
◆ A reminder: The law requires registration of all males within a 60-day period beginning 30 days before their eighteenth birthday. Draft cards should be carried until one reaches 26 years of age.
◆ Outlines for two special talks are being prepared for use by all congregations. The titles are “Why Look to God as Your Refuge?” and “Are You Really Making Jehovah Your Stronghold?” We suggest that you set aside dates for them on your schedule of public talks for either late in April or early in May. The outlines do not need to be ordered; they will be sent in ample time.
◆ New Publications Available:
Is the Bible Really the Word of God?​—Serbian
Listening to the Great Teacher​—Cinyanja, Kissi, Efik, Lingala, Sesotho, Swahili
Organization for Kingdom-preaching and Disciple-making​—Cebuano, Efik, Hiligaynon, Iloko, Sesotho, Swahili, Xhosa, Yoruba, Zulu
Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook​—Sesotho
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Amharic, Bulgarian
True Peace and Security​—From What Source?​—Chinese, Lingala, Thai
Human Plans Failing as God’s Purpose Succeeds​—Portuguese
Living in Hope of a Righteous New Order​—Kiluba
◆ Available Again in U.S.A.
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Thai
◆ Out of Stock in U.S.A.
“All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial”​—French
Basis for Belief in a New World​—Hungarian
◆ Please keep in mind that all renewal subscriptions are for the full rate of $1.50 per year. There is no publisher or pioneer rate on renewals. On each slip for a new subscription obtained by a pioneer, please mark that it was obtained by a pioneer, and on all subscriptions note whether they are for six months or one year. If subscriptions are for several years, each additional year is full rate. Please do not send the duplicate copy of the subscription slip. Send only the original along with a remittance form and exact payment to cover the subscriptions.

