Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
We are again in the Watchtower campaign. Last year, according to the Yearbook, around the world we obtained 2,387,904 new subscriptions for The Watchtower and Awake! People want the magazines. And with good reason​—these are the best magazines in the world.
Our report for last year included about a half million more subscriptions than during the previous year, but it was not our best year. Back in 1971 the brothers world wide obtained 2,702,972 subscriptions. Now, for the next four months, January through April, we shall have a wonderful opportunity to offer to the people The Watchtower and Awake!, particularly The Watchtower because it is a Watchtower campaign. However, many persons will want subscriptions for both magazines. People who do not subscribe should be offered two magazines on a contribution of ten cents. The insight as to the significance of current events and the hope for the future contained in these magazines is not available in any other periodicals.
During these four months our distribution of magazines should increase. Last year, around the world, we had our greatest distribution of magazines by the Kingdom publishers. During the whole year our brothers and sisters distributed 273,238,018 copies. What a marvelous witness was thus given!
We are sure that all of you are watching the growth in printing of the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. The Watchtower printing per issue increased by over 700,000 last year; Awake!, by 900,000. With regular printings of over 8,700,000 for The Watchtower and 8,600,000 for Awake! these are two of the most widely read magazines of any kind in the world. Would it not be wonderful if, before 1975 passes, it became necessary for the Society, through all its printing facilities world wide, to print 10 million copies of each issue?
We here at Bethel are delighted with the demands put on us for the printing of the magazines. The paper supply is now ample. Maybe the Watchtower campaign will start moving things even more rapidly.
May Jehovah’s rich blessing go with all of you as together we put forth an extraordinary effort to distribute these two fine magazines during 1975. Be assured of our warm love and good wishes.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

