Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 12
15 min: Song 100. Introduction, text and comments, items from Theocratic News, and consideration of Question Box.
20 min: “Sharing in a Faith-building Work.” Question-and-answer discussion of material. Brief demonstration based on paragraph 6. May show a publisher, who has just obtained a subscription, demonstrating how to start a study using one of the free booklets left with the subscriber. Publisher says he would like to demonstrate briefly how to get full benefit from the publications. May call attention to title on cover of booklet “Look! I Am Making All Things New.” Explain that this is a Bible promise based on Revelation 21:5. If person is not familiar with how to locate this scripture in the Bible, hand him yours and tell him how to find it by means of the index in the Bible, letting him do it. Commend him when he finds it and explain that now he knows how to use the Bible to find important texts mentioned in the publications. Publisher continues, briefly calling attention to opening question of the booklet and showing that the answer is to be found in the paragraph. Chairman interrupts to explain that the study may be continued discussing the opening paragraphs of the booklet if the householder desires. Before leaving, the publisher should offer to return to continue the discussion, mentioning further points to be considered.
15 min: “Not on Bread Alone.” (Matt. 4:4)
(2 min.) Chairman: We want to help children understand Bible, not just find answers to study material. Good to discuss key scriptures thoroughly, to be sure all in family understand their meaning. When reading the Bible in connection with the Theocratic Ministry School program, take time to comment on the significance of what is read. At times it is beneficial to discuss questions or problems confronting the family or that may be raised in school. Some families find it interesting for the one taking the lead to take the opposite side of a question, raising arguments for the others to overcome Scripturally.
(12 min.) Interview several family heads on their arrangements for family study and how they prepare for the meetings. Consider (1) their study program, (2) how they try to add variety to the study arrangement to keep it interesting for younger members of the family, and (3) what they do to make the material meaningful and applicable to their family.
(1 min.) Chairman: The important thing in each case is to have a regular program for family study, one that is helpful to your family. Commend the brothers for the efforts they are making to help their families keep well-nourished spiritually.
10 min: Arrange brief presentations of current magazines for magazine work, highlighting articles appropriate to the territory. Brief mention may be made of important items from accounts report, which may be posted on the information board for further consideration. Concluding comments. Song 90.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 19
15 min: Song 94. Introduction, text and comments, and appropriate items from Announcements. Demonstrate how theme of first article in The Watchtower and the scripture featured therein may be used to offer the subscription.
18 min: Discussion, with questions and answers, on article “Cleanliness Brings Honor to God.” Paragraphs may be read if desired.
15 min: Talk based on November 1, 1974, Watchtower article “What Is More Important to You?”
12 min: Concluding comments. Interview publishers on how they came into the truth or made other changes in their lives, perhaps to get into the full-time service as pioneers, because of appreciating the importance of the truth. Song 108.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 26
15 min: Song 93. Introduction, discussion of the text and highlights of Branch Letter. This could be handled as a shepherding call, bringing the Kingdom Ministry to publisher who is unable to get to the meeting. Material should be covered in normal conversational way in effort to mention highlights that visitor has appreciated from the material, sharing thoughts with householder, not making it a point-by-point coverage of the material.
20 min: Benefiting Spiritually from ‘God’s Wonderful Light.’ Enthusiastic talk on 1975 Yearbook (pp. 34-53). Can read excerpts. Stress points likely to be beneficial to local congregation, but convey the story, not dwelling long on one idea. On pages cited, can emphasize: (1) Brother Russell’s action when his faith in the Bible was reestablished, and how God’s spirit enlightened early Bible students about Christ’s invisible presence, end of Gentile Times (pp. 34-37); (2) The Watchtower has Jehovah’s backing and has upheld the ransom from the start (p. 38); (3) God’s people knew they should preach the good news and did so (pp. 39, 40); (4) Holy spirit prompted persons to act on the truth (pp. 41, 42); (5) God’s people put forth effort to attend Christian meetings and from these young and old benefited spiritually (pp. 43, 44); (6) Tract work was done industriously and tracts brought good results (pp. 45, 46); (7) Pilgrims displayed Christian qualities, and spiritual benefits resulted from their visits (pp. 48-51); (8) Society’s headquarters were transferred to expand the preaching work, and Bethel family received good spiritual care, as through morning Bible discussions (pp. 51-53).
As a résumé, review with congregation how same pattern of Christian activity applies to us: (1) God’s spirit still reveals truth and motivates people to act on it; (2) Faithfully preach the good news, as did the early Bible Students; (3) Attend Christian meetings regularly, for they benefit young and old spiritually; (4) Share in tract distribution and presenting the magazines, and we can expect fine results; (5) Take full advantage of circuit overseer’s visit and thus benefit as God’s people did when pilgrims visited; (6) Like the Bethel family, we can discuss daily Bible text, to our spiritual advantage.
12 min: Talk on material from December 1, 1974, Watchtower, “Is There Danger in Occult ‘Charms’?” This may be handled with audience participation in reading and commenting on the scriptures.
13 min: Concluding comments. Discussion of Scriptural theme, ‘Make Your Advancement Manifest.’ (1 Tim. 4:15) Encourage all in congregation, including many new ones, to think about progressing spiritually. Family heads and study conductors especially could consider how to help others. (Deut. 6:7) Some might want to offer to help others get to meetings regularly to comment, to have a part in the Ministry School or to share in the field service if they are ready for that, taking each step progressively, giving aid to those new in the truth or young in years.​—Phil. 3:13. Song 109.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 2
10 min: Song 111. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: Why Is God’s Kingdom the Theme of Our Preaching? Question-and-answer discussion of following material. Our stressing a theme helps people to remember our message. Jehovah’s witnesses emphasize the theme highlighted by the Bible. (1) What does the Bible indicate that the theme of our preaching should be? How did Jesus emphasize it during his ministry? (Matt. 10:7; Luke 8:1; Matt. 6:9, 10) (2) How do the Scriptures show that the Kingdom is a heavenly government to rule over the earth? What do the Scriptures show as to the extent and duration of its rule? (Matt. 13:45, 47; Zech. 14:9; Dan. 7:13, 14) (3) Why is the Kingdom theme appropriate and timely today? (Matt. 24:14; Rev. 14:6) (4) How has Jesus already shown the power of his Kingdom rule? What will he yet do? (Rev. 12:10; 19:11, 15) (5) How can we individually go on record that the Kingdom is all-important to us? (Matt. 6:33; 13:19, 23)
18 min: Talk on “Preparing for Effective Return Visits,” with supporting comments from congregation if desired. Interview one or two who conduct studies, asking them to relate or demonstrate how they got study started. Encourage publishers to think about making return visits the next time they go in the field service.
12 min: Talk on “Learning to Trust in Jehovah” from November 15, 1974, Watchtower. Some audience participation may be arranged if desired on consideration of scriptures. Concluding comments. Song 112.

