Vol. XX. JULY 1, 1899. No. 13. 



CONTENTS. 



"The Bishop of London on 

'Getting On'" 163 

Daniel in Babylon 165 

In the Fiery Furnace 168 

Weighed in the Balances 172 

Interesting Letters 175 

Attendants at Indianapolis Convention 

Should Secure Quarters 162 

page 162 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



WILL YOU ATTEND THE INDIANAPOLIS CONVENTION? 

-NOTIFICATIONS- 
SHOULD BE RECEIVED PROMPTLY TO SECURE ACCOMMODATIONS. THE 
CITY WILL BE CROWDED WrTH EPWORTH LEAGUERS. 

Arrangements are completed for a Convention of believers in 
the Second Coming of the Lord and the Plan of the Ages,— to 
be held at Indianapolis, Ind., July 21st to 23d, as follows:— 

The Railroad fare will be one-half the usual, except from a 
few points which will add $2 to the one fare for round trip. All 
passenger trains run into Union depot, which is about three 
blocks distant from the meeting place of the Convention— 
"Shover's Hall," on Market Street, between Delaware and Alabama 
Avenues. 

Accommodations— good and clean— have been arranged for, 



at the very reasonable rate of ninety-five cents per day, at "Barton's 
Hotel," No. 29 Virginia Ave. Such ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
readers as cannot afford even this modest sum, will be entertained 
free, by the Indianapolis friends, with great pleasure. 
Those who ride to the hotel can take any car leaving the Union 
depot and should ask for "transfer" when they pay their fare. A 
"Reception Committee" will meet all the friends at the Barton 
Hotel— except during convention hours, when it will be at 
Shover's Hall, as above mentioned. 

The following program will be followed closely as practicable: 

Friday, July 21st.— The opening "rally" will be at 10 A.M., 
conducted by Brother C. A. Owen— an opportunity for getting 
generally acquainted. At 3 P.M. the assembly will be addressed 
by the Editor of this Journal from the text— "Looking for the 
blessed hope, even the glorious appearing of our great God and 
Savior, Jesus Christ." (Titus 2:13.) At 7:30 P.M. an address on 
the Ages and Dispensations of the divine plan, illustrated by 
the Chart of the Ages, may be expected. 

Saturday, July 22d.— Testimony Meeting at 8 A.M. Preaching 
at 10:30 A.M. by the Editor of this Journal: subject, "The Law 
of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus." (Rom. 8:2.) At 3 P.M. 
a discourse by Bro. M. L. McPhail— "Sanctify them through 
thy Truth." At 7:30 P.M. a discourse from the Chart. 

Sunday, July 23d. -Testimony Meeting 8:30 A.M.; at 10:30 a 
discourse by Bro. M. L. Staples on "The Offence of the Cross;" 
at 3 P.M., "I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ," by the 
Editor; at 7:30 P.M., "Preserving the Unity of the Spirit in the 
bonds of peace"— several speakers. 

All who love the Lord, trust in the precious blood and wait 
for his Kingdom, are cordially invited to attend this Convention 
which recognizes only the one Church and her one Lord, 
one faith and one baptism. All such will please address the 
WATCH TOWER SOC'Y as soon as they know definitely that they 
will attend, stating in few words who will be of their party, 
and whether or not they will stop at the hotel. There will be 
an opportunity for symbolizing baptism. 



R2491 :page 163 
"THE BISHOP OF LONDON ON 'GETTING ON.'" 



"THE Bishop of London possesses a mind of unusual 

interest, and everything that he says is 

worth paying attention to, whether we agree with it 

or not. In addressing the pupils of the Philological 

School the other day, he took as the subject of his remarks, 

'Success in Life.' Considering his own career, 

one might expect that he would justify, and possibly 

glorify, success, for few men of our generation have 

risen more rapidly and achieved such brilliant success 

as he. But the Bishop did not take that line of thought 

at all, and we are glad that he did not. Enough and 



too much has been written for boys as to the way in 
which they may regard the world as their oyster to 
open at their will. Strength, instead of purity, of will 
has too often been represented as the most desirable of 
attainments. Now we do not doubt for one moment 
that this element of great will-power is an important 
element in the building up of character. Without it 
nothing can be achieved that is worth achieving. But 
mere strength of will may, and often is, accompanied 
by the worst traits in human character. We need not 
accept all the deductions of Schopenhauer to agree with 
him that what he calls the 'will to live' is a root of all 
the crime, sensuality, and base unsatisfied longings 
which make up the carnal side of human nature. 

"It is true that Nature itself implants this forceful 
'will to live' in every one of us, and that without 
it the human race would soon cease to exist when confronted 
with the terrific forces of the material universe. 
It is true that great and beneficent discoveries are due 
to the persistence of this intense will in us. It is even 
further true that many noble qualities, and no little of 
the social and the humanizing elements in life, are intimately 
connected with a powerful will. Many of the 
great human scourges of the race have, unconsciously 
and unintentionally, done immense good for mankind 
through the possession of this vast overflowing energy. 
'There shall be no Alps,' said Napoleon in his selfish 
desire to conquer Italy, and the result was the wonderful 
roads which connected Northern and Southern 
Europe. If ever there was an example on a colossal 
human scale of the 'will to live,' it was embodied in 
Peter the Great, an awful and drunken barbarian; but 
see what he did for Russia. In this world, whose ultimate 
problems we do not pretend to solve, the 'will 
to live,' with all its potential consequences, is a great 
fact without which the human race would gradually 
die out. 

"Now the successful man, in the ordinary sense 
of the word, is he who develops in himself in an abnormal 
degree this 'will to live.' We in the Western 
world scarcely recognize that this 'will to live' carried 
to great lengths is not only not universal among mankind, 
but is rather exceptional in its operations. It is 
the brute inheritance, at least on one side, against 
which some of the great religions of the world have 
contended, and contended with success. The East as 
a whole finds in the quiescence of the will, in its passive 
submission to a vast and supreme Power, the solution 
of the problem of life. Even among Western 
peoples the average man lives with content amid the 

R2492 : page 163 

'petty murmur of his bourg' rather than contends for 
the great material prizes of life, or what are supposed 
to be such. It is well that this is so, for if every one 



were fired by the ambition of a successful general, 
or politician, or merchant, the competition among men 
would be so terrible that, from another point of view, 
annihilation would be the lot of humanity. Men would 
not be able to stand the strain, nor would Nature afford 
the mass of them the opportunity for attaining, 
or even seriously striving for, the object of their ambition. 
Earth would become a hell, and this green 

R2492 : page 164 

globe would witness tragedies compared with which 

the most awful in history would dwindle into insignificance. 

Most men are, happily for themselves and 

for their fellows, contented, like the Apostle, with 

food and raiment, and taking the world as a whole, they 

live the lives of decent and faithful fathers, sons, husbands, 

and friends. Ambition is the mark of a comparative 

few, and what are called the prizes of life are 

contended for by an insignificant minority. 

"We say that this is well, and the Bishop of London 
is evidently in agreement with our position, for he 
does not think that success in life usually develops the 
best qualities among men. It is indeed true, as Wordsworth 
said, that it is dangerous to look on tyrants with 
a dazzled eye, and one might add that it is not quite 
safe for most men to take as their models those who 
are generally estimated to be successful men. There 
can be, as the Bishop said, no absolute rule as to what 
one should do to gain success. One may spend one's 
life in the most praiseworthy diligence, and yet die 
poor, unknown, and be accounted by the world as a 
failure, tho happily the world's coarse judgments do 
not constitute the final court of appeal. One may master 
all science, one may be a great thinker, and yet 
pass away from these noises of earth unrecognized, 
and even laughed at, by one's fellow-men. 

"It has been reserved for few great men to attain 
renown in their own lifetime. They have been hated 
and ridiculed, while the shallow charlatan has won the 
success of his age. This is, indeed, such a truism, 
that one does not need to dwell on the fact. If we are 
to measure character, genius and worth by the standard 
of success, we should have to say that the great 
men of the world have been among the least successful 
men. What does seem to us to ensure success is 
some overplus of human energy with which a man is 
born, and which cannot be created in him afterwards, 
and which is directed towards the attainment of objects 
that can be best appreciated by the average man. 
There is a general demand in the world at any given 
time for a kind of mechanical talent rising at times to 
genius, but of a variety which can be estimated by 
common people, and which can apply itself to objects 
of general desire. He who possesses this kind of overplus 
of human energy is the successful man, because 



he holds a monopoly of what all desire and of what all 
can appreciate. To him all the world's a stage, and 
all the men and women merely players, and he soon 
finds out that he can play the best game of them all 
in some particular line. 

"In a world such as ours, how far is it wise to encourage 
that kind of talent? Religion, as we have 
said, over most of the Eastern world has persuaded 
countless millions of people that this kind of success 
is not worth while. Buddhism and Brahminism have 
indoctrinated a large proportion of the human race with 
a positive contempt for the kind of existence which 
alone seems worth having for a member of the New 
York Stock Exchange. Indeed, if we contemplate the 
two varieties of mankind from a spiritual, instead of a 
physical, point of view, we might be led to doubt 
whether the human race had a common origin. There 
seems absolutely nothing in common between the two 
types. 

"On the one hand, we see the action dictated by 
the strong will, by the 'will to live' endowed with keen 
intelligence and a rather low standard of aspiration. 
On the other side, we see a being who is striving— 
for what? For the cessation of all will, for the attainment, 
not of material commodities, not even of mental 
good, but of entire peace and calm, and to him all the 
efforts of human life in our busy civilization seem entirely 
purposeless and even absurd. Are we to take 
the extreme Oriental view, or must we accept the 
standard of the strong will as believed in and acted 
upon by the busy men of our busy world? If the latter 
is a true theory of life, then we must accept the successful 
man as our hero, even tho we cannot teach our 
youths how to imitate his example. 

"We think there is a mean between these extremes, 
as there is between most extremes. We cannot 
annihilate 'the will to live,' because existence itself 
on our planet depends upon its mysterious operation. 
Neither can we desire the larger development of the 
'will to live,' the will carried to an abnormal point, as 
in a very great general or financier, among average 
men. All that we want among average men, as Hegel 
said, is that they should be good men in all the fundamental 
relations of life. If they happen to achieve 
that reward which, as Coleridge says, so rarely comes 
to merit, well and good. 

"But it is well that most men should not go out 
of their way to seek rewards. So long as they are 
standing on the ground of right, they are safe; but the 
moment they quit that point of moral vantage for the 
perilous peaks of human ambition, they are usually 
lost. They must not, then, put forth the abnormal 
'will to live,' but neither must they crush that will 
without which human life would be empty of all positive 
content. No, what is really needed among men 
is a pure will, a will cleansed of all that degrades life 



while prolonging it and extending its relations. This 
was the best Greek idea, it is also the Christian idea, 
which comes to men, not as taking away the real content 
of life, but as giving life more abundantly; but 
life which can control those fiery courses of the soul 
instead of leaving them to their own ungoverned sway. 
On the whole, therefore, we say with the Bishop that 
success in life is a dubious object of desire, since it is 
connected inextricably with so much that wars against 
the soul. But we must not, as the Germans say, throw 
away the baby along with the bath. We must accept 
the will, but we must give to it that direction and noble 
purpose which render it truly free." 
—London Spectator. 



R2492 : page 165 

DANIEL IN BABYLON. 

JULY 9.-DANIEL 1:8-21. 

"Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself.' 

DANIEL is set before us in the Scriptures as one 
whom the Lord loved. His standing with the 
Almighty is strikingly presented through the Prophet 
Ezekiel, where the Lord, speaking of the sureness of 
his judgments about to come upon the land of Judah, 
said, "Tho these three men, Noah, Daniel and Job, 
were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by 
their righteousness." (Ezek. 14:14.) These words 
were spoken by Ezekiel shortly before the desolation of 
Jerusalem, while Daniel was in Babylon, where he had 
risen to a position of great prominence; and his fame 
no doubt had reached his home. 

Daniel was carried captive with Jehoiachim, king 
of Judah, and many of the nobility of the land of Israel, 
eighteen years before the final captivity in the 
days of Zedekiah, when the land was left desolate without 
an inhabitant, and the seventy years of desolation 
began. Daniel was fourteen years old when carried 
captive to Babylon, and consequently lived to the extreme 
age of over one hundred years.— Dan. 1:21. 

The Book of Daniel is one of those against which 
the "higher critics" expend special energy, some being 
inclined to call it a fiction, while others declare it 
to be a history of the period of Antiochus Epiphanes 
(over three hundred years after Daniel's death) and 
that it was written by some unknown writer who attached 
Daniel's name as a disguise. Modern science 
and the higher critics are very much opposed to anything 
in the nature of positive prophecy— anything 
claiming to be of direct divine inspiration, and in any 
sense of the word attempting to foretell the future. The 



Book of Daniel is preeminently marked with these 
characteristics, and hence it, more than any other book 
of the Old Testament, has the reprobation of these 
gentlemen. But the Lord forewarned us, through the 
Apostle and the Prophet, of these wise men, whose wisdom 
would become a trap and a snare unto them, so 
that "the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and 
the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid 
[obscured]. "-Isa. 29:14; 1 Cor. 1:26-29. 

Our Lord also pointed out that these things are hidden 
from the wise and prudent and revealed unto babes 
—made clear to those who make no boast of wisdom 
according to the course of this world. (Matt. 11:25.) 
How true to facts we find this to be! While many of 
the great and learned are stumbling themselves into 
higher criticism and other forms of infidelity, the Lord's 
"little ones," meek, humble, teachable from the Father's 
Word, are being instructed, and are growing in 

R2493 : page 165 

grace and in the knowledge of the truth. 

To those who have clearly in mind the presentations 
and interpretations of Daniel's prophecies as presented 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. I., II. and III., there 
is no need for elaborate arguments to prove that this 
wonderful Book of Daniel is not a fiction, but more 
wonderful by far than any fiction that could have been 
written. And to them it will be useless to declare it a 
history of events which transpired 167 B.C. and falsely 
set forth as a prophecy by Daniel; for they see fulfilments, 
past, present and to come, far larger and grander 
and more wonderful than anything which occurred at 
the date named— they see in these fulfilments unmistakable 
evidence of superhuman intelligence, and that, 
as Daniel declared, the most high God therein revealed 
the secrets of his plan still future. 

Our lesson proper finds Daniel with others of the 
Jewish captives in Babylon, where, according to custom, 
the king had made choice of a number of the most 
promising of the captive youths to pass a three-years' 
course of education in the sciences, Babylon being 
at this time the center of learning. The object in 
this was no doubt two-fold: the Babylonian monarch 
thus attempted to associate with his empire the learning 
and skill of the world, and to promote a friendly 
feeling as between Babylon and the various countries 
over which it held sway, that foreign nations might 
feel the greater interest in Babylon as the center of the 
world-empire, and be the more contented with the laws 
and regulations which proceeded therefrom, knowing 
that some of their own nation stood before the king as 
his counsellors or secretaries— magicians, astrologers 
and wise men, as they were then called. 

The choice of the four young Israelites was no 
doubt a subject of divine providence, and from their 



names we may infer that they were all children of religious 

parents, the compounds of their names so signifying, 

as follows: Daniel, "God is my Judge;" Hananiah, 

"God is gracious;" Mishael, "This is as God;" 

Azariah, "God is a helper." Thus did the Lord, overthrowing 

a nation for its wickedness, make special provision, 

even in its captivity, for those of that nation 

who were faithful to him. In choosing these four Jews 

for the Babylonian college course the prince of the 

eunuchs, according to custom, gave them new names, 

to break their identity with their native homes and to 

establish an identity with the kingdom of Babylon; 

hence he named them Belteshazzar, Shadrach, Meshach 

and Abed-nego. 

From the first Daniel seems to have been the specially 
favored of these favored four— he was favored of 
the Lord in that, while all four were specially blessed, 
his portion included visions and revelations; he was 
specially favored by the prince of the eunuchs who 
had these youths in charge, as we read, "Now God had 
brought Daniel into favor and tender love with the 
prince of the eunuchs" (vs. 9). We are not to understand 

R2493 : page 166 

that this favor both with God and man was something 
wholly outside of Daniel himself; on the contrary, 
it is proper for us to infer that by birth (heredity) and 
by natural training of godly parents Daniel had a noble, 
amiable, winsome character, which not only prepared 
him the better to be the Lord's mouthpiece, but which 
also made him moderate, discreet and amiable toward 
all with whom he had to do. 

What a lesson is here, not only for young people, 
but also for parents! How necessary it is that those 
who seek divine service shall endeavor to attain to 
characteristics pleasing to God! And if any find themselves 
wholly without friends, how proper it is that 
they should suspect that some measure of the fault lies 
in themselves; and how proper it would be that all such 
should seek to cultivate amiability and suavity at the 
expense of everything except principle! Only Ishmael 
was to have the experience of every man's hand against 
him, and his hand against every man, and those who 
have Ishmael's experience have need to fear that they 
have Ishmael's disposition, and should forthwith diligently 
seek grace at the throne of mercy whereby to 
overcome ungainly qualities and idiosyncrasies. 

It is only when we are hated because of our loyalty 
to the truth (directly or indirectly) that we are to 
take satisfaction therein, or to think that we are suffering 
for righteousness' sake. As the Apostle points out, 
some suffer as evil-doers and as busy-bodies in other 
men's matters, or because of ungentleness, uncouthness, 
or lack of the wisdom of moderation, which the 
Lord's Word counsels. (1 Pet. 4:15; Phil. 4:5; Jas. 1:5.) We 



are not to forget, however, that rudeness, which is an 
element of selfishness, may be more quickly dispelled 
from the heart than from the life, and all should take 
encouragement from the thought that God, and his people 
who view matters from his standpoint, judge the 
sons of God not according to the flesh, but according 
to the spirit or intention of their minds, their hearts, 
and have patience with the weaknesses of the flesh, 
where there are evidences that the new mind is endeavoring 
to bring the flesh under its control. 

Of these four Jewish companions, Daniel seems 
from the first to have been leader, and his leading seems 
to have been in the right direction. In a new land, 
under new conditions, a shallow character would be 
likely to be thoroughly spoiled. First, the fact of being 
chosen, even in the probationary sense, to be of the 
king's council was certainly a great honor; and the tendency 
to a shallow mind would have been toward vanity, 
bombast, pride, haughtiness, etc., qualities which 
would have hindered real progress in the school, and 
thus would have made him less likely to be the king's 
ultimate choice as counsellor: but still more important, 
it would have separated between him and God, for 
God resisteth the proud and showeth his favor to the 
humble.- 1 Pet. 5:5. 

Daniel might have said to himself, as some would 
have said,— I am now far from the land of Israel; I am 
identified with the Babylonish court, and I therefore 
may profitably forget and neglect the laws of God, and 
consider them as having been applicable to me only in 
my own country, and that here, far from the land of 
promise, I may do in all particulars as the better Babylonians 
do. But, on the contrary, Daniel very wisely 
resolved in his heart that, since his nation had been 
cut off from the Land of Promise because of disobedience 
to God, he would be ever careful to do those 
things which would be pleasing to the Almighty: and, 
as we shall see, he soon found a place for his new 
resolutions. 

The portion of food provided for these college 
students by the king's command was good— far better, 
probably, than they had been used to previously;— nor 
was Daniel's mental objection to it instigated by self-denial, 
but wholly by religious duty. The Israelites, 
under their Law Covenant, were forbidden to eat certain 
articles of food in common use amongst other nations, 
for instance, swine's flesh, rabbit flesh, eels, oysters, 
etc., and indeed all flesh that was not killed by being 
allowed to bleed to death: for the Law specially forbade 
the use of blood under any circumstances or conditions. 
The food of the king's household was not prepared 
along these lines, and the young Hebrew perceived that 
he could not hope for any change in these respects, 
and he was too wise to even find fault with them. 
He saw rightly enough that the divine Law that was 
upon him as a Jew did not apply to Gentiles, and he 



made no efforts to interfere with the general 
arrangements. 

Daniel's request, therefore, was a very simple one, 
viz., that he be permitted to have a very plain and inexpensive 
diet, called "pulse," which no doubt was 
prepared as a part of the general household meal. If 
the request could be granted, no one would be specially 
inconvenienced, and yet Daniel would thus preserve 
himself from "defilement" under the terms of the Jewish 
Law. It would appear that Daniel's companions, 
influenced by his decision, joined with him in this request. 
The prince of the eunuchs, while desirous of 
favoring Daniel, feared his own position if, as he surmised, 
this simple diet would prove insufficient for the 
boys, and lead to a breakdown of their health during 
the period of study. But finally it was arranged with 
the melzar (or butler) that the matter of diet should 
be tested for ten days. 

Here Daniel's faith in God showed itself. He was 
confident that, even tho such a diet might not be the 
most desirable in every respect, yet, inasmuch as it was 

R2493 : page 167 

the only course open to them whereby they could preserve 

themselves from violation of the divine Law, 

therefore God would specially supervene to the extent 

necessary, and in this, it seems, he was not disappointed. 

There is a lesson for all of the Lord's people here. 

It is our duty not only to study the Lord's will, but 

also to consider well the circumstances and the conditions 

which surround us, and to seek to adopt such a 

moderate course in life as would first of all have divine 

approval, and secondly, cause as little trouble, inconvenience 

and displeasure to others as possible, and then 

to confidently rely upon the Lord's supervising wisdom 

and providence. 

When we read, "As for these four youths, God 
gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom; 
and Daniel had understanding in all visions and 
dreams," we are not to understand that this skill and 
learning was wholly miraculous, like the understanding 
in visions and dreams, which was to Daniel only. 
Rather, we are to judge that under what we might term 
natural laws four boys who had enough character to 
undertake such a course of self-denial for righteousness' 
sake would have also courage and strength of 
character in respect to all their affairs and studies. We 
are to surmise that their determination in this matter 
of their food, that they would rather deny themselves 
than violate God's Law, would mean to them a mental 
and moral discipline which would be helpful in all the 

R2494 : page 167 

affairs of life. 



And there is a lesson in this for every Christian. 
Many are inclined to think of the little things of life 
as being unimportant, but everyone who attains to any 
proficiency in any department of life surely learns that 
his attainments were in considerable degree the result 
of determined will-power, and that it is well-nigh impossible 
to be strong in will-power in respect to important 
things if lax and pliable in respect to things in general, 
even tho less important. Habit is a wonderful 
power, either for good or evil, and the boy or girl, the 
man or woman, who has not learned self-control in respect 
to little things, indeed all things, cannot expect 
to be able to exercise self-control upon the greatest and 
most important affairs merely. 

In other words, applying this matter to Christians, 
we might say that he who wants to be an "overcomer" 
at all, must make the attempt all along the line on every 
point, great or small, where conscience and principle 
call for it. It is he who is faithful in things that are 
least who may be expected to be found faithful also in 
things that are greater: and this evidently is the Lord's 
view of this matter. From the Lord's standpoint, all 
of the affairs of this present life are little in comparison 
with the future things. Hence he is calling for "overcomers" 
whose general faithfulness to principle, even 
in small things, will give evidence of the disposition, 
the character, to which may be entrusted the great responsibilities 
of the Kingdom glory, honor and immortality. 
-Luke 16:10; Matt. 25:23. 

At the end of the three years' college course, when 
Daniel was seventeen, came the examination before the 
king, and as should have been expected, Daniel and 
his companions, faithful to the Lord, seeking first his 
will, were found to be far in advance of their companions, 
and were accepted to the king's council. We might 
draw a lesson here, without in any sense of the word 
intimating that it was typified, for we do not so think. 
We might say that there is a certain correspondence as 
between the position of Daniel and his associates and 
the position occupied by all those who have been called 
of the Father to joint-heirship in the Kingdom, with 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Not all who are called, nor all 
who undertake the course of training, have the promise 
of acceptance: on the contrary, many are called, few 
will be chosen. But the character of those who will 
be chosen in many respects corresponds to that of Daniel 
and his companions. All are not leading spirits, as 
was Daniel, nor are all given to visions and revelations 
and interpretations, as was he; but all will have the 
same spirit of devotion to principles of righteousness, 
which devotion will be tested under divine providence, 
step by step, through the narrow way, as they seek to 
walk in the footsteps of him who set us an example— 
our Daniel, our Leader, our Lord Jesus. Let all, then, 
who have named the name of Christ, depart from 
iniquity, let all such be faithful: "Dare to be a 



Daniel." 

Another thought is that clean spiritual provender 
is important to the Lord's flock, and that those who 
have come to a knowledge of the truth should abstain 
from all food that is defiled. If this shall seem to restrict 
the bill of spiritual fare, and the opportunities 
for mingling with the Babylonians at their table, it will 
have its compensating advantages nevertheless, for the 
Lord will bless to the spiritual good of his faithful ones 
even the plainest of spiritual blessings and opportunities. 
Let a test be made, after the manner of Daniel 
and his companions, and see whether or not those who 
feed upon the clean provender of the Lord's Word, and 
who reject the more sumptuous arrangement and defiled 
food of Babylon will not be fairer of countenance 
spiritually, even after a short test. But let us not suppose 
that anything would be gained by simply abstaining 
from the Babylonian portion and starving themselves 
spiritually. Whoever abstains from the popular 
and defiled supply must seek and use the simple and 
undefiled food which the Lord in his providence supplies, 
otherwise their last state of spiritual starvation 
will be worse than the first. 



R2494 : page 168 

IN THE FIERY FURNACE. 

--JULY 16. -DAN. 3:14-28.- 

"Our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us." 

PROBABLY twenty years elapsed after Daniel 

and his companions reached Babylon in captivity 

before the scenes of this lesson were enacted. 

Meantime Daniel had been raised to a very high position 

in the empire, as king's counsellor, while his three 

companions had been made magistrates in the provinces 

of Babylon. We know that their prosperity did not 

tend to make them careless of their duties and responsibilities 

toward God, for otherwise they would not have 

been able to stand the severe test recounted in this lesson, 

and which proved a great blessing to them because 

of their fidelity to the Lord. 

King Nebuchadnezzar just before this had won 
some great victories over surrounding nations— Egypt, 
Syria, etc.— as he had previously done with Judah, 
and as the Lord had predicted in the dream which 
Daniel had interpreted for the King, which showed the 
Babylonian Empire as the golden head of earthly dominion. 
His great success no doubt had tended to 
feelings of pride and a desire for display. Yet these 
were probably not the only motives which led to the 
program of the great festival in honor of his victories, 



and the erection of the great image which all were commanded 

to worship. Nebuchadnezzar's thought evidently 

was to unify his empire, and as a step in this 

direction he desired to unify the religious views and 

worship of the various peoples under his sway. In 

this his example was frequently followed subsequently, 

for all rulers have seemed to grasp the thought that 

man's mental organization is such that obedience can 

be best and most lastingly secured through the acquiescence 

of the religious organs of his mind. In other 

words, since man is a religious animal, no government 

of him can be secure and permanent which does not 

have, directly or indirectly, the support of his veneration. 

Hence it was that Nebuchadnezzar and others 

endeavored to associate the Creator and the king together 

in men's minds, that venerating the One they 

should respect and serve the other as his representative. 

It was no doubt with a view to thus unifying the 
religious sentiments of his empire that this great feast 
was arranged, of which the very center of attraction 
was the great image which Nebuchadnezzar the king 
had set up. This image, with its pedestal, was ninety 
feet high and nine feet wide. It was of gold, probably 
either made hollow or on a base of clay cement. It 
was located in the Plain of Dura, about the center of 
the walled enclosure twenty-four miles square, known 
as the city of Babylon. As it is a level country, and 
as the structures were comparatively low, the image 
could probably be seen from every part of the great 
city. 

The appointed time for the festival having come, 
leading representatives, judges, treasurers, governors, 
sheriffs, etc., from all the divisions of the empire, clad 
in the gorgeous garments of the East, were present. A 
great band had been prepared, composed of all the 
musical instruments popular at that period, and the 
command of the king had gone forth that when the 
musicians should play upon their instruments all the 
vast concourse of people, representatives of his whole 
empire, facing the image which he had set up, should 
fall down and worship it, and thus indicate their loyalty, 
not only to King Nebuchadnezzar, but also to his 
gods who had given him the wonderful victories which 
they were celebrating. 

As magistrates of the empire, Shadrach, Meshach 
and Abed-nego were necessarily in the great throng, 
tho it is quite probable that they, representing different 
departments, may have been at a distance from each 
other, each surrounded by his secretaries, assistants, 
servants, etc. Undoubtedly the object of the festival 
was clearly discerned by these intelligent men, and the 
question arose before their minds respecting their duty 
to God and the conflict of this with the probable requirements 
of the king. It was a crucial test for them, 
for they knew that the king's powers were autocratic, 
and that to cross his will meant death in some form. 



Nevertheless, they decided that they must be true to 
God, whatever the cost. It might be that their refusal 
to prostrate themselves before the image would pass 
entirely unnoticed by others, or it might be that, even 
if noticed, the incident might never reach the ears of 
the king, but such circumstances could make no change 
in the matter of their duty; whatever others might do, 
they must not bow the knee to any but the true God. 
Daniel is omitted from mention here, possibly because, 
occupying a different position as one of the king's personal 
staff and household, his conduct would not come 
so directly in contrast with the general conduct. 
Finally, the hour of trial came, when the great 
king of Babylon was recognized not only as civil but 
also as religious ruler, and the image which he had set 
up was worshiped by the various representatives of his 
empire— except Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego. 
Their neglect to bow was quickly brought to the attention 
of the king, for no doubt these, like all good men, 
had their enemies: some enemies through jealousy and 

R2495 : page 168 

rivalry for the king's favor; other enemies because, 
perhaps, they had been interrupted or hindered in dishonest 
practices and contracts with the government. 
The matter seems to have astounded the king, and 
hence his inquiry, Is it true, can it be true? Surely, 
no sane men would be so foolhardy as to oppose my 
decree, and that in my very presence, and upon such 
a fete-day as this? Not waiting an answer as respects 

R2495 : page 169 

matters of the past, the king voluntarily proposed 
for them a fresh test of loyalty and submission, 
nothing doubting but what, now that the matter had 
come to his attention, they would be moved by fear, 
not only in respect to their degradation from office, but 
by the danger of death in the fiery furnace, to render 
prompt obedience. 

Perhaps the king's mind shot a glance backward 
fifteen years, to the time when the God of the Hebrews, 
through Daniel, had told and interpreted his dream, a 
matter which none of the other gods of his wise men 
could do; and as tho he had this in mind, and wishing 
to impress the matter upon these three Hebrews who 
had dared to challenge his power, he made the boast, 
"Who is that God that shall deliver you out of my 
hands?" In his arrogance of mind and under the 
flush of his mighty victories over the greatest nations 
and mightiest kings, Nebuchadnezzar felt prepared to 
have a contest even with the unseen and to him unknown 
invisible powers. He would not be backed 
down in his own capital city; he would demonstrate 
his power to inflict a penalty, regardless of what any 



of the gods might do in retaliation. He would show 
that he, at all events, had the power in the present 
time, and in this respect at least was more powerful 
than any of the gods of whom he had knowledge. 

The answer of the three Hebrews was a wise one; 
seeing from the king's mood that the discussion of the 
subject would be useless, they did not attempt to retaliate 
by threatening him with divine vengeance; 
neither did they attempt to convert the king to Judaism, 
knowing well that the provisions of the Jewish 
covenant were not for Gentiles. They simply responded 
that they were not anxious to avail themselves of 
the opportunity to argue the matter with the king. 
They assured him of their full confidence that their 
God was able to deliver them from the fiery furnace, 
and out of the hand or power of even the greatest king 
of the earth; but they answered, While our God is thus 
all-powerful we are not by any means certain that he 
will deliver us; nevertheless, "O king, be it known unto 
thee that we will not serve thy gods nor worship the 
golden image which thou hast set up." 

Angered that his great festal day should be thus 
marred by even the slightest opposition to his will, the 
king did not wait to give another opportunity wherein 
the Hebrews might relent. He saw that it was useless, 
that they were men of character and determination, 
and he resolved that he would make an example of 
them before all the people. The form of his visage or his 
countenance changed toward these men; whereas once 
he had admired them, as amongst his ablest counsellors 
and magistrates, and an honor to his empire, now 
he hated them, as opponents whose course, if not interrupted, 
might introduce disorder into his empire, 
and lead to more or less sedition, if copied by others. 
In his rage he commanded that the furnace be heated 
seven times, or to its utmost capacity. The furnace, 
already heated for the occasion, may have been the one 
used in melting the gold for the image, and must have 
been of immense size. 

Probably as a mark of his great authority, and to 
show that even the very greatest of his subjects were 
subordinate to his supreme authority, the king commanded 
that these three recalcitrant officials be cast into 
the fiery furnace by prominent officers of his army 
—no doubt to teach a lesson respecting the power of 
the army, and the willingness of its chief representatives 
to serve the king, as against everybody else. 

The Hebrews, bound in their official garb, were 
evidently cast into the furnace from the top, because it 
is stated that they fell down bound, while the heat was 
so intense that it even killed those who cast them into 
the furnace, possibly by the inhalation of the flames, 
which might kill them instantly. 

The king seemed to be having matters his own 
way, as usual; even the mighty God of the Hebrews 
had not delivered these men from his power. And yet 



the king was solicitous and eyed the furnace, and to his 
surprise beheld those who had been cast into the furnace 
bound, walking about free in the flames— seemingly 
uninjured. More than this, he saw a fourth person 
there, of most remarkable appearance, which caused 
the king to think and speak of him as one of the gods. 
No wonder he was astonished; he was evidently contending 
with a God of whose powers he had been 
ignorant. 

Nebuchadnezzar showed himself to be a man of 
broad mind— in his acceptance to the Babylonian college 
of the brightest youths out of all the peoples taken 
captive; in his readiness to acknowledge the God of 
Daniel, when he had received the evidences of his power; 
so now, realizing that he had made a great mistake 
in attempting the destruction of three of his most eminent 
magistrates, and that he was thus defying the 

great God, Nebuchadnezzar was prompt to make acknowledgement, 
and approached the furnace, calling out, 
"Ye servants of the most high God, come forth and 
come hither." In the presence of the king's courtiers 
they came forth, and all beheld them that the fire had 
done them no injury, not even having singed their 
clothes or their hair. This was indeed a stupendous 
miracle, and doubtless was valuable in its influence, 
not only upon the Gentiles, but also upon the Hebrews 
residing throughout Babylon, who would thus hear of 
the power of Jehovah in delivering those faithful to 
him. Whether this had a bearing on the subject or 
not, we know well that, while idolatry had been one of 

R2495 : page 170 

the chief sins of the Israelites before this captivity, 
there was comparatively little of idolatry in its crude 
forms in that nation afterward. 

Nebuchadnezzar's acknowledgement of the God of 
the Hebrews, who sent his messenger and delivered his 
servants that trusted in him, is very simple and very 
beautiful. He rejoiced in the noble character of these 
men, and at once made a decree "that every people, 
nation and language which speak anything amiss against 
the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego shall be 
cut in pieces, and their houses shall be a dung-hill; because 
there is no other god that can deliver after this 
sort." And furthermore, he promoted these faithful 
men to still higher positions, for they had still more of 
his confidence respecting their integrity. Men who 
would thus hazard their lives for conscience' sake could 
be trusted in the most important positions. 

It is not necessary that we determine this incident 
to have been a type and look for correspondencies to 
its every feature. Without so determining, the Lord's 
people may readily find in it many valuable lessons 
and suggestions. Not all of God's people are in such 
prominent positions as were these Hebrews; and not 



many have testings of exactly the same kind as were 
theirs, with a literal fiery furnace before their eyes. 
Nevertheless, there are trials before the Lord's people 
to-day that are fully as severe. Who will not agree 
that questions respecting a public acknowledgement of 
an idol and thus a public disavowal of the true God 
would be a point more quickly and more easily decided 
by nearly everyone than some of the subtle temptations 
of our day? For instance, various idols are set up all 
over Christendom, each of which, it is claimed, represents 
the true God, and each of which demands worship 
in honor and substance. 

Babylon the literal was in ruins long before the 
Apostle John on the Isle of Patmos was shown in prophetic 
vision the mystic or symbolic Babylon "which 
reigneth over the kings of the earth" to-day. The provinces 
of Babylon to-day are the various civilized nations 
—really "kingdoms of this world;" but deluded 
into calling themselves and thinking themselves kingdoms 
of Christ— "Christendom." And parallels to the 
king and the image are also presented in Revelation— 
they are religious systems symbolically described as 
"the beast and his image."— Rev. 13:15-18. 

Without at present examining the symbols in detail 
we note the fact that worship of this symbolic beast 
and his image are to be the great test or trial upon professing 
Christians in every province of symbolic Babylon 
in the end of this age: indeed, the testing is even 
now in progress. And we have the same inspired record 
as authority for the statement that only those who refuse 
to render worship to those powerfully influential religious 
systems (symbolized by "the beast and his image) 
will be counted by the Lord as "overcomers" and be 
made his joint-heirs as members of his elect Church. 
-See Rev. 20:4. 

As already pointed out, the "beast" represents not 
Roman Catholics (the people) but the Roman Catholic 
system, as an institution: and the image represents not 
Protestants (the people) but the consolidation of Protestant 
systems, as an institution. We have pointed out* 
that the first step in the formation of this symbolic 
image of Papacy was taken in A.D. 1846 in the organization 
of the Evangelical Alliance, and that the second 
step must come shortly in an active living cooperation 
of Protestants as one system; and that this infusion of 
life will result from the Episcopal Church or Church 
of England joining or affiliating with other Protestants 
under some general arrangement similar to the Evangelical 
Alliance. 

R2496 : page 170 

While the severest testings will follow the giving 
of life to the consolidated image, in the near future, 
the testing has already commenced with many, for 
"Churchianity" is more and more demanding reverence 



and support, and those who absolutely refuse to worship 
its images are already exposed to fiery trials;— 
social ostracism and financial boycotts. Prominent 
amongst these is the Roman Catholic idol; that church 
sets itself as the representative of God, and demands 
worship, obedience and contribution to its funds. It is 
one of the most popular as well as one of the most 
arbitrary of idols. The Greek Catholic Church is 
another idol: the Anglican is another; and the Lutheran, 
Methodist, Presbyterian, etc., etc., all similarly 
demand worship, obedience and revenue. They have 
"pooled their issues," to a certain extent, so as not to 
war upon each other's devotees, but they unite in warfare 
against all who do not bow the knee to some such idol 
(who reverence and worship only the Almighty God, 
and recognize his only begotten Son as the only Head 
and Lord of the true Church, whose names are only 
written in heaven— not on earthly rolls of membership.) 
-SeeHeb. 12:23. 

All who refuse to worship before any of these images 
are threatened with a fiery furnace of persecution, 
and the threat is generally carried out as thoroughly as 
circumstances will permit. In the "dark ages," when 
Papacy had a monopoly of the "church" business, it 
meant torture and the stake, as well as social ostracism. 
To-day, under a higher enlightenment, and especially 
because of competition for worshipers, matters are not 
carried to the same extreme, thank God! Yet in many 
instances there are evidences that the same spirit prevails, 
merely restrained by changed circumstances and 
lack of power. Still, as many are witnesses, there are 

R2495 : page 170 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., p. 119. 

R2496 :page 171 

methods of torture which serve to intimidate many who 
would scorn to bow the knee to a literal visible idol. 
Thousands to-day are worshiping at the various shrines 
of Christendom who in their hearts long to be free from 
the sectarian bondage of fear— who fain would serve 
the Lord God only, had they the courage. And there 
are some the world over who, with a courage not less 
than that of Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego, declare 
publicly that the Lord God alone shall have the 
worship and the service which they can render. None, 
perhaps, know better than the writer the various fiery 
experiences to which these faithful few are exposed- 
boycotted socially, boycotted in business, slandered in 
every conceivable manner, and often by those of whom 
they had least expected it, who, according to the Lord's 
declaration, say "all manner of evil against them falsely.' 



-Matt. 5:11,12. 

But with these, as with the three Hebrews of our 
lesson, the chief trial is in connection with their faith; 
after they have taken a firm stand for the Lord and his 
truth they may indeed be bound and have their liberties 
of speech and of effort restrained, and they may 
indeed be cast into the fiery furnace, but nothing more 
than these things can be done to them. As soon as 
they have demonstrated their fidelity to God to this extent, 
their trials and troubles are turned into blessings 
and joys. As the form of the Son of God was seen 
with the Hebrews in the fiery furnace, so unseen, the 
Lord is present with those who trust him and who, because 
of faithfulness to him and to his Word, come 
into tribulation. How beautifully this is expressed in 
the familiar hymn, 

"When through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie, 
My grace all sufficient shall be thy supply; 
The flame shall not hurt thee, I only design 
Thy dross to consume, and thy gold to refine." 

And sometimes even the worldly can realize that 
the Lord's people in the furnace of affliction are receiving 
a blessing, and sometimes thus our Heavenly Father's 
name is glorified in the world, as in Nebuchadnezzar's 
experience. Sometimes the Lord's people who 
are bound, restrained of liberty to proclaim the truth, 
find, as did those Hebrews, that the fire burns the cords 
and sets them free, and really gives them larger opportunities 
to testify to the glory of our God than they 
could have had by any other course. 

The Lord's providences vary, and it is not for his 
people to decide when shall come remarkable deliverances, 
and when they shall apparently be left entirely 
to the will of their enemies without any manifestation 
of divine favor on their behalf. Note, for instance, 
the fact that, while the Lord interposed to deliver these 
three Hebrews from the fiery furnace, he did not interpose 
to prevent the beheading of John the Baptist, altho 
of the latter it is specifically declared, "There hath 
not arisen a greater prophet than John the Baptist." 
We remember that, while Peter was delivered from 
prison by the angel of the Lord, James was not delivered, 
but was beheaded. We remember also that Paul's 
life was miraculously preserved on several occasions, 
and that the Apostle John, according to tradition, was 
once cast into a cauldron of boiling oil, but escaped 
uninjured, while on other occasions dire disaster came 
upon the Lord's faithful ones, and that quickly, as in 
the case of Stephen, who was stoned. 

It is not, therefore, for us to predetermine what 
shall be the divine providence in respect to ourselves; 
we are to note the point of right and duty and to follow 
it regardless of consequences, trusting implicitly 
in the Lord. This lesson is most beautifully set forth 



in the language of the three Hebrews, who declared to 

King Nebuchadnezzar that their God was entirely capable 

of delivering them from his power, but that, 

whether he chose to do so or not, they would not violate 

their conscience. It is just such characters that the 

Lord is seeking for, and it is in order to their development 

and testing that multiform evil is now permitted 

to have sway. 

While such testings have been in progress to a considerable 
extent throughout this entire Gospel age, the 
Scriptures clearly indicate to us that in some special 
sense all of the Lord's people will be tested in the 
"harvest" or closing time of this age. Our Lord speaks 
of it, likening our Christian faith to a house, and represents 
the trials in the end of this age as a great storm 
which will beat upon every house, with the result that 
all that are founded upon the rock will stand, and all 
founded upon the sand will collapse. The Apostle 
Peter speaks of this trial-time, saying, "Think it not 
strange concerning the fiery trial which shall try you, 
as tho some strange thing happened unto you." (1 Pet. 4:12.) 
We are to expect a testing in the end of this 
age, just as there was a testing of the Jewish nominal 
church in the end of its age. As in that testing there 
was a thorough, complete separating of the "wheat" 
from the "chaff," so here the separating will be complete 
between the "wheat" and the "tares," as our 
Lord declares. (Matt. 13:24-30.) Throughout the age 
the "wheat" and the "tares," by divine arrangement, 
have been permitted to grow side by side; but in the 
"harvest" the separation must occur, that the "wheat" 
may be "garnered," received to the Kingdom. 

The Apostle Paul, also, speaks of this time of fiery 
trial, and, likening the faith and works of a zealous 
Christian to a house built of gold, silver and precious 
stones, he declares that the fire of this day, in the end 
of this age, shall try every man's work of what sort it 
is, and shall consume all but the genuine faith and 
character structures. (1 Cor. 3:11-15.) But we are to 

R2496 : page 172 

remember that such loyal characters grow not suddenly, 
in a few hours or days— mushroom-like,— but are 
progressive developments, fine-grained and strong like 
the olive-tree. 

Looking back, we cannot doubt that the step of 
self-denial recorded in our previous lesson,— taken for 
conscience' sake by the Hebrews,— had much to do 
with the development in them of the staunch characters 
illustrated in this lesson. Likewise we who have 
become "new creatures," reckonedly, in Christ, know 
that we are to be tested (if our testing has not already 
commenced), and should realize that only as we 
practice self-denials in the little things of life, and mortify 
(deaden) the natural cravings of our flesh in respect 



to food, clothing, conduct, etc., will we become 
strong spiritually and be able to "overcome." 

Many deal slackly with themselves in respect to 
little violations of their consecration vow, saying,— 
"What's the use" of such carefulness and so different 
a life from that of the world in general? Ah! there is 
great use in it, for victories in little things prepare for 
greater victories and make them possible: and on the 
contrary, surrender to the will of the flesh in the little 
things means sure defeat in the warfare as a whole. 
Let us remember the maxim laid down by our Great 
Teacher— that he that is faithful in the things that are 
least will be faithful also in the things which are great. 
And this is the operation of a law, whose operations 
may be discerned in all the affairs of life. 

Our Lord expresses the same thought, saying,— 
To him that hath (used) shall be given (more), and 
from him that hath not (used) shall be taken away that 
which he hath. If we start on a Christian life ever so 
weak in the flesh and weak in spirit, we will find that 
faithfulness in the little things will bring increasing 
strength in the Lord and in the power of his might. 
But it is in vain that we pray, "Lord, Lord," and hope 
for great victories and the "crown of rejoicing," if we 
fail to do our best to conquer in the little affairs of daily 
life. In other words, our testing is in progress from 
the moment of our consecration, and the little trials are 
but preparations for greater ones which, when faithfully 
attained, we will be able to reckon with the Apostle 
as light afflictions which are but for a moment, and 
which are working out for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory.— 2 Cor. 4:17. 

The answer of the Hebrews to Nebuchadnezzar,— 
"Our God whom we serve," is worthy of note. They 

R2497 : page 172 

not only acknowledged God and worshiped him, but 

they additionally served him, according as they had opportunity. 

And so it will be found to-day: those who 

have the necessary strength of character to refuse to worship 

human institutions and thereby to "suffer the loss 

of all things," counting them but as loss and dross, 

that they may win Christ and be found finally complete 

in him, as members of his glorified body, and joint-heirs 

in his Kingdom, not only practice self-denials, 

but gladly serve and confess the Lord in their daily 

life. Rightly appreciated, a profession of love for the 

Lord would always be a profession of service to his 

cause. Whoever is not rendering some service to our 

King in the present time of multiplied opportunities 

has at very most the "lukewarm" love that is offensive 

to the Master. -Rev. 2:4; 3:16. 

Let us resolve, dear brethren, as did the three 
Hebrews of this lesson, that we will worship and serve 
only the Lord our God— that we will neither worship 



nor serve sectarianism, in any of its many forms, nor 
mammon, with its many enticements and rewards, nor 
fame, nor friends, nor self. God "seeketh such to worship 
him as worship him in spirit and in truth," is the 
declaration of our Lord and Head.— John 4:23,24. 



R2497 : page 172 

WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES. 

JULY 23.-DAN. 5:17-31. 

"God is the Judge."— Psa. 75:7. 

NEBUCHADNEZZAR'S kingdom, altho very 

prosperous, and wealthy by the gathering 

of the spoils of centuries from the great surrounding 

nations, was of short duration. Secular history mentions 

the father of Nebuchadnezzar as the founder of 

new Babylonia, and quite a number of Bible students 

have thus been misled to reckon the "Times of the 

Gentiles" as beginning before Nebuchadnezzar's time 

in the days of Nabopolasser. But while it is doubtless 

true that that monarch was prominently identified 

with the organization of Babylonia, the "Times of the 

Gentiles" could not have begun in his day, because 

God still had his own typical Kingdom in the earth, 

as represented by the Jews— down until Zedekiah's 

captivity to Nebuchadnezzar, 606 B.C. We should remember 

that the "Times of the Gentiles" merely 

means the times or years in which the world's affairs 

are delivered over to Gentile supremacy, between the 

time of the removal of God's typical kingdom and the 

time of the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom 

October, 1914.* This Bible view of the matter is 

further confirmed by the fact that the ruins of Babylon 

show the name of Nebuchadnezzar on the bricks of the 

principal palaces, and thus give evidence that it was 

under his administration that the empire reached its 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I. Chap. 13; VOL. II., Chap. 4. 

R2497 : page 173 

zenith, or became, in the language of the dream, the 
golden head of the image, which represented Gentile 
dominion.— Dan. 2:38. 

Secular history seems to give the name of Nabonidus, 
as king of Babylon, at the time of its fall, but 
the Scriptures make no mention of this name, giving 
us instead Belshazzar, denominating him the son of 
Nebuchadnezzar. Two explanations are possible: Belshazzar 



may have been the son of Nabonidus and the 
grandson of Nebuchadnezzar, or Nabonidus may have 
been his original name, and Belshazzar a name adopted 
when he assumed the office of king; or reversely, 
Belshazzar may have been his original name, and the 
one by which Daniel and the people at home would 
speak of him, while Nabonidus may have been the 
name he assumed officially as king. At all events the 
name that appears on the tablets is Nabonidus, while 
the name which Daniel gives repeatedly is Belshazzar, 
a name of the same signification as that given to Daniel, 
who was called Belteshazzar, both words signifying 
"Favored of God." We can safely hold to the 
Scriptural account, assured that time will justify our 
confidence in this, as it has done in other matters. 

At the time of our lesson, Babylon, the capital city 
of Babylonia, was the most wonderful city in the 
world. The following observations respecting it are 
from the pens of others. "Nebuchadnezzar converted 
his capital, Babylon, into one of the most magnificent 
and beautiful cities of antiquity." "Herodotus, who 
visited it about B.C. 450 [nearly a century after the 
date covered by our lesson], while its walls and buildings 
were still perfect, describes it as forming a square 
of nearly fourteen miles on each side." "The walls 
surrounding the city, according to Herodotus, were 
three hundred feet high and eighty feet broad. A 
hundred gates, with their great posts, leaves and sills 
of brass, and their bars of iron, permitted entrance to 
the city." "Such a city was never seen before, and 
was the work of Nebuchadnezzar. The bricks marked 
with his name, and the inscriptions which he wrote, 
being hidden in the ruins, have now come forth from 
their grave as witnesses to the truth of God's Word." 
"In those days Babylon was the metropolis of the 
world, the center of commerce, art and wisdom." 
"The great plain on which it lay, a Paradise of fertility 
and cultivation, was intersected by countless 
canals, both small and great, serving alike for irrigation 
and navigation." "Babylon was a university 
city. The wealth of the world poured into the coffers 
of the Babylonian merchants." 

Such wealth and prosperity were likely to beget 
luxurious ease on the part of the Babylonians, as they 
also excited the cupidity and ambition of enemies. 
Accordingly, the Medes and Persians had consolidated; 
and their army under Cyrus for several months had 
been besieging Babylon, whose citizens, however, felt 
quite secure behind their immense walls, and amply 
provisioned for a longer siege than it was supposed 
any army could enforce. So great was the confidence 
of the king of Babylon in the strength of his capital 
that he made a great feast to a thousand of his lords. 

This feast would seem to have been in the nature 
of a boast in the greatness of Babylon; and as tho to 
emphasize his power and to remind his nobles and 



lords of how none of the gods of the surrounding nations 
had been able to deliver their peoples out of the 
hand of Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar had called for the 
vessels of gold and silver brought from the Jewish 
Temple, and these were profaned by drinking therefrom 
to the honor of Bel, the god of Babylon. 

In the midst of the revelry of the feast, the king, 
his counsellors and lords were astonished to see a part 
of a hand writing certain fiery letters upon the wall 
of the palace. The revelry ceased, a hush of fear came 
over all; the flush of confidence upon the king's face 
gave place to one of terror; he trembled and called for 
the advice of the wise men to interpret the wonderful 
message, but they were unable to explain the matter 
satisfactorily. Even if they had deciphered the letters 
and words, they had no interpretation to offer, because 
from their standpoint any other meaning than the true 
meaning would have been more reasonable; nothing 
would have seemed further from the truth to Babylon's 
wise men than the message which these miraculously 
written words conveyed. The king was greatly disappointed, 
but his mother came to his assistance, informing 
him of Daniel, who had given to his father, 
Nebuchadnezzar, an interpretation of a dream, when 
all the wise men of Babylon had failed, and accordingly 
Daniel was sent for. 

The aged Prophet, at this time about ninety years 
of age, as an officer of the kingdom doubtless resided 
in one of the palace buildings near by, and in response 
to the king's command he stood before them. The 
king, realizing the importance of the message, manifested 
his anxiety by offering, first to the astrologers, 
and now to Daniel, a great reward for the interpretation 
—to be robed in royal purple, with a royal golden 
chain as insignia of rank, and to be third in dignity 
and power in the empire. The first thing in the lesson 
which strikes us is the nobility of God's servant, 
in renouncing all claim to these gifts as a reward for 
the service of interpreting God's message. "Let thy 
gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another; 
yet I will read the writing unto the king, and make 
known the interpretation." 

We may stop here long enough to take a valuable 
lesson, to the effect that all who would be the mouth-pieces 

R2497 : page 174 

of the Lord, and speak forth his Word, should, 
like Daniel, do so without stipulation of compensation. 
Only from this standpoint can any hope to be entirely 
free and untrammeled in speaking words of truth and 
soberness which may be very distasteful to those who 
inquire the mind of the Lord. Had Daniel thanked 
the king for the promised gifts, and thus accepted 
them as a reward for his service, he would have felt 
obligated to the king to such an extent that it might 



have warped his judgment, or have weakened his expression 

of the Lord's message. And the king in 

turn would have felt that, having paid for the information, 

it should be a smooth, favorable message. 

And just so it is with some of the Lord's true servants 

in mystic Babylon. They have the opportunity presented 

to speak the Lord's Word; yet many of them 

are handicapped by reason of having received honors 

and robes, and are more or less inclined to hide and 

R2498 : page 174 

cover the message now due to Babylon in this its Laodicean 
epoch. They are bound by the chain of gold 
around their necks.— Rev. 3:14-22. 

The aged Prophet displayed gentleness as well as 
fearlessness in the delivery of his message. It was 
stated as kindly as the truth would permit, but the 
truth was not withheld by reason of fear. He recounted 
to the king his father's exaltation to power, and 
ascribed it not to the god of Babylon, but to the God 
of Israel. He reminded him of how pride had been 
his father's downfall, resulting in his degradation to 
bestial conditions for seven times (seven years— corresponding 
to the seven times, i.e., 2520 years, of 
Gentile domination). He reminded Belshazzar of how 
in the end his father had acknowledged the God of 
heaven as the real ruler amongst men, and then he 
charged home to the king that instead of profiting by 
this experience, of which he well knew, he had lifted 
up his heart to pride, had ignored the only true God, 
and had even brought what he knew were the sacred 
vessels of Jehovah's service, to profane them in the 
worship and glorification of idols— "gods of silver, 
gold, brass, iron, wood and stone, which see not nor 
hear nor know." He pointed out to the king that he 
had thus dishonored and defied "the God in whose 
hand [power] thy breath is [the God of all life-Acts 17:28,29], 
and whose are all thy ways [who has full 
power to control your course]." This true God he 
had not glorified, but dishonored. 

By thus kindly but plainly showing the king the 
truth, the Prophet prepared the way for the exposition 
of the fateful words— "Mene, Mene, Tekel, 
Upharsin." Mene was repeated twice, probably for 
the sake of emphasis— Numbered! Numbered!— the 
limit of the time of your dominion has expired. Tekel 
—short weight, lacking. Peres signifies divided, and 
its plural form, Upharsin, gives the thought of broken 
or crushed into pieces— destroyed. Nothing in the 
word peres signifies Medes and Persians, but the 
Prophet knew from the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's 
vision that the Babylonian dominion would be 
followed by the Medo-Persian kingdom, and he also 
knew that the Medes and Persians were already besieging 
the city. 



So far from being offended with the plain words 
of the Prophet, Belshazzar seems to have felt their 
truth, and gave command that the honors already 
promised should be bestowed upon Daniel. But meantime 
other matters were transpiring in his capital, of 
which the king and his lords were unaware, so that 
the fulfilment of the doom written upon the palace 
wall was close at hand. 

While the Babylonians were feasting and reveling 
in fancied security, Cyrus, the general of the united 
forces of the Medes and Persians, having studied up 
a plan of attack, had already caused a great ditch to 
be dug above the city, to divert the waters of the River 
Euphrates into a new channel. This river flowed 
through the center of Babylon diagonally, and was 
protected by enormous gates of brass, which were supposed 
to be equally as impregnable as the three-hundred-foot 
wall. Indeed, it would appear that the Babylonians 
had never a fear of attack from the river, 
and had left it comparatively unguarded; consequently, 
when Cyrus had diverted the stream into the new 
channel he found little difficulty in marching his troops 
under the brass gates into the city, so that at the very 
time the revelry was progressing in Belshazzar's palace 
the soldiers of Cyrus were taking possession of the 
entire city, and very shortly after Daniel's interpretation 
of the writing the troops reached the palace, 
Belshazzar was slain, and the new empire of Medo-Persia 
was inaugurated— "without fighting," as the 
tablets declare. Thus did great Babylon fall suddenly 
—"in one hour." 

The thoughtful Bible student must of necessity 
have always in view the many correspondencies which 
the Scriptures institute between literal Babylon and 
mystic Babylon, and when studying the account of 
the fall of literal Babylon his attention is naturally 
drawn also to the foretold fall of mystic Babylon in 
the end of this age. Indeed, he must be comparatively 
blind who cannot see that the wonderful prophecies 
which speak of the fall of Babylon (Isa. 14:22; Jer. 50 
and 51) were not wholly fulfilled by Cyrus the 
Persian. The fall of literal Babylon, while it was sudden, 
and while it made a great commotion amongst the 
nations, lacks much of filling to the full the prophetic 
picture. Much of the prophecy still waits for fulfilment 
in mystic or symbolic Babylon to-day; and this 

R2498 : page 175 

fact is abundantly supported by the prophecies of the 
Book of Revelation, written centuries after the fall of 
literal Babylon, which unmistakably refer to symbolic 
Babylon, and use language almost identical with that 
of Jeremiah. -See Rev. 16:19-18:24. 

It will be noticed, further, that, as literal Babylon 
sat upon the literal River Euphrates, so mystic Babylon 



is said to sit upon the waters, peoples. It should 
be noticed, also, that as the literal city was captured 
by the diversion of the literal waters, so symbolic 
Babylon is to fall by reason of the diversion of the 
symbolic Euphrates, which in Rev. 16:12, it is foretold, 
shall be "dried up— that the way of the kings of 
the East might be prepared." 

The kings of the East, or kings from the sunrising, 
are, we understand, the kings of Christ's Kingdom, 
who are also priests— the body of Christ, the 
Royal Priesthood. "Thou hast made us unto our God 
kings and priests, and we shall reign on the earth." 
From this standpoint of view, Cyrus and his army, 
overthrowing literal Babylon, was a figure or illustration 
of Messiah, King of kings and Lord of lords, 
who with his faithful will shortly overthrow mystic 
Babylon, and take possession of the world in the name 
of Jehovah, to establish the Kingdom for which he 
taught us to pray, "Our Father. ..,thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

This likeness of Cyrus to Messiah is not merely 
in the particulars noted. It should be remembered 
that the name, Cyrus, signifies "the sun," and that 
thus in his name he reminds us of the prophecy of 
Christ,— "The Sun of Righteousness shall arise with 
healing in his beams." Moreover, there were sundry 
very remarkable prophecies respecting Cyrus, made 
long before he had come into prominence. Through 
the Prophet Isaiah (44:28) the Lord speaks of Cyrus 
as his shepherd, who would lead back Israel, and again 
(45:1-14) he calls him his anointed, saying, "Thus 
saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right 
hand I have holden to subdue nations before him; and 
I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the 
two-leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut; I 
will go before thee, and make the crooked places 
straight; I will break in pieces the gates of brass and cut 
in sunder the bars of iron; and I will give thee the 
treasures of darkness and hidden riches of secret places, 
that thou mayest know that I, Jehovah, which call 
thee by thy name, am the God of Israel. For Jacob 
my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even 
called thee by name; I have surnamed thee, tho thou 
hast not known me." In this prophecy Cyrus is evidently 
indicated, and yet just as evidently a greater 
than he is indirectly referred to, viz., the Prince of the 
kings of the earth, who in Revelation is shown as drying 
up the symbolic Euphrates and destroying symbolic 
Babylon, and delivering spiritual Israel. And 
the time for the fulfilment of the symbol is clearly 
indicated, by the drying up of the Euphrates under 
the sixth vial of the "Day of Wrath:" and the fall of 
Babylon under the seventh vial, resulting in the liberty 
of all of God's people from the thraldom, through 
false doctrine, which has been upon them for lo, these 
many years, is portrayed as resulting. 



Babylon literal fell because, when tried in the 
balances by the Lord, she was found wanting: mystic 
Babylon falls for a similar reason. Literal Babylon 
never was Israel, but the Israelites were for a time 
swallowed up in Babylon; likewise, mystic Babylon 
never was spiritual Israel, tho for a long time spiritual 
Israel has been in captivity to mystic Babylon. As 
the same Cyrus who overthrew literal Babylon made 
the proclamation which permitted literal Israel to return 
from captivity, so it is the King of kings who, 
upon taking his great power as earth's new King will 
set free all of the Lord's people— and in advance he 
sends the message to those who have ears to hear, 
saying, "Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is 
become the habitation of demons and the hold of every 
foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful 
bird.... Come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her 
plagues."— Rev. 18:2-4. 

The great feast which preceded the fall of Babylon 
would seem to correspond well with the great denominational 
union expected soon, and the season of 
rejoicing which will accompany it. The gold and silver 
vessels of the Lord's house which were profaned 
may fitly represent not only the precious truths of divine 
revelation, but also the Lord's consecrated people 
—the golden vessels representing the "little flock," 
and the more numerous silver vessels representing the 
"great company." What may be the character of the 
defilement and injury of these is of course problematical, 
but in any case we remember that those consecrated 
vessels were all highly honored, and restored 
to the Temple by Cyrus, and likewise we know that 
not only the truths of divine revelation will all be 
cared for by our Lord, but also that all that are his 
shall be glorified in the spiritual Temple which he will 
rear shortly. 



page 175 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your kind favor 
of the 9th received, and the announcement of Brother 
McPhail's visit is much appreciated by all the friends 
here in Philadelphia. Your letter was read and discussed 
at our meeting, and we decided to have an all-day 
meeting on Sunday, the 9th of July, with intermissions 
for lunch; and evening meetings on Friday and 
Saturday; all to be held at our usual meeting-place, 
Dover Hall, Marshall and Susquehanna aves. Please 
tell Bro. McPhail to come to my house on his arrival 



at Philadelphia. 

I am glad to be able to say that all our meetings 
are smooth and harmonious: so much so as to be a little 
different from what we might Scripturally expect: 

page 176 

but perhaps this is for a pleasant alternation to the 

ruggedness of the past few years. I take this opportunity 

of thanking you for the rich semi-monthly 

feasts of which we are the recipients from our present 

Lord through your agency; and I hope I may lay the 

lessons well to heart and never lose sight of the responsibility 

which accompanies the knowledge of the 

truth, but always realize that this is my day of judgment 

and try to be faithful to my consecration to his will. 

I enclose a clipping which is strikingly corroborative 
of the Laodicean period of the nominal church, 
and yet this gentleman will in all probability refuse to 
be enlightened from God's Word on the strange inconsistencies 
of which he complains. 

Sr. Walker unites in love to yourself and all those 
associated with you in "the work of the Lord." 

Yours in Christ, SMITH WALKER-Philadelphia. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Last Sunday I gathered up the 
rest of my Bible vs. Evolution pamphlets, slipped tracts 
into each one, left dinner to cook itself and went down 
to the Baptist church to make a beginning of distribution. 
The 500,000 pamphlets weighed on me, and I 
felt uneasy at doing so little toward the work. It was 
Children's Day, and services were prolonged, so I stood 
for half an hour, with what patience and fortitude I 
could, beset by inducements to give it up for that day, 
and nearly breaking down, when I heard the children 
in a responsive exercise saying, "Shall doubtless come 
again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him." 
Had no difficulty in waiting after that, and disposed 
of the pamphlets to the first ones who came down the 
stairs. All but one were kindly received; one woman 
passed by with her head up, but it did not disturb me. 
I hurried home, to find things all right, my absence had 
caused no trouble, and I am not sure it was known. 
The Lord was merciful; for this had seemed to me an 
impossible thing for me to do, but while I was waiting 
I felt that I must not let anything prevent my 
carrying out what I had planned to do, or perhaps I 
could never have attempted it again. The obstacles 
have been so many and great; but when it seemed that 
I was a little willing to be prevented, then I felt I 
must overcome at any cost, or grieve the spirit. 

I have been letting no day pass without at the 
very least three witness-bearings to the truth of the 
Kingdom, and am greatly pleased when the number 
rises to seven or more, as it sometimes does. Generally, 
when I make opportunities in the morning, the 



Lord sends me others later in the day. If evening 
comes before I have given any testimony, I am unhappy 
and do not think I could rest, if I did not mail 
before retiring at least three missionary envelopes with 
tracts. It gets to be meat and drink to do the Lord's 
will. I am glad there are so many ways of serving. 
I want to say "Any service, anywhere;" and think it 
has been good for me that I had not money to put into 
the harvest-work lately, for it has compelled me to 
give tracts as something I still could do, and from 
which I felt I had no right to shrink. It has been a 
valuable training, undoubtedly, in addition. 

The Lord's peace is with me richly to-day. I have 
felt conscious of the presence of the heavenly Caretaker 
and, as it seemed, of the kindly down-looking 
of hosts of happy saints. I have felt almost ready to 
put away every fear at last. I belong to Christ, and 
I rejoice to find that God is true. His Word shall 
abide. That same Jesus whom I have seen slighted 
and decried and explained away and talked down and 
forgotten, by the people for whom he gave his very 
breath in unappreciated love,— he shall surprise them 
with goodness in power shortly. "Every knee" and 
"every tongue" ! I praise his name! My health is 
better of late, maybe since my immersion. That seemed 
a relief to my mind. 

The June 1st TOWER is very excellent and helpful. 
And also The Wonderful Story, very prettily finished 
and illustrated. 

Wishing you all things good in the Lord's service, 

Your sister in him, 

ALICE L. DARLINGTON, -Pennsylvania. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just closed 
a meeting in Madison Co. which was the most interesting 
held there in a long time. I preached for them 
three days, and at the close of the meeting baptized 
five. I tried an hour and a half to explain the significance 
and beauty of the symbol, and I hope they understood 
what they were doing. 

Appointments are being arranged for me to make 
another trip to Santa Anna in July, and I hope to be 
able to fill them. If I go I want to hold meetings in 
Milano, Goldthwaite and Mullen. 

Oh how I do thank the dear Lord that he has seen 
fit to use me, yes, even me, in the service of the truth 
and those who love it! I do esteem it a grand privilege 
to be accounted worthy of a place in the harvest 
of this age. I think of the apostles who, when they 
were whipped for preaching Jesus, departed rejoicing 
that they were counted worthy to receive stripes for 
his name. 

My poor heart leaps for joy when I think of seventeen 
years ago in comparison with the present. 
Then I stood (so far as I then knew or know yet) almost 
alone, and in the ministry entirely alone. Now 



I look at the pile of good letters on my table from interested 

ones in different parts of Texas, and I read 

them with wet eyes and cheeks, as my heart rejoices 

to discern "the same mind" in the writers as I follow 

the lines of their letters. 

We are glad that we have been "able to stand" 
in these seventeen years of trial, and to-day thank 
God our lamp is burning, and we have oil in our vessel. 
We have borne reproaches, our name has been 
cast out as evil, we have been slanderously reported 
and persecuted; but we rejoice, knowing that it was 
for "his sake." Again, how light these afflictions 
were compared with his peace! Oh this blessed peace! 
"Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is 
stayed on thee." 

Oh how we feast, as we come to the table prepared 
for us in the presence of our enemies! His grace has 
been sufficient for us at all times. I think and rejoice 
over these things. God bless you! Let us look up; 
our redemption draweth nigh. Yes, we can say of 
each other, "whom having not seen we love." I seem 
to have known you since April, '83. 

My love goes out to, and my prayers up for, all 
who love our dear Lord. Yours, in the Lord's service, 
SAM. WILLIAMS.-Texas. 



page 177 