Happy to Serve the God Who Remembers
IT WAS the evening of May 24, 1971. A dedicated Christian had been dining with others at a restaurant. On leaving, he started down a flight of stairs. In vain, his right hand grasped for a nonexistent handrail​—and in a moment he was plummeting downward. With tremendous force, his head struck a decorative metal item.
Alex Henderson had been severely injured. In fact, so dim were his prospects of survival that his wife received the doctor’s condolences. And yet, her husband lived. The results of his fall? A badly fractured skull, three hematomas and paralysis of the left side. Only after months of unconsciousness would there be even partial improvement.
Today, serious disability prevents Alex Henderson from doing as much as he once did in Jehovah God’s service. Yet he is happy, realizing that “God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name.” (Heb. 6:10) How comforting to know that works of faith and love for God’s name are remembered by our heavenly Father!
But how might Christians cope with the aftermath of such a tragic accident? What can sustain them? Before answering such questions​—a brief look at the past. Alex supplies the details.
RELIGION IN OUR FAMILY
“Glasgow is where I first saw the light of day back in 1921. Our family belonged to the Church of Scotland. Mother was a devout woman, but unfortunately we lost her to the enemy death when I was a mere lad of 12. (1 Cor. 15:26) Tending a thriving garden seems to have been my father’s chief way of getting closer to the Creator. In fact, one of the few times he darkened a church doorway was June 11, 1943, when Janet and I were married.
“World War II saw me in military service for five years. A clergyman offered to arrange my discharge, provided I enter a seminary and become a minister. But I opted to remain in the air force.
“With the war’s end, my wife and I were caught up in the social whirl. Janet was a Sunday-school teacher, and at church-sponsored variety shows we sang together the lilting airs of ‘bonny Scotland.’ Incidentally, although there is a Scottish hymn entitled ‘Guide Me O Thou Great Jehovah,’ I have no recollection of hearing the divine name in those days.”​—Ps. 83:18.
LEARNING ABOUT THE GOD WHO REMEMBERS
“In November 1947, we and our three-year-old son moved to New York city. Soon Janet’s religious interests came to the fore. She had known about Jehovah’s Witnesses in Scotland, but now began studying the Bible with them. And in 1950 she symbolized her dedication to God by undergoing water baptism.
“Since my wife was involved with ‘those Jehovah’s Witnesses,’ it seemed appropriate for me to attend one of their meetings. How can I forget the first one​—the 1951 commemoration of Jesus’ death? (Luke 22:19, 20) All was calm at first. But then an elderly woman cried out: ‘Let’s sing a song for Jesus!’ That did it! They could count on my absence in the future. Of course, the woman was a visitor, not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and their meetings are so orderly that an attending unbeliever can say, ‘God is really among you.’ (1 Cor. 14:23-25) But you could not have convinced me of that at the time.
“Janet often invited a few Witnesses to our apartment after meetings on Sundays. To avoid contact with them, however, I frequently sat through two showings of motion pictures at some local theater, or resorted to aimless meanderings until the visitors had left and I could ‘safely’ return home, weary and footsore. How some of us resist exposure to Scriptural truth!
“Little by little, though, my ‘resistance’ broke down. Fine wifely conduct, some well-chosen words​—and strategically placed magazines like this one—​convinced me that the Witnesses ‘were not so bad after all.’ (1 Pet. 3:1-6) A bout with tuberculosis and some months of hospitalization gave me time to think. By letter, Janet answered my many Bible questions, and before long I heartily embraced the true faith. So did our son Adam, today a Christian overseer. Both of us were baptized on the same day​—September 9, 1957.”
“Being very conscious of my present limitations, I am grateful for past opportunities to serve the God who remembers. The privilege of serving as presiding overseer soon came my way. Besides engaging in the evangelizing work and other congregational activities, it was a delight to share in constructing a Kingdom Hall where Christians still meet regularly.
“In those days, some individuals good-naturedly called me ‘Talk-a-lot Henderson.’ Among other things, it was touching to perform marriage ceremonies and to observe the happiness reflected on the faces of those entering wedlock. There were sad occasions, too​—times when funeral discourses had to be given. One of these is vividly recalled because of a language problem. Just imagine​—an audience of Spanish background listening to an English talk given with my Scottish accent. But there was an interpreter, and I know that they understood, for gradually those saddened faces brightened somewhat on hearing about the marvelous resurrection hope. Yet my finest speaking privilege was that of giving the talk at the congregation’s observance of the Lord’s Evening Meal in 1959, because it afforded opportunity to make heartfelt expression about the grand salvation made possible by Jehovah God through his beloved Son Jesus Christ.​—Matt. 26:26-29; John 3:16; 5:28, 29.
“In 1963, we began associating with another congregation and surely were happy as a family dedicated to Jehovah. But then came my debilitating accident in 1971. Physical impairment has been my lot ever since, but great is my joy in continuing to serve the God who remembers.”
FELLOW BELIEVERS LEND A HAND
Alex Henderson’s recollection of the accident and its immediate aftermath is scant. So it seems fitting to let others fill in some details . . . and thus help to answer such questions as these: How can Christians cope with adversity? What sustains them? How can others help? And can an infirm Christian aid fellow believers?
For a Christian, a serious accident may call for strong determination to ‘abstain from blood.’ (Acts 15:28, 29) It did for the Hendersons, and their resolute course affected others, for a close associate says: “To see fellow Christians risk their lives to stand firm uncompromisingly against blood transfusion is strengthening to faith.” Yes, even amid tragedy, we may upbuild others spiritually by taking the unflinching position that ‘live or die, we belong to Jehovah.’​—Rom. 14:7, 8.
Fellow believers themselves may be able to render aid. During the months that Alex was in a coma, he required very expensive round-the-clock nursing care. “The congregation (spiritual brothers and sisters individually) helped carry that burden,” comments one elder. Here was one deeply appreciated manifestation of the love that identifies Jesus’ true followers.​—John 13:35.
Christian love can, of course, be displayed in many ways. In retrospect, another overseer remarks: “The operation was successful. Alex was moved to the intensive care unit and remained there for several days. I visited daily . . . During those visits, I would hold Alex’s hand and offer a prayer. Whether he was able to hear, I couldn’t very well tell. But, surprisingly, the nurses were quiet and did not move about noisily.”
Another elder adds: “Slowly Alex began to respond and become conscious. The process was agonizingly slow. Yet he was able to communicate after a while. As time progressed, his physical limitations were manifest​—paralysis of the left side of his body and impaired eyesight. . . . His memory, too, was affected seriously, especially of events regarding his hospitalization and the near past. But his recollection and knowledge of spiritual things seemed almost unimpaired. His progress there was amazing.”
How easy it is for a disabled person to give up, to sink into despair! But how unwise to do so, especially if the individual is serving Jehovah, “the God who gives hope”! (Rom. 15:13) “Alex held on, as patient as he could be,” remarks a fellow believer. “Slowly he began to have his sensibilities restored. He was able to read, talk and function fairly well, but remained paralyzed at the left side. Recovering slowly, he began to attend meetings and later participated in them, both from the platform and by commenting.”
Alex Henderson first had to be helped to Christian meetings in a wheelchair. Later, he was able to walk with the leg brace and cane that still must be used. When asked what has sustained him, one factor he readily mentions is “meeting attendance.” How vital for Christians to meet regularly and ‘incite one another to love and fine works’!​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
Singing had always been a significant part of life in the Henderson household. “I’ve always loved to hear Alex and Janet sing at the Kingdom Hall,” says one of their spiritual sisters. But with visual impairment, Brother Henderson could not see the print in the congregational songbook. So this sister thought of a way to lend a helping hand. “I wrote the entire songbook in large print,” she says, “and was thrilled to hear him sing Jehovah’s praises again.”​—Eph. 5:18-20.
FURTHER OPPORTUNITIES TO SERVE
“It is not likely that our family will ever forget a particular meeting late in 1975,” recalls Alex. “What joy was ours as one of the overseers read a letter stating that I had been appointed an elder! This came as a complete surprise, for the brothers had not discussed this matter with me, although they knew very well that serving my fellow believers in this way would be accepted as a cherished privilege. My initial reaction? ‘Me! What can I do?’ Humbly, I must admit that it is possible to shoulder such responsibility only with Jehovah’s aid, for how can I boast in my own strength?”​—Compare 1 Corinthians 1:28-31; Philippians 4:13.
Is it really possible for someone quite handicapped to aid others? Yes, and that fact can well serve as an encouragement to an individual experiencing adversity because of physical disability. One young person remarks: “I appreciate the many fascinating details about the truth with which Brother Henderson spices up his comments and talks.” And another says: “It is evident that he has an abundant wealth of knowledge that he is eager to share with all of us. . . . It is amazing how zealous and encouraging he can be in the face of these physical difficulties!”
So let no infirm Christian feel that his or her efforts to praise Jehovah and humbly upbuild fellow believers are ineffective. One elder states: “Just recently has Brother Henderson begun to stand at the podium, whereas previously he would sit and speak to the congregation. . . . This simple fact has been faith-strengthening and encouraging to me because I can see that a man faithful in Jehovah’s service, who has met with a crippling accident that has interrupted his service, has conquered these things with the help of Jehovah’s spirit.”
HELPED BY THE GOD WHO REMEMBERS
Indeed, only with Jehovah’s aid can Christians successfully face adversity, whatever is its nature. “From where will my help come?” asked the psalmist. “My help is from Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth.” (Ps. 121:1, 2) “Jehovah helped me to be patient​—to endure,” says Alex. “He provided loving assistance and gave me strength to maintain my integrity under difficulties.” Janet adds: “When problems arose, I took them to Jehovah in prayer, asking not for miracles but just that He would show me the way to cope and to be content with the outcome, whatever it might be.”​—1 Pet. 5:6, 7.
Christians are not serving a forgetful God. Jehovah never abandons those who truly love him, and before them he has placed the joyous hope of life eternal. (Ps. 94:14; John 3:16; 2 Pet. 3:13) Hence, optimistic despite his disabilities, Alex urges:
“Be of good cheer, ‘persevere in prayer’ and carry on in faith. Some day soon the blind will see, the deaf will hear, the tongue of the speechless will cry out in joy​—and, yes—​the lame will leap about as does the nimble stag. Of course, I yearn for that splendid time. Meanwhile, it is a source of true happiness to serve Jehovah, the God who remembers.”​—Ps. 100:2; Isa. 35:5, 6; Rom. 12:12.

