Set Spiritual Goals
1 What a privilege it will be to praise Jehovah throughout eternity! To help us realize that goal, we can set more immediate spiritual goals and work toward attaining them. This enables us to direct our energies wisely. (1 Cor. 9:26) What goals would be realistic for you?
2 Bible Study: Do you prepare for each congregation meeting? If so, do you allow time for research and meditation when you study? For example, when preparing for the weekly Watchtower Study and Congregation Book Study, do you just underline answers or do you look up the cited scriptures and also ponder the reasons for the explanations given? Could you make it your goal to do research on a few points each week from the assigned Bible reading for the Theocratic Ministry School? Such spiritual digging takes time and effort, but it yields rich rewards.​—Prov. 2:4, 5.
3 Congregation Meetings: Another goal is to attend all five congregation meetings regularly. Arriving early enough to associate with fellow believers and to share in the opening song and prayer helps build up the spirit of the congregation. We might also strive to comment at each meeting and work at improving our comments. Perhaps you can show how a scripture in the paragraph bears on the discussion or point out how the material applies in everyday life.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
4 Field Service: Our ministry improves greatly when we set goals. Do you have a personal goal of hours that you plan to spend in service each month? Some find that helpful. Or could you improve in some aspect of your ministry, such as using the Bible in the house-to-house activity, making more meaningful return visits, striving to start a Bible study, or teaching more effectively on studies?
5 Parents, are you prompting your children to set goals in Jehovah’s service? Help them to see that serving as a pioneer, a missionary, or a member of the Bethel family is an excellent way to show the depth of their appreciation for Jehovah.​—Eccl. 12:1.
6 As we examine our activities, set spiritual goals, and then work at reaching them, we will find greater joy in our service and be a source of encouragement to others.​—Rom. 1:12.

