Take as a Pattern the Prophets—Amos
 1. Why can the example of Amos be a source of encouragement to us?
1 Have you ever felt unqualified to preach because of having a humble background? If so, you can take courage from the example of Amos. He was a sheep raiser and a seasonal laborer, yet Jehovah empowered him to proclaim a weighty message. (Amos 1:1; 7:14, 15) Similarly, in our day, Jehovah uses those who are humble and lowly. (1 Cor. 1:27-29) What other lessons for our ministry can we learn from the prophet Amos?
 2. Why can we remain firm in the face of opposition in the ministry?
2 Remain Firm in the Face of Opposition: When Amaziah, a calf-worshipping priest in the northern ten-tribe kingdom of Israel, heard the prophesying of Amos, he retorted, in effect: ‘Go home! Leave us alone! We have our own religion!’ (Amos 7:12, 13) In his appeal to King Jeroboam to ban the work of Amos, Amaziah twisted the words of the prophet. (Amos 7:7-11) But Amos was not intimidated. Today, some clergymen seek political support in their effort to persecute Jehovah’s people. However, Jehovah assures us that no weapon formed against us will have lasting success.—Isa. 54:17.
 3. What twofold message do we declare today?
3 Declare God’s Judgment and Future Blessings: Although Amos prophesied judgment against the ten-tribe kingdom of Israel, he concluded the Bible book bearing his name with Jehovah’s promise of restoration and abundant blessings. (Amos 9:13-15) We too speak of God’s coming “day of judgment,” but this is only part of the “good news of the kingdom” that we must declare. (2 Pet. 3:7; Matt. 24:14) Jehovah’s destruction of the wicked at Armageddon will clear the way for a paradise earth.—Ps. 37:34.
 4. What assurance do we have that we can accomplish Jehovah’s will?
4 Preaching the Kingdom message in a world with many opposers certainly tests our determination to live up to our dedication and to do Jehovah’s will. (John 15:19) Nevertheless, we are certain that Jehovah will continue to qualify us to accomplish his will, as he did Amos.—2 Cor. 3:5.

