Who Are Doing Jehovah’s Will Today?
 1. When will we begin considering Who Are Doing Jehovah’s Will Today? and how will this benefit us?
1 Beginning the week of October 28, Who Are Doing Jehovah’s Will Today? will be considered at the Congregation Bible Study. This new brochure, released at the “Safeguard Your Heart!” District Convention, is designed to direct Bible students to the organization. Not only will consideration of this publication heighten our appreciation for being a part of Jehovah’s organization but it will also help us become well-acquainted with this valuable tool for the ministry.—Ps. 48:13.
 2. How will the brochure be studied in the congregation?
2 How It Will Be Studied: The conductor will need to apportion his time so that each lesson receives equal coverage. He will introduce each of the 28 lessons by reading the question that forms the title. Then, he will invite the reader to read the introductory paragraph. Next, the conductor will ask the audience a question that he has prepared for the introduction. Thereafter, each section that begins with a statement in bold print should be read and discussed separately. After the section is read, the conductor will invite comments on how it answers the question that is the title of the lesson. The brochure also has many illustrations that can be commented on. Key scriptures should be read as time allows. Before moving on to the next lesson, the conductor will review by asking the questions at the bottom of the page. If there is a “Find Out More” box, he will have it read, and then he will invite comments from the audience on how a Bible student will benefit from following the suggestion. If time allows at the conclusion of the study, the conductor may use the titles of the lessons as review questions. Keep in mind that this is not necessarily the procedure for conducting a home Bible study.
 3. How may we benefit to the full from studying this brochure?
3 In order to benefit to the full, come to the meeting well-prepared. Endeavor to share in commenting. During the discussion, think about why the material is beneficial for Bible students. May our consideration of this new brochure equip us to help others to join us in doing God’s will so that they too may have the prospect of remaining forever.—1 John 2:17.

