Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points. Check yourself.
● How do we show what comes first in our lives?
By what we constantly think and talk about and by the way we use our time, energy and means.—Pp. 520, 521.a
● What will help us to let God’s kingdom come first in our lives?
Faith in Jehovah God, conscientiousness, godly devotion, self-sufficiency, modesty and unselfish love.—P. 523.
● For lasting happiness in marriage, for what must marriage mates show regard?
For Jehovah’s reminders as set forth in his Word, the Bible, which spells out the duties of both man and wife.—Pp. 553-555.
● What are some of the advantages a single person has in serving Jehovah?
More opportunities for full-time service; less distraction.—Pp. 564, 565.
● Against whom in particular does Jude warn in his letter?
Against immoral, lawless persons infiltrating God’s organization.—Pp. 587-596.
● The human race is said to depend for its continuity on what kind of government, and who alone can provide it?
World government; Jehovah God.—Pp. 614, 615.
● In view of the circumstances under which it was raised, what is the answer to Pilate’s question, “What is truth?”
God’s kingdom with Jesus Christ serving as King-Priest upon the throne.—P. 656.
● In cases where there is a dispute between God and man, how do we let God be found true?
By letting what his Word, the Bible, says on the matter settle it for us.—P. 680.
● Who in the Bible is reported as swearing to the truth of something more than anyone else?
Jehovah God; in fact, more than seventy times.—P. 684.
● Why is it not good for us to be willing slaves of sin?
Because, while it may result in some pleasure now, we will thereby forfeit everlasting life in happiness.—P. 713.
● What are some of the things we must do if we would not be neglecting the house of Jehovah God?
Attend congregational meetings, pray for God’s house, contribute materially to its support, prepare for the meetings, engage in the field ministry.—Pp. 751-755.
[Footnotes]
Page numbers refer to The Watchtower for 1965.

