Putting the Worship of the True God First
TIME and time again in the Scriptures our attention is directed to the folly of putting the things of this world first. For example, there was the man, in Jesus’ parable, who kept increasing his barns to store up his grain, not knowing that suddenly he would die and not be able to enjoy it at all. We are warned that those who put money first in their lives are led astray from the faith and stab themselves all over with many pains. And those who sow to the flesh are warned that they will reap corruption from the flesh.—Luke 12:16-21; 1 Tim. 6:9, 10; Gal. 6:7, 8.
Then what should come first in our lives? The worship of the true God Jehovah. It contributes toward the most important issue in the universe, the vindication of Jehovah’s name. This is the right thing to do because, as his creatures, we owe him our worship, as Jesus showed when repelling the third temptation of the Devil, in which he offered Jesus all the kingdoms of the world and their glory if he would but fall down and worship Satan. He rebuked that tempter, saying: “It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.”—Matt. 4:10.a
Putting first the worship of the true God also benefits ourselves and our neighbor. By wholeheartedly engaging in true worship, we will be ‘saving both ourselves and those who listen to us.’—1 Tim. 4:16.
Surely these are compelling reasons for our putting first in our lives the worship of the true God. How do we show that we put the worship of the true God first? For one thing, by using such time as we have at our disposal for personal Bible study, meeting attendance and Christian ministry. Secondly, by conserving our physical energies so that we can expend them in our worship of Jehovah. And thirdly, by being wise stewards of our material means, supporting the worship of Jehovah internationally, congregationally and individually, as opportunity affords.—Eph. 5:15, 16.
What will aid us to do all these things, so that in practical everyday matters we will be putting the worship of God first? Important to this end is strong faith in Jehovah, believing that he lives and will reward those who truly worship him. Honesty and conscientiousness will also help.—Heb. 11:6.
We cannot escape it; putting the worship of the true God first in our lives is the right, wise and loving thing to do. One way in which we can do this during the month of January is by acquainting lovers of righteousness with the worship of the true God as explained in this very magazine, The Watchtower.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, September 1, 1965.

