Questions From Readers
● I have been reading The Watchtower for a few months now, and I would appreciate your counsel. Recently I sued for a divorce on what I understand to be grounds that are in harmony with the Bible. Is it Scripturally wrong for me to “date” or seek the attention of one of the opposite sex other than my ex-mate before the divorce is final?—U.S.A.
It would first be good to have fixed clearly in mind what the Bible has to say about divorce. According to God’s Word, the only ground for divorce that frees one for remarriage is adultery by one’s mate. (Matt. 19:9) Jesus did not say one can divorce his mate if he ‘strongly suspects’ that adultery was committed. There has to be real evidence of adultery, such as the mate’s confession, or proof that the mate stayed all night with a person of the opposite sex under improper circumstances.—Prov. 5:8-11.
A legal divorce obtained where there is no proof of adultery might end a marriage legally, but in God’s sight it does not free one for remarriage. (Mark 10:9) If one got a legal divorce without proof of the mate’s adultery, remarriage would amount to adultery in Jehovah’s eyes. We read: “Whoever divorces his wife [without evidence of adultery] and marries another commits adultery against her, and if ever a woman, after divorcing her husband, marries another, she commits adultery.”—Mark 10:11, 12; compare Matthew 19:9.
Now, assuming that one actually has a Scriptural basis for the legal divorce that is being obtained, he still is not in position to “date” or “court” someone else if the divorce is not final. He is still married. Divorce laws differ from place to place. In some lands and states the parties to a divorce action are completely and legally free immediately. In other places the divorce does not become effective for six months. In yet other places, the divorce does not become final for quite a period, such as a year, after a temporary or interlocutory decree is granted.
Concerning this last type in one state, a lawbook says: “Interlocutory decree is entered after trial if the court finds that a divorce should be granted. . . . This stands for one year, during which time the parties are still husband and wife. . . . The final judgment restores the parties to the status of single persons.” Thus a period of time is allowed in order that a reconciliation may be worked out, if that is possible. If that fails, the parties become legally free only after the final decree has been entered.
In the case giving rise to the question, the divorce has not become final, so both parties are still legally married, and the court is allowing time to see if they can be reconciled. So it should be obvious that one in such a position is not free to act as if he were a single person able to “court” and marry another person. To do so would only be courting trouble, both legally and Scripturally. (Heb. 13:4) Only after a divorce becomes final, and a final decree is entered, if that is necessary according to law, will one be at liberty to act as a single person and be free to remarry.
One in this circumstance who is interested in doing what will have God’s approval would do well to note what Jehovah has counseled about marrying, in case he wants to remarry after the present marriage ends legally and Scripturally. God commanded his servants that they should not consent to a marriage between a true worshiper and one who did not worship Jehovah in accord with the truth of his Word. (Deut. 7:3; Neh. 10:30) Marrying an unbeliever can lead to God’s disapproval, as it did with King Solomon of Israel. (1 Ki. 11:4, 9) God’s Word says that true Christians are to marry “only in the Lord,” or only other true Christians. (1 Cor. 7:39) Though that limits one’s association with marriage in view, it can work to one’s everlasting good by helping one to secure a place in the paradise that God will soon establish on earth.
By continuing to study the Bible and Scriptural publications one can learn what Jehovah’s will is and how one can serve Him acceptably in company with his Witnesses. At present, the questioner is yet a married person and should resist any temptations to develop emotional attachments to some single person. And if after the divorce is final he is interested in remarriage, he should be sure to seek a mate who will serve Jehovah faithfully. Such a course will have heaven’s blessing.—Prov. 10:22.

