What the Future Holds for You
Mankind faces the threat of annihilation. Yet, to what future can you confidently look?
“MANY signs are appearing on the international horizon which are reminiscent of what happened before the outbreak of World War II,” noted an editorial in the U.S. News & World Report of October 9, 1967. A few months before, United Nations Secretary-General U Thant observed: “I’m afraid we are entering today the first phase of World War III.”
The world situation is unquestionably dangerous, and is fast becoming more so. Preparations for war go on at an accelerated rate, and as more nations acquire atomic weapons, the danger increases. In addition to the peril of war, the present population explosion poses a threat of even greater food shortages and widespread starvation. In their new book, Famine—1975!, two noted food experts, William and Paul Paddock, make this forecast for the future, on page 61:
“By 1975 civil disorder, anarchy, military dictatorships, runaway inflation, transportation breakdowns and chaotic unrest will be the order of the day in many of the hungry nations—all because hunger will turn inexorably into starvation and starvation will become widespread famine.”
No wonder there is great anxiety and bewilderment as people contemplate the future. But is the situation really so critical? Does the World actually face disaster? What does the future hold for you?
UNPRECEDENTED TRIBULATION AT HAND
Jesus Christ, God’s greatest prophet, pointed forward to a period of unusual distress, and his description matches perfectly conditions prevailing since World War I in 1914. For instance, among other things, he foretold: “Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages . . . in one place after another.” Wars of unprecedented scope and widespread famine! And of what are such conditions a sign? Jesus explained that they were to mark his invisible presence in Kingdom power, and “the conclusion of the system of things.”—Matt. 24:3-14; Luke 21:7-33.
Thus, the fulfillment of Jesus’ prophecy, currently being experienced, indicates that the complete end of this system of things is at hand! Jesus compared the destruction that is soon to occur with what actually happened once before in human history. He said: “For just as the days of Noah were, so the presence of the Son of man will be. For as they . . . took no note until the flood came and swept them all away, so the presence of the Son of man will be.” (Matt. 24:37-39) Yes, Jehovah God actually brought a world of wicked mankind to ruin in Noah’s day.
Whether men choose to recognize the fact or not, this system soon faces a similar destruction. It will occur at what the Bible calls “the war of the great day of God the Almighty,” or Armageddon. (Rev. 16:14-16) At that time the tribulation upon ungodly mankind will exceed any ever before experienced. In the course of God’s execution, all political organizations and alliances will be broken down. There will be wild confusion. Every man’s hand will be against his neighbor. (Ezek. 38:21; Zech. 14:13) The disorder, terror and strife will surpass even that experienced when the floodwaters rose above the heads of those struggling to escape in Noah’s day.
Jesus indicated this when he said: “For then there will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again.” (Matt. 24:21) Happily, however, there will be survivors, even as there were Flood survivors. Jehovah’s executional forces will bring their executional swords down only “upon those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus.”—2 Thess. 1:7-9.
DESTRUCTION OR PRESERVATION?
The future, therefore, is clear-cut. Faced with Armageddon, people today are going in either one of two directions. They are either supporting this system of things and stubbornly refusing to lean about Jehovah God or they are showing that they truly love Him by taking up His service in imitation of Jesus. There are just the two courses—one leads to everlasting life and the other to eternal destruction. “Jehovah is guarding all those loving him,” the Bible says, “but all the wicked ones he will annihilate.”—Ps. 145:20.
Which course of action are you taking? Do you put Jehovah God and his interests first, or do you selfishly pursue the pleasures and comforts of the world, making them your chief concern? Do not try to deceive yourself. You cannot be on both sides.—Matt. 6:24.
The Bible shows clearly that Satan the Devil is “the ruler of this world.” It is under his control. (John 12:31; 1 John 5:19) And its entertainment, its pleasures and its attractions are all designed to win your affection. But beware, for making yourself a friend of the world will earn God’s enmity, and will eventually lead to your sharing its fate of destruction. (Jas. 4:4) Therefore, heed the inspired warning recorded at 1 John 2:15-17:
“Do not be loving either the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him; because everything in the world—the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the showy display of one’s means of life—does not originate with the Father, but originates with the world. Furthermore, the world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.”
A GLORIOUS FUTURE
As a reward for their faithfulness, Jehovah God will see that his servants have a place of security during the destruction of the wicked world of mankind. This is indicated by his prophetic invitation: “Go, my people, enter into your interior rooms, and shut your doors behind you. Hide yourself for but a moment until the denunciation passes over. For, look! Jehovah is coming forth from his place to call to account the error of the inhabitant of the land against him.”—Isa. 26:20, 21.
After surviving that unparalleled tribulation, what a glorious future will be enjoyed by those who have placed their trust in Jehovah! Imagine living in a new system where all persons love God and have genuine affection for one another, yes, where all exhibit the fruits of God’s spirit—love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness and other such qualities. (Gal. 5:22, 23; Col. 3:12-14) No others will be permitted by God to live in His new system.
The sublime peace and pleasantness that exist among those who manifest the fruits of God’s spirit today will obtain everywhere in God’s righteous new system of things. The prophecy says: “They will have to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears. They will not lift up sword, nation against nation, neither will they learn war any more. And they will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble; for the very mouth of Jehovah of armies has spoken it.” (Mic. 4:3, 4) Would you like to dwell under such peaceful circumstances?
Do you long for a future when all crime and maliciousness are eliminated, and the danger of being raped, robbed or even cheated will no longer exist? Do you desire the time when locks on doors will be unnecessary, and jails and policemen obsolete? Do you yearn never again to see a city slum with overcrowded buildings? Do you sincerely want to see the manufacture of weapons halted, and an end to the senseless carnage of war? Then you will love God’s Kingdom rule, for it will usher in these desirable conditions earth wide.—Prov. 10:30; Isa. 65:21-23; Ps. 46:8, 9.
But this is not all. Under the reign of God’s kingdom the earth will be restored to paradisaic beauty. It will produce abundantly good things to eat, so that never again will a human inhabitant go hungry. The Bible promises: “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.” “The earth itself will certainly give its produce; God, our God, will bless us.”—Ps. 72:16; 67:6.
Would you like to live under such conditions forever, enjoying perfect health, with never so much as a toothache? This is no wishful dream. Such a future in God’s new system of things is certain. The blind will then see, the dumb will speak, the deaf will hear, the lame will walk and the maimed will be restored. During his earthly ministry Jesus Christ performed such miraculous physical healings to demonstrate what will be accomplished earth wide in God’s new system. (Matt. 15:30, 31) Even the graves will be emptied as the resurrection brings thousands of millions back to life!—John 5:28, 29; Acts 24:15.
ACTION THAT IS NOW URGENT
If you truly desire to enjoy this grand future, if you desire to survive the imminent end of this system of things, then without delay seek to win the favor of Jehovah God. Since destruction will befall all “who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus,” do not hesitate to begin a regular Bible study in your home to become better acquainted with these purposes of God. A local minister of Jehovah’s witnesses will be happy to assist you in such a study. (2 Thess. 1:7-9; John 17:3) See how clearly the Bible prophecies identify this as the time of the end for this system. And rejoice in the assurances of survival into a grand new system of indescribable happiness.
Also, endeavor to mold your life in harmony with the principles of God’s Word. Cultivate the fruits of the spirit in your life. Be meek, teachable and ready to obey. (Jas. 3:17) Do not allow yourself to become involved in the affairs of this world of wicked mankind—in its ambitions, its hopes, its desires for sensual pleasures and its overemphasis on material comforts. Heed the Scriptural injunction: “Seek Jehovah, all you meek ones of the earth . . . Seek righteousness, seek meekness. Probably you may be concealed in the day of Jehovah’s anger.”—Zeph. 2:3.

