Special Campaign to Advertise the Memorial!
 1. What will Kingdom publishers be involved in worldwide starting March 21, 2009, and why?
1 On Thursday, April 9, 2009, worshippers of Jehovah God worldwide will gather to reflect on his greatest act of love for mankind. (Rom. 5:6-8) We keenly anticipate having millions of interested ones present with us when we commemorate Jesus’ death. A special invitation to the Memorial will be distributed earth wide starting March 21.
 2. What points should you keep in mind when offering the invitation?
2 Points to Keep in Mind: Use to the full the illustrations, the questions, and the cited scripture on the invitation. For example, you might refer to the cover picture and say: “I wanted to invite you to commemorate with us Jesus’ death, which will be observed on Thursday, April 9, 2009.” Then refer to the title of the invitation and subsequent questions. Be sure to emphasize that the householder is welcome to invite his family and any others he chooses to bring along.
 3. How might you follow up on an invitation made earlier in the campaign?
3 If your congregation has a large territory, the elders may direct you to leave the invitations at not-at-homes. On the weekends, offer the magazines in addition to using the invitation. Make it your goal to invite your return visits, Bible students, relatives, schoolmates, workmates, neighbors, and other acquaintances. Last year, one sister invited 30 of her relatives, and then she periodically reminded them of the importance of the occasion. How happy she was that 25 attended, and 4 of them later accepted a Bible study!
 4. What plans must we make now, and why?
4 Plan Now: Many publishers may be able to increase their activity during March and April. If you have children or Bible students making good progress, this may be an excellent time for them to become unbaptized publishers. Now is the time to begin making arrangements to have a full share in this campaign that advertises the commemoration of the two greatest expressions of love.​—John 3:16; 15:13.

