Announcements
SPIRITUAL HEALING MADE AVAILABLE TO ALL NATIONS
In the visions of the Apocalypse the apostle John saw groves of life-giving trees on the banks of a river. These trees produced twelve crops of fruit, a crop each month. Additionally the leaves of the trees were of healing quality and were available “for the curing of the nations.” (Rev. 22:2) What an entrancing picture, holding out hope to the people of all nations everywhere! These life-giving trees, trees of righteousness, are the planting of Jehovah God and glorify him by producing life-giving fruit, health-giving leaves. (Isa. 61:3, AV) They are servants and witnesses of Jehovah, holding forth the “word of life” for the benefit of all who will accept it. In every way possible they aid willing people to gain understanding of God’s Word and purpose and bring them ‘health and cure.’ During February they will call on people with the Watchtower magazine and offer a year’s subscription on a contribution of $1. New subscribers will receive free three Scriptural booklets containing health-giving information. Be sure to share in this spiritual healing work wherever you may be.
GETTING THE MIND OF GOD
To know God you must get the mind of God. God’s thoughts are expressed in his Word, which he gave us so that we might get to know him. To ignore the Bible, then, is to ignore the thinking of the greatest mind in the universe. Yet some do just that. They spend their lifetime seeking the answers to life’s problems in the minds of other men. The vanity of such a course can be seen in the world’s mounting tensions. At the same time, the value of rightly directing one’s thoughts is found in the worldwide unity of Jehovah’s witnesses. The minds of this rapidly expanding group are at ease because they have learned that present world conditions are but part of the sign of the establishment of God’s kingdom. Foreknown and foretold centuries ago, such information is invaluable because it originates with God and is vital to man’s salvation. It is considered regularly in the Watchtower magazine, which is dedicated to seeking the mind of God through his Word and publishing its findings for all men of good will. You can receive The Watchtower semimonthly for one year for $1. Send today and receive three booklets free.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
February 23: Overseers in Apocalyptic Times, ¶1-25. Page 41.
March 2: Overseers in Apocalyptic Times, ¶26-35, and Overseers in the Right Hand of Christ, ¶1-11. Page 48.
March 9: Overseers in the Right Hand of Christ, ¶12-39. Page 54.

