Crisis in South Africa
In the following three articles, “Awake!” correspondent in South Africa considers the crisis and its solution
“TOWNSHIP rioting leaves 26 dead.” “Mixed emotions as 15 unrest victims are buried.” “Widespread violence continues.” “Death toll reaches 13 in 10-day SA bomb blitz.” The daily headlines and press reports tell the grim, sad story. As one commentator put it: “South Africa is facing the worst crisis in its history, both internally and externally.”
Vivid pictures and news items are flashed into the homes of millions world-wide. As a result, many think that the whole of South Africa is in chaos. But this is not true. In most white areas and in black rurals, life goes on normally.
Nevertheless, in some black townships, dreadful things are happening. Many TV viewers were horrified to see a young black woman, accused of being a police informer, kicked, trampled on, and burnt alive. Often the venom of the crowd is directed against those in government service or those who collaborate with the government. Black policemen have been killed, and hundreds have had their homes burnt or damaged.
The majority of the rioters are teenagers or even younger. For them violence is becoming a way of life. Furthermore, thugs exploit the unrest to attack and rob innocent people.
The unrest has affected South Africa’s economic condition. The local currency has suffered a serious devaluation. Many commercial firms have had to close down, with unemployment resulting. South Africa’s international reputation has declined. The threats of disinvestment and sanctions loom larger than ever.
This affects neighbouring countries also​—Swaziland, Botswana, Lesotho, and South West Africa/​Namibia—​whose economies depend heavily on South Africa. For many years, two larger neighbours, Mozambique and Angola, have been suffering a crisis more serious than that of South Africa with severe civil strife, their economies severely damaged.
South Africa is a beautiful country, richly endowed with many natural resources​—fine farming land, gold, diamonds, coal, copper, and many other valuable minerals. And among its varied population groups​—blacks, whites, Coloureds (mixed race), and Indians—​there are many fine, kindly people.
Moreover, South Africa is a very religious country. Most people, white or black, believe in God. Yet the country is terribly disunited. Is religion partly to blame? What has brought about this distressing situation? And, far more important, is there a solution?

