Assist Children in Praising Jehovah
1 Ever since its release in 1978, My Book of Bible Stories has proved to be an invaluable aid both to parents and to youths. One mother was overjoyed when her nine-year-old boy, who previously never enjoyed sitting down to study, came into the house and asked: “Mom, will you get me my new book?” This is typical of the effect My Book of Bible Stories has had on children. How can we use it more fully to help children praise Jehovah?
HOW IT CAN BE DONE
2 The Bible Stories book can be used to instill spiritual qualities in the minds and hearts of your children. For example, story 58 emphasizes the qualities of courage and reliance on Jehovah when it tells of David facing the Philistine giant Goliath. (1 Sam. 17:45-51) Sometimes children are called upon to face obstacles that seem giantlike to them. If parents prepare children ahead of time, youngsters will be able to praise the name of Jehovah courageously in spite of pressures and temptations.​—Prov. 22:6; see Genesis 18:19.
3 It may be that you do not personally have any young children. But you may be able to work with young ones in the congregation, assisting them in praising the name of Jehovah. Christian youths are encouraged and motivated when appointed servants in the congregation take a personal interest in them. (Prov. 27:23) Can you spend more time with the young ones? It is especially beneficial when we assist them in field service.
OFFERING THE BIBLE STORIES BOOK
4 During the month of December, we will be offering My Book of Bible Stories. Young ones can be helped to present it effectively in the field service. They may even be able to start a study in it.
5 We encourage you young people to make a special effort during December to praise Jehovah in your school. It will take courage to do so, but Jehovah will give you the needed strength. Make opportunities to acquaint your schoolmates with My Book of Bible Stories.
6 Parents, go over some suggested presentations with your children. Help them use the scriptures in the Topic for Conversation. Young and old will take notice when they see well-prepared children praising Jehovah.
7 Let us also show our children the value of keeping good house-to-house records so they can make return visits on those who show interest. Keep before them the goal of starting home Bible studies. You may need to assist them in conducting the study when they get one started.
8 We want our young people to be among those mentioned by the psalmist who said: “Every breathing thing​—let it praise Jah. Praise Jah, you people!” (Ps. 150:6) Pray for Jehovah’s guidance in rendering the needed assistance.

