Helping Irregular Publishers
1 Jesus said: “Everyone that hears these sayings of mine and does them will be likened to a discreet man, who built his house upon the rock-mass.” (Matt. 7:24) Getting the sense of Jesus’ words and being properly motivated will cause one to produce fine works, including preaching the good news. Such rightly motivated obedience provides a rocklike foundation that will not wash away during storms of adversity.
2 It is for good reason that we want to help one another share in the preaching work to the fullest extent permitted by our individual circumstances. Some among us are irregular publishers, and this is of much concern. What could cause one to let an entire month go by without having some share in the vital preaching and disciple-making work?
3 Some may have been seriously ill, and others may have put off field service until late in the month, only to find themselves caught up in unforeseen circumstances that prevented them from getting out in service. Others may lack appreciation for the ministry as a treasure of service that should be given priority. (2 Cor. 4:7) Pressure from an unbelieving mate or other relatives has been a discouraging factor at times. A failure to maintain good personal study habits and regularity in meeting attendance has affected still others, so that they lost their sense of urgency regarding the nearness of the end of Satan’s world. (2 Pet. 3:11, 12) Something has affected their heart. Therefore they are not motivated to speak out of its abundance. (Matt. 12:34) Whatever the reason, we want to help them.
WHAT THE ELDERS CAN DO
4 Elders should strive to know the circumstances and needs of all in the congregation so as to render loving assistance. In their meetings the elders should take note of any who may have become irregular publishers and determine who can help them and how this might be done. They may also address the problem when considering local needs for the Service Meeting. The secretary should note any trend toward irregularity in field service when posting the Congregation’s Publisher Record cards.
WHAT BOOK STUDY CONDUCTORS CAN DO
5 Each month the secretary should provide Congregation Book Study conductors with a list of those who fail to report field activity, so that prompt assistance can be given. (See Our Kingdom Ministry for May 1984, page 7.) The study conductor should kindly approach irregular ones to ascertain what may be hindering them and how he can be of assistance. (Prov. 27:23) Most irregular ones will appreciate help. After getting to know the person’s circumstances, the conductor should make definite arrangements to work personally with him or to have another mature publisher or pioneer do so. Giving irregular ones practical suggestions on preparing a schedule suited to their individual circumstances may also be helpful. Can they plan to share regularly in field service the first Sunday of each month or on the second and fourth Saturdays? If transportation is a problem or they need help with small children, the conductor can enlist the aid of other willing publishers.
6 When visiting the book study groups, the service overseer can make arrangements to call on irregular ones with the study conductor. Thus two mature brothers will be able to share in giving counsel and then help such ones to build a rocklike foundation of obedience to Christ’s command to preach and make disciples. They may thus be motivated to place the preaching work high on their list of priorities. (Rom. 10:10) Let us exert ourselves in this way to show our love for “those related to us in the faith.”​—Gal. 6:10.

