Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 29
Song 164
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Review magazine presentations for Saturday magazine activity.
20 min: “Assist Children in Praising Jehovah.” Questions and answers. Demonstrate how a parent can help a child prepare the current Topic for Conversation and tie it in with the offer of the Bible Stories book.
15 min: “Witnessing as a Family During December.” Questions and answers. Have exemplary family discuss prospects for increased service as a family in December and how they will make up a schedule for their service. Conclude with encouragement for all who qualify to share in field service, offering Bible Stories book on first Sunday in December.
Song 126 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 6
Song 211
10 min: Local announcements. Discuss magazine presentations and encourage all to support magazine witnessing on the second Saturday.
20 min: Conducting Effective Bible Studies. Encourage all to conduct Bible studies, including family studies, in a way that reaches the heart. Review some of the points outlined in the chart on page 24 of the November 1, 1986, Watchtower under the question “How can you be sure of reaching child’s heart?” as well as some of the points in the article “When You Teach, Reach the Heart,” found in the August 1, 1984, Watchtower, pages 13-17. Use an effective pioneer to demonstrate some of these points in conducting a Bible study, using one or two paragraphs of chapter 1 of Live Forever book.
15 min: Have book study conductor interview individual(s) or a family from his study group. Draw out how long they have been in truth, what made the truth appeal to them, what trials they had to overcome in order to come in the truth, what obstacles they have had to deal with to remain steadfast in the truth, and so forth.
Song 10 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 13
Song 189
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Mention acknowledgments of any contributions sent to the Society, including those for the Society Kingdom Hall Fund and for helping missionaries attend the 1988 conventions. Outline special arrangements for witnessing during the holiday season.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Use Effective Introductions.” Questions and answers. Demonstrate the two introductions featured in paragraph 4. Analyze with audience why these are effective.
15 min: Local needs or Do You Experience the Greater Happiness of Giving?, talk by elder based on first article in November 22, 1987, Awake!
Song 184 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 20
Song 194
15 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Demonstrate magazine presentations for use on fourth Saturday, developed with holiday season in mind. Discuss with audience how to respond to holiday greetings in field service. (See 1930-1985 Index, heading “House-to-House Preaching,” subheading “Christmas season.”)
20 min: “Anticipating the Needs of the Harvest.” Question-and-answer consideration of paragraphs 1-11. Read paragraphs as time permits. Call attention to pictures on pages 3 and 4.
10 min: “Progressing With the Theocratic Ministry School.” Discussion by Theocratic Ministry School overseer. Highlight changes in 1988 Theocratic Ministry School. Encourage local publishers to make good use of the Theocratic Ministry School in order to become more effective in their Christian ministry.
Song 165 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 27
Song 93
12 min: Local announcements. Encouragement for all to support arrangements for holiday witnessing this weekend, including the first Sunday of January. Highlight literature offer for January.
18 min: “Anticipating the Needs of the Harvest.” Question-and-answer consideration of paragraphs 12-18. Read paragraphs as time permits. Call attention to pictures on pages 5 and 6. Give encouragement to support Society Kingdom Hall Fund.
15 min: “Helping Irregular Publishers.” Discussion between secretary and another elder who conducts a Congregation Book Study. Include suggestions that will help local publishers who are irregular.
Song 116 and concluding prayer.

