Missionaries Taught: Know Jehovah as a Person!
“MANY have asked, ‘Well, what did you learn?’” so stated a spokesman for the graduating 66th class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. Standing before a packed hall of 1,952 persons, he read a class resolution that expressed the sentiments of all 26 students. He continued: “One sister well expressed it this way: ‘I have appreciated getting a much better understanding of Jehovah as a person and of his compassion for his people. This has greatly strengthened my confidence in him and his desire to take care of me under any circumstance.’”
How had they come to have a “better understanding of Jehovah as a person”? Addressing the class for the last time, instructor K. Adams revealed the answer to the audience by saying: “We started on a project of studying the whole Bible as a group. We took 10 to 15 pages a day, with all of you students doing research and contributing to our discussion. If we encountered a difficult verse, we considered (1) the context, (2) the circumstances at the time of writing and (3) the meaning of key words in the text. We constantly asked, ‘What does this tell us about Jehovah and his qualities?’ We found it always told us something about him.”
What quality of Jehovah constantly stood out? Instructor Adams continued, ‘It was Jehovah’s loving-kindness. It is this “precious” quality that engenders trust and confidence in his worshipers, making them feel that no matter where or under what circumstances, Jehovah will care for them.’​—Ps. 36:7.
One of the positive results of knowing Jehovah personally is a heartfelt respect for his authority. This includes loving respect for those vested by God with authority in the congregation. It was about this respect that the school’s registrar, U. Glass, spoke. He arrested the attention of all by saying: “We are all dedicated to Jehovah and loyal to his Word. But some of our brothers may find it difficult to accept the authority given by God to imperfect men in the congregation.”
What, then, should be our attitude toward such men? Should we become followers of men? Glass referred to Hebrews 13:7 and showed that after contemplating the course of conduct of these men, it is their faith that we must imitate. By such contemplation, coupled with love, we can maintain this vital respect for authority. The first man was tested in this regard, and a person’s attitude toward authority may be involved in the final testing of mankind after the end of the 1,000-year reign of Christ.​—Rev. 20:1-10.
A penetrating discussion of Malachi chapter three came next on the day’s program. The speaker, C. Barber, warned that there is a danger of developing a negative attitude, as did some in Malachi’s day who said, ‘It is of no value or profit to serve God and keep his laws.’ (Mal 3 Vs. 14) But how untrue! Those who know Jehovah as a person rejoice in the fine association of a international brotherhood and are made spiritually rich through God’s overflowing blessing. (Mal 3 Vs. 10) These ones, because they bring their spiritual sacrifices of good works into Jehovah’s temple of worship, become to him a “special property” or a “treasure.” (Mal. 3:16, 17, The Amplified Bible) The series of seven talks was capped by the school president’s discussion of the fulfillment of the seven plagues mentioned in Revelation chapters 15 and 16. He showed what a large part those with earthly hopes for the future have played in pouring out the plague-like messages.
These graduates, who were assigned to 12 countries, are not novices but already have known God personally for many years before graduating on March 11. In fact, Viola Scott, herself a baptized Christian for over 20 years, said: “It was our appreciation for Jehovah and our love for people that moved my husband and me to come to Gilead.”
Before becoming a Witness, Michael Molina had been a naval airplane machine-gunner and had flown 284 combat missions in Vietnam. He had been awarded numerous medals because of his daring. “Killing was my business and I was very good at it,” he said. Now a different man, he launched out on a Christian missionary career that is to take him to Guatemala where he can engage in saving lives​—all this because he has developed a personal relationship with Jehovah.
The delightful program presented by the students included a session showing the use of music in the Scriptures, as well as two Bible dramas. So, as the curtain closed, all those in attendance had become more conscious of the need to analyze their own relationship with Jehovah and to become ever closer to him.

