Questions From Readers
● Is the use of the birth-control device known as the IUD (intrauterine device) compatible with Christian principles?
An IUD is a small object inserted into a woman’s uterus as a birth-control measure. Of particular concern to Christians is whether the IUD functions in a way that is basically abortive. There is increasing evidence that it does.
The matter can best be understood by considering the normal course of events in pregnancy. A female egg or ovum comes from a woman’s ovary and enters her fallopian tube. Male sperm that have passed up through her uterus may meet the ovum in the tube. When fertilization (conception) occurs there, a new life has begun. In about a week the fertilized ovum (blastocyst) reaches the uterus and becomes implanted in its lining, to which it will be attached for the remainder of the pregnancy.
For many years there were conflicting theories as to how an IUD functioned. In The Watchtower of December 15, 1969, we pointed out that some scientists then believed that an IUD prevented the sperm from reaching and fertilizing the egg. Yet other authorities held that it permits conception but interferes with implantation. Regarding this latter possibility, it was explained that such “would amount to abortion from a Biblical standpoint.” (Ex. 23:26; 1 Cor. 15:8, footnote, NW; Moffatt) Yet, in view of the fact that even experts were divided over how the IUD functioned, the view was expressed that each concerned married couple would have to make a conscientious decision.
In the intervening years doctors have done much research into the IUD’s mode of action. What have they learned?
A lengthy article on the subject in the Canadian Medical Association Journal of January 7, 1978, concluded:
“The exact mechanism of action of the IUD is not known. Several effects have been noted with the IUD in place and probably a combination of these contribute to its contraceptive action.”
The article mentioned some of these effects:
1. “The IUD interferes mechanically with implantation.”
2. It produces an inflammatory reaction in the uterus, with resulting cells that engulf and interfere with the sperm [and the blastocyst, according to other researchers].
3. Increased muscular action of the fallopian tubes or uterus, so that the egg [fertilized or not] moves along too quickly.
4. Alteration of the biochemical state of the uterine lining where the fertilized egg would have to implant.
Additional comments were made about IUD’s containing copper, which seems to “have additional mechanisms of action,” such as: decreasing sperm motility, producing enzyme changes in the uterus’ lining that retard implantation, and more pronounced inflammatory reaction.
Such technical discussions usually include some comment about the possibility that the IUD may interfere with the sperm before fertilization can occur. However, most of the descriptions of how the IUD likely functions involve its preventing implantation after conception has occurred. The American Family Physician (Nov. 1977) observed: “Animal experiments have shown that the copper IUD exerts its contraceptive action mainly by preventing implantation.”
Even with an IUD in place actual developing pregnancies sometimes occur. There is also evidence of increased risk of ectopic (extrauterine) pregnancy, such as in the fallopian tubes. The last-quoted article concludes:
“While the IUD is effective in preventing over 98 percent of intrauterine pregnancies, it is less than 90 percent effective in preventing tubal pregnancies. If a patient becomes pregnant while she still has an IUD in place, the chances are more than one in 20 that the pregnancy is ectopic [extrauterine].”
The Canadian Medical Association Journal says:
“Among pregnancies occurring with the IUD in place the spontaneous abortion rate is 41%, . . . In contrast, the rate among pregnancies in women without an IUD is 10% to 15%.”
Many persons who condone deliberate abortion hold that (after conception) until an embryo reaches an age of a certain number of weeks no life or living person is involved. But the Creator of life, Jehovah God, expresses no such view in his Word. On the contrary, the Bible makes it plain that God recognizes and respects a life even in its early embryonic development. (Ps. 139:13-16; Jer. 1:5) Under the Mosaic law an action that caused the termination of that developing life merited severe punishment.​—Ex. 21:22, 23.a
Such respect for life comes into the picture when considering the question of using an IUD. The fact is that at present no man can state with absolute certainty whether the IUD does prevent conception from occurring. There is mounting evidence, instead, that with an IUD in place conception can or does take place and that the product of conception is prevented from developing normally into a child. The sincere Christian concerned about the propriety of using an IUD should seriously weigh such information in the light of a Bible-based respect for the sanctity of life.
[Footnotes]
The Watchtower of August 1, 1977, pp. 478-480.

