Build One Another Up by Commenting at Meetings
1 We are exhorted at Hebrews 10:24 to ‘incite one another to love and fine works.’ This includes building one another up by making meaningful comments at congregation meetings. Why should we comment? How can we do this? Who stand to benefit?
2 Think of the many times you benefit from hearing others offer simple, clear expressions that enhance your understanding and strengthen you spiritually. You have the privilege of doing the same for them. When you participate, you demonstrate your desire to “impart some spiritual gift” for the encouragement of all who are in attendance.​—Rom. 1:11, 12.
3 How to Make Good Comments: Do not offer long comments, covering every thought in the paragraph. Lengthy comments usually fail to pinpoint the specific answer and may discourage others from sharing. The first comment on the paragraph should be a brief, direct answer to the printed question. Those offering additional comments can then make practical application of the material or show how the scriptures apply. See the School Guidebook, pages 90-2.
4 If the thought of commenting causes you some anxiety, prepare a brief comment beforehand, and ask the conductor to call on you for that paragraph. After you do this at a few meetings, participating will become easier. Recall that Moses and Jeremiah expressed lack of confidence in their ability to speak in public. (Ex. 4:10; Jer. 1:6, ftn.) But Jehovah helped them to speak on his behalf, and he will help you too.
5 Who Will Benefit From Your Comments? You yourself benefit because your comments impress the truth more firmly on your mind and heart, making it easier for you to recall the information later. Also, others benefit from hearing your upbuilding expressions. We are encouraged when all, whether experienced, young, shy, or new, make the effort to express their faith at congregation meetings.
6 We are sure to find that ‘words at the right time are O how good’ when they are used to build one another up at the meetings!​—Prov. 15:23.

