I Want a Bible Study!
1 Many of us have expressed a desire for a Bible study, and for good reason. The Bible study work is where we achieve our goal of making new disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20) And yet many of us have gone for months, perhaps years, without experiencing the special joy that comes from teaching someone the truth. What can we do about this during November? Since the Knowledge book is being featured this month, we can make a special effort to use it to start new Bible studies.
2 Set Aside One or More Weekends: We encourage everyone to set aside some time this month to concentrate on starting a new Bible study. Congregation Book Study conductors should select the weekend(s) to be used specifically for this purpose and then organize their groups to put forth a concerted effort in the return visit work.
3 Bring your return visit records with you to these meetings for service. Then call on all of those who have shown interest, taken literature, or attended meetings. Make each call with the specific purpose of starting a study.
4 Demonstrate a Bible Study: At the selected meetings for service, a well-prepared demonstration should be presented, showing how to start a study on a return visit. You might say: “Many people have a Bible, but they do not realize that it holds the answers to the important questions we all face in life. [Show the table of contents in the Knowledge book, and read the titles of chapters 3, 5, 6, 8, and 9.] Using this study aid for an hour or so a week, you can gain a basic understanding of the Bible in just a few months. If you would like to pick one of these topics, I would be happy to show you how the program works.” If the person hesitates to study because of having a busy schedule, explain that we also have an abbreviated program. Introduce the Require brochure, and offer to study one brief lesson a week for 15-30 minutes.
5 If we all make a united effort to start studies and if we pray for Jehovah’s blessing upon our endeavor, we will surely find new studies! (1 John 5:14, 15) If you want a Bible study, this may be your opportunity to start one.

