Service Meetings for November
Week Starting November 2
Song 38
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Also, “We Surpassed the Million Mark!” Comment on August field service report for the country and the local congregation. Stimulate publishers’ resolve to be regular in field service and to report promptly at end of each month.
15 min: “All Must ‘Embrace the Word Heartily’!” Questions and answers. Include additional suggestions from June 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, paragraph 21.
20 min: “I Want a Bible Study!” Audience discussion conducted by service overseer. Explain how this concerted effort to make return visits will be organized locally. To the extent possible, experienced publishers may work with newer ones. Car groups should be kept small so that more calls can be made. Review suggestions in the April 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, paragraphs 12-15. Have a capable publisher demonstrate how to offer a study on a return visit. Encourage everyone to strive to start a new study.
Song 35 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 9
Song 187
13 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Question Box.
15 min: Local needs.
17 min: “Build One Another Up by Commenting at Meetings.” Questions and answers. Explain how commenting adds to our spiritual advancement. (See School Guidebook, study 38, paragraph 4.) Invite some to relate how they overcame a reluctance to make comments and how they have been blessed by participating at meetings.
Song 51 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 16
Song 182
 8 min: Local announcements. Outline special field service arrangements for November 26.
20 min: “Overseers Taking the Lead​—The Theocratic Ministry School Overseer.” Talk by school overseer. Review School Guidebook, pages 10-11, paragraphs 6-12.
17 min: “Be Effective in Your Ministry.” Question-and-answer discussion of paragraphs 1-7 of insert. Focus on points that may particularly apply to local territory.
Song 167 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 23
Song 89
 8 min: Local announcements. Relate the experiences printed on the back page of the August 8, 1998, Awake! regarding the impact that the Greatest Man book has had on people. All publishers should be alert to offer this book on appropriate occasions.
17 min: “Be Effective in Your Ministry.” Question-and-answer discussion of paragraphs 8-21 of insert. Focus on points that may particularly apply to local territory.
20 min: Suggestions to Enhance Your Bible Reading. Talk based on May 1, 1995, Watchtower, pages 16-17. Highlight spiritual benefits derived from daily Bible reading. Review suggestions offered, and discuss how to apply them. Have two or three publishers relate how they are benefiting by regularly reading God’s Word.
Song 46 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 30
Song 64
15 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports. Encourage any who did not start a study during November to continue their efforts through December, when the Knowledge book is being featured with the New World Translation. Have a capable publisher demonstrate a return visit using the box on page 19 in the Knowledge book; the publisher explains how the book can be used to gain an understanding of Bible teachings and starts a study.
15 min: Make Good Use of the 1999 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses. A talk. Review features of the calendar: (1) striking illustrations that depict notable Bible events and teachings, (2) weekly Bible reading schedule for the Theocratic Ministry School, (3) annual Bible reading schedule for the week preceding the Memorial, (4) notification of upcoming written reviews, and (5) reminders to share regularly in magazine service. Discuss ways to use the available space to outline a field service schedule, to jot down service reports and appointments to work with others, to list meeting assignments, to note reminders of the circuit overseer’s visits and upcoming assemblies. Displaying the calendar in a conspicuous spot in the home or workplace may give rise to opportunities to initiate Scriptural discussions. Relate experience from the 1988 Yearbook, page 8.
15 min: Benefiting From the New Brochure, What Happens to Us When We Die? Review highlights of its contents. It traces the roots of the teaching of the immortality of the soul and explores how the concept has become central to nearly all the world’s religions. It explains in an appealing way what the Bible says about the soul, why we die, the condition of the dead, what hope there is for life after death, and why we need to know the truth about these matters. All should read this brochure. Point out some of the 40 illustrations as well as the quotations appearing at the start of each section, which can be used to arouse people’s interest. Show how the last section can be featured when offering a home Bible study. Invite publishers to comment on how they plan to use the new brochure in the ministry.
Song 121 and concluding prayer.

