Trinidad and Tobago
WHEN Columbus discovered Trinidad on July 31, 1498, he saw three hills in the southeastern part of the island. It is said that this reminded him of the Trinity, and so the island has been called Trinidad ever since. Of course, the Arawak and Carib Indians had discovered the island centuries earlier, and to them this was “the land of the hummingbird.”
That same year Columbus also discovered the sister island of Tobago, which some call “Robinson Crusoe’s Island,” believing it to be the site of Defoe’s novel. Its name, Tobago, seems to come from the name the Indians gave it, Tavaco or Tobaco (Tobacco), referring to a plant that they grew and used extensively.
These islands are the southernmost in the chain that stretches from Puerto Rico to South America. Indeed, Trinidad lies just off the coast of Venezuela, near the Orinoco River. Tobago is about 20 miles (32 km) to the northeast of Trinidad. They are small tropical islands that are a pleasing green most of the year. There is much contrast in their physical appearance​—rugged mountains with lovely valleys, fertile plains, and sandy beaches. Tobago is well known for its reefs and fascinating coral formations.
A TRULY COSMOPOLITAN POPULATION
Although tobacco was extensively cultivated originally, cacao estates gradually predominated. Then these, too, were replaced in importance by large sugar plantations owned by the Spanish, French, and English sugar barons. In order to work their estates, the owners procured thousands of African slaves. When the owners finally had to bow to rising pressure and free the slaves, thousands of East Indians were brought in under an indenture system. Today, Trinidad’s population of over one million is about evenly divided between those of African and East Indian origin, with a much smaller number of Europeans, Chinese, and some from the Middle East. There has been a considerable mingling of these groups through marriage, and this has resulted in a truly cosmopolitan population. Eventually Britain gained control and ruled the islands as colonies until 1962, when they were granted independence.
Many religions are represented here, including Hindu, Muslim, and major denominations of Christendom. The people themselves are friendly and warmhearted. Nevertheless, there is also the violence common to the last days.
THE SOWING OF TRUTH GETS UNDER WAY
It was to this population of mixed ethnic origins that the good news of the Kingdom began to be proclaimed in 1912. The proclaimer was Evander J. Coward, an American. The then president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, Charles Taze Russell, had sent Brother Coward to the islands for the express purpose of opening them up to the preaching of Bible truth, and this he did. For several years he was very active in carrying out his commission and in getting classes of Bible Students, as Jehovah’s Witnesses were then known, organized for regular meetings and for preaching and teaching the truth of God’s Word to as many as had ears to listen.
Today, not many remain who personally heard E. J. Coward. However, Ragbir Boland Gowrie, who died early in 1986, recalled: “Brother Coward spoke on the end of the Gentile Times. His lecture was advertised both by word of mouth and by a large tract that was distributed. He was a fairly large, well-built man. He had a masculine voice and used considerable emphasis and modulation. He had the habit of raising his right hand and snapping his fingers to emphasize a point.” Another brother, also now deceased, remembered: “He was something like the man on the Quaker Oats boxes. He wore his hair long in the back.”
Coward spoke in all the principal towns in Trinidad. The halls were packed with crowds that came to hear him present the Bible truths on hell, immortality of the soul, the future of the earth, and other topics. The Mirror printed some of his lectures or parts of them. On the other hand, he was strongly attacked in the Port of Spain Gazette. But he stood his ground. A dividing occurred between the merely curious and the sincere truth-seekers, and soon a regular Bible study class was organized in the home of Gilbert L. Talma, in Port of Spain. Before long, the room became too small, so in 1912 they rented the Foresters Lodge on Philip Street. That meeting place was used by Jehovah’s Witnesses for some 62 years.
“BIBLE” BROWN WORKS WITH E. J. COWARD
That same year a Jamaican, William R. Brown, arrived in Trinidad to assist in the spreading of the good news. For some ten years he worked with his wife, and for a time with Brother Coward, in covering much territory in Trinidad, Tobago, and neighboring islands. It would be years before there would be organized supervision under a branch office, but both Coward and the Browns visited and strengthened the small groups that were beginning to manifest themselves. Then in 1923 Brother Brown and his wife were given a thrilling new assignment to West Africa, where he earned the name “Bible” Brown.
One of the many places where Brother Coward gave lectures was Tunapuna. William A. Jordan, headmaster in the Anglican school there, decided to attend one of Coward’s lectures to convince himself of the falsity of Coward’s teachings. He armed himself with scriptures to refute Coward. But to his surprise and consternation, Coward started his lecture by using Revelation 21:8, the very scripture that was Jordan’s chief support for hellfire. Being honest and humble, Jordan admitted the superiority of Coward’s presentation of Bible truth. He did this personally to Coward at the end of the talk.
As Jordan progressed in the truth, he realized that his position as a lay reader in the Anglican Church and headmaster in their school was not good. He felt that he had to make a decision. At this time, failing eyesight forced him to take sick leave. After prayer to God, he promised that if he should be able to see again and resume work, the first day he went back to work he would resign from his job. He did just that in March 1915. This enabled him to care for the newly formed class of Bible Students at Tunapuna.
INTO A LEPER COLONY
Young Arthur Guy had been reading Coward’s lectures in The Mirror and became genuinely interested. He relates: “I next decided to write Brother C. T. Russell. He sent my letter to Brother E. J. Coward, the very man whose lectures I had been reading. He was then in Barbados. He wrote to me stating that he had received my letter and was convinced that I was consecrated. I would soon be visited by Brothers Talma and Ferreira. I was thrilled.” A day or two after that the promise was fulfilled.
Arthur made good progress in the truth. He was soon attending meetings. Then came a severe test. He was declared a leper and taken to the leper colony, not for just a week or two, but to spend a number of years. Immediately he began witnessing to the patients concerning his newfound faith. A debate was arranged between him and a Catholic named Paul. Paul used his catechism but did not refer to a single scripture. Now it was Arthur’s turn. He recalls:
“I began by reminding the audience that the discussion was to be based, not upon what we had been taught or believed or what the catechism says, but on the Bible. ‘Let us hear what the Bible has to say on this subject,’ I said and quoted Genesis 2:7. I then drew an illustration. ‘If Mr. Brown went to England to study medicine, passed his examinations, and obtained his diplomas, he would become a doctor. If Mr. Brown died, the doctor would die. Therefore, since man became a living soul, when man died, the soul died.’” The audience shouted their approval, and the chairman agreed that Arthur had the better of the argument. As a result, Arthur was called “Bible” by the patients.
RESPONSIBILITY SHIFTS TO OTHER WILLING ONES
Brother Coward’s work in the islands was drawing to a close. World War I was in progress, and the authorities viewed him as a security risk. About 1917 he was asked to leave the islands and so he returned to the United States. Jehovah had blessed his ministry with success, however. The seeds of truth had taken root. For the Memorial celebration that year, after just five years, there were 68 in attendance in Port of Spain, 90 in Bridgetown, Barbados, and 21 in St. George’s, Grenada. The work would continue to grow, slowly but surely.
G. L. Talma gladly accepted responsibility as the Society’s representative. William Ferreira had also identified himself as a true worshiper of Jehovah. Both of them did considerable traveling to spread the truth and to visit the small classes. Talma spent some time in Barbados, his native island, and also in Grenada, British Guiana (now Guyana), and Dutch Guiana (now Suriname). Ferreira was of Portuguese descent and so was able to do some work among the Europeans.
LARGE CROWDS SEE PHOTO-DRAMA
Following World War I, it would have been difficult for another American to serve the brothers in the islands. So, in 1922, the Society sent a Canadian, George Young, to strengthen the brothers. In a report to Brother Rutherford he stated:
“I landed in Trinidad the morning of the 14th instant. . . . There is plenty of work to keep me busy here for some little time. The truth is spreading quite rapidly in Trinidad. The brethren here are doing a good work. In some respects Trinidad is the best field in the West Indies for spreading the truth.”
During Young’s tour of Trinidad, the Photo-Drama of Creation was used to stimulate the public’s interest. W. R. Brown had done some work with one version of the Drama, but this time it was the complete showing, the motion picture sections included. Large crowds saw it and heard the commentary. Regarding his work Brother Young reported:
“In Port of Spain the friends hired a theatre for two weeknights. No ad of any kind was put in the papers, but 5,000 handbills were put out. The usual number is 10,000. The place was packed and large numbers were turned away. The second night the building was thronged with people; when the doors were shut they pushed open the side entrance in order to stand at the open side of the theatre. The warnings of the priests of Baal are of no avail. The truth is gradually winning its way in Trinidad.”
Brother Young stayed in the Caribbean for about six months.
OUR MEETINGS THEN
Meetings in those early days were not what we are accustomed to now. William A. Douglas, a faithful worker until his death in 1981, remembered:
“The first meeting I attended was on a Tuesday night. We studied a lesson from the book Tabernacle Shadows. After that a chart was posted on the wall, and a brother with a rod in his hand was explaining certain things. I could not grasp anything from what the brother was saying.
“Wednesday night meeting was prayer meeting. One brother would pray, then a song; another brother would pray, then a song. All present would pray. One by one they would stand and give a testimony. Some would say how many good things God had done for them; others would say how God helped them to overcome temptations; others would say how God had helped them to avoid an accident. When my turn came I could not find anything to testify on. . . .
“I can clearly remember the happenings in the first Watchtower meeting Mother and I attended. The conductor asked a question; a brother would answer this way: ‘My thought is so and so.’ Another would say, ‘I am not in harmony with that thought, for so and so.’ This would go on for a whole hour, and the first paragraph on the study was never completed. Now we appreciate with thankfulness to Jehovah the great improvements he has granted us through the Society.”
BOLD​—BUT LACKING TACT
In the 1920’s theocratic tactfulness was unknown to the brothers. They used very plain and sometimes blunt speech in presenting the Bible’s message in homes of the people. W. A. Douglas recalls an experience that took place during a convention in Port of Spain:
“It was the first time arrangements were made for brothers to work together from house to house, as far as I can recall. I, being a young immature brother, was assigned to work with an older publisher . . . It was Sunday morning. We called at a home and the brother made the offer of literature to some men in the gallery. An argument began. The brother told the man, ‘The reason why you cannot understand me is that your father is Satan the Devil.’ One of the men walked up to him and said: ‘You come in my house and tell me that Satan is my father?’ The man then struck the brother in his mouth, knocking out two teeth. While we were coming downstairs and walking to the street, the brother told me if it was not for his consecration to God, he would have handled that young man! He felt at that time that he was suffering for the truth, so he was in good spirits.”
Although the brothers were not at that time being served by representatives from the headquarters of the Society, they were endeavoring to make adjustments in their lives to conform to the better understanding of God’s Word that they were receiving. Jehovah’s spirit thus aided the brothers to maintain unity of thought, expression, and action to a fairly good degree.
TRINIDAD BRANCH OFFICE REGISTERED
May 1932 was an important date for Trinidad. The branch office at 64 Frederick Street, Port of Spain, was registered with the government, and Brother Talma was given legal standing as the representative of the Society in Trinidad and Tobago. Reports were submitted to this office from a number of the other islands of the British West Indies.
The witness being given took on increased intensity with the use of portable phonographs and the more powerful transcription machines. In 1934 there were six transcription machines in use: one in Grenada, one in Dominica, and four in Trinidad. People would not always come out in the open to hear the lectures, but many would listen through open windows. Honesthearted ones appreciated what they heard. Remarks such as the following were made: “This is the only consolation; let us draw near.” “That’s right, boy, come here and listen; don’t go back to Belmont and let that man [a clergyman] fool you anymore.” Many portable phonographs were also imported by the brothers, and these added their voices to the witness being given.
A BAN​—EVEN ON THE BIBLE
Without warning, the importation of our literature was banned by the government. Alfred Wallace Seymour, acting governor of Trinidad and Tobago, in Executive Council, deemed The Golden Age and other publications of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society to be of a seditious character. By Order Number 49 of August 20, 1936, all literature printed by the Watch Tower Society and the Golden Age Publishing Company was banned. That included the Bible itself!
When it was brought to the attention of the governor, Sir Arthur Fletcher, that the Bible had been banned, a further Order in Council, Number 60 of December 3, 1936, was issued that allowed any literature to come in for which an import license was granted. Thereafter, the Bible, The Harp of God, and three booklets were allowed. For nine years this condition continued in Trinidad.
Who was behind it? Many years later, in the spring of 1946, the then police commissioner, Colonel Mueller, told the branch servant in a private interview that the ban had really been because the Society’s publications made attacks on the Roman Catholic Church. The clergy had agitated for it.
In St. Kitts, to the north of Trinidad, on March 20, 1944, the government had all Watch Tower literature they got their hands on burned in the boilers of a sugar factory. Even so, the Witnesses kept busy with what literature they had, and they used their phonographs and transcription machines whenever and wherever possible. But the police seized some sound equipment too.
With the continuing effects of the ban, the number of publishers dropped from 293 in 1936 to 229 by 1940. But the activity of the brothers was productive, because now they were beginning to make return visits and conduct Bible studies.
SCHOOLTEACHER SENT TO PRISON
W. A. Douglas was one of several in Trinidad who were jailed during this time of persecution. In April 1939 two police officers searched his home, where he conducted a private school, and found the booklet Face the Facts. Three months later he was summoned to appear in court; the case finally was heard on October 12. He was accused of being an unpatriotic schoolteacher, refusing to participate in Empire Day celebrations, and not allowing his pupils to sing the national anthem. Douglas defended himself by stating that the school was a private one and that no singing at all was done there. He used Acts 5:27-32 in his defense, pointing out that, like the apostles of Jesus Christ, he “must obey God as ruler rather than men.” The magistrate found him guilty and sentenced him to two months at hard labor. Douglas appealed.
Justice Vincent Brown presided as appeal judge. He was nervous and drank three tumblers of water while reading out the court’s decision. His first words were: “This man is not fit to live in the community. A man in his position as a schoolteacher would not teach the children to be loyal to His Majesty the King and should not be permitted to freedom. We uphold the sentence of the learned magistrate.”
So in 1940 Brother Douglas found himself in prison. While there, he had fine opportunities to witness, and he did so. He came to be known as “Face the Facts.” On Sunday mornings many of the prisoners did not attend the religious services held in the prison church, so Douglas held question-and-answer sessions with them. He reported: “I am happy to mention that during the seven Sundays I spent in jail I had the privilege to speak to more than 200 persons at one time. Also, being permitted to walk over all the prison’s grounds, I spoke to all I came in contact with about Christ’s Kingdom being the only hope of mankind.”
THE BAN IS LIFTED
During the ban an American military base was established in Trinidad. An American at the base had relatives in the truth in the United States. Whenever his relatives sent him The Watchtower, he would give it to the brothers. They would have typewritten copies made, leaving off the name Watchtower, and would then distribute these to the congregations. Thus the brothers were able to get spiritual food despite the ban.
To obtain relief, however, a large meeting was held at the Princes Building on December 22, 1940, and a resolution requesting that the ban be lifted was forwarded to London to the Secretary of State for the Colonies. But the matter was deferred until after the war. On September 11, 1945, another petition, this one bearing 20,851 signatures, was forwarded to London to the Secretary of State for the Colonies. Early in November the good news came through that the ban had been lifted. Literature could again be freely imported. That service year the branch office shipped out 30,988 books and 77,226 booklets to the eagerly waiting brothers.
A NEW ERA IN PREACHING
A number of provisions had been made by the Society that were to make the postwar period a new era of theocratic activity. In 1943 a Theocratic Ministry School had been arranged to train local brothers to be competent speakers and readers. The Watchtower Bible School of Gilead had been put into operation to train missionaries for opening up and strengthening the Kingdom work in many lands. Also, in 1945 a campaign featuring public lectures in each congregation was begun. This, together with encouragement to give brief Bible sermons at the doors, made the use of the phonograph and transcription machines no longer necessary. We were also thrilled to learn that for the first time the president of the Watch Tower Society would be serving conventions in the Caribbean! The flood of help provided by all those means would contribute to remarkable growth for years to come.
Alexander Tharp, of the third class of Gilead, graduated on July 31, 1944. Thereafter he was assigned to Trinidad to look after the work in the British West Indies branch, as it then became known, for Gilbert Talma had now become advanced in years and was in failing health. Brother Tharp arrived on March 24, 1946, a few days in advance of the Society’s officials.
An incident that occurred in the hotel rooms of Brothers Knorr and Franz impressed Brother Tharp and was never forgotten. One day when Brother Tharp went up to their rooms, Brother Franz was polishing his shoes. Without saying anything, Brother Franz squatted down and polished Brother Tharp’s shoes. It was a spontaneous act and reminded Brother Tharp of the act of Jesus in washing the feet of the apostles.​—John 13:3-17.
The convention was a great success, with 1,611 present for President Knorr’s public talk, “Be Glad, Ye Nations.” While N. H. Knorr was in Trinidad, he gave instructions to look for a place that could be purchased for a branch office and missionary home. The back-room office at 64 Frederick Street had served its purpose. On May 30, 1946, 21 Taylor Street in Woodbrook, Port of Spain, was purchased and was to serve as branch office and missionary home for 26 years.
MISSIONARIES CONTRIBUTE TO GROWTH
On October 4, eight more missionaries arrived. There was a steady flow of missionaries to the various islands of the branch for several years​—years of improvement in theocratic organization and of rapid increase. In Port of Spain the number of publishers jumped from 60 in 1946 to 159 in 1947. In some parts of town it seemed as if everyone wanted to study the Bible with one of the missionaries. At times a missionary would have as many as 30 different studies to care for in a month.
Some Bible studies produced true disciples. Teresa Berry recently wrote: “One of the most outstanding studies that I started was with Mabel Guin and her family. I still remember her saying, after my talking with her for a few minutes, ‘We always wondered if there was anything we could do for God, since he has done so much for us.’ I started the study with her, and soon she began attending the meetings and going in the service. The whole family of ten came into the truth. I still write to Mabel, and she is a very active Witness down to this day, some 37 years later.”
The missionaries came to be well known. One day when Peter Brown was coming home from field service, he took a shortcut through the cemetery as a funeral procession came in. They recognized Peter to be a missionary, so one of the party approached and said: “We do not have anyone to give a talk at the grave. Would you do that?” He gladly did.
The new missionaries had to get readjusted in a number of ways, and they also helped the local brothers to make some adjustments. At the Kingdom Hall it was noticed that the brothers sat on one side of the hall and were all dressed in navy blue or black suits. The sisters, dressed in white, sat on the other side of the hall. But the missionaries dressed in all sorts of colors and began to sit on both sides. Before long the old custom disappeared.
The Trinidad office was now receiving reports from small groups in all the islands of the British West Indies except Jamaica.
CIRCUIT OVERSEERS EXPEND THEMSELVES
Late in 1946, Joshua Steelman, a Gilead graduate who had been in Cuba, was assigned to serve the Trinidad branch as a representative of the President’s Office and to do servant-to-the-brethren (circuit overseer) work in all the islands. He was very successful in encouraging publishers to get out in the field service. New peaks of publishers were reached in practically every congregation he served.
The following year the missionary home in Barbados was closed, and the remaining missionary, Bennett Berry, was assigned to be servant to the brethren. His experiences would fill a book. There was little transportation. If there was a bus, it was hard to get a seat. Chickens, fish, and goats were also passengers, making a ride quite an experience! Talk among the passengers was constant. Roads were narrow and winding, especially in mountainous areas.
On the island of Dominica, Brother Berry had to walk 18 miles (29 km) over mountain trails and up a riverbed to reach one of the congregations. One time he got a horse, but the horse fell. Nevertheless, he had great joy in seeing humble brothers get a better appreciation of their relationship with Jehovah, his Son, and Jehovah’s organization. Brother Berry’s spirituality grew, too, as he unselfishly ministered to the needs of his brothers.
RESPONSE TO ASSEMBLY ADVERTISING
A district assembly was arranged for May 21-23, 1948, to be held in Port of Spain. There was to be extensive advertising. Everything worked well. This time, in addition to the usual information marching, handbills, and window signs, a bicycle parade was formed with placards on each bicycle. It certainly did attract attention.
Since the building for the assembly was small, the public talk was to be held outdoors in Woodford Square, the heart of the business district, at 8:00 p.m. A tropical full moon lighted the scene. The brothers were overjoyed to see a crowd of 3,623 gather around the bandstand to hear “The Coming Gladness of All Mankind.”
OPEN-AIR PUBLIC TALKS
A number of local brothers had become fairly competent public speakers, and these, along with the circuit overseers, began to give open-air talks frequently. It was easy to arrange such talks.
A shopkeeper would be contacted for permission to give a talk under the overhanging eaves of his shop. If electricity was not available, a gasoline lantern or a carbide light would be hung on one of the roof supports. Then a table for Bible and notes, and everything was in readiness. Word-of-mouth advertising and handbills in the area the day or the week of the talk would be sure to produce a crowd of 100 or more. There was little to distract, apart from traffic and insects. In time, however, with the advance of crime and rowdyism, the era of open-air talks came to an end.
Nevertheless, those open-air talks had introduced the truth to some sheeplike ones. After one such talk in Chaguanas, a young Hindu had obtained two translations of the Bible from the speaker. That young man entered the full-time service, and he served Jehovah faithfully until his death.
THE SIBIA AND THE LIGHT
When the Society purchased a sailing vessel (the Sibia), a new and exciting method of bringing the good news to the smaller islands was inaugurated. S. J. Carter, G. Maki, R. Parkin, and A. Worsley comprised the initial crew. They sailed in a sort of circuit between Puerto Rico and Trinidad, giving a thorough witness on all the small islands. Even the larger islands enjoyed their periodic short stays for supplies and to attend assemblies.
Most of the islands had small fishing villages scattered along their coasts. Since roads did not always link these villages overland, the use of the Sibia proved very practical in bringing the good news to these isolated areas.
During 1953 the Society arranged to replace the Sibia with a larger twin-engine motor vessel called Le Cheval Noir, which name was later changed to Light. On November 9, 1953, it was registered in Trinidad as its home port.
However, the following year, Maurice Dorman, Colonial Secretary, was present when Brother Knorr spoke to an audience of 3,269 in Woodford Square. Later that year, on July 6, Mr. Dorman, who was then acting governor, signed an order in Executive Council that deemed the crew of the Light undesirable visitors. On September 25, 1954, when the Light put into port after serving an assembly in Barbados, immigration officers served notice on the crew that they were not permitted to land. Negotiations and interviews with officials proved fruitless, and the vessel was ordered to leave not later than October 5. It did, in the face of one of the worst hurricanes to strike the Caribbean in years.
LOCAL BROTHERS SERVE
Local brothers who could serve as special pioneers now played an increasingly important role. Native circuit overseers had already replaced foreign missionaries to a large extent and in time would do so completely. During 1950 and 1951 a missionary home had functioned in Scarborough, Tobago, but some feeling against white persons on the part of the public hindered their effectiveness. So in 1954 two local special pioneers, Edward Harry and Oliver Smith, were assigned to Tobago to try to expand the Kingdom work. This proved successful and demonstrated that, in some territories at least, qualified local brothers would be more effective than foreign missionaries.
Since then, some of the local special pioneers have attended the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead and returned to Trinidad. Two of these are Theresa Chin Chee Fat and Sylvia Permell. They have served faithfully and zealously, and Jehovah has blessed their disciple-making service. Theresa has been blessed with 46 spiritual “children,” while Sylvia has seen 59 dedicate their lives to Jehovah and get baptized.
GROWTH REQUIRES NEW BRANCHES
At the time of Brother Knorr’s visit in January 1954, it was decided that the Kingdom work in the Leeward Islands had grown sufficiently for a separate branch office to be set up. Nine islands would comprise the Leeward Islands branch, leaving Trinidad with seven. Another division occurred in 1966 when the Barbados branch was formed. The Trinidad branch now included just Trinidad and Tobago. Our own field was getting smaller, but it was because of expansion of the Kingdom work.
During the 1950’s and following, only modest gains in the number of publishers were experienced, and in some years there was a decrease. This did not necessarily mean that there was no interest to be cultivated. It was largely due to the economic conditions. Unemployment was high, wages were low, and families were large. This was true of the Witnesses as well as others. And so, during these years there was a constant flow of Witnesses as emigrants to England, Canada, and the United States. Yet spiritual growth became evident.
PROVIDING SUITABLE KINGDOM HALLS
During the latter part of 1959 a brother in Trinidad discussed with Robert D. Newton, who was then branch servant, the possibility of inviting congregations to pool their resources in order to build Kingdom Halls for some of the congregations. At that time there was only one small Kingdom Hall in Trinidad; it had been built in San Fernando in 1940. Eventually a Kingdom Hall Fund came into existence. Not long afterward, work was begun on a fairly large Kingdom Hall in San Juan. Nearly all the labor was voluntary. It was a sight to see a group of men and women, all Witnesses, mixing concrete and forming a bucket brigade to pour the concrete. Early in 1961 the hall was finished. It became one of the locations for the Kingdom Ministry School classes that were inaugurated that year.
Almost immediately another hall was begun, this one for the Laventille Congregation in Port of Spain. Although the fund was soon depleted, it became possible for loans to be secured from the Society for such construction. More congregations took advantage of the provision to put up a good Kingdom Hall. Today there are 27 halls, with plans for more in the near future.
In May 1985 something new occurred in the building of Kingdom Halls. The brothers had been thrilled with reports of quickly built Kingdom Halls in other lands. Could such a thing be done in Trinidad? A building committee was set up to investigate. Intensive discussions took place, and it was decided to try to put up a hall at the Siparia Congregation in two weekends instead of one. The response of the brothers was thrilling. Yes, it was done on the two weekends, and the brothers in Siparia are enjoying their new hall. All this building activity has certainly contributed to the expansion of the Kingdom-preaching work in these islands.
LOCAL ASSOCIATION IS FORMED
To care for the growth, new branch facilities became necessary. In 1963 Brother Tharp again began serving as branch overseer, after a 15-year interval during which others had cared for that responsibility. An application was made for land to be leased to the International Bible Students Association of London. The grant was refused. Three fine sites were then found, and permission was secured from the Town Council to build on all three sites. But when a license was requested from the Prime Minister’s Office to secure title in the name of the International Bible Students Association, it was refused. One of the owners of the sites said: “What they want you to do is form a local association.”
Legal advice was sought and then necessary steps were taken to form a local association of Jehovah’s Witnesses. A meeting of congregation servants with the branch office personnel on August 18, 1968, was the basis for forming the association. Draft regulations for the association had been prepared and an Advisory Council was elected. Finally, after the sponsoring of a private bill in both houses of Parliament, a bill was enacted and assented to on August 7, 1969. Now the brothers had a legal association that enabled them to hold, acquire, and sell property without the need of a license from the government.
All existing titles of Kingdom Halls were now vested in the local association, and all future acquisitions of sites could be taken in the name of the Association of Jehovah’s Witnesses of Trinidad and Tobago. Now marriage officers could also be appointed, so it would no longer be necessary for Jehovah’s Witnesses to be married by a civil officer of the government.
ARRANGING FOR CONVENTIONS
With the growth of the organization, the need to find more suitable places for annual district conventions became pressing. Theaters had long since been outgrown. Two locations were available that were partially suitable​—the Himalaya Club in San Juan and the Queen’s Hall in Port of Spain. These were used year after year.
Then Eric Gregorio, a local brother, said he thought he could get the Grand Stand at the racetrack of the Queen’s Park Savannah, and he did! This was the first time since 1932 that permission had been granted for us to use this fine facility. The convention was arranged for October 1-4, 1970.
Suddenly, however, early in 1970, Black Power demonstrations broke out. Fighting, burning, and some killing occurred. An emergency was declared in April and a curfew was imposed. Could the district convention be held? Would we be able to have our circuit assemblies in July? Well, the commissioner of police granted permission to hold all the assemblies.
The circuit assemblies went off smoothly with the exception of our largest one, in Port of Spain. Just before that assembly was to begin, the circuit overseer was informed by the commissioner of police that, while we could hold the assembly, we could not use any sound equipment. An interview with him proved to be fruitless. A delegation then attempted to see the minister of national security; this, too, failed. A second attempt was made to get the commissioner to change his mind, but he emphatically stated he would not. So the Friday program was presented with no sound equipment at all to an audience of over 1,300. Saturday morning a brother who had formerly been a policeman attempted to have an interview, only to be told that the commissioner was not in his office on weekends. We had done everything possible.
Then about noon on Saturday, a young woman who was interested in the truth made up her mind to do something about the problem. She had attended on Friday night but had not been able to hear. She decided to phone the commissioner at his residence, although she was not acquainted with him. First, she prayed that Jehovah would soften his heart. What was the result? The commissioner granted this request from a person who was not yet one of Jehovah’s Witnesses! The sound was fine for the remaining days of the assembly, and the 2,187 who attended the public talk could hear it clearly.
When the “Men of Goodwill” District Assembly was held in October at the Grand Stand, there was no interference at all. How pleasant it was to have plenty of space all under cover, with ample parking space just adjacent to the Grand Stand! Even though there was pouring rain on the last day, 3,239 were in attendance. Having set a precedent in cleaning up the Grand Stand and leaving it clean, we have never had any further trouble in getting it for both circuit assemblies and district conventions.
SERVING FAITHFULLY TILL DEATH
Not only are the anointed brothers of Christ Jesus to serve faithfully until death but his “other sheep,” too, must prove faithful under all circumstances, even till death if that occurs. This has been true of some of our missionaries.
Edmund Charlwood and Jerry Doering arrived in 1949. Soon Edmund was assigned to circuit work, which took him to all the islands under the Trinidad branch. Under the broiling tropical sun and in pouring rain he was busy in the field ministry with the brothers. Gladly he stayed with them in their humble homes, and he became well acquainted with a diet of breadfruit and salt fish. For 19 years he traveled, first as circuit overseer, then as district overseer. When Edmund became advanced in age, Jerry was given the assignment.
For a time, Jerry and his wife had served in Barbados. Those years of full-time service helped to make his work as district overseer effective. But tragedy struck suddenly during February 1971 while Jerry and his wife were in the field service. They were struck by a car that failed to stop on entering a major road. Brother Doering died the following morning. He had served faithfully for nearly 22 years since his arrival in Trinidad. His death certainly was a blow.
Edmund Charlwood continued to serve in a missionary home in a diminishing capacity as advancing age weakened him. Finally in August 1976 this loyal brother died. His widow Elsie, as well as Alice, Jerry’s widow, continue their missionary service.
Among the brothers who comprised the crew of the Sibia and the Light was Stanley Carter. He worked hard along with the others to proclaim the good news among the islands. When he married Ann, they were assigned to open up a missionary home in St. George’s, Grenada. It was not an easy assignment, but they persevered and saw Jehovah’s blessing on their efforts. In 1965, because of serious illness, they went to Canada to obtain medical treatment for Stanley. Shortly afterward, he ended his long years of faithful service.
These integrity-keeping missionaries are now resting until the voice of Christ calls forth to life such ones who are in God’s memory.​—John 5:28, 29.
OUTSTANDING AUXILIARY PIONEER SERVICE
For quite a few years consistent steps have been taken to enlarge the auxiliary pioneer activity in these islands. During the 1960’s the branch overseer made it a practice to visit the meeting of the district and circuit overseers with the congregation overseers at circuit assemblies. He would take about five or ten minutes to talk to them and encourage them to emphasize vacation (auxiliary) pioneering in April.
Then at a circuit assembly at the Himalaya Club in January of 1968, a brother had a part on the Service Meeting program entitled “The Pioneer Service​—A Real Joy.” All over the building there were signs with the letters “VPA” on them. What did they mean? Came time for his part, and onto the stage walked a large brother with a sandwich sign. On it was written “April 1968.” His name was “Big April.” Now the audience realized that VPA meant “Vacation Pioneer in April”! The brothers never forgot that demonstration.
Gradually at first and then rapidly the brothers began to respond to the encouragement. Unbaptized children and adults were encouraged to work with the vacation pioneers and strive to meet the same goals. Surprising results began to be obtained from 1978 onward, as the chart on page 247 shows.
In the congregation in Belmont, Port of Spain, the elders personally talked to the brothers and gave them an application form to read and consider. Charts were prepared and posted that gave schedules of hours for the days of the week, showing how housewives, secularly employed persons, and students could reach the goal of hours. Slogans were posted on the walls of the Kingdom Hall to help all to keep vacation pioneering in mind.
Other congregations learned of Belmont’s success and began to use similar methods. As a result, by 1985 almost every congregation had excellent support for auxiliary pioneer service. In Belmont, 75 percent of their total publishers were auxiliary pioneers, averaging 63 hours in the field. Arima East reported 73 percent, while Maraval had over 63 percent reporting as auxiliary pioneers. These were large congregations of over 100 publishers each. The Cocoyea Congregation, which was reporting 93 publishers, had 78 percent in the auxiliary pioneer ranks.
How could so many manage to do it? A sister explained: “It was not until the seventh of the month after a talk from an elder that I made out my application. I encouraged a young sister to go along with me. She agreed, so I got her parents’ permission for her to sleep at my home sometimes in order for us to do street work early in the morning. My schedule was as follows: up around 5:00 a.m., get on the street around 6:30 a.m. and work to 8:00 a.m., then off to my secular job. In the afternoon I’d spend another two hours or more. Saturday was my day off, so I’d begin around the same time, take time off for lunch and rest, and be at it until 9:00 p.m., putting in a minimum of ten hours. On Sundays I’d spend only one hour in field service. Besides the sister, I was very pleased to meet other brothers doing street work, for without them I would not have been able to stay out as late as I did . . . I was able to put in 75 hours and make 12 return visits and hold 2 home Bible studies, besides placing 716 magazines. As I look at my report, Luke 17:10 keeps coming into my mind: ‘What I have done is what I ought to have done.’”
In one congregation a sister in her 70’s pioneers several times each year. In April 1985 she was very ill, but when she began to feel a little better around the 15th of the month, she wanted to get going again. She dragged her arthritic body up from the bed and made it known that if she was going to die, she wanted it to be as a pioneer, active in Jehovah’s service. With great effort she got out to share in the ministry on the streets. Then others in her congregation arranged to use their cars to help her. Just ten days later she had met her goal of hours for the month. At the time of this writing she is still alive and planning to auxiliary pioneer again.
The entire Bethel family has also found it possible to share in this increased field ministry. And as one of the senior members of the family said: “How refreshed we felt, even though physically tired!”
PROVISIONS FOR SPECIAL SCHOOLING
In 1961 the first Kingdom Ministry Schools were held in Trinidad. All special pioneers were privileged to attend. They certainly appreciated this privilege and were benefited by the course. Still later, regular pioneers who were brothers had the opportunity to benefit from the school courses. In 1985 all ministerial servants had a special course for their benefit. A better spirit toward the full-time service was evident, but there was more to come.
In 1977 a beautiful textbook entitled Shining as Illuminators in the World was prepared as the basis for a two-week course of instruction for the pioneers! Now the sisters could also get much upbuilding encouragement and instruction. This had an excellent influence on the full-time work, especially the auxiliary pioneer service. The spirit of pioneering seemed to rub off on the congregation publishers, and this was particularly noticeable in April of 1978 when a fine new peak of 500 auxiliary pioneers was reached.
Many letters of appreciation have been received. One reads: “This is to express my appreciation for the Pioneer Service School. It was indeed a wonderful provision from Jah at the right time. A few months before attending the school, my husband began doing circuit work and I accompanied him; this was a real challenge for me. The extensive course helped me to meet that challenge. Now the field service has taken on added meaning to me, as my presentations are more effective, interesting, and successful. This is because of applying some of the fine suggestions given at the school as to showing more personal interest in the householder.
“One of the points that impressed me the most is that we are fellow workers with Jehovah in the preaching and disciple-making work, thus showing the need to develop a close acquaintance with him. This has impressed on me the need to call on him more often in prayer while engaging in the service and has made me more confident and assured of his backing.”
EXPANSION REQUIRES NEW FACILITIES
In May 1972, after 26 years at 21 Taylor Street, we moved into our new home and branch office just outside of Port of Spain. It was not a new building, but it certainly did suit our needs much better than our previous site.
When we decided that we should acquire this property, we noted that it was adjacent to the Maraval River. It was the dry season when we moved in; inquiries of neighbors did not arouse any apprehension of flooding of the property. But December of that same year saw a flash flood that caused the stream to become a raging torrent, sending a foot of muddy water surging through the office and lower floor.
A block wall was erected along the riverbank, and for several years we had no problem. Then in 1975 a devastating flash flood smashed the wall, covered the first floor with four feet (1.2 m) of water, and ruined thousands of books, as well as office equipment and files. On an engineer’s recommendation, a seven-foot-high (2 m) tapering stone wall, four feet (1.2 m) thick at the bottom, was built along the river and around the property. Pumps were also installed. But in 1980 another disaster befell us. The wall between our property and that of a neighbor gave way, with the result that tons of water raced around the branch home, smashing doors, causing havoc, and endangering lives. Within 30 days two more floods came, and there were no protecting walls. As they had done before, the brothers turned out in large numbers to help us clean up. Neighbors could hardly believe their eyes as tons of debris were hauled away. In a remarkably short time, things were looking fairly normal again. A new reinforced concrete and steel wall soon was built, but the Branch Committee recommended to the Governing Body that the branch be relocated.
WE BUILD A NEW BRANCH FACILITY
In addition to danger from floodwaters, the home and office had again grown too small for the work. There just was no longer sufficient room to care for the needs of the congregations. Since 1972, there had been a nearly 40-percent increase in the number of publishers.
The Governing Body approved the Branch Committee’s recommendation. In time an acre of land was located between Port of Spain and the airport. There were problems, but these were overcome one by one. When the Pentecostals had wanted to buy the site for a church, the neighbors had protested because of the noise that such meetings would generate. There was also some fear of “catching the spirit.” But when Jehovah’s Witnesses assured the neighbors that no danger would be posed if the Witnesses built on the site and that noise would be minimal, the neighbors did not oppose. So in 1981 the property was purchased in the name of the local Association of Jehovah’s Witnesses of Trinidad and Tobago.
Nearly a year and a half elapsed before we were able at last to begin work on the building itself. The brothers gave of themselves willingly for the work. When floors were to be poured, many hands were needed, as there was no sophisticated equipment available​—just two cement mixers, a lot of buckets, and a series of platforms for brothers to stand on to pass the buckets from one to another. Two long lines of brothers and sisters stretched from the mixers to where the cement was being poured. Another line returned empty buckets to the mixers. Frequently, craftsmen worked all night. The result was a truly unifying and stimulating effect on the congregations.
For the dedication program on March 16, 1985, Milton G. Henschel of the Governing Body was present. Publishers from every congregation in Trinidad were also on hand; 2,942 filled every seat and vantage point. When everyone left, they were in a joyful and exuberant mood.
JEHOVAH GIVES PROGRESSIVE IMPROVEMENT
In Isaiah chapter 60, Jehovah long ago foretold his purpose both to improve and to enlarge his earthly organization in his due time. The old-timers among us can testify that this has certainly come true. How much better conditions are in the congregations now than when brothers campaigned to be elected as elders! The congregations today are prospering spiritually.
There are now 50 congregations in Trinidad and Tobago. Prospects for more are encouraging. Our April 1986 report shows 4,558 publishers, who placed over 135,000 magazines in addition to 11,537 books. Over 6,990 home Bible studies were being conducted. At the Memorial celebration there was an encouraging 13,961 in attendance. During the following months, many more new disciples were baptized.
Since the time of the arrival of missionaries in 1946 a great quantity of literature has been distributed for such a small branch. The report shows over 1,600,000 books, upwards of 1,500,000 booklets, and millions of magazines. A great witness has been given in Trinidad and the islands that were under this branch. There are also prospects for a further great ingathering of sheeplike ones before the end of this system of things.
A circuit overseer reports: “While working on a Wednesday morning during a district overseer’s visit, we arrived at a street, only to be told, ‘Brother, we worked here Friday.’ Nevertheless, we decided to work the street. On calling at a home we were invited in, and my partner presented the Topic for Conversation.
“The woman explained to us that she was a Trinidadian living in London with her family and was home on vacation. Her mother-in-law, in London, had encouraged her to read the Bible, and after a while she did so and enjoyed it. On telling her mother-in-law this, she was told, ‘That is not enough; you must join a church.’ The mother-in-law was an Adventist. But the woman did not want just to join a church, so she went to God in prayer and told him that she would take it as a sign that the ‘first people bringing the gospel to my door have the truth,’ and we were the first to call at her door. The Britain branch was written so that a Bible study could be continued with her when she returned. This study was conducted. Now the family is back in Trinidad. Both husband and wife are baptized, and they and their children associate with a congregation in east Trinidad. What is interesting is this: The publishers had worked there on Friday, but she came in from London on Saturday, and we were there on the following Wednesday.” Yes, good results are being had in the field ministry, and those who make themselves available are sharing in this joy.
Along with improved shepherding arrangements for individual congregations, there has been a corresponding improvement in supervising the work from the branch office. No longer does a branch overseer alone have the responsibility for overseeing the activities of the branch. A dividing of the work and responsibilities among members of the Branch Committee has made it possible to give closer attention to all the many facets of the work. The present members of the committee here are Earl David, Zephrine Nedd, Winston Simon, and Alexander Tharp.
“The land of the hummingbird” and “Robinson Crusoe’s Island” are pleasant places in which to live and serve the great Creator, Jehovah, who makes all things pretty in their time. (Eccl. 3:11) The Trinidad branch is now small in area and in numbers when compared with larger countries of the earth. Yet there is a warm glow that comes when we contemplate the history of the work here. It is our determination to continue to press ahead with our brothers worldwide in caring for the Kingdom interests as we look forward to the time when everything that has breath will be praising Jehovah.​—Ps. 150:6.
[Graph on page 247]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
INCREASE OF AUXILIARY PIONEERS
          1978   1979   1980   1981   1982   1983   1984   1985
4,000
3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
  500
          16.9   28.8   40.6   39.1   47.9   52.3    54.1   56.7
Percentage of Auxiliary Pioneers to Total Publishers
[Picture on page 232]
Alexander Tharp, Branch Committee coordinator in Trinidad, with his wife Lois
[Picture on page 239]
Aboard the missionary boat “Sibia”

