“You Have Crowned the Year with Your Goodness”
As the foregoing reports show, Jehovah’s Witnesses in 208 lands around the globe enjoy a marvelous unity. It is a oneness in belief, faith, organization, and service to our “one God and Father,” such as has never before been witnessed on the face of this earth! (Eph. 4:3-5; Mark 12:29, 30) How wonderfully has Jehovah answered Jesus’ prayer at John 17:20, 21!
During 1986 there has been astonishing growth worldwide, notably in predominantly Catholic countries​—Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, France, Spain, Portugal, and—​in the very heart of Christendom​—Italy. In Poland the “Divine Peace” District Conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses drew capacity crowds. In the Oriental sector of Babylon the Great, the world empire of false religion, Jehovah’s work moved forward with greater momentum. This is illustrated by Buddhist Japan’s publisher peaks, which now stretch out for 92 consecutive months.
Oh, yes, Babylon the Great fumes at Jehovah’s Witnesses. She has vigorously opposed our work in some lands where religious influence has been strong. But her political power is waning. She jumped on the UN bandwagon in giving full support to the 1986 International Year of Peace, but this did nothing to advance the cause of true peace. It served only to identify her as “part of the world”​—this world that is alienated from God and doomed. Her perch atop the UN “beast”​—which a Roman pontiff described as “man’s last hope for peace”—​is a precarious one indeed.​—John 15:19; contrast Revelation 17:3-6, 15-18.
Recently, a Hong Kong newspaper carried the headline “Church ‘must be part of world’” and quoted Pope John Paul as saying that “the Catholic Church desired to be part of the modern world.” But a different John of the first century said under inspiration: “Do not be loving either the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him; . . . the world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.” (1 John 2:15, 17) And another Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, foretold our critical “last days,” saying: “Wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse, misleading and being misled.” (2 Tim. 3:1-5, 13) That is the situation in today’s world. But must true Christianity be part of that wicked world? Far from it!
With regard to the world’s conglomerate empire of false religion, the divine call rings out: “Get out of her, my people, if you do not want to share with her in her sins, and if you do not want to receive part of her plagues.” (Rev. 18:4) The individuals that make up the 3,229,022 witnesses of Jehovah on earth today have done just that! It is our prayer that other millions of teachable people, including many from among the 8,160,597 who attended the 1986 Memorial of Jesus’ death, may yet take a dedicated stand for Jehovah. By so doing they may be saved in the day of “the burning anger of Jehovah.”​—Zeph. 2:2, 3.
‘Feet Shod With the Good News of Peace’
The God of peace has sent forth his people with “feet shod with the equipment of the good news of peace.” (Eph. 6:15) This he has done in a wonderful way, giving us the precious Word of truth, his empowering spirit, and a forward-moving global organization.
In recent years, Jehovah has provided us with publications of superlative quality; and at the “Divine Peace” District Conventions we received additional equipment. The beautiful updated brochure “Look! I Am Making All Things New” will no doubt be a valuable tool for greatly increasing the 2,726,252 Bible studies that were being conducted in the homes of the people last year. The brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide will provide a splendid basis for discussing with such newly interested ones the various facets of God’s organization and its activities. As “solid food” we now have an absorbing book for group study, Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace.” (Heb. 5:14) And the latest cassette, Kingdom Melodies No. 7, should remind us, as we listen to its delightful tunes, that we have every reason to thank and praise our illustrious God for all of his goodness.
New Kingdom Halls are sprouting up by the hundreds earth wide. Assembly Halls, new or expanded branch facilities in some 40 lands, additional printing presses for four-color and simultaneous publication​—all of these provisions come as a blessing from our loving God. Jehovah has indeed stirred the hearts of his willing servants to support this advancement by their hard work, their material sacrifices, and their prayers! (Mal. 3:10) As we move along, procedures will be simplified; we must be well organized in view of the tremendous shout of praise being sent up by the 391,294 pioneers and other zealous publishers. These are ‘sowing bountifully,’ and they are also ‘reaping bountifully’!​—2 Cor. 9:6.
In a melody sung to Jehovah, David declared, “Happy is the one you choose and cause to approach, that he may reside in your courtyards.” How true that is of each one of God’s people today! Yes, all of us can respond to our God: “We will certainly be satisfied with the goodness of your house, the holy place of your temple. With fear-inspiring things in righteousness you will answer us, O God of our salvation, the Trust of all the borders of the earth and those far away on the sea.” Wherever we are serving on this earth, may Jehovah be our trust. Enriched by all of Jehovah’s loving-kindnesses, let us cry to him with jubilation: “You have crowned the year with your goodness”! (Ps. 65:4, 5, 9, 11) And as we turn now to our work for 1987, may we be like-minded with Joshua who said: “As for me and my household, we shall serve Jehovah”!​—Josh. 24:15.
Your brothers,
GOVERNING BODY OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES

