From Our Readers
Young Cancer Victim  I am 18 years old, and I want to thank you for the experience of Matt Tapio, in the article “He Did Not Give Up.” (October 22, 1998) I was really moved by his faith, his appreciation for spiritual things, and his sense of urgency. I hope to thank Matt personally after his resurrection in Paradise.
E. G. G., Spain
On behalf of our family, thank you for the article. Since we have teenage sons, we found it very beneficial to consider with them Matt Tapio’s example of faith. It gave us a chance to analyze our own priorities as individuals and as a family.
M. F. N. G., Brazil
The article was of great encouragement to us young ones because it highlighted the zeal of a young man who, despite his illness, never stopped talking about Jehovah.
D. M., Italy
Even though Matt Tapio faced a deadly infirmity, he held on to life so that he could praise and serve Jehovah. This is a good example for those of us who have good health.
D. P., Puerto Rico
The article about Matt, who had to undergo surgery for a brain tumor at age 14, caught my attention. Among his last words were, “Don’t ever stop witnessing about Jehovah.” This encouraged me not to give up and helped me realize how important it is to study the Bible and gain the knowledge that leads to life!
D. V., Philippines
AIDS  I wanted to thank you sincerely for the series “The Battle Against Aids—Will It Be Won?” (November 8, 1998) It was very informative. I am 19 years old and have been taught many things about AIDS and HIV in school and at home, but I was still confused. This article helped me to appreciate how vital it is that I choose a marriage mate wisely and lead a morally clean life.
S. T., United States
Your articles were informative, accurate, and truthful. I have been living with AIDS for over ten years. A friend is teaching me the Bible with the help of your publications. Thank you for not being afraid to publish such articles.
B. W., United States
I could not put Awake! down until I finished reading the articles on AIDS. I have never read such accurate information on this subject. And that means something, since I am a nurse. Many thanks.
D. E., Germany
My appreciation comes from the fact that my son left the Christian way and returned with full-blown AIDS. With the help of Jehovah, he is now in good standing spiritually. His health has stabilized thanks to medical treatment. We know that there are many who are infected and do not realize it yet. This should be of great concern to anyone thinking of marriage.
N. J., United States
Bridges  Just after Hurricane Mitch destroyed up to 80 percent of the bridges here in Honduras, we received the November 8, 1998, issue, with the article “Bridges—How Would We Manage Without Them?” My husband and I are always traveling here, and we quickly learned how important bridges are to us in our work. We want to thank you for the interesting and timely article. As the closing paragraph says, we will no longer take bridges for granted!
C. H., Honduras

