Vol. XXXI X 


BROOKLYN, X. Y., MARCH 15, 1918 


No. (» 


THE GREAT SHAKING NOW IN PROGRESS 


"Whose voice then shook the earth; but now he Jtath promised, 
heaven. And this word, Yet once more, signifieth the 
things that are made, that those things which can 

Why should there be so many trying experiences in the 
church at this timet is a question often asked. A Scriptural 
consideration of the period in which we are living clearly answers
 this question. And we believe all who will thus prayerfully
 and carefully examine the matter will, instead of having 
their faith shaken by reason of the trials that are now upon 
the Lord's people, have it greatly strengthened. This is a 
time when all the consecrated should have confident assurance 
of their standing with the Lord. Since making a consecration
, our hope has been for an abundant entrance into the 
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Confident 
assurance of the establishment of Messiah's kingdom is that 
condition of mind resulting from believing the teachings of 
the Scriptures upon the subject. These teachings are clear, 
cogent and convincing; so that, thoroughly relying upon them, 
all doubt of an early establishment of the kingdom is removed
. 

Each one who will enter the kingdom must have his faith 
thoroughly tested. This test will demonstrate who is loyal 
and who is not. To be faithful means not only to know the 
truth and rely upon it, but to be loyal to the Lord — to Jehovah, 
to Christ Jesus, to the cause of truth and to the brethren. 
Loyalty to the very core will be required of those who enter in. 

In chapters eleven, twelve and thirteen of the epistle to 
the Hebrews the apostle presents the most convincing argument
 concerning the establishment of the kingdom and the 
conditions to prevail immediately preceding that event. In 
the eleventh chapter he defines faith, without which it is impossible
 even to be considered in the class that is running for 
the prize of the kingdom. He defines the elements of faith, 
which, when once acquired, lead to confident assurance and 
loyalty. Beginning witih Abel, the first martyr to shed his 
blood for the cause of righteousness, the apostle enumerates 
many of that array of strong characters, which reaches down 
to and includes John the Baptist, the last and greatest of the 
prophets. The crowning virtue of each of these approved 
ones, that which gained for him a good report before God, 
was his loyalty to the Lord and to righteousness. It would 
appear that the very purpose of the historical record in the 
eleventh chapter of Hebrews is to establish definitely in the 
mind of the Christian the fact that the fixed law of Jehovah 
approves only those who are fully loyal at heart; and the 
further fact that to prove himself loyal he must endure many 
trying experiences. He must fight against the foes of righteousness
, and he must fight loyally to the end. Applied to the 
fully consecrated Christian, these principles prove that only 
the truly loyal at heart will be able to stand the great shaking
 that precedes the establishment of the kingdom. 

The apostle waxes eloquent when he describes the virtues 
and achievements of the faithful ancient worthies. He tells 
us that time would fail him to tell of Gideon, Barak, Samson, 
Jephtha, David and other prophets, who by reason of their 
faith and loyalty subdued kingdoms; wrought righteousness; 
fought with wild beasts; quenched the violence of fire; turned 
armies to flight; endured mockings and seourgings, bonds and 
imprisonments; wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins, 
being destitute, afflicted, tormented ; were stoned, sawn asunder, 
and slain with the sword ; of whom the world was not worthy. 
All this they did that they might obtain a better resurrection. 
But they have not yet received the thing promised, God havaj
/iitg. Yet once more I shake not the earth onl;/, but ui.to 

removing of tJiose things that arc shaken, as of 

not be shaken may remitin" — Hebrew* 12:20, 27. 

ing preparei I a Letter thing for the Gospel church. But when 

the church is perfected, then these faithful ones of old shall 

come into their reward. 

WRITTEN AFORETIME FOR OUR ADMONITION 

Why did the Lord cause the apostle to record these events 
so much in detail? Because they are experiences typical of 
the experiences that should come to the members of the church. 
Those trying things demonstrated the loyalty of the men of 
old, and. prove that those who enter into the kingdom must 
possess a like loyalty. These faithful worthies were consecrated
, but they had no opportunity to obtain membership in 
the heavenly phase of the kingdom; for the ransom sacrifice 
was not yet given. 

The apostle's argument beginning with the twelfth chapter 
shows conclusively that the eleventh chapter was written for 
the very purpose of encouraging Christians in their trying 
experiences. There he says in substance: "Take into consideration
 the great trial through which the prophets and faithful
 worthies passed; and having in mind the promise of membership
 in the heavenly kingdom, let those experiences be a 
stimulus to you to endure cheerfully whatsoever the Lord is 
pleased to give you; having in mind also the Lord Jesus, who 
was the author and who will be the finisher of your faith, who 
rejoiced greatly in the prize set before him and endured all 
hardships and persecutions gladly. Take these into consideration
, therefore, lest you become wearied and faint in your 
minds. You have not yet resisted to the end; but you must 
thus resist in order to prove your loyalty to the Lord." 

What an encouragement to Christians at this time, who 
may be undergoing severe trials and tribulations! There is a 
disposition, when severely tested, to draw back and give up 
the fight. Not Infrequently one will say: "I wonder why 
the Lord permits me to have such severe trials. Why does the 
rhurch have to endure such trying experiences now?" To this 
the apostle answers in substance-: 'You have forgotten that 
the Lord disciplines his called ones, and that he "puts them 
through the necessary trials for that purpose. He does this 
because he loves his children/ It is added then that if we 
endure this discipline cheerfully, God deals with us as his 
sons. To emphasize the matter lie says that if we are without 
this discipline we should have cause te be alarmed, It would 
be an evidence that we were not sons. In other phrase, trying 
experiences are indispensable to all those who come into the 
kingdom. 

INAUGURATION OF MESSIAH'S KINGDOM AT HAND 

"But," one asks, "w*hy are these trials m&re severe just 
now?" The apostle answers that question, saying, "Ye 'are 
come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, 
the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of 
angels, to the general assembly and church of the first-born, 
which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and 
to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator
 of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling 
that speaketh better things than that of Abel .... whose 
voice tnen shook the earth; but now he hath promised, saying, 
Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven." 

In brief, we are told that when the feet members of the 
church approach the inauguration of the kingdom there will 
be a great shaking and testing. A picture or illustration of 


[6223] 


(.84-85) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


this was given at the institution of the Law Covenant at Mount 
Sinai. God directed the children of Israel through Moses, to 
purify themselves three days, saymg that on the morning of 
the third day he would make a covenant with them through 
Moses as their mediator. On the third day, amdist a great 
convulsion of the elements, the covenant was made. This circumstance
 foretold that Messiah's kingdom would be inaugurated
 in the morning of the third thousand-year day. Moses 
vividly describes the events accompanying the institution of 
the Law Covenant. There was a great fire in Mount Sinai. 
A blackness settled down over the mountain, darkness and 
tempest, the sounding of trumpets, the voice of words; and so 
terrible was the sight and the sound that the people of Israel 
entreated that such should not be repeated to them. Even 
Moses said: "I do exceedingly fear and quake." — Exodus 
19:1-19. 

We are now well into the morning of the third thousandyear
 day. There is great darkness and blackness over the 
nations and kingdoms of the earth* The shaking is in progress
. Kingdoms and governments are being shaken. The 
financial powers are shaken. The ecclesiastical elements are 
shaken. The temptations and trials that have come to the 
world of mankind must be met by those of the church yet in 
the flesh. The Lord has promised the faithful, however, that 
he will not suffer them to be tempted above their ability to 
endure; but that with each temptation or trial he will provide 
a way to escape, — 1 Corinthians 10:13. 

In the picture made at Mount Sinai, and mentioned by the 
apostle, only the things of earth were shaken; but now, he 
says that God will "shake not the earth only, but also heaven." 
This means that all things pertaining to the governmental institutions
 of the earth and all the ecclesiastical systems and 
those who are of the truly consecrated shall be shaken, "that 
those things which cannot be shaken [out] may remain." 
Clearly, the apostle states that the purpose of this shaking is 
not* merely to shake out the disapproved, but to make manifest
 who are approved of the Lord, who are accounted worthy. 
Absolutely certain it is that the kingdom class cannot be 
shaken out, for the reason that if they could be shaken they 
could not be of the kingdom. This time of testing is the 
same to which the Lord Jesus referred when he said that he 
would send forth his messengers to gather out of his kingdom 
all things that offend and them which do iniquity. (Matthew 
13:41) It is the time of final testing for the church; and 
this testing will make known wiho are faithful and loyal; all 
others will be shaken out. 

ADMONITION FOB PREPAREDNESS 

The evidence about us everywhere shows that the institutions
 of this world are going to pieces. Seeing, then, that this 
is "the end of all things," we should expect a shaking in the 
church; and if there should be no shaking, there might be 
reason for doubt as to the nearness of the Lord's kingdom. 
Instead of these trials bringing to us discouragement, let us 
look up and lift up our heads, because our deliverance draweth 
nigh. 

To be forewarned means to be forearmed. The apostle 
admonishes those who are to engage in this fight and who 
are looking for entrance into the kingdom to take heed, fully 
fortifying themselves against this time of great testing. 
Knowing that some will Income discouraged, faint hearted, 
hang down their hands and be weak in their knees, tho, apostle 
said: "Lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble 
knees; and make straight paths for your feet, lest that which 
is lame be turned out of the way; but let it rather be healed." 
The consecrated, being forewarned of the dangers besetting 
their pathway, are to take heed to the course they pursue and 
to be of good courage. 

WAB OR PEACE ONE OT THE TESTS 

All of Christendom so-called is at war. The ecclesiastical 
systems are involved. Based upon the apostle's reasoning 
that the ehurch must encounter similar trials, we should expect 
a disturbance of the peace in the ecclesia of the Lord, the purpose
 of such disturbance being to make manifest who are 
loyal to the Lord and his way of action; and to shake out all 
others. To this end the apostle says: "Follow peace with 
all, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord." 
In the ecclesias there are often some who are of a contentious 
spirit, who insist on having their way; and failing in this, 
seek to bring about strife and confusion. This often results 
in disruptions of the little classes, and many are surprised and 
astounded that those claiming consecration should take such a 
course. But we should not be surprised. "Beloved, think it 
not strange concerning the firo among you to try you, as 
though some strange thing had happened unto you/' (1 Peter 
4:12 — Diaglott) Plainly, those who provoke difficulties and 


indulge in strife will sooner or later be shaken out, unless they 
mend their course. 

Further we read: "Looking diligently, lest any man fail 
of the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up 
trouble you, and thereby many be defiled." In this time of 
shaking, the heart condition of every one is being thoroughly 
tested. If there is any root of bitterness in the heart against 
any one else, and particularly against any of the brethren, the 
shaking will make it manifest. And if that root of bitterness 
is cultivated, it will quickly cause the one having it to be 
shaken out and to go into outer darkness. The apostle makes 
it clear that in order to have a full assurance of faith and a 
knowledge of the mystery of God, the Father, and of Christ, 
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, 
it is necessary not only to put out bitterness but that the 
hearts of the approved must be united closely together in love. 
— Colossians 2:1-3. 

SOWERS 0? DISCORD AMONG BRETHREN 

"God hath set the members in the body as it pleaseth him." 
The Father, through the Son, is executing his great plan. 
The Master of the harvest is attending to his business, and 
he knows exactly what to do. Any attempt on our part, to 
assume a place that the Lord has 'not selected for us would 
necessarily result in his disapproval, would show a wrong condition
 of heart and would manifest a spirit of disloyalty, and 
subject such an one to such a severe shaking that might result 
in his being shaken out. Some who have been much favored 
of the Lord and given many opportunities of service, not being 
able to have their own will carried out with reference to the 
harvest work and the manner of conducting it, have deemed 
it their duty to go about the ecclesias and stir up strife and 
seek to draw away followers after themselves. We are not 
surprised that such a thing should take place. The Apostle 
Paul plainly warned against this. He first admonishes each 
elder to take heed to himself. He foretells that after his departure
 grievous wolves, would enter, not sparing the flock, 
and then pointedly adds: "Also of your own selves shall men 
arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after 
them." (Acts 20:28-30} Brother Russell, seemingly in prophetic
, language in approximately bis last message to the church, 
repeated this warning. (Z. '10, p. 327— "The Hour of Temptation
") We now observe its fulfilment; and instead of being 
surprised at it, we mark it as a part of the groat shaking 
mentioned in our text. 

With deep regret we hero mention that the practice of 
some is to go about the classes and at first, by soft and smooth 
speech, assure the dear sheep that they have deeply the interest 
of the Lord's work at heart; and then suddenly tlrey bring 
a tirade against the work as the Lord is conducting it through 
the channel that he has used for the past forty years. Some 
of the dear sheep become very much disturbed, and some are 
shaken out. This in another evidence of the great shaking 
now in progress. It would seem that any one who is loyal 
to the Lord and his cause and the brethren would not seek to 
disrupt his work; at least, if they could not see eye to eye 
with the manner in which it is being conducted, the proper 
spirit would prompt sucli to remain quiet or quietly to withdraw
. Any other spirit would not soem to be the spirit of the 
Master. 

What should be our attitude toward those who thus disturb
 the Lord's little ones? St, Paul answers: "Mark them 
which cause divisions and offences contrary to the doctrine 
which ye have learned; and avoid them." (Romans 16:17, 18) 
Should those who manifest a wrong spirit be the majoritv 
of an ecclesia. what, then^ should be the attitude of the minority
? To this the apostle answers: "From such withdraw 
thyself."— 1 Tim. 6:3-5. 

Let us see to it, dear brethren, that we do not indulge in 
strife. Whatsoever another may do ; let us follow the apostle's 
admonition to live in peace and pursue a course of holiness, 
without which we shall not be permitted to Fee the Lord. We 
should manifest our disapproval of those who show a wrong 
spirit by calmly and quietly withdrawing ourselves. Let us 
refrain from indulging in acrimonious debate or discussion. 
"I will keep my mouth with a bridle while the wicked is before
 me." (Psalm '39:1} Jt matter* little who i« in the majority
 here. The question with each one of us should be, Am 
I heeding the instructions of the Lord and his inspired apostles
? Let us keep uppermost in our mind at all times that we 
are now approaching the inauguration of the kingdom. We 
see that the prophetic words of the apostle are being, fulfilled ; 
and it behooves us to run patiently, to be of calm and sober 
mind, watchful and prayerful, permitting nothing to swerve 
us from the right course or to divert our ,-itt:mtion from the 
great prize of entering and participating in the kingdom. 

Our Lord, speaking of this time says: "The Son of Man 


[6224] 


March 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(85-86) 


will send forth his messengers, and they will gather out of 
his kingdom all the seducers and those working the lawlessness
/' i. e., those who are lawless. — Matthew 13:41, Diaglott. 
TESTS ALONG OTHER LINES 

A further admonition is: "Let brotherly love continue." 
Thus we are shown that this great shaking will severely test 
our love for the brethren. Love for the brethren means an 
unselfish desire to do good to the brethren and the putting of 
that desire into operation even at *£ sacrifice to ourselves, 
having in mind the building up of such an one in the most 
holy faith. Such desire, then, would preclude us from contending
 in the class for our own way; and, on the contrary, 
would lead us to be patient and kind with others; and should 
it become necessary for us out of good conscience to take a 
course contrary to others, then with calmness and sobriety 
we should state our position and leave it there, avoiding all 
controversy. 

Some of the Lord's dear children in this time of great 
stress may be disturbed about their prospects of supplying 
things needful for themselves and dependent ones. There may 
be a temptation here to turn aside from active participation 
in the service with a view of amassing a sum of money* Some 
might even be induced to think that it would be proper to let 
their minds be turned into the channel of money-making to the 
exclusion of spiritual interests, and that they would give any 
overplus to the work of the harvest. But a warning is apparently
 given against such a course. The literal rendering of 
Hebrews 13:5, 6 is: "Let not your turn of mind be toward 
money-making, but be content with such things as you have; 
for himself hath said, I will in no wise fail thee, neither will 
I in any wise forsake thee. So then with good courage we 
can say, The Lord is my helper; I will not fear/* 

The real vocation of the Christian is to prepare himself 
for entering the kingdom— to be made "meet for the inheritance
 of the saints in light." Let the sentiment of our hearts 
find expression in the words of Brother Paul: "This one 
thing I do." Let our purpose be a single one, resolving by 
God's grace to prove our loyalty and fidelity to him, come 
what may. 

THE GLORIES OF THE KINGDOM 

Since the mind is the battleground, we do well to keep 
before our mental vision the exceeding great and precious 
promises and the glories that await those who love the Lord 
supremely. Let us, then, at times take a mental view of that 
which we are approaching. "Ye are approaching Mount Zion, 
the city of the living God," which means the kingdom of our 
Lord. That the peoples of earth and the creatures of heaven 
may ever appreciate the importance of this great kingdom t 
God will manifest his power and justice to all, inaugurating 
his kingdom amid a great time of trouble — afterward the 
peoples of earth will learn to know his love. 

The faithful martyrs looked and hoped for the coming of 
this kingdom, but were not permitted to know the time or 
manner of its coming. The Psalmist sang of its coming, and 
those songs have gladdened the hearts of Christians throughout
 the Gospel age. Long has natural Israel hoped for its 
coming. Long has spiritual Israel prayed for its coming; 
and now with joy we can say, "The kingdom of heaven is at 
hand." In happy anticipation the members of the bride this 
side the vail await their change. We may reasonably expect 
the change and shaking. But this change will come in a moment
, in the twinkling of an eye. One moment the creature 
will be corruptible; the next, incorruptible. One moment, in 
weakness; the next, in power. One moment, amid the clouds 
of blackness and darkness; the next moment, ushered into the 
glorious light of the divine nature. In our minds now we 
havo gone beyond the vail and are about to behold the assembly
 of the glorious sons of God. For whom shall we first 
look? 

THE JOYOUS INTRODUCTION 

If a person who expected to be presented to an earthly 
king or potentate had a friend who was acquainted at that 
court, he would certainly desire first to consult his friend and 
receive some suggestions as to how he should appear before the 
court. Court functions are always attended with much formality
 and dignity. We are expecting: to be presented to the 
great King of Kings, before whom all things must be graced 
with dignity and formality. Have we a friend who knows 
something about that great King! Yes, indeed. We are assured
 that all along* our pilgrim journey we have been attended
 by our guardian angel. (Hebrews 1:14; Psalm 34:7) 
Speaking of the Lord's little ones, Jesus said: "In heaven 
their angels do always behold the face of my Father which 
is in heaven." (Matthew 18:10) In describing the general 
assembly of the church of the first-born, the Apostle mentions 
first an innumerable company of angels. Pur p. lovable, and 


beautiful in form and character must these be. They have 
kept a record of our journey and of our blessed assembling 
together. (Malachi 3:16) Anxious shall we be to become 
acquainted with these precious and beautiful creatures who 
have been our helpers along the way, May we cot want their 
help further to know just what to do that we may be presented
 properly to the great King, in harmony with the dignity
 of his court? Having loved and served us along our 
earthly journey, surely they will be glad to direct us when first 
we reach the kingdom and we shall be glad to make their 
acquaintance. It would not seem reasonable that one born 
on the spirit plane would immediately have all knowledge; 
but he would have to acquire knowledge after reaching that 
condition. Hence the angels could be of assistance. 

Next is mentioned the "church of the first-born/' of which 
Christ Jesus, the great King, is the Head. Certainly we shall 
be eager to see our wonderful Lord — the Lamb slain from the 
foundation of the world, who redeemed us to God with his 
precious blood, and who has made it possible, for us to aspire 
to membership in the kingdom and to enter the race-course. 
To us he is the dearest friend, our Advocate and our Deliverer. 
And now, entering the kingdom, the relationship of bride and 
bridegroom is about to be experienced in its completeness. 
How thrilling will be that time! Behold him I He is the 
fairest of ten thousand and altogether lovely. Prom the time, 
when by faith we first know the Lord, we have longed for the 
hour when we might see him face to face. Then shall we express
 to him our devotion and love as we desire. Then "we 
shall be like him and see him as he is." (1 John 3:2) "In 
thy pressure is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are 
pleasures forevermore." The joy of meeting the Lord cannot 
be approximated. 

We shall next desire to see the various members of the 
Royal Family. Among these will be especially the apostles, 
who so faithfully served the Lord and left food upon which 
we have fed. Then we shall look for those whom we have 
known and especially loved here, and whom the Lord used as a 
special blessing or help to us. Every member who has come 
to a knowledge of the truth during the harvest period of this 
age will be especially anxious to greet Brother Russell, that 
faithful messenger of Laodicea. To us he has been the den rest 
friend amongst men whom we have seen; for the Lord used 
him to bring to us the message of the divine plan. Without 
doubt he will occupy a very honorable position in that Royal 
Family. Others who will compose that heavenly assemblage 
we shall be anxious to see, for they have been specially near 
and dear to us; some with whom we have had special' opportunities
 of service, whose weaknesses and virtues, whose love 
and devotion to the Lord and his cause we have learned of. 
with whom we have passed through peculiarly fiery trials, 
which greatly blessed us. All the members of that family will 
be beautiful; for all will be like the Lord. But as star differeth
 from star, so shall the glory of one differ from that of 
another. What a glorious convention that will be! 

THE GREATEST ASSEMBLY OF THE CHTJRCH 
For some years during the harvest it has been the blessed 
privilege of many of the Lord's dear people to meet at conventions
; and the sweet experiences there enjoyed have been 
but foretastes of the general convention which is so near at 
hand. At our earthly conventions the difficulty has been in 
separating after coming together. At the general convention 
there will be no seperation. In due time we shall become acquainted
 with all of the 144,000 perfect, beautiful, glorious 
beings. There will be nothing there to mar the beauty and 
sweetness of the fellowship with each other throughout eternity. 
Next in order will be the presentation of the church before
 Jehovah, which will surely be attended with great ceremony
 and splendor. It is unthinkable that heaven is a place 
where every one is constantly beholding every one else. Surely 
Jesus and his bride will have a place prepared especially for 
them (John 14:2, 3) to which none other shall be admitted. 
Surely Jehovah inhabits a place of exclusion, where none other 
can gaze upon him except by his permission. 

The day approaches for the presentation of the bride before
 the throne of God, and the Apostle informs us that to 
Jesus is granted this honor. In vision we behold an innumerable
 company of angels assembled before the throne of the 
all-wise, all-loving, eternal Jehovah. The trumpets of the 
heavenly heralds announce the approach of the Bridegroom 
with his bride. Music of surpassing sweetness fills the heavenly
 courts. Behold the conquering Hero approaching with 
his^ bride upon his arm! All honor and praise is due to him. 
Every knee in heaven is bowing to him and every tongue is 
singing his praise. He presents before Jehovah his bride, 
whom ihe has redeemed and blest. She is gar lied in her rolms 
of glory and beauty; "her clothing is of inwrought gold. She 


[6225] 


(87 -M) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


shall be brought to the King in raiment of embroidered 
work." (Psalm 45:13, 14) Thus the prophet in symbol describes
 her immortality and inherent beauty. "Faultless before
 the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy," shall he 
present his bride. (Jude 24, 25) Then the union is made 
complete. 

"Oh, that will be a union such as earth has never known, 

When Bride and Bridegroom arc made one 

Before the great white throne!" 

The members of the church of the first-born, the bride of 
Christ, will be a special monument to the grace of God. She 
has been taken from an unrighteous race and exalted to the 
highest position in heaven. Of her the prophet says: "Thou 
shalt be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord and a royal 
diadem in the hand of thy God." (Isaiah 62:3) And "in the 
ages to come God will show forth the exceeding riches of his 
grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus," (Ephesians
 2:7) And thus she will ever be the recipient of Jehovah
's favor. Having in mind the blessedness, the glory and 
honor and the surpassing sweetness of being in that general 
assembly in heaven, who would not gladly undergo any and 
all kinds of shakings and testings that the Lord might see 
fit to give his people in order that they might have part in 
that kingdom! "Wherefore, we receiving a kingdom which 
cannot be moved, lot us have grace whereby we may .serve God 
acceptably with reverence and goodly fear!" 

In this time of the greatest crisis in the world's history, 
a time of the worst shaking yet known, a time of petty trials 
and fiery experiences, that have come upon the Lord's people, 
if we keep in mind the glories of the kingdom we shall be 
enabled to endure; and forgetting the things behind, and 
looking to that wonderful thing before, to press forward along 
the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ 
Jesus. Beloved, let us think it not strange concerning these 
fiery times through which the church is passing, but rather, 
receiving them as a strengthener to our faith, let us with 
calmness and sobriety meet them, keeping a pure heart toward 
all; and soon we shall be forever with the Lord. 


JESUS SETS NEW STANDARDS OF LIVING 

[This article was reprinted from article entitled, "The Narrow way to Life Eternal, 1 * published in issue of August 15, 1906, 
which please see.] 

JESUS FACES THE CROSS 

[This article was reprinted from article entitled, "Only the Humble Shall Be Exalted/' published in issue of May 1, 1904, 
which please see.] 

JESUS EXERCISING KINGLY AUTHORITY 

[Paragraphs 1-14 of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Barren Fig Tree — Temple Defiled, 5 ' published in issue
 of July 15, 1914* The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Coming in the Name of the Lord," published in 
issue of September 1, 1906. Please see the articles named. 1 


THY WILL BE DONE 


We see not, know not, all our way 
Is night, — with thee alone is day, 
From out the torrent's troubled drift, 
Above the storm our prayers we lift, 
Thy will be done! 

The flesh may fail, the heart may faint, 
But who are we to make complaint 
Or dare to plead, in times like these, 
The weakness of our love of ease t 
Thy will be done! 


We take with solemn thankfulness 
Our burden up, nor ask it less, 
And count it joy that even we 
May suffer, serve, or wait for thee, 
Thy will be done! 

And if, in our unworthiness, 
Thy sacrificial wine we press, 
If from thy ordeal's heated bars 
Our feet are seamed with crimson scars, 
Thy will be done! 


SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 


THE POWER OF THE TRUTH 
Dear Brethren: — 

A returned missionary called at our store yesterday with 
the object of denouncing what he called Russellism. He told 
me that he had spent many years in India, and that in the 
district next to him, many Methodist missionaries had labored 
hard for many years, and the fruit of their labor was that 
they established in all forty churches. At the time he was 
speaking of, the missionary society's funds became low, and 
they were forced to recall these missionaries. 

'Just after this, Brother Davy [I, B. S. A. representative 
in India] and another native brother visited that district; and 
in a few weeks, the missionary told me, they took over all 
the forty churches, thus undoing the missionaries' arduous 
work of "many years of trying to scare the poor natives into 
their belief of eternal torment and hell-fire! "What do you 
think of that for Russellism?" asked my informant; and 1 
had to admit that it was fine. I told him I was glad that 
the poor natives had the fear of hell-fire removed from them. 
Surely this is just another example of the great force of the 
truth ! 

We thank you for the allotment of further territory, Alaska 
and the Yukon. We will endeavor faithfully to colporteur 
as much of this district as we can, all of it if possible. 

With much Christian love, I am 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, J. E. — Can. 

READING WITH THE GREATEST INTEREST 

The Secretary 

The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. 
Dear Sir: — 

I am enclosing two Money Orders, amounting to $130.00, 
as a donation to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, 
with my best wishes for every success during 1918. 

[6 


This includes the payment for the long-looked-for 

Volume of the Studies in the Scriptures, by Pastor Russell, 
which was sent to me by mail last July, and winch I have 
just realized was not paid for. 1 am reading it with the 
greatest interest. Yours truly, O. H. M. -Can. 

RESOLUTION OF LOYALTY 

WHERKAS: Certain of the Philadelphia Ecclesia went out 
from us because they were not in harmony with the Lord's 
arrangements as represented in the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society and its present management, and 
WHEREAS: We understand they intend to publish a resolution
 condemning the present management of the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society, to which the loyal members did not 
subscribe, and 

WHEREAS: This might lead to an inference by tho^e unfamiliar
 with the circumstances that the Philadelphia Ecclesia 
is not in harmony with the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society and its present management, therefore 
BE JT RESOLVED: That the Philadelphia- Ecclesia to the 
number of about 200 unanimously loyal to the Lord and his 
arrangements for carrying on his work under the present 
management of -his channel, the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society, make known to all its unalterable fidelity to 
the Lord, its hearty co-operation with the dear feet members 
in spreading the message of the Seventh Volume and ali 
kindred work, and its appreciation of the zeal and love displayed
 bv our President and those associated with him. 
BE IT RESOLVED: That realizing that none are perfect, 
"no not one," we believe that any mistakes that may have 
been made are of the head and not of the heart, and that 
the Lord will overrule all to the advancement of his cause. 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED: That this resolution be sent 
tn the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society with the re- 

226] 


March 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(93-95) 


quest that it be given the widest possible publicity, and that 
our assurance bo sent to our dear Brother Rutherford and 
all the dear co-laborers everywhere that daily at the throne 
of Heavenly grace, we, who continue to keep our Vow unto 
the Lord, members of the most wonderful prayer circle that 
has ever existed, remember the general interests of the harvest
 work and particularly the share which we are permitted 
to enjoy in that work, and also the dear co-laborers at the 
Brooklyn Tahernacle and Bethel and everywhere. 

Philadelphia Ecclesia. — i*a. 

"BENDER THEREFORE TO ALL THEIR DUE" 

Dear Brother Rutherford: — 

I have wanted for some time to write you and to tell you 
of my great appreciation of the privileges afforded me in the 
Pilgrim service and the blessings received therefrom. 

It lias been my pleasure to attend no less than eight conventions
 since last fall, and the benefits 1 have received therefrom
, and the hopes inspired, are beyond computation. It is, 
indeed, refreshing to see the enthusiasm manifested by the 
friends everywhere, and the avidity with which they" have 
grasped the opportunities in connection with the Seventh 
Volume; and it is seldom that I meet any one now who is 
opposing himself in the work. 

The love and general good feeling manifested at the meetings
, especially at our little conventions, is distinctly noticeable
. ^ There is one matter, however, that I wish could be 
definitely impressed upon the minds of the friends everywhere
, especially at the conventions, and that is the necessity
 of punctuality and orderliness in our meetings. I do 
not like to be over-critical j but I notice that it is as a general
 thing that the same individuals are invariably late in 
coming in, and they never seem to realize what a disturbing 
factor this is, inconsiderate and impolite. I verily believe 
in this respect we are apt to be the most disorderly and lacking
 in reverence of all Christian people. I am sure if these 
dear friends realized how inconsiderate it appears to others, 
and what a lack of reverence is shown, they would surely 
try to correct this unseemly ha.bit of coming in after service 
is started, or leaving before it is finished. 

It we were given the privilege of an audience with an 
earthly king or ruler, we would be very punctilious as regards
 the time and manner of our arrival; and we would 
surely have respect enough to wait until the interview was 
closed, and not unceremoniously turn our back upon the king 
and leave his presence whilst he was yet speaking. Surely, 
if this is the case with any that hold high positions (here on 
earth, it ought to be more true when you hive been granted 
an audience with the Lord, and that he is communicating a 
message to us through his servant, whoever that may be. In 
plain, words, we should have respect enough and reverence 
enough for our Lord to come in time to our appointment and 
stay with him until the interview is ended from the opening 
hymn to the close of the Doxology. 

Of course, to every rule there are exceptions. In the case 
of illness or having to catch a train, there might be some 
allowance made, but wdiere brethren or sisters have any reason
 to 'believe that they must leave the meeting before it is 
ended, they should be careful and considerate enough to take 
their seats in the most inconspicuous place possible, so that 
their withdrawal would not cause any commotion. 

I am afraid, dear brother, that ins'tead of writing a letter, 
I got to sermonizing. However, if you will pardon the suggestion
, I do believe some short and pithy article in The 
Watch Tower might help us to overcome our slackness. 

With much love and earnest prayers for the Lord's blessings
 and guidance to be with you, I remain, 

Your brother in the Lord, " E. D. Sexton. — Pilgrim. 

FOB SUCH LOVE SHE WOULD MAKE RETUBN 

Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

Greetings in his dear name! I was so amazed at the wonderful
 love of the Father and Son, in a re-reading of the first 
article in The Watch Tower of July 15, 1916, that I cannot 
refrain from now expressing my gratitude that the dear heavenly
 Father used Brother Russell to make it m plain, that 
even my unworthiness can no longer cause me to doubt the 
love of these two Supreme Beings. Surely, "My cup runneth 
over I " 

As I read that article I thought, "Oh, for such love I would 
make some return!" and I am reminded that I can, if I be 
willing. I want to have my will completely immersed into 
the Lord's will. I still have daily, yea, hourly evidences that 
I am His child; and I am determined by the Lord's assisting 
grace to hold on until the end. 


The suggestion some time ago that we seek by prayer and 
study to develop more love has been pursued by me, and I am 
unable to express what a wonderful help I have derived therefrom
. The Lord surely has answered my prayers! With my 
heart filled with love even some very crucial tests have been 
only "light afflictions." 

In rereading my back Towers, I liave derived so much more 
good than at the former reading! I had not the capacity to 
assimilate them all at once. 

Yours in him, Farrell F. Gossin. 

MORE ENCOURAGEMENT FOB VOLUNTEERS 

Gentlemen: — 

Having read one of your pamphlets found in one of the 
railway depots I wi3h to state that it has never before been 
my pleasure to reach such a definite understanding with regard
 to a number of wonderfully important points heretofore 
a mystery. 

1 would like you to see to it that it will be made possible 
for me to receive regularly a copy of your Bible Students 
Monthly, as I am interested in the work coming from people
 who have not only been sincere and devout believers but 
also teachers and preachers of the gospel. 

Yours very truly, A. 0. Smith. — -Ind. 

WOULD CORRECT THE RUMORS 

Dear Brother: — 

Replying to your letter regarding rumors that have come 
to you about me and the questions respecting "that servant" 
in Matthew 24, and the "resurrection of the saints, " will state: 
because of misunderstandings, rumors have started on these 
and other subjects, which when passed from one to another, 
soon 'become distorted from the original facts. 

For your information, as well as for the information of 
any others, I desire to state: 

1st. I fully believe that the expression, "that servant," in 
Matthew 24 and Luke 12, applied to Pastor Russell, 

2nd. I do not deny the resurrection of the saints in 1878. 

3rd. I may add that neither I- nor any of my fellow directors
 in our present work are in any way opposing "the 
Society. 

Trusting these statements may stop these and other rumors 
from being further circulated, and clear up the present misunderstanding
, 1 remain, 

Yours in his service, L. W. Jones, M. I). — 111. 

HOT IK HARMONY 

Dear Brother:— 

I hereby withdraw as a shareholder of the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society, relinquishing any right to vote or 
be a member in the Society. 

I am not in harmony with nor do I approve of the Society 
nor its subsidiary corporations as now conducted subsequent 
to the death of Pastor Russell, 

Very truly years, F. H. MoGee. — N. J. 

[We commend the above as an honorable course for any 
who cannot conscientiously work in harmony with the Society
.— Ed. Com.] 

FALSE IMPRESSION DISSIPATED 

Recent publications in the press concerning the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society of Brooklyn, are of so exaggerated
, sensational and untruthful a character as to create 
a false impression in the minds of those ignorant of the facts. 
These publications made it appear that this great Society 
is rent by internal dissensions and that dissatisfaction has 
taken the place of harmony and that unity no longer exists. 

We are in a position to state here that no such condition 
of affairs exists. There may be a diversity of opinion upon 
certain subjects, but that is only natural in an organization 
of such an extensive membership. Beyond this there is nothing
 to justify the sensational stories referred to. The Society
 is as strong today, if not stronger, than ever before 
in its history. The death of Pastor Russell, its great founder, 
was of course severely felt, as he was the controlling spirit 
of its destinies, the man who made it the great and dominating
 influence for good it is. But a worthy successor has 
been found in Mr. Rutherford, who was the close friend, 
confidant and chief aid of Pastor Russell. With the great 
ability with which he is endowed, Mr. Rutherford is continuing
 the work along the lines laid down by his predecessor, 
and already, as the result of his earnestness, energy and welldirected
 efforts, has succeeded in increasing the efficiency and 
usefulness of the Society. 

This is the position of affairs today, no matter what any 


[6227] 


(94-82) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


newspaper may say to the contrary. Needless to say that we 
rejoice that such is the case, because we recognize in this 
Society a great force for good. Through its instrumentality 
the Bible today is read by more people and read more intelligently
, than ever before. It has made people think, it 


has caused them to moralize along the right lines, and has 
opened their eyes to the absurdity, and in some instances, 
the cruelty of certain old-fashioned dogmatic theologians. 

Prom Mercantile and Financial Times. — N. Y. 


From time to time we receive letters concerning the Mena 
Film Company; and some of the dear friends seem to misunderstand
 the attitude of the Society toward that organization
. We have heretofore published in The Watch Toweb 
the Society's position, but we now repeat that the Mena Film 
Company is a separate and distinct organization from the 
Watch Towee Bible and Tract Society. Our Society has 
nothing whatsoever to do with the work of the Mena Film 
Company. We have no money invested in it now, nor have 
we had anything to do with this work in the past. 

This does not mean that we are antagonistic to the Mena 
Film Company and would, therefore, want to do it injury. It 
is not our province to do injury to any one. We have no interest
 in the railroads of the land; yet we would not want 
to do injury to any railroad company. Investments in railroad
 securities are for purely selfish purposes. Investments 
which are for the purpose of teaching the Bible surely are 
much more commendable. 

The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society we believe 
was specially organized under the Lord's direction for the 
purpose of doing the harvest work of the gospel age, and nothing
 else. Thousands of Christian people, realizing this to be 
the mission of the Society, have gladly contributed their time 
and money and have joined with it in such work. We do not 
believe that any other organization in the world has been used 
or is now being used to do harvest work; hence all of our 
time, energy and money is spent in that 'behalf. We do not 
believe it to be pleasing to the Lord for us to engage in any 
other ,work except that supervised by the Society. 

More than a year ago certain consecrated brethren believed 


IN RE THE MENA FILM CO. 


that they saw a field opening to them for the teaching of the 
Bible through the medium of moving pictures. They organized 
the Mena Film Company for that purpose. Such was their 
privilege. They believe the Lord's blessing has been upon their 
undertaking. If so, then all Christians should rejoice with 
them. Anything that turns the people away from error and 
teaches them the truth is to be commended. The Mena Film 
Company has produced a picture different from any that is 
shown in any of the theatres throughout the world. The 
picture discloses the perfect man and woman in Eden, and the 
temptation of Mother Eve by Lucifer. Many episodes are 
then presented showing how Satan, from the time of Eden 
until now, has sought to thwart God's purposes and how, 
ultimately, Satan will be overthrown, and how restitution 
blessings will then come to mankind. Surely every true Christian
 rejoices to have the people receive the message of Truth 
relating to God's great plan. We cannot 'believe that Satan 
would wish this picture shown, 'because it exposes his nefarious 
methods and his ultimate downfall. We must conclude, then, 
that the Lord would be pleased to have it shown; because 
it shows the ultimate triumph of truth and righteousness. Just 
how much good will be acquired by the public who have no 
knowledge of the Bible, we do not know; but it may be that 
the Lord desires to use this for the purpose of turning the 
minds of the people back to the Bible, The clergy have turned 
their minds away from it and offer them no hope. The world 
i3 in great distress. If the Lord is pleased to bless the efforts 
of these brethren of the Mena Film Company, then we will 
rejoice with them. 


KINGDOM NEWS 


The evidences daily increase that the "dark night" is fast 
settling down. The new dispensation is coming in. It seems 
appropriate, therefore, to announce the kingdom, and to call 
the people's attention to the fact that millions now living on 
earth may never die, because the "times of restitution" will 
soon begin. The Society is issuing a statement which explains
 the opposition manifested against the message of the 
seventh volume, how it came to be suppressed, and the clergy's 
responsibility in connection therewith. A full explanation such 


as the friends and the public desire is given in clear terms. 
We are shipping the classes a supply of these papers for general
 circulation, in about the same quantity as wag ordered 
for the No. 99 B. S. M. distribution. These papers are released
 for distribution immediately you receive them, and we 
pray the Lord's blessing upon the united efforts of the friends 
in this proclamation of our present position. Shipments will 
begin to be made within a few days. 


Many recent letters from friends throughout the country 
tell of the special help and comfort the 1918 Year Text has 
given them at this time: "The end of all things is at hand: 
Be ye therefore sober and watch unto prayer; and above all 
things have fervent love among yourselves." (1 Peter 4:7, 8) 


YEAR'S MOTTO FULL OF MEANING 

We still have a small quantity of these mottoes, also postcards 
bearing this text, which the friends may have at half pnce 
while they last. The mottoes, 5c each; the postcards 10c per 
dozen, postpaid. 

