Gilead Graduates, Do Not Give Up!
THE apostle Paul underwent many trials. He suffered much persecution. He was afflicted by physical ailments. Many times he lacked material goods. So how did he react? Did he long for the past, when he did not have these trials? Did he want to go back to Tarsus? Paul himself answers: “We have this ministry . . . We do not give up.”​—2 Cor. 4:1.
With the above expressions Karl Adams, an instructor in the Gilead School for training missionaries, opened a series of short talks given to the sixty-third graduating class. The exercises took place on September 11, 1977, at the Assembly Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses, located in Long Island City, New York. Twenty-three graduating students received diplomas and foreign assignments.
Another instructor, Ulysses Glass, used an illustration from the Bible to stress the same point, namely, do not give up. He referred to Jesus’ illustration of the father with two sons who asked them to go to work in his vineyard. One said he would go, but did not. The other said he would not, but did. The latter was the one approved. Brother Glass then reminded the students that they had agreed to go to work in foreign fields, in Jehovah’s vineyard. Now they must make good on that promise.​—Matt. 21:28-31.
A. D. Schroeder pointed out that Jehovah was a communicator. In this capacity he used angels and prophets, and he also used his Son, Jesus Christ. Now the footstep followers of Jesus must communicate his message to the peoples of earth, using many languages to do so. Jesus promised success: “I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your opposers together will not be able to resist or dispute.”​—Luke 21:15.
“Why are you being sent out as missionaries?” the graduates were next asked by John Booth. He answered the question for them in Jesus’ words: “Lift up your eyes and view the fields, that they are white for harvesting.” (John 4:35) One sows, another reaps, and both rejoice together.
After Robert Wallen read greetings from missionaries already out in foreign fields, the talks continued. M. G. Henschel stressed using immediately the language of the country where they were going. By doing this missionaries long in foreign assignments have been instrumental in bringing many into the ranks of Jehovah’s Witnesses!
L. A. Swingle reminded the graduates that they had been successful in pioneering, in being invited to Gilead, and in now graduating. But why had they been successful? Ability? Study? Perseverance? Those are factors in success, but the primary thing is reliance on Jehovah. (Gen. 24:40; 39:2, 3, 23) Sticking close to his Word brings success. (Josh. 1:8; Ps. 1:1-3) Being alert and prayerful will bring success in living through the great tribulation: “Keep awake, then, all the time making supplication that you may succeed in escaping all these things that are destined to occur.”​—Luke 21:36.
F. W. Franz, Watchtower Society president, climaxed the counsel not to give up by reminding the graduates that they were soldiers of Christ. As such in foreign assignments, they would suffer hardship, but, they were told, “as a fine soldier of Christ Jesus take your part in suffering evil.” Also, “the fruitage of the righteous one is a tree of life, and he that is winning souls is wise.” (2 Tim. 2:3; Prov. 11:30) “Winning souls​—this is what you are to do,” Franz said. “Will you do it?”
The answer was a powerful affirmative, judging from the resolution read by a member of the graduating class after they had received their diplomas, given to them by the chairman of the meeting, Karl Klein.
After an intermission, and a Watchtower study conducted by Dean Songer, and a delightful musical and slide program presented by the students, two forceful Bible dramas acted out by the graduates emphasized the admonition, Do not give up!
An audience of 1,870 well-wishers enjoyed being with the graduates on this their special day, and prayers go with them that indeed they “do not give up.”

