Insight on the News
Psychiatry Challenged
● In Canada, a Hamilton, Ontario, study of juvenile crime showed that youthful offenders who received professional psychiatric care had a worse crime record later than those who were simply warned by police. Margaret Birch, provincial secretary for social development, stated: “This conclusion is a shocking contradiction of the assumptions we have incorporated into our children’s services.”
A British study came to a similar conclusion. It showed that young delinquents who were fined and sent home had fewer subsequent offenses than those who were given psychiatric treatment.
A basic problem of psychiatry is that counsel can differ with each psychiatrist. Also, there is no overall general acceptance of standards for human behavior. That is why those who turn to the Creator of the mind and body, Jehovah God, and observe his counsel for mental health find much more practical help than those who go to psychiatrists. The Bible’s counsel is time tested, applies to any period of history and is consistent.
This is only to be expected, since “all Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight.”​—2 Tim. 3:16.
What Is Life’s Purpose?
● A professor at York University in Toronto, Canada, has appealed for “the 100 best intellects in the world” to discuss, at an international conference, the purpose of human existence. Dr. Daniel Cappon declared: “With every ideology wavering, religion all but gone, science unable to give the answers to why, no one can tell us any more what it’s all about.” He said that today people are less happy and more confused than their forefathers.
However, none of this world’s “best intellects” will be able to answer such a question so long as they ignore the one who can answer it, “the One telling from the beginning the finale,” Jehovah God. (Isa. 46:10) Jehovah, the Creator of this earth and mankind, knows what the purpose of human existence is, and already has determined mankind’s future. His purpose is clearly stated in his inspired Word, which tells us: “The meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.” For how long? “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”​—Ps. 37:11, 29.
Bingo Backfires
● A Roman Catholic priest in Worcester, Massachusetts, said that the bingo games at his church grossed about $8,000 a week, netting $1,400 profit. However, he admitted: “It is no longer helping us morally or spiritually.”
The priest observed: “The people who came to play bingo weren’t coming to help the church or take part in a parish social. They came to make money.” He noted that the gambling brought out the worst in players, and that it had become too “hard to keep it innocent and charitable.”
But gambling has never been “innocent and charitable.” It is a form of greediness, seeking the money of others without working for it. The Bible view is: “Let each one do just as he has resolved in his heart, not grudgingly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.” (2 Cor. 9:7) It also counsels: “Let the stealer steal no more, but rather let him do hard work, doing with his hands what is good work, that he may have something to distribute to someone in need.”​—Eph. 4:28.
Immorality Condoned
● A United Church of Christ general synod held in Washington, D.C., approved, by a two-thirds majority, views of morality that are opposite to those found in God’s Word. The synod declared that the Bible alone is not an adequate guide for morality or sexual conduct. “Christianity Today” said that the synod “looks askance at traditional interpretations of the Bible’s condemnation of homosexual acts. It also takes a liberal view of abortion . . . and sex outside of marriage.” Thus, they are saying that the wisdom of imperfect men is preferred to the wisdom of God.
However, Jesus said: “Let them be. Blind guides is what they are. If, then, a blind man guides a blind man, both will fall into a pit.”​—Matt. 15:14.

