Perseverance Brings God’s Blessing in Pakistan
PAKISTAN, meaning, literally, “holy land” in the Urdu language, has been a nation for just thirty years. However, historically it is an ancient land. When Abraham was alive there was already an advanced civilization in a place called Moenjodaro in the fertile Indus River valley and at Harappa in the Punjab. A little more than three hundred years before the birth of Christ, Alexander the Great led his army through the area now known as Pakistan. In the early eighth century of our Common Era, the Arab invasion of the southern part of the country, known as the Sind, brought Islam to these regions, and it was on the basis of religion​—Islam—​that Pakistan came into existence.
Pakistan, located in Asia on the shores of the Arabian Sea west of India, is by no means a small nation. The 192 proclaimers of the good news of God’s kingdom in this land have well over seventy million persons to whom they may witness.
The Kingdom proclamation had been going on in this part of the earth many years before the political inception of Pakistan. From the mountainous regions of the north, throughout the fertile plains of the Punjab and the arid desert of the Sind, a few zealous Witnesses of Jehovah literally “pioneered” as they searched out honest-hearted persons who were desirous of learning about the truths of God’s Word. Every sort of transport was used, overcrowded trains, horses and horse-drawn vehicles, bullock carts and sometimes even a camel.
Like the apostle Paul, these Witnesses learned ‘how to be low on provisions and how to have an abundance.’ (Phil. 4:11, 12) When in the villages they lived with the local people in their little mud houses along with the chickens, cows and goats. While in the cities they found accommodations in pukka (cement or brick) homes of interested persons, or in cheap dingy hotels. Some of the first ones to share in this rewarding work, often accomplished under grueling temperatures along with such diseases as typhoid, dysentery and malaria, were Edwin Skinner, Ron Tippen, Clarence Taylor and Randall Hopley from England. Included among these also was Claude Goodman, who, despite the hardships, refers to the time that he spent in this “pioneer” work as the best years of his life.
To understand why progress was and still is a little slow in respect to acting on the Kingdom news, it has to be appreciated that 97 percent of Pakistan’s population are of the Islamic faith. The Moslem believes that the Koran is the final revelation from God, superseding the Bible, which, they say, is not in its original form. To get a listening ear to a Bible presentation, therefore, it is necessary to suggest to them that, although they are familiar with their Koran, they may never have had the opportunity of hearing what the other “holy writings,” as contained in the Bible, have to say about present world conditions and the future. Many times, out of curiosity and a natural sense of hospitality, people will listen and accept Bible literature.
The increasing economic problems, as evident here as in the rest of the world, cause most persons to agree that we are in the “last days,” but it is something quite new to them when the idea of an earthly paradise is presented. (2 Tim. 3:1; Rev. 21:3, 4) Almost all believe, as do many in Christendom, that the earth is to be destroyed and paradise will be in heaven. However, the fact that people generally like discussing religion makes visiting from house to house very enjoyable. Oftentimes these discussions can last for half an hour or more and a good witness about God’s kingdom can be given, in comfortable surroundings inside the home.
GRAPPLING WITH PROBLEMS
Whereas the bulk of the visiting from house to house is done among Moslems, Bible studies are conducted mostly with those of the nominal Christian community, who make up a sizable part of the non-Moslem 3 percent found in Pakistan. From these, then, have come the majority of those now sharing in proclaiming the good news of the Kingdom. In the cities they are not easy to find initially. But when one family is contacted it usually leads to meeting others. Sometimes the “lost sheep” have to make much effort themselves to learn the truth, as illustrated by the following:
A young Catholic man approached a Witness on the street while she was going from house to house and asked for a book about the Bible. He obtained The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life in the Urdu language and willingly gave his address, which proved to be in the servant’s quarters belonging to a large Muslim home. A Bible study was begun with him on the first visit and arrangements were made to supply him with the first copy of the Bible that he had ever owned. He started attending meetings right away, but just a few months later the lady, on whose property he was living with his wife and small son, forbade the Witnesses to come regularly to the house. Nevertheless, undaunted and even more eager to continue his studies, he came regularly to the local Kingdom Hall for that purpose on his bicycle. He soon began zealously conducting Bible studies with others and preaching publicly from house to house, always looking for opportunities to express his gratitude for what he had learned. Early in 1977 he became a dedicated, baptized member of the congregation and has shared in auxiliary pioneer service.
Another problem in Pakistan is the widespread illiteracy. Considering the population that is over five years of age, about 84 percent cannot read or write and, although the government has been trying to overcome this, it has been handicapped by a population increase of over 3 1/2 percent a year. Failure to read and write, however, has not prevented sheeplike persons from responding to the Kingdom message. (John 10:27) For example:
A few years ago in the town of Quetta, the capital of the province of Baluchistan and which is situated 5,500 feet (1,670 meters) above sea level, a nominal Christian heard the Kingdom message when at the home of one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The mother of ten children, she dedicated her life to God and was baptized, two of her daughters also accepting the truth soon after. Over the years it has taken much faith and determination for this Witness to keep proclaiming the “good news” to others, this being due not only to her lack of formal education but also because of the lack of mature Christian help. The winters are very cold in Quetta and, if possible, people then move to warmer parts of the country, while in the summer many find relief there from the extreme humidity of Karachi or the scorching heat of the Punjab. For many years this Witness, along with others, has traveled three times a year on round trips of more than 1,000 to 1,400 miles (1,600 to 2,250 kilometers) to attend the annual and semiannual assemblies of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The beginning of 1977 also found one of her sons serving as a “special pioneer” more than 700 miles (1,120 kilometers) away from his native town, helping another group of brothers centered in a small town in the fertile region of the Punjab.
OPENING UP THE PUNJAB
One group of more than twenty Punjabi-speaking Witnesses come from small towns and villages scattered over a wide area. Since Pakistan is largely an agricultural country, the greater part of the population live in villages where the houses are made of mud and there are no proper roads to reach them. In this area, due to transport problems and a six-day workweek, Jehovah’s Witnesses hold all their meetings at their little Kingdom Hall on the one holiday of the week. It has not been easy for these Witnesses to advance spiritually.
Language presents another problem. Each of the four provinces of Pakistan has its own language, with Urdu being the main, official language of the country. A few years ago the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life was translated into Urdu and has been a great help in aiding persons to get a basic knowledge of the Bible. The Watchtower comes out monthly in the Urdu language, but for many years it was difficult to get copies in from India. Now, though, Pakistan prints its own copy of the translation made in India.
The Punjab (meaning “Five Rivers”) is the most productive agricultural area of the country. Wheat, rice, sugarcane and cotton are some of the main crops. This is also the most densely populated province, and the branch office of the Watch Tower Society in Pakistan is located in its capital city, Lahore. Situated just a few miles from the Indian border, Lahore is a very old city known for its ancient monuments, universities and colleges. Among the almost two and a half million inhabitants there are fifty-five proclaimers of the good news of the kingdom of God. Several of these, although well acquainted with the message that Jehovah’s Witnesses preached for many years previously, have only very recently become dedicated, baptized members of the congregation, the worsening world conditions in the 1970’s causing them, in some cases, to think seriously about acting on what they had once learned, as in the following instance:
A lady began studying with Jehovah’s Witnesses about 1955. She liked what she learned and always prepared for the study. Occasionally she attended meetings despite her husband’s efforts to dissuade her. However, although she spoke to others and read the text each day to nominal Christian girls where she worked, it appeared that she was still connected with the church. Her husband fostered this thought. Over the years various Witnesses studied with her but finally discontinued this, just calling from time to time, as she enjoyed reading every new publication of the Society. Surprisingly, one day she asked if she could be baptized as she felt that she had waited long enough to become a Witness. It was then learned that she hadn’t attended church for the past ten years. So the study was resumed and she started attending meetings regularly, becoming a dedicated, baptized Witness in November 1976. Although elderly now, she spends a lot of time witnessing and conducts Bible studies with others.
BELOW THE HIMALAYAS
More than 930 miles (1,490 kilometers) inland to the north and ten miles (16 kilometers) from Rawalpindi lies Islamabad, the newly built capital of Pakistan. A few hours by road from here are pine-clad mountains and valleys and views of the snowcapped Himalayas towering in the distance. Some of the world’s highest mountains are in Pakistan and much of the breathtaking scenery, due to its inaccessibility, is virtually “untouched” by civilization. However, the ten proclaimers of the “good news” centered in Rawalpindi are doing most of their work in the two big cities, two of their number living in Islamabad.
IN KARACHI AND HYDERABAD
Needless to say, in such a vast country and with so few Witnesses, there are difficulties in keeping interest in the Kingdom message alive once it is manifested. However, if persons really want the truth of God’s Word they will try to learn more about it. In the largest city of Pakistan, Karachi​—once a modest fishing village on the shores of the Arabian Sea near the mouth of the Indus River—​upward of seventy Witnesses have four and a half million persons as their witnessing “territory.” Some of them have also made the opportunity to travel from time to time to the city of Hyderabad, a hundred miles (160 kilometers) away, to sow seeds of truth there. Here is an example of how some of that seed took root:
About four years ago a study was started with a young housewife. Feeling the need to study more regularly and to attend meetings, this young woman took advantage of an opportunity to go to Karachi for a year to take postgraduate training in one of the hospitals there. She progressed quickly. Soon she was spending a lot of time witnessing to fellow students, and in 1974 she symbolized her dedication to God by baptism. Although she and her husband are now the only Witnesses in Hyderabad, she recently wrote and expressed her appreciation for the truth and the encouragement she gets from letters and occasional visits of the brothers from Karachi. She told how daily she gets the chance to witness among young medical students. Particularly after she has delivered her medical lecture on such subjects as blood transfusion or congenital defects, she has an opportunity of explaining what the Bible’s view is on these matters. Many listen with interest, and she is now conducting a number of Bible studies.
With the help of Jehovah’s spirit and under angelic direction, Jehovah’s Witnesses throughout the land of Pakistan are contacting persons who are desirous of knowing the truth about God. The Witnesses there are concerned with persevering, faithfully continuing to make known the “good news” until all such persons are gathered.

