Reading the Bible with Your Family
CHRISTIANS truly view the Bible as a gift from God. Also, as they fulfill their commission to preach “this good news of the kingdom,” they earnestly desire to talk on the Bible and share its comforting message with others. (Matt. 24:14; Rom. 15:4) But to do this effectively requires regular reading and study of God’s Word.
There was a time when Bible reading was fairly common in many families. As a result, boys and girls grew up knowing the Bible stories and being able to apply some Scriptural principles in their lives. In the fast-moving modern world, however, with television and various distractions, family Bible reading has for the most part become a thing of the past. But what about the Christian home? Surely, great pleasure and benefit will be had as you read the Bible with your family.
SOME OF THE BENEFITS
Suppose a family spends part of an evening each week reading the Bible together; perhaps an hour or so is spent in this pleasant way. As the weeks progress, Bible characters virtually will ‘come alive’ and dramatic events will present themselves to the mind’s eye. Why, the Bible-reading family can witness the events of creation! They can peer into man’s original paradise home. It is possible for them to “walk” with patriarchs like Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Along with the Israelites, they can cross the Red Sea and the river Jordan dry shod. It is possible to ‘be there’ when the shepherd lad David vanquishes the Philistine giant Goliath. Bible readers can witness the construction of Jehovah’s temple in Jerusalem, can “see” its desolation by Babylonian hordes and can also view its reconstruction under Governor Zerubbabel.
With the humble shepherds near Bethlehem, the Bible-reading family can “hear” the angelic announcement of Jesus’ birth. They can “hear” God’s approving words as his Son is baptized in the Jordan River. It is possible for them to “accompany” Jesus and the apostles, to be “present” when Jesus dies, and when he is resurrected. They can travel with the apostle Paul and “see” the establishment of congregations at Corinth and elsewhere, while true Christianity spreads during the first century. And, with the apostle John, they can enjoy the marvelous view of the future, including the thousand-year reign of Christ, as set forth in the book of Revelation.
Also, as family members possibly take turns reading from the Scriptures, their ability to read may be enhanced. But, more importantly, they will be absorbing God’s laws and principles. It will be possible for them to draw closer to Jehovah, which will increase their love for him. As a melody of Asaph puts it: “But as for me, the drawing near to God is good for me. In the Sovereign Lord Jehovah I have placed my refuge, to declare all your works.” (Ps. 73:28) This will help members of the family to be like Moses who “continued steadfast as seeing the One who is invisible.”​—Heb. 11:27.
ASSOCIATING NEW POINTS WITH OLD
Doubtless every Christian will acknowledge that there was a time when he knew comparatively little about Jehovah God and his purposes. Today, however, the Christian is able to start with creation and man’s fall into sin, explain the purpose of Christ’s ransom sacrifice, tell of the oncoming destruction of this system of things and explain Biblically how paradise will be restored to this earth and how obedient humankind will be uplifted to perfection. How has this been possible? It has come about largely because, in studying the Bible and Christian publications, the individual has gradually associated new points learned with older ones already understood.
In family Bible reading, then, associating new points with old ones can be a rewarding experience. Of course, this requires that a person ‘pay attention to how he listens.’ (Luke 8:18) During the family Bible reading, never let your senses become dulled so that important points escape your notice. When statements, principles, laws or various abstract ideas are presented, connect these thoughts with what you already know. Fit the information into the pattern of truth that you understand. Compare thoughts and look for new, different or more thorough information that may help you to adjust your thinking, or that may assist you in sharing with others the truth of God’s Word.
When reading about human conduct, endeavor to see which principles were in operation. You can then meditate on this, form a conclusion and make a decision as to what you would do under similar circumstances. How vital that is! For instance, Jacob’s son Joseph consistently refused to engage in sexual immorality with Potiphar’s wife, asking: “How could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God?” (Gen. 39:7-9) Here, in a moving true-life account, the reader finds an underlying principle, one that he can mentally associate with other statements in God’s Word and can remember with profit when temptation to immorality presents itself.
VISUALIZE BIBLE INCIDENTS
As some Bible accounts are being read, family members can try to relive an event. If the material is read with warmth, feeling and enthusiasm, they can form mental pictures of what is taking place. Endeavoring to visualize an incident will help each one to understand and remember what occurred so long ago.
To illustrate: The family may be reading Judges chapter 7. Try to visualize what is taking place. For instance, consider Jg 7 verses 19 to 22. Gideon and the three hundred valiant men with him have just taken their places on the edge of the Midianite camp. It is about 10 p.m., the beginning of the “middle night watch,” and the sentries have just been posted. Darkness prevails over the sleeping camp of the enemy. Gideon and his men are equipped with horns and have large water jars that cover torches in their left hands. Suddenly, the three hundred blow the horns and dash to pieces the large water jars. You “hear” the sound of the horns and the smashing of the jars. The three bands of a hundred each blow the horns, shatter the large jars, take fresh hold on the torches and begin calling out: “Jehovah’s sword and Gideon’s!” You “see” and “hear” it! Then you look at the Midianite camp. Why, while Gideon and his three hundred keep standing in their places, the entire camp gets on the run, breaks into shouting, and flees! The three hundred continue blowing the horns and Jehovah sets the sword of each Midianite against another in the camp. Midian has been put to flight. Jehovah has given the victory!
Again, suppose the family is reading the Bible book of Ruth. You see the Moabitess Ruth accompany her widowed mother-in-law Naomi back to Bethlehem, and you hear Ruth say: “Your people will be my people, and your God my God.” (Ruth 1:16) Soon Ruth is seen gleaning industriously behind the harvesters in the field of Boaz. He later compliments her, saying: “Everyone in the gate of my people is aware that you are an excellent woman.” (Ruth 3:11) Boaz marries Ruth and, in keeping with the arrangement for brother-in-law marriage, by Boaz she bears a son “to Naomi,” becoming an ancestress of David and, eventually, of Jesus Christ.​—Ruth 4:17-22; Matt. 1:1, 5, 6.
Will not young ones in the family be intrigued by the story of the three faithful Hebrews, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego? Indeed they will. But perhaps as a father reads the account he can make it live, encouraging everyone to visualize what is taking place. There is that mammoth image of gold towering above the plain of Dura! The satraps, prefects, governors, counselors and other officials have been assembled. A signal is given by the sounding of all sorts of musical instruments, and all these men fall down and worship the image of gold that King Nebuchadnezzar has set up. All but three, that is. Respectfully but firmly Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego tell the king that they will not serve his gods and worship the image of gold. Into the superheated furnace these young Hebrews are cast. But, what is this? Nebuchadnezzar sees in the furnace four able-bodied men, one of them “resembling a son of the gods.” (Dan. 3:25) Promptly the three Hebrews are brought out of the fiery furnace, and Nebuchadnezzar blesses their God.
ADDING LIFE AND INTEREST
Bible accounts such as these are absorbing. They are instructive and encouraging. Moreover, during family Bible readings, it is possible to add life and interest in various ways.
For one thing, the Bible should be read articulately, with warmth and feeling and deep enthusiasm. In fact, when reading some portions of the Scriptures, it may be possible for one family member​—possibly the father—​to read the words of the general account, while others assume the parts of Bible characters. Each character part can be assigned in advance. The father may be reading the general account until he introduces the words of a particular Bible character. Then, the family member assigned to portray that character can read the words ascribed to that individual, with meaningful expression.
In the book of Ruth, for instance, one family member may assume the role of Naomi, another that of Ruth. Still another may play the part of Boaz, and so forth. Young and old alike may find this to be especially enjoyable. And it may help them to remember this touching Bible story.
Interest will be enhanced if, after reading a certain portion, the family reviews that section, poses questions, and answers these. A word or a particular phrase may not be understood, or, a certain statement may require clarification. By using the Watch Tower Publications Index, or whatever indexes are available in a person’s language, it may be possible to find answers to these Bible questions. Also, the book Aid to Bible Understanding can be consulted, family members looking under appropriate headings for discussions of matters of special interest. A dictionary will help youths to understand the meanings of words. In this way, Bible reading is coupled with rewarding research that adds to the family’s fund of Scriptural knowledge.
LASTING BENEFITS
Everyone in the family can derive pleasure and benefit from regular reading of the Bible. When this is done as a family group, God’s laws and principles can become fixed in the minds of old and young alike. And each one can learn something from the true-life experiences recorded in God’s Word. How vital it is, therefore, to think searchingly as the Bible is being read! Whether the information is doctrinal, prophetic, or of some other type, when reading it the mind should be kept active.
After a portion has been read, the head of the household might ask: How does this affect us? Does this information call upon us to make any adjustment in our lives? What relation does this have to other Bible teachings that we have learned? How can we use these points in sharing the “good news” with others?
There is so much to be derived from God’s Word! The account of Gideon and the three hundred teaches courage and reliance upon Jehovah. Ruth’s fine example of industriousness and faithfulness should move any Christian woman to want to be like her, “an excellent woman.” And, when faced with tests of their integrity at school, what Christian youths would not benefit from recalling the firm stand of the three faithful Hebrews? Like them, godly youngsters continue to ascribe salvation to Jehovah and refrain from worshipful acts that would displease their heavenly Father.​—Ps. 3:8.
If yours is a Christian family with deep regard for the Word of God, read the Bible regularly. Relive Biblical accounts. Fix in mind the laws and principles of the Scriptures. Take the time to enjoy the pleasure and benefit of reading the Bible with your family.

