Australia’s Perky, Pesky Parrots
A CASUAL visitor to Australia could be excused for thinking that a flock of exotic tropical birds had escaped from the local zoo or aviary. Creatures that in other countries would be found only in cages are flying around the garden. Especially is this true of the Australian parrot​—and that means a varied family of multicolored, noisy birds.
There are about 330 species of parrots, and they are found on all major landmasses except Antarctica, south of 20 degrees north latitude. Although not all species are found in Australia, there are enough in that land to make their presence known! The parrot family includes budgerigars (known by some as parakeets), cockatoos, and the nectar specialists, the lories. In Australia it sometimes seems that these colorful birds are everywhere.
That was certainly our impression on a visit to New South Wales. At times there were dozens of budgerigars feeding on the lawns, especially early morning and late afternoon. On busy streets, we saw the pink and gray galahs, also known as the roseate cockatoo. Their noisy chirping is by no means musical. They are one of the most oft seen parrots in Australia, and large flocks settle in towns and cities. They perch on telephone lines and power lines and have been known to cause communication breakdowns in the outback. The males and females pair up for life and valiantly defend their nests in tree hollows against intruders. Unfortunately, “they have become so numerous as to rank as agricultural pests.”​—The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Ornithology.
At a public park, we had crimson rosellas feeding from our hands. Totally unafraid of swarms of tourists, they obviously knew where to get a handout. It was like a paradise setting to have such tame birds all around us.
Perhaps our biggest surprise was to see large sulfur crested cockatoos swooping over us. Their distinctive yellow crest justifies their name. The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Birds explains: “While the flock is feeding on the ground, a few birds stand sentinel in nearby trees and warn of danger with loud, raucous cries.” You soon know when you have a cockatoo in the neighborhood!
What makes parrots so distinctive? For centuries man has appreciated them for their ability to mimic the human voice. But do they also mimic other birds? The above-​quoted Cambridge encyclopedia states: “Although flocks of wild parrots are noisy, they are not known to mimic other species and so it is not clear why parrots have the ability to ‘talk.’” When it comes to bird mimics, the North American mockingbird is still the champion.
Birds are found nearly everywhere throughout the world​—but do you notice them? Do you observe them? Do you know the birds that frequent your neighborhood? Can you distinguish their different color designs, calls, and songs? Have you noticed their varying flight patterns? All of it certainly makes for a fascinating study.
With over 9,300 bird species to study, not to speak of all the other marvels around us, who can rightly claim that everlasting life will be boring? So much to learn, so many reasons for praising the Creator! How thankful we can be that God saw good to include the “winged flying creature” in his creative works.​—Genesis 1:20-23; Job 39:26, 27; Revelation 4:11.
[Pictures on page 15]
Galah and (above) rosella
[Credit Line]
By courtesy of Australian International Public Affairs
[Picture on page 16]
Sulfur-​crested cockatoo
[Credit Line]
By courtesy of Australian International Public Affairs

