From Our Readers
Bad Manners  For as long as I could remember, I had shown bad manners. There were even times when I felt proud of failing to voice expressions of courtesy and consideration, such as “Thank you,” “Please forgive me,” and “I’m sorry.” Then I read the article “The Decay of Manners” and the portions of the Bible quoted therein. (July 22, 1994) I learned that God is always mannerly when dealing with those below him, often adding “please” to his requests. I was very surprised to see this in the Bible. It has motivated me to try to imitate God. A million thanks go to you.
M. E. J., Nigeria
I really appreciated the article. Closely related to manners is respect for others’ rights and property. Sometimes when you invite friends over, their children feel they have free rein to do as they wish​—going into different rooms, rummaging through drawers and refrigerators, and so forth.
G. W., United States
Every sentence in the article was important. It was just what I needed for instructing my two teenage boys. I learned that there were many details about manners that I have not taught my children. Now I know these lovely details and how to apply them.
P. H., United States
Moscow’s Subways  Recently I read “Moscow’s Dazzling Underground Palaces.” (June 22, 1994) I have always wanted to travel abroad, and I find that reading such articles puts me right there.
J. H., New Zealand
I visited Moscow while attending a recent convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I spent a lot of time riding the Metro. I didn’t realize then that I was seeing one of the most beautiful and important subways in the world. So I really enjoyed the article.
P. M., Finland
Snipers?  In the article “My Reflections as a Military Historian,” the writer describes entering Paris following its liberation at the end of World War II. (April 22, 1993) He claims to have been shot at by German snipers and to have left his jeep a number of times to seek cover​—and that on the most famous street in Paris! Paris was never “liberated” but was surrendered without a fight by German commander Dietrich von Choltitz, who acted against orders.
A. W., Italy
The author was relating his own personal experience, a recollection that is confirmed by other eyewitnesses and historians. For example, the book “Liberation,” by military historian Martin Blumenson, acknowledges that although von Choltitz defied Hitler’s orders to burn Paris to the ground, severe fighting did take place between the German soldiers and the French and U.S. troops in the days before his surrender. As for fighting on the Champs Élysées​—“the most famous street in Paris”—​this too is confirmed by other historians. See “Six Armies in Normandy​—From D-Day to the Liberation of Paris,” by John Keegan.​—ED.
Medical Controversy  I am 12 years old. I read the article “Neither Magicians nor Gods.” (May 8, 1994) I was pleased to see a Christian who is really young like me stand up to the hospital doctors and surgeons and ‘abstain from blood.’​—Acts 15:20.
P. M. H., United States
I am 19 years old. How my faith has been strengthened by reading Mercy Uwasi’s experience! It made me aware of the fact that loyalty to Jehovah does not depend on one’s age but on one’s deep love for him. This has made me more determined than ever to maintain my loyalty to Jehovah.
S. M., South Africa

