Comfort in Times of Crisis
THE news these days is hardly comforting. One person wrote: “Current events are so grim that we often can’t decide whether or not we dare watch the six o’clock news.” The world is awash with war, acts of terror, suffering, crime, and disease—evils that may soon affect us directly if they have not already.
The Bible accurately foretold this state of affairs. In describing our time, Jesus said that there would be great wars, pestilences, food shortages, and earthquakes. (Luke 21:10, 11) Similarly, the apostle Paul wrote about “critical times hard to deal with,” when people would be fierce, lovers of money, and without love of goodness. He called that period “the last days.”—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
Thus, in describing world conditions, the news bears some similarity to what the Bible foretold. But there the similarity ends. The Bible gives a perspective that the news does not. Through God’s inspired Word, we can come to understand not only why there is so much evil but also what the future will be.
How God Views Wickedness
The Bible explains how God views the distressing conditions of our day. Though he foresaw the present troubles, he neither approves of them nor intends to tolerate them indefinitely. “God is love,” wrote the apostle John. (1 John 4:8) Jehovah cares deeply for people and deplores all badness. Quite rightly we may turn to God for comfort, since he is good and compassionate and has the power and will to eliminate evil from the earth. The psalmist wrote: “[God’s appointed heavenly King] will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper. He will feel sorry for the lowly one and the poor one, and the souls of the poor ones he will save. From oppression and from violence he will redeem their soul, and their blood will be precious in his eyes.”—Psalm 72:12-14.
Do you feel sorry for those who suffer? Probably you do. Fellow feeling is a quality that Jehovah put in us, for we were created in his image. (Genesis 1:26, 27) We can be confident, therefore, that Jehovah is not insensitive to human suffering. Jesus, who knew Jehovah more intimately than anyone else, taught that Jehovah is intensely interested in us and is full of tender compassion.—Matthew 10:29, 31.
Creation itself testifies that God cares for humanity. Jesus said that God “makes his sun rise upon wicked people and good and makes it rain upon righteous people and unrighteous.” (Matthew 5:45) To the people of the city of Lystra, the apostle Paul said: “[God] did not leave himself without witness in that he did good, giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling your hearts to the full with food and good cheer.”—Acts 14:17.
Where Lies the Responsibility?
It is noteworthy that Paul also said to the people of Lystra: “In the past generations [God] permitted all the nations to go on in their ways.” Thus, the nations—or people themselves—are largely responsible for most of the predicaments in which they find themselves. The blame does not rest with God.—Acts 14:16.
Why does Jehovah permit bad things to happen? Will he ever do anything about it? The answer to these questions can be found only in God’s Word. That is because the answer is bound up with another spirit person and with an issue that was raised by him in the invisible spirit realm.
[Pictures on page 4]
Humans have fellow feeling. Is God any less sensitive to human suffering?
[Picture Credit Lines on page 2]
COVER: Tank: UN PHOTO 158181/J. Isaac; earthquake: San Hong R-C Picture Company
[Picture Credit Line on page 3]
Starving child: UN PHOTO 146150 BY O. MONSEN

