“Let Your Light Shine”
 1. What do we have the privilege to share?
1 From dawn till dusk, the beauty of visible light brings praise to Jehovah God. Yet, it was another kind of light that Jesus invited his disciples to possess—“the light of life.” (John 8:12) Possessing this spiritual enlightenment is a special privilege that includes serious responsibilities. Jesus instructed: “Let your light shine before men,” thereby benefiting others. (Matt. 5:16) Amid today’s deep spiritual darkness, this light must be shared, and the need has never been greater! How can we, like Christ, let our light shine?
 2. How did Jesus show the importance of sharing spiritual light?
2 By Preaching: Jesus used his time, energy, and resources to make the light of truth known to people in their homes, in public squares, on the mountaintops—wherever they could be found. He recognized the lasting value of providing true spiritual enlightenment. (John 12:46) To reach even more people, Jesus prepared his disciples to be “the light of the world.” (Matt. 5:14) They let their light shine by doing good to their neighbors and by sharing spiritual truths.
 3. How can we demonstrate genuine appreciation for the light of truth?
3 God’s people take seriously the responsibility to “go on walking as children of light,” and they preach wherever people can be found. (Eph. 5:8) Simply reading the Bible or other Christian publications in public view during a work or school break can open the way for a Scriptural discussion. In this way, one young sister started a Bible study and placed books with 12 of her classmates!
 4. Why does ‘letting our light shine’ include exemplary conduct?
4 By Fine Works: Letting our light shine also involves our daily conduct. (Eph. 5:9) At work, at school, and in other public areas, Christian conduct stands out and creates opportunities to share Bible truths. (1 Pet. 2:12) For example, the good behavior of one five-year-old boy moved his teacher to call his parents. She said, “Never have I seen a child with such a strong sense of morality!” Yes, our ministry and fine conduct attract people to “the light of life” and bring praise to our God.

