A Better Life​—Just A Dream?
“My ‘lives’ are ruined,” confessed Ronald, a 47-year-old who for six years led a double life. His life was now shattered by a decision he made over a decade earlier.
Though at the time married and with two children, he sought to “improve” his life by a secret love affair. He set up his lover with a home and soon had two children by her. After six years of juggling his time and money, and trying to cover up with lies, he finally felt too torn at heart to continue. He divorced his wife and lived with only his lover. But then she left him. Now he had no one. “I’m living in a slum in a three-room flat with my parents,” sobbed Ronald. “It’s degrading.”
One’s life can be easily ruined. The bad decisions you make may come back to haunt you. On the other hand, right decisions increase your happiness, making for a better life.
Even if we avoid gross errors such as Ronald’s, there are many things that can hinder our having a better life. Chronic illness has ruined the lives of countless millions. Others have been abandoned by a marriage partner and have had to make it in life alone.
Ours is an age of frustration and discontent. Multitudes turn to alcohol abuse, drugs and promiscuous sex in an attempt to escape from reality. Their lives become even worse. Many wonder: How can I increase the happiness in my life?
What Is Needed to Be Really Happy?
Over 100,000 persons were asked, “What would make you happy?” From the variety of answers, two needs stood out. One “attitude that is important for adult happiness is a certainty that life has meaning and direction” and that one is ‘progressing toward lifetime goals,’ stated Psychology Today, the source of one poll. While Redbook magazine concluded from its poll: “Women of all ages most highly prize being at peace with themselves . . . to reach inner harmony.”
How true! If your life is not accomplishing anything really meaningful or you cannot live with yourself because of overwhelming guilt and weaknesses, you probably yearn for a better life. But how do we put our lives together so they are happy? A certain decision or course of action may seem to lead to a better life, but time and experience often prove it to be disappointing.
However, millions worldwide have found notable happiness by following the “world’s best seller”​—the Bible. Could this really be how our lives can be guided to lasting happiness?
“But what about the hundreds of millions who have the Bible and whose lives are no better than mine?” many respond. Having the finest mountain guide in the world is valueless if the climbers refuse to follow him. So with the Bible, for it says: “If you know these things, happy you are if you do them.”​—John 13:17.
But will a careful study and application of the Bible really make your life better​—even during this age of frustration? If so, why? The following article provides a substantial answer.
[Box on page 5]
TO BE HAPPY
● You need to know that your life is accomplishing something meaningful and that you have worthwhile goals
● You need inner harmony, having self-esteem and control over your emotions ​—Based on surveys involving over 100,000 persons

