Life Can Be Better Now!
Many people think the Bible offers a better life only in heaven after death, and that their present life is destined to be as it is. However, the publishers of this magazine receive letters from all over the world showing that thousands of persons have been helped to a better life right now by following the Bible. Consider the following true-life examples.
Better Mental Balance
A plague of mental illness is sweeping the earth. For example, according to official statistics one out of every three Germans in the Federal Republic has suffered from or is presently suffering from a mental disorder. Worldwide there are 1,000 suicides each day.
In the United States, where up to one quarter of the population is said to suffer from mental imbalance, one young woman in New York city complained: “My life lacked any significance. For this reason I began to drink heavily and participated in wild parties.” Yet rather than this bringing the happiness she so desperately sought, she adds: “I became so disgusted with life that I decided to commit suicide. With this in mind, I obtained a bottle of barbiturates to mix with alcohol.”
“That night,” reveals the woman, “I prayed to God and told myself that if God really exists, he should stop me from taking my life. It was at this precise moment that somebody knocked at my door. A lady offered to study the Bible with me.”
“My initial reaction,” she confessed, “was that I slammed the door in her face. However, realizing what I had done, I went after the lady and begged her not to leave me. I then made arrangements to study the Bible with this woman who was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
From the Bible she learned of a Creator who takes a personal interest in each of us. “Throw all your anxiety upon [God],” says the Bible, “because he cares for you.” (1 Pet. 5:7) He promises to rid the earth of wickedness soon and to establish a “new earth” wherein will be an “abundance of peace.”​—2 Pet. 3:13; Ps. 37:10, 11.
Such knowledge brought meaning into this young woman’s life. She now had self-esteem and hope for the future. After studying for two years she concluded: “My life is now filled with real joy and significance.” Not everyone receives an answer to prayer as quickly as this woman did. But God is “not far off from each one” who turns to him with a desire to know his will and he does answer such sincere pleas for help.​—Acts 17:26, 27.
Coping with Bad Health
“All my life I had been weak in health,” wrote an older man from Sweden who had suffered through the Spanish flu, several operations and presently was distressed by an eye defect.
“The turning point in my ability to cope with my bad health,” beamed this elderly man, “came when I was only 22. Your magazine [Awake!] helped me to turn to the Bible.” From the Bible he learned that soon God will remove permanently all sicknesses from the earth. (Rev. 21:1, 3, 4) “Since that time,” continued the man, “I have experienced years of happiness, for despite my many physical handicaps I have a real hope for the future. Also, I’m accomplishing something, as I have been able to help many others to get the same bright outlook on life.” Thousands of similar cases prove that the Bible can fill one’s life with hope and meaningful activities. This really helps one to endure sickness cheerfully.
Better Habits
‘A habit,’ it has been said, ‘may at first be but as the spider’s web, easily broken through, but, if not resisted, it soon binds us with chains of steel.’ How many are those held back from a better life by such “chains of steel,” bad habits, such as drunkenness, drug abuse, gluttony, thievery and others!
“I was listed as ‘wanted’ by 18 police centers,” began a young man in Spain. His bad habits included street fighting, drug abuse and drunkenness; he also forged checks and engaged in illegal gambling and drug trafficking. He was in and out of jail.
He read one of the Bible publications of Jehovah’s Witnesses and saw the need to change if he wanted to be happier. “But it wasn’t easy for me to change. All I wanted were revelries and ‘kicks,”’ he admitted; yet he hated the kind of person he had become. “I had many ups and downs. On one occasion, in frustration, I ripped up a Bible and threw it against the wall.”
Nevertheless, the Bible’s counsel gradually began to reach his heart. “With the help of Jehovah God I have changed completely,” concluded this man. Now, not only can he live with himself, but he even assists others to make similar changes.
Better Family Life
One newly married man became fed up with his family life and walked out after 18 months of marriage. He then searched the world for happiness. After seven years, which included living in a hippie commune and indulging in drug abuse, he felt that his life was a failure and attempted suicide a number of times.
“It was then while in Australia that I was contacted by one of Jehovah’s Witnesses who was kind to me both materially and spiritually,” reported this young man. He began to study the Bible with the Witness and was shown from the Bible how he could have a successful marriage. He was convinced it would work, so he contacted his wife. Noting his changed way of life, she decided to join him. Now the two of them live by the Bible and declare: “We are both happy and have a very contented homelife.”​—Eph. 5:33.
Better Economy
“We figured out we spent more money on smoking, drinking and gambling per month than on housing, food and clothing for our family. Our smoking habits alone cost us more than the rent for our cramped housing,” admitted one couple in Sweden.
“A Bible study with Jehovah’s Witnesses motivated us to quit our excessive habits,” continued this couple, who now had gained an inner harmony by cultivating self-control. “We now have a larger flat, we eat better, dress better, feel better, sleep better, and we have both money and energy left for more spiritually and physically uplifting activities.” Countless others world wide have been assisted similarly.
Additionally, Bible guidelines concerning honesty, industriousness and contentment have helped many to attain a better life economically as these became trusted and valued employees. By learning not to love money, but to respect it, they make better use of it. As the Swedish couple concluded: “That God-given book brings balance to everything in life.”​—Heb. 13:5, 18; compare Proverbs 18:9.
These preceding cases show how the Bible can help a person to enjoy a better life now. But you may think: ‘Those were exceptional persons. I could never, by simply reading the Bible, make all those changes.’ Neither could they. More was involved.
Peace and Brotherhood
The persons referred to above all received free personal help from Jehovah’s Witnesses. One American newspaper called their organization “a model of peace and brotherhood.” Association with these people was a forceful incentive to imitate their good conduct.
One young American woman testifies to the value of such association. Her former life-style included drinking at bars, smoking “pot” and fighting. “I was just mean,” she said, and tells why. “Never underestimate what bad associations can do!” Her “friends” brought out the worst in her.
Then she and her husband began to study the Bible and enjoy the company of Jehovah’s Witnesses. “I got rid of my hang-ups and developed a good conscience,” she reports. “We found that we don’t need our old associations anymore, because we have hundreds of new faithful friends that we can trust.” This is not to say that this organization of people is perfect. But at least they are trying hard to live by the Bible, and the results are notable.
Yet, even if we enjoy a better life now, it is not perfect. Try as we may, we still make mistakes and at times lose our self-control. Additionally, sickness and death can bring to us unavoidable pain. We also struggle against a bad environment. Will the time ever come when our lives will be completely happy?

