The Best Life​—Soon To Come
‘SO WHAT if the Bible promises the best life in the near future. You can’t believe everything in that book.’ That’s how many feel. To them, a change from their lifetime of problems would take an unbelievable miracle.
One man who trusted the Bible was taunted: “Surely a sensible man like you cannot believe in the miracles that the Bible tells about. You cannot, for instance, believe that this Jesus of yours turned water into wine.” The man simply replied: “Whether He turned water into wine or not, I do not know; but in my own house, I have seen Him turn beer into furniture.”
You see, this man had been a former drunkard and wasted his family’s money drinking. The Bible helped him to change. Those who have seen their own lives greatly improved by following Bible guidelines are convinced of its truthfulness. They look for the realization of its future promises​—regardless of their apparent unlikeliness. But what does the Bible promise?
‘Rescued’ Completely from an Inner Conflict
“Miserable man that I am!” sighed one Bible writer because of the inner struggle between the desires of his body and his Bible-educated mind. “Who will rescue me from the body undergoing this death?” The Bible shows how God will help us out of this aggravating situation. Though he gives much help now so that we can resist bad desires, he will in the near future remove completely all such bad tendencies. Obedient mankind will be brought to perfection and will be granted everlasting life amid paradisaic conditions on a cleansed earth.​—Rom. 7:21-25; 5:21; Luke 23:43; 2 Pet. 3:13.
Imagine what a relief! No longer will you have to struggle to do what is right. Doing the right thing then will be just natural. Gone will be the constant worry about controlling your tongue or temper. You will never feel guilty because of losing your self-control.
The urges to steal, lie, cheat, commit immorality, will be permanently replaced by perfect honesty, loyalty, kindness and love. How wonderful to be able to do exactly the good that wells up in your own heart!
Sickness and Disease Vanish
God will give the inhabitants of earth his full attention. He, as it were, “will reside with” mankind and “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Rev. 21:3, 4.
No more backaches, headaches, or any pain caused by imperfection. Dreaded killers such as cancer, heart disease and snail fever (schistosomiasis) will be permanently eliminated. Imagine each morning to rise refreshed and physically able to do your very best at whatever task you undertake.
Bad Environment Removed
Do you ever recall being so flustered because of surrounding noises or background annoyances that, before you realized it, you lashed out at someone? Our environment can greatly affect how we think and act. Living in a climate of poverty, crime, overcrowding, insecurity and hostility can breed frustration and cause us to react in ways we otherwise might not.
God knows this, so he promises in the Bible: “The upright are the ones that will reside in the earth, and the blameless are the ones that will be left over in it. As regards the wicked, they will be cut off from the very earth; and as for the treacherous, they will be torn away from it.”​—Prov. 2:21, 22.
This divine action will immediately eliminate fear of crime and violence. The survivors will dwell on the earth in secure, pleasant surroundings. They will have meaningful work that will contribute to their happiness and gradually make the earth a beautiful park with plenty of living space for all.
Imagine life in a world where all show genuine love for you; where crime, injustice, oppression, poverty and loneliness will be no more; where each day will bring satisfying challenges to be met with perfect abilities; where not even death will cut short your activities or tear loved ones away. Truly, God will fulfill completely his promise to “give you the requests of your heart.” Just think: To be given your ‘heart’s desire’! Could God promise us any more than that? It will be the best life!​—Ps. 37:3, 4; compare Isaiah 65:17, 21-25.
But How Soon?
For millenniums of time people have looked forward to this “best life.” Why do we say it is “soon to come”? Because the Bible contains detailed prophecies that pinpoint the very generation of people that would see the fulfillment of these precious promises.
The beginning of this “sign” was to be marked by a dramatic change in war. The highly symbolic book of Revelation (6:4) predicted a figurative horseman who would “take peace away from the earth.” The result would be ‘nation rising against nation.’ Peace taken, not merely from a few nations, but from the earth means global warfare.​—Matt. 24:7.
Suddenly, without any anticipation of its eventual enormity, World War I shattered the “Golden Years” that led up to its start in 1914. It was “The War That Changed the World.” This “bloodiest and costliest conflict in the history of mankind” up to that time “included every major state and left unrepresented no part of the globe,” according to authorities. It certainly fulfilled the Bible’s prophetic description of a global war.
That same “generation” saw World War II, as well as the fulfillment of scores of other parts of the “sign” of the last days. (Note accompanying chart.) “This generation,” said Jesus, “will by no means pass away until all things occur.” Since we see these prophecies coming true, we can do what Jesus recommended: “As these things start to occur, raise yourselves erect and lift your heads up, because your deliverance is getting near.” Yes, the best life is soon to come!​—Luke 21:10, 11, 28-32.
Since these blessings are truly near at hand, why not accept the free help of Jehovah’s Witnesses to become better acquainted with your Bible. Write the publishers of this magazine, or go to the local Kingdom Hall and ask for a free home Bible discussion. That is the first step you can take toward a better life now and the best life in the near future.
[Box on page 11]
SIGN OF LAST DAYS
“NATION WILL RISE AGAINST NATION”​—Matt. 24:7
  “The Great War became a pivotal moment in modern Western history. It did more than decimate a generation; it changed the world.” (Boston Sunday “Globe,” 1978) This was followed by World War II, costing 55 million lives and 4 trillion dollars (U.S.). From then till 1978, 150 wars have been fought, with only 26 DAYS when there was no war going on.
“THERE WILL BE FOOD SHORTAGES”​—Matt. 24:7
  Not having enough food “now afflicts a thousand million people”! “There have always been famines, but the scale and ubiquity of hunger today is on a totally new scale. . . . as many as 400 million live constantly on the brink of starvation.”​—London “Times” (1980).
“EARTHQUAKES IN ONE PLACE AFTER ANOTHER”​—Matt. 24:7
  “During a period of 1,059 years (from 856 to 1914) reliable sources list only 24 major earthquakes causing 1,973,000 deaths. However . . . we find that 1,600,000 persons have died in only 63 years, as a result of 43 earthquakes which occurred from 1915 to 1978. . . . Our generation is an unfortunate one.”​—Italian journal “Il Piccolo” (1978).
“INCREASING OF LAWLESSNESS”​—Matt. 24:12
  We are experiencing what some call an “epidemic of violence” and a “worldwide wave of terrorism.” Authority Walter Laquer said: “Today’s terrorism has become indiscriminate​—far more brutal than in the past. Terrorists leave a bomb in a supermarket and couldn’t care less who gets killed. You see, the period up to the first World War was, on the whole, more humane. I’m sorry to say that human life has become cheaper in our time.”
“IN ONE PLACE AFTER ANOTHER PESTILENCES”​—Luke 21:11
  “The Spanish-influenza epidemic of 1918 sped over the earth, took 21 million lives, and vanished,” reports “Science Digest” (1977). It adds: “In all history there had been no sterner, swifter visitation of death . . . had the epidemic continued its rate of acceleration, humanity would have been eradicated in a matter of months.” Even since then cancer, heart disease, venereal disease, snail fever, river blindness (onchocerciasis) are at epidemic levels; they maim and kill scores of millions.

