From Our Readers
Humor  I would like to express my appreciation for the article “Put Humor Into Your Life.” (May 22, 1994) I have always been very withdrawn, often being ill-​tempered. When I learned to put humor into my life, things changed. Laughter truly is “the shortest distance between two people.”
A. Q. G., Brazil
Cancer  I recently gave my mother’s doctor a copy of your April 8, 1994, issue on “Breast Cancer​—Every Woman’s Fear.” On page 10 you describe hydrazine sulfate as a “nontoxic drug.” The doctor showed us medical literature that lists it as highly toxic.
D. M., France
Since the toxicity of this chemical is evidently a matter of controversy, we erred in calling the drug nontoxic. One Russian research study claimed that it proved highly toxic when given in large doses to laboratory rats and mice. However, in one clinical study on human cancer patients performed at UCLA Medical Center, hydrazine toxicity was reported as “mild” with 71 percent of the patients reporting no toxic effects. No doubt much more research will have to be done before the risks and possible benefits of this drug can be fully evaluated.​—ED.
Opera  I’ve always thought your articles were great, and I’ve always had the feeling that they were written especially for me. But I never imagined that you would write about something that I truly love, the opera. I couldn’t stop crying when I saw the article “A Night at the Opera.” (July 8, 1994) Thank you so much.
S. S., Romania
Addie’s Story  The article “Addie Found the Answer Late but Not Too Late” (July 22, 1994) was simply marvelous! It was like reading a novel, except it was really a true story. I was moved when I realized that the moral of her story was that the most effective way to help our neighbors is by preaching!
D. L., Italy
I just read the life story of Addie Clinton Few, and for the first time in the 19 years that I have been reading Awake!, I am writing to say thank you! I too am black and have suffered the barbs of social injustices all my life. But I have learned that Jehovah really cares for the plight of people of color and that his promised new world will right all the wrongs.
L. N., United States
The article showed her wit and humor tempered by her humility. She was a great storyteller! I found the ending very touching. There I was on the bus chuckling one moment and crying the next.
D. M., United States
Overweight  I was impressed by the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Am I So Fat?” (April 22, 1994) I was always mad about my weight, but the article said that Jehovah does not look at how you look but at what is in your heart. Thank you.
N. C., United States
Even though I am not really fat, sometimes I wish I could look like those models. Sometimes I get depressed and just cry. Your article helped me to see that I am not the only one who feels like this, and that was comforting.
R. M., United States
I’m not obese, but I’m a very hefty girl with broad shoulders. I get teased by my cousins and older brothers. I appreciated your point that though I may be on the stout side, that does not necessarily mean I have to lose weight.
M. T., United States

