





What Has Happened to Respect for Others?


WHY RESPECT FOR OTHERS MATTERS

Respect for others defuses tension and keeps a bad situation from getting worse.

  A Bible proverb says: “A mild answer turns away rage, but a harsh word stirs up anger.” (Proverbs 15:1) Disrespectful speech and actions only add fuel to the fire, often with disastrous results.

  Jesus stated: “Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.” (Matthew 12:34) Disrespectful speech can reveal a deeper problem​—how we truly feel about people whose race, tribe, nationality, or social background is different from our own.
In a recent survey of more than 32,000 respondents in 28 countries, 65 percent said that the lack of civility and mutual respect today is the worst they have ever seen.



WHAT YOU CAN DO
Whether at school or at work, respect all people​—even if you don’t share their views. Identify things that you can agree on. That will help you to avoid becoming critical or judgmental.

“Stop judging that you may not be judged.”​—Matthew 7:1.

Treat others the way you want to be treated. If you are considerate and fair with others, they will be more likely to return the favor.

“Just as you want men to do to you, do the same way to them.”​—Luke 6:31.

Be forgiving. Give others the benefit of the doubt by overlooking unkind words or actions.

“The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger, and it is beauty on his part to overlook an offense.”​—Proverbs 19:11.












WHAT WE ARE DOING
In the communities in which they live and work, Jehovah’s Witnesses promote respect for others.
We offer free Bible instruction to all people, but we do not force our beliefs or opinions on others. Rather, we try to apply the Bible’s counsel by sharing our message “with a mild temper and deep respect.”​—1 Peter 3:15; 2 Timothy 2:24.
We reject discrimination and welcome to our congregation meetings people from all backgrounds who want to learn what the Bible teaches. We strive to be tolerant and to “show proper respect to everyone.”​—1 Peter 2:17, New International Version.
We respect the authority of the government under which we live. (Romans 13:1) We obey the law and pay taxes. And although we remain politically neutral, we respect the rights of others to make their own decisions on political matters.








LEARN MORE
It is difficult to respect others when you have been taught to hate them. Learn how two men from opposing nations were able to learn to respect others. Search for the video Can Love Conquer Hatred? on jw.org.



