





What Has Happened to Respect for Family?


WHY RESPECT FOR FAMILY MATTERS

Respect for family members creates a stable environment in which husbands, wives, and children feel secure.

  The book The Seven Principles for Making Marriage Work says that when spouses have mutual respect, they express fondness for each other “not just in the big ways but in little ways day in and day out.”

  Research shows that children who learn to respect others have greater self-esteem, enjoy a better relationship with their parents, and suffer fewer psychological problems.


WHAT YOU CAN DO
Create a plan, together with your family. First, fix in mind what you mean by “respect.” Second, write down specific behaviors that are expected from everyone in the family as well as behaviors that should be avoided. Third, discuss the plan as a family so that your children​—and you—​have a common foundation on which to build.

“The plans of the diligent surely lead to success.”​—Proverbs 21:5.

Set the example. Do you criticize your family members for their faults, mock them for their opinions, or ignore or interrupt them when they are talking to you?
Tip: Try to view respect as something that you owe your spouse and children, not something that they need to earn.

“In showing honor to one another, take the lead.”​—Romans 12:10.

Disagree without being disagreeable. When expressing yourself, avoid sweeping assertions, such as “you always” or “you never.” Such harsh criticisms attack the character of your family member and can turn a minor disagreement into a major conflict.

“A mild answer turns away rage, but a harsh word stirs up anger.”​—Proverbs 15:1.







WHAT WE ARE DOING
Jehovah’s Witnesses encourage family members to treat one another with respect, often making it a theme of the articles, books, brochures, and videos that we publish, which are made available free of charge.
FOR MARRIED COUPLES: The article series Help for the Family can help husbands and wives to . . .
  be good listeners

  end the silent treatment

  stop arguing


(Search “Help for the Family” on jw.org)
FOR PARENTS: The article series Help for the Family can help parents train their children to . . .
  be obedient

  assist with chores around the house

  say “please” and “thank you”


(Search “Raising Children” and “Raising Teenagers” on jw.org)
See also the appendix, “Questions Parents Ask,” in the book Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work, Volume 1. (Search “Questions Parents Ask” on jw.org)
FOR YOUNG PEOPLE: The Teens and Young Adults section of jw.org has articles, videos, and worksheets that can help young ones to . . .
  get along with parents and siblings

  talk respectfully to parents about rules

  gain their parents’ trust


(Search “Teens and Young Adults” on jw.org)
Use of the website jw.org is free of charge. No fee, subscription, or membership is required, and no personal information will be requested.








LEARN MORE
Joseph Ehrenbogen was violent and addicted to drugs when he got married. To learn how studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses improved his family life, search for the article “I Learned to Respect Women and Myself” on jw.org.



