





What Has Happened to Respect for Self?


WHY RESPECT FOR SELF MATTERS

People who have self-respect can face life’s challenges with confidence. They do not give up easily.

  Research shows that those who do not think well of themselves are prone to anxiety, depression, and eating disorders. And they are more likely to abuse alcohol and drugs.

  People who respect themselves avoid comparing themselves with others, which makes it easier for them to get along with people around them and to form strong friendships. On the other hand, those with little self-respect tend to be critical, which can damage relationships.

  Even when they face challenges, people with self-respect have resilience; they do not let setbacks keep them from reaching their goal. In contrast, those with little self-respect often view small failures as huge obstacles. That can cause them to give up easily.


WHAT YOU CAN DO
Choose upbuilding friends. Associate with people who are respectful, who are truly interested in your welfare, and who will build you up.

“A true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress.”​—Proverbs 17:17.

Help others. When you are kind and do things for others​—including those who cannot return the favor—​you will find genuine happiness that comes from giving. That will be true even if you do not seem to receive credit for your good works.

“There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”​—Acts 20:35.

Help your children cultivate self-respect. One way to do that is to allow them to solve their own problems, to the extent that they are able. That helps children learn how to cope with adversity and work through it. This lesson builds self-respect, and it will serve them well in adulthood.

“Train a child in the way he should go; even when he grows old he will not depart from it.”​—Proverbs 22:6, footnote.












WHAT WE ARE DOING
The meetings and Bible study program of Jehovah’s Witnesses help people improve their life and thereby their self-respect.
OUR WEEKLY MEETINGS
At our weekly meetings, we enjoy listening to Bible-based talks that often include suggestions on how to build self-respect. Our meetings are free and open to the public. For example, at our meetings you will learn . . .
  why you matter to God

  how to find real purpose in life

  how to build strong and lasting friendships


You will also meet true friends who “have mutual concern for one another.”​—1 Corinthians 12:25, 26.
To learn more about our meetings, search on jw.org for the short video What Happens at a Kingdom Hall?
OUR BIBLE COURSE
We offer a free interactive Bible course using the book Enjoy Life Forever! This study book features key scriptures, clear reasoning, effective questions, stirring videos, and beautiful artwork. Our Bible course helps people find dignity and improve their life.
To see how studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses can benefit you, search on jw.org for the short video Why Study the Bible?








LEARN MORE
Israel Martínez felt inferior to others because of his financial situation and his limited education. Search for the article “I No Longer Feel Ashamed of Myself” on jw.org to learn how attending meetings with Jehovah’s Witnesses and studying the Bible helped him gain self-respect.



