From Our Readers
Poet’s Grammar
I much enjoyed reading “Tall Sailing Ships Captivate Sydney” (September 8, 1988). I feel I should, however, draw to your attention the inaccuracy of the quotation from John Masefield’s poem “Sea-Fever” as printed in the box. It should read: “I must go down to the seas again.” I enclose a copy of source material.
D. S., England
Our sources for the reading without “go” are the British “Oxford Dictionary of Quotations” (Oxford University Press) and “Familiar Quotations,” by John Bartlett. Authorities advise us that the original reading without “go” comes under “poetic license.”​—ED.
Broken Heart
I have just read “How Can I Get Over a Broken Heart?” (January 22, 1988) Everything you said applied to me. My boyfriend broke off our close friendship. He acted just the way the article said. First, he began to ignore me as his girlfriend, as though the problem would just disappear. When it didn’t go away, then he just sat down and explained the situation. For a few days, I could not adjust myself to the idea, but today, especially after having read the article, I feel relieved, although not yet happy about it. I now realize that I am not the first, nor will I be the last, to go through this.
C. V., Brazil
I came to a point where I needed help on this subject. I talked to my mother and a friend, and they both said I was silly. They said it would pass. But as Awake! described, I was really devastated and heartbroken. It seemed that nothing else mattered in life. Awake! gave me the help I needed more than anything else.
M. M., Portugal
I was 13 at the time. It lasted a year and a half. I was so hurt and upset that I have held a kind of grudge against any guy. I would not talk to any guy unless I had to, or unless he was married. I see now that was wrong. Your article helped me to see that maybe someone will come along that is a more desirable marriage mate.
J. W., United States
I feel I am now in a better position emotionally, mentally, and spiritually to go in search of a mate. The article made it plain that there is no easy and painless way of ending an engagement. These and related articles can go a long way in enabling youths to become wiser in going about their engagement, thereby minimizing the heartaches and unhappiness that result from marrying out of sympathy.
A. U. I., Nigeria
Advertising
I am a subscriber to your magazines, although not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I wish to thank you for the articles you print. I have a difficult and delicate job in a psychiatric hospital. I am attending a three-year interuniversity course in psychiatry, and just a few days ago, I sat for my first- and second-year exams. The articles on advertising in the February 8, 1988, issue of Awake! were a most valuable help for my sociology exam. My preparation was really based on your magazine! I got fine results. Thank you once again, and best wishes for your most interesting magazines.
P. V., Italy

