Insight on the News
Bad Advice by Cleric
● In a recent Toronto “Star” column, “Youth Clinic,” an 18-year-old girl asked whether the Bible forbids sex before marriage. The answer by Anglican priest Graham Cotter was: “There is no specific passage in the Bible which forbids sex before marriage in all circumstances.” However, letters to the editors pointed out that many specific Bible passages do indeed condemn premarital sex. The paper tried to explain that the clergyman was not “defending casual sex” but that the problem was in determining “what constitutes marriage.”
As to “what constitutes marriage,” the Bible says: “Let marriage be honorable among all, and the marriage bed be without defilement, for God will judge fornicators and adulterers.” (Heb. 13:4) Certainly, for marriage to be “honorable” it must be legally and morally sound. Therefore premarital sex is not a basis for “honorable” marriage. Hence, the Scriptures classify as fornication sexual relations outside of marriage, counseling: ‘Flee from fornication.” Also, God’s Word warns: “Neither fornicators . . . nor adulterers . . . will inherit God’s kingdom.”​—1 Cor. 6:9, 10, 18.
When a clergyman tries to accommodate a promiscuous generation by condoning fornication, or obscuring what it is, he is giving bad advice. The young woman needed sound counsel on the wisdom of exercising self-control before marriage, which would also be expected of her after marriage. Refusing to direct people toward such decent behavior is a great disservice to both God and man.
Baptism for Infants?
●“Infant baptism must remain the practice in the Catholic church,” observed the “National Catholic Reporter” recently. This was based on a directive issued by the Vatican reaffirming that baptism “must be administered soon after birth, not deferred until people reach the age of reason,” commented the New York “Times.”
Were infants baptized in first-century Christianity? No, for Jesus did not teach infant baptism, he himself being 30 years old at his own baptism. (Luke 3:21-23) The Bible shows clearly that baptism is for only those who are old enough to gain an accurate knowledge of Christianity and who then offer themselves for water immersion. Jesus instructed: “Go, therefore, make disciples of all the nations; baptise them . . . and teach them to observe all the commands I gave you.” “When they believed . . . they were baptised, both men and women,” not infants. Also, the Bible says: “They were convinced by his [the apostle Peter’s] arguments, and they accepted what he said and were baptised”​—which could not apply to infants.​—Matt. 28:19, 20; Acts 2:41; 8:12, Catholic “Jerusalem Bible.”
Religious historian Neander says of first-century Christianity “that the practice of infant baptism was unknown at this period.”
‘Obstacle to Peace’
● The three great Western religions (Christendom’s churches, Islam and Judaism) ‘constitute an obstacle to world community and therefore world peace,’ said Mortimer Adler, chairman of the board of editors of “Encyclopædia Britannica.” At a symposium entitled “Religion and World Conflict” held at the University of Idaho, Adler stated that there could be no world community or world peace until those religions ceased to conflict with one another.
However, history shows that conflict long has been an integral part of these religions, and still is. That conflict not only has been of a doctrinal nature but often has involved literal warfare against one another and within their own kind. An example of the latter is the backing that Christendom’s churches gave to each side in both world wars of this century. Moslem nations, too, have warred against one another in recent times.
Because a ‘leopard will not change its spots,’ these religions will not suddenly become peacemakers. (Jer. 13:23) History bears this out. That is why the Bible includes them all as part of “Babylon the Great” that is to be forcibly removed by God himself at his coming execution of judgment against this entire wicked system of things.​—Rev. 17:5, 16; 18:11-21.

