Announcements
◆ Literature offer for June: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (bi12) and Is This Life All There Is?, for $1.25. For July: “Eternal Purpose” book, for 25c. For August: God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached, for 50c.
◆ Congregation accounts should be audited during June for the past three months, March, April and May.
◆ Anyone enrolled in the Theocratic Ministry School who desires a copy of the Organization book for himself may obtain one for a contribution of 25c.
◆ The elders may wish to arrange in advance for brothers and sisters, either individually or through book study groups, to give a report on the service meeting on certain aspects of the convention program that impressed them. Having in mind the following aspects may be helpful in making notes: (a) Counsel and examples designed to benefit families. (Parents may wish to comment on this.) (b) Points for those reaching out for greater responsibilities. (Elders, ministerial servants and brothers not yet appointed may wish to watch for these.) (c) Qualities that we personally need to cultivate in order to please Jehovah. (Some young publishers could be assigned.) (d) How the program enhanced our appreciation for Jehovah’s sovereignty. (e) The attitude that we should have toward people who are not in the truth. (f) Other outstanding points and experiences. (All can share in reporting on the last three points.)
◆ New identification cards have been prepared. It is requested that these be issued to all baptized Kingdom publishers. When you issue the new identification cards, please have the publishers return the old ones. The old ones will then be destroyed by the congregations. The identification cards no longer carry a blood-transfusion declaration on the back. A separate card entitled “No Blood Transfusion” has been prepared and those who wish to carry such cards may obtain them through the congregation. These two cards can be ordered by the congregations with the regular literature orders at a rate of two for one cent.
◆ New Publications Available:
God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached​—Dutch, Finnish, Spanish, Swedish
Is This Life All There Is?​—Chinese, Dutch, Swedish
Paradise Restored to Mankind​—By Theocracy!​—Finnish, Swedish
Human Plans Failing as God’s Purpose Succeeds​—Dutch, Finnish, German
◆ Available Again in U.S.A.:
Is the Bible Really the Word of God?​—Chinese
◆ Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
1975 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses​—German, Italian, Japanese
◆ An American Translation, by Smith and Goodspeed, is no longer available from the Society. This Bible is out of stock permanently.
◆ The Society will very much appreciate it if the brothers will send in their renewals for The Watchtower and Awake! through the congregation rather than sending them directly. This will save postage for the publishers, and the mail can be processed more quickly in the office.

