Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
This is the month when the “Divine Sovereignty” District Assemblies begin. Which one will you be attending? There are over ninety in the United States, so one should be near your home. On each day, from Thursday through Sunday, the program will offer down-to-earth discussions to help all of us to conform more fully-to Jehovah’s ways, a fascinating Bible drama, and much “solid” spiritual food. Don’t miss any of it!
We here at Bethel frequently have spiritual treats. On April 21, following our family study, we enjoyed meeting the students of Gilead’s 59th class. They shared some heartwarming experiences with us. For example:
A couple from Hawaii related that one night they had earnestly prayed to “Yahweh” for him to bring them in touch with his people, if such a people existed. Within five minutes a Witness was at their door with the Truth book. They read it that very night and went to the Kingdom Hall the next day. As the wife said: “It is simply amazing how quickly Jehovah answered our prayer.”
A student from the Near East told what happened when a brother was called up for national service: “When he explained to an official that his conscience would not permit him to take part, the official pointed his gun at the brother’s head, demanding: ‘To whom do you belong, to Jehovah or your country?’ The brother answered: ‘I belong to Jehovah.’ The official removed the gun, and said: ‘My congratulations. You are a man of integrity’; and he set him free.” How heartwarming to hear of such examples of faithfulness!
In Vietnam our brothers have also been undergoing tests. We have heard that all eighteen missionaries got out of the country in ample time as the crest of the war moved toward Saigon. But, of course, over a hundred of our Vietnamese brothers and sisters are still there. Nothing that is not Communist can now be printed there, so, for the present, the Vietnamese Watchtower will not be available. But our brothers know Jehovah, and our prayer is that he will strengthen them to persist in a faithful course.
We remember all of you in our prayers, and send warm love.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

