Faithfulness​—Our Way of Life
1 “A God of faithfulness, with whom there is no injustice; righteous and upright is he.” (Deut. 32:4) This is how Moses felt in singing a song of praise, extolling the lofty qualities of Jehovah. Our hearts feel the same way when we come to know Jehovah and the faithfulness he shows toward us. We want to imitate him. We want to make faithfulness to him our way of life. Our sentiments are the same as the apostle Paul’s: “For to this end we are working hard and exerting ourselves, because we have rested our hope on a living God, who is a Savior of all sorts of men, especially of faithful ones.”​—1 Tim. 4:10.
2 Faithfulness involves what we do every day, even in little things. Jesus said: “The person faithful in what is least is faithful also in much.” (Luke 16:10) Our conduct in the community, the way we conduct ourselves at our secular work, the way we deal with others, all can attract people to the truth by way of our example. But do we go farther? Do we share in house-to-house witnessing as often as possible? Are we alert to witness to our workmates? To those met in traveling? To those who visit us? Jehovah is using his people to search out deserving ones in all the earth, and he sees to it that his people are brought in touch with good-hearted ones wherever they are. (Matt. 10:11-13) Thus, faithfulness will motivate us to use appropriate opportunities to preach.
3 During June we will be featuring the New World Translation and the book Is This Life All There Is? on a contribution of $1.25. Since emphasis will be placed on Bible distribution in June, you may find it convenient to take along with you your copy of The Kingdom Interlinear Translation, or a Diaglott, and when you meet @ persons interested in the Bible, you can show these to them. Some may be interested in getting the large-print edition of the New World Translation or Byington’s translation. Also, Bible study aids such as the Aid book and “Make Sure of All Things” might be just what some are looking for to help them in their studies. And remember to demonstrate faithfulness by making definite arrangements to return where interest is shown in an effort to start a Bible study, knowing that most persons need help and encouragement if they are to progress spiritually.
4 Do you find that summer months go by very fast for you? They are busy months, but many have found that advance planning makes it possible to enlarge their opportunities to preach the good news. Perhaps you will find this to ‘be the case also, as you think about ways to reach more people in your community with Jehovah’s lifesaving message. Some have found that temporary pioneer service is just what they need. Young folks out of school often are able to spend several months as temporary pioneers. Those who look back on a summer spent in temporary pioneering often say that it afforded them some of the happiest experiences in their life. And even if you cannot be a temporary pioneer, favorable weather, longer daylight hours, vacation periods and other factors may permit you to spend additional time in preaching.
5 “What is looked for in stewards is for a man to be found faithful,” says Paul. (1 Cor. 4:2) This applies to men such as elders in the congregation, but we all want to be found faithful in caring for our commissioned work of preaching the good news. We feel a keen responsibility toward all the people in our assigned territory. How much more time we have for preaching the good news before the outbreak of the “great tribulation,” we cannot say. We know we are deep into the time of the end and the time is very short. But Jehovah’s people are resolved to continue preaching as long as he holds the way open. Their faithfulness in preaching is resulting in many more taking their stand for true worship and preparing for surviving the “great tribulation.” Jehovah’s promise at Psalm 101:6 is reassuring: “My eyes are upon the faithful ones of the earth, that they may dwell with me. The one walking in a faultless way, he it is who will minister to me. Comforting also are his words: “But as for the righteous one, by his faithfulness he will keep living.”​—Hab. 2:4.
[Blurb on page 1]
Persisting in Faithfulness as Our Way of Life

