Protect, Build Up the Congregation Through Loyalty
1 Those who are reaching out for responsibility in the congregation, and everyone else who wants to please God, need to cultivate loyalty. What a fine quality loyalty is! This is especially true when it is combined with love, when it is true loyal love. “A true companion is loving all the time, and is a brother that is born for when there is distress.”​—Prov. 17:17.
2 Loyalty is regarded, in the English language, as faithful adherence to a sovereign or government, or to a leader or cause, but the Bible shows that more is involved; it is kindness that lovingly attaches itself to an object until its purpose in connection with that object is realized. Adversities do not cause one to abandon the deep friendship based on loyal love. Only unfaithfulness, really disloyalty, causes a breaking of this strong tie.
3 Of Jehovah it is said by those in his presence: “You alone are loyal.” (Rev. 15:4) Humans cannot begin to match Jehovah’s perfect and balanced loyalty, but we can seek to imitate his lofty example. (Eph. 5:1) We love because he first loved us. (1 John 4:10, 11) Within the Christian congregation we are drawn together in a loving loyalty to Jehovah and to one another. “True righteousness and loyalty” are included in the new Christian personality.​—Eph. 4:24.
4 Elders are to be “loyal” in an exemplary way as they shepherd the flock. (Titus 1:8, 9) Loyal love toward Jehovah will impel them not only to be exemplary in shouldering their responsibilities, but to stand alongside their faithful fellow servants when these are reproached or faced with trials. Their work is to uphold Jehovah’s name in the congregation and before the community. (2 Cor. 7:1) In giving counsel, they are obligated to stick to the faithful Word of God. They are always to be on the alert to see that uncleanness, false teachings and divisions are not allowed in the congregations.
5 Loyal love will cause us to overlook the unintentional sins and weaknesses of one another, “because love covers a multitude of sins.” (1 Pet. 4:8) On the other hand, loyalty to God will help us to avoid misplaced loyalty, the tendency to support others, particularly close friends, even if they are doing wrong. In ancient Israel, those who were witnesses to wrongdoing were to tell the elders what they knew, in order to avoid sharing the blame for a possible wrong decision.​—Lev. 5:1.
6 Accordingly, if you know about real wrongdoing​—if persons are carrying on acts that could result in disfellowshiping—​you should in true loyalty help the elders with all the factual information you have. This is not “squealing,” as it is known in the old world. In love for such ones, you may first choose to admonish that they go to the elders themselves and reveal their wrong, but they should understand that, if they do not go, you will do so. Really, it is loyalty to erring ones to help the elders to know the full circumstances so that needed help can be given, with a view to aiding the erring ones not to lose out on everlasting life.
7 Loyalty to God, coupled with the counsel of his Word, provides a climate of understanding and respect in which our relationships with one another can grow. It can help to keep us from imposing our conscience on others in personal tastes where there is no violation of Scriptural principles involved. For example, only where matters go to the extreme in clothing styles or grooming and things of this nature might the elders feel the need to provide Scriptural advice.
8 Loyalty to God and to our brothers brings peace and a good conscience to us. It promotes greater love and loyalty on the part of others and the smile of approval from God. Congregation prayers will be heard and answered by him. (1 Tim. 2:8) With the good spirit that loyalty promotes, we can have greater freeness of speech toward God and toward men.​—Heb. 4:16.

