A Call to Assemble
Moses wrote this law: “Assemble the people, the men and the women and the little ones, and thy sojourner that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear Jehovah your God, and observe to do all the words of this law; and that their children, who have not known, may hear, and learn to fear Jehovah your God, as long as ye live in the land.” (Deut. 31:12, 13, AS) Similarly a call to assemble is now being announced through God’s organization, only this time the assembly is to be held at Yankee Stadium July 19-26, 1953. Are you planning to be there with your family?
Now is the time to build up a keen interest and desire to attend. The Israelites were enjoined by law to set aside ten per cent of their income to finance their three journeys to Jerusalem each year. Each family should be able to do as much today. Children should be willing to set aside a little of each week’s allowance for this purpose. Their presence at assemblies has always been a source of praise to Jehovah God. One worldly observer wrote of the last Yankee Stadium assembly: “Even the children were quiet.” The Times reporter marveled: “A light shone in their eyes—even weary little children were laughing.”
Well-behaved children do not go unobserved. Think of your privilege as a parent to instruct your child while en route to the assembly city—pointing out scenic, geographic and other points of interest. At the assembly, the entire family can meet friends from far and near. The child should learn to mix and work with others of his age from distant communities. Joseph and Mary took the child Jesus with them three times annually to Jerusalem. At the age of twelve, he showed himself a well-qualified witness of Jehovah God. Later in his ministry, Jesus showed that children are very much a part of assemblies, saying: “Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings you have furnished praise.” “Let the young children come to me and do not try to stop them.”—Matt. 21:16; Luke 18:16, NW.
Do all in your power to give your children that glorious hope of everlasting life in the new world. Bring them with you to the Yankee Stadium assembly July 19-26, 1953. As Jesus said: “Do not try to stop them.”

