Do You Have Pity for People?
1 Of Jesus it was said, ‘He felt pity for the people.’ (Matt. 9:36) Do we feel such tender affection for others? (Matt. 9:36b, Kingdom Interlinear) How strongly are you moved to show it?
2 If your neighbors’ house was on fire and their lives were in danger, how persistent would you be in an effort to reach them? (Matt. 22:39) Would you tap lightly on the front door once or twice and, getting no response, go home? Surely you would exert utmost effort to reach them and save their lives! The lives of people worldwide are now at stake. For this reason Jehovah has provided his message of salvation and commissioned us to carry it to the people whether they hear or whether they refuse.​—Ezek. 3:10, 11.
3 In an effort to reach all people, we should share in the house-to-house work and do so regularly. Pioneers usually share in this work each day. Many of us have some share in the house-to-house work each week. All of us should make it our goal to share in this lifesaving work as often as possible and especially on the first Sunday of each month as well as on the second and fourth Saturday.
REACHING EACH ONE
4 In preaching the Kingdom message, do you make it your goal to reach everyone you can? Some publishers share in the house-to-house work in the late afternoon and early evening hours, because they find many more people at home at that time. Could you do this? Also when doing house-to-house work, do you stop to talk with those who are out-of-doors? Good results have come from doing so. One brother, while in house-to-house work, noticed a young man walking down the street. Our brother approached him and struck up a conversation. This led to a Bible study. The young man progressed rapidly and is now active in Kingdom preaching.​—Acts 13:48, 49.
5 Are you conscientious in calling back where no one was at home? One brother observed that many of those who are not at home may seldom, if ever, have been contacted with the Kingdom message. It often happens, when we do find them, that they show appreciation and sheeplike qualities. Have you been following the suggestion given to call again at not-at-homes before leaving the territory? (km 6/81 p. 3) Publishers who have been doing so report finding as many as half of these people at home the second time they call. Our love and concern for other people should also move us to make return visits, endeavoring to start studies where interest is shown.​—Rom. 12:11.
6 Brothers will be working unassigned territory this summer or helping another congregation with territory that is seldom worked. Could you help in this way, too?
7 Now, suppose your house was on fire! How persistent would you want your neighbor to be in knocking at your door to warn you? With similar feelings for others and a real sense of urgency, let us show pity for others as Jesus did.

