Imitating Our Loving Shepherd
1 As our Loving Shepherd, Jehovah is sensitive to our need for nourishment, guidance and protection. (Ezek. 34:11-14) His record of activity in these modern times has consistently highlighted his tender care for distressed humanity. Each year his love draws tens of thousands into the security of a close relationship with him and the precious unity of our Christian brotherhood. In the United States more than 400,000 Bible studies are being conducted. Many thousands with whom these studies are held attended the Memorial April 15. If these newly interested ones are to grow spiritually, we must render loving personal assistance to them, thus endeavoring to imitate Jehovah’s own gentle care.​—Isa. 40:11.
2 In harmony with Jehovah’s leading of his people at this time, we should keep in mind the need (1) to help new ones to attend the congregation meetings regularly and (2) to prepare them, as they qualify, to share in the field ministry. (Heb. 10:24, 25; Matt. 28:19, 20) This joyful, yet sobering, responsibility requires that we lovingly impart to new ones “all the counsel of God.” (Acts 20:27) As they increase in knowledge and begin to associate with the congregation they will appreciate the gentle way in which our Loving Shepherd cares for his sheep.​—1 Thess. 2:7, 11, 12.
HELP THEM TO ATTEND MEETINGS
3 Jehovah’s interest in us is seen in his provision for our feeding regularly at his spiritual table. What can we do to help our Bible students and those who attended the Memorial to develop appreciation for the congregation meetings? First, invite them to attend the meetings on a regular basis. Second, encourage and help them to prepare in advance and participate in congregation meetings. As the student expresses his personal conviction in his own words, he gives evidence of progress toward sharing in the field ministry as a Christian disciple.
PREPARE THEM FOR FIELD SERVICE
4 Working with Jehovah’s organization, you play a helpful role as a teacher in preparing new ones for field service. By word and example encourage the qualified prospective publisher to enroll in the Theocratic Ministry School, since it provides training for the ministry. When you are sure that the individual qualifies, you can invite him to share with you in field service. Before doing so, however, you should carefully evaluate the student’s progress, being guided by the questions on pages 98 and 99 of the Our Ministry book. This will help you to determine whether he is ready to take a very important step. If so, invite him to go along with you in the field service. Prepare simple presentations that he can use as he accompanies you from door to door.
5 Those who qualify should be encouraged to begin sharing in the ministry this month as we offer the “Kingdom Come” book. You may be able to help them use the current Topic for Conversation. After a brief introduction, some might say: “World conditions have gone from bad to worse, haven’t they? [Allow response.] Economic problems and threats of nuclear war have caused many people to wonder what man’s future will be. The Bible provides us with encouragement and a hope for the future. Notice how present world conditions were foretold in a remarkable prediction about our generation. [Read Matthew 24:7.] We have seen these things, have we not? [Allow response.] However, Jesus shows that there are better things ahead for you and your family. [Read Mt 24 verse 13.] It is God’s Kingdom that will save mankind.” There can be a brief transition to introduce selected points in the “Kingdom Come” book.
6 When we teach others we have the responsibility of doing so in a gentle yet helpful way. Like Paul, each of us should share “not only the good news of God, but also our own souls” as we imitate our Loving Shepherd.​—1 Thess. 2:8.

