Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer. Each congregation may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the district convention and then for a 30-minute review of the program highlights on the Service Meeting the following week.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 3
Song 76 (41) (Number in parentheses refers to 1966 songbook.)
10 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
20 min: “Imitating Our Loving Shepherd.” Questions and answers. Read paragraphs and appropriate scriptures as time permits. Emphasize need to help Bible students get to the meetings and then progressively prepare for field ministry.
15 min: “Hope Despite World Distress.” Father discusses with teenage child Topic for Conversation and presentation outlined in paragraph 5 of article entitled “Imitating Our Loving Shepherd.” Youth gives presentation to father. Thereafter father gives his presentation of Topic for Conversation and, in presenting “Kingdom Come” book, reads points on page 25 under heading “What God’s Kingdom Will Do.” Encourage all to share in magazine work on second Saturday as well as house-to-house work with the offer on Sunday, if possible.
Song 114 (61) and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 10
Song 221 (31)
15 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Consider Question Box.
15 min: “Are You a Young Witness for Jehovah?” Questions and answers. Read paragraphs and scriptures as time permits. Interview teenagers who are putting forth a good effort in some of the areas discussed. Ask about their schedule for study and service, as well as their preparation for meetings and field service. Many have been helped greatly to grow in knowledge and understanding by reading some of the older publications such as “Your Will Be Done on Earth” and the “Mystery” and Babylon books. Ask audience to comment on benefits of reading such older publications. Encourage youths to benefit from such reading. If some young publishers will be having a fuller share in the field service this summer, encourage others to work with them. It may be appropriate also to get comments from some parents as to what they are doing to assist their children in some of these matters.
15 min: “Why Hesitate? Listen and Obey!” Encouraging talk to congregation. (w84 5/1 pp. 8-10) Encourage families to participate in group witnessing this weekend.
Song 157 (73) and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 17
Song 156 (82)
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry. Question-and-answer consideration of pages 138-41. Read paragraphs and scriptures as time permits. Conclude with brief talk on three paragraphs on page 141 and encouragement for all to conduct themselves in harmony with Jehovah’s will to his praise.
20 min: “Do You Have Pity for People?” Question-and-answer consideration of article. When considering paragraph 6, briefly outline how arrangements are made to help with seldom-worked as well as unassigned territory as explained in the Society’s letter of January 1, 1984, addressed: “To All English-Speaking Congregations.” Mention arrangements already made by the congregation, if any.
 5 min: Field service for the weekend. Encourage all to share in magazine witnessing on fourth Saturday of the month. Draw attention to articles in the current issues of The Watchtower and Awake! that would appeal to men, women, the elderly and the young. Demonstrate presentation of current magazines, using the information under “Feature Articles” on page 2 in Awake!
Song 133 (68) and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 24
Song 15 (92)
 8 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Use time for local needs. Otherwise, encouraging field service experiences may be used. Be sure to prepare these in advance. Or, the time could be used for a talk on “Are You Trustworthy?”​—w84 4/1 pp. 26-9.
22 min: “Presenting the Good News​—When on Vacation.” Questions and answers. Ask some to comment on how they begin conversations in informal witnessing and how they considerately witness to relatives. As time permits entertain experiences on good results from following up on not-at-home calls and making return visits. Encourage all to share in field service on first Sunday.
Song 192 (58) and concluding prayer.

