Presenting the Good News​—When on Vacation
1 Will you be taking a vacation this summer? If so, what will you be doing? Many use their time caring for things around their home. Others visit friends and relatives. Of course, we should all be in attendance at the “Kingdom Increase” District Convention. Vacation time may also provide an opportunity to have a fuller share in Kingdom preaching.​—Mark 6:30-34.
INCREASED FIELD SERVICE
2 During vacation time, we usually have more freedom to spend our time as we wish, do we not? Possibly we could then have a fuller share in preaching the good news of the Kingdom. You care about other people and have a desire to do something about it. Vacation time may furnish you with that opportunity. (Mark 1:40, 41) Do you have not-at-home calls that need attention? Do you have a list of interested people who have not been visited recently? Will your vacation period provide you with the opportunity to make additional return visits and perhaps start a study? Are you planning to serve as an auxiliary pioneer during your vacation period? If so, will you invite other publishers to work along with you? All of these are opportunities to show we really care about other people and to have an increased share in the field service.
INFORMAL WITNESSING
3 While vacationing and traveling or relaxing, we are often presented with fine opportunities for informal witnessing. Do you use this means to present the good news to others? Or is this a feature of service in which you could have a greater share this summer? (John 4:7-9, 23) Those who have been successful in witnessing informally say that it helps to be friendly and sincerely interested in the other person. Also, giving advance thought to what you will say helps you to be at ease and, consequently, more effective in speaking with others.
4 While traveling, many brothers and sisters take the initiative to engage others in conversation. Then during the conversation they simply ask, “Do you like to read?” If a positive response is received, they continue: “I read something very interesting in this magazine. [Show subject and make appropriate comment.] I have finished it. If you would like to read it, you are welcome to it.” They have done this in offering older issues of the magazines informally. Some persons may be pleased to contribute for the current issues when offered in a similar way. Those who decline your offer of the magazine(s) will often accept your gift of a tract.
5 When witnessing informally, some have found it effective to identify themselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses and ask, “How do you feel about the Bible and what it teaches?” This has often opened the way for a fine conversation. If you always carry a few tracts, magazines or the current offer, you may find many opportunities to present them to others.
WITNESSING TO RELATIVES
6 Usually our unbelieving relatives know we are Jehovah’s Witnesses. They may be curious about our beliefs or activities but hesitate to ask because they do not want to be ‘preached to’ or get involved in a lengthy discussion. Some brothers have successfully handled matters by just making one statement about the truth and then giving the relative an opportunity to continue the discussion if he wants to. For instance, you might simply mention where you and your family attended the convention this summer. You might show one of the Society’s publications. Or, a comment about world conditions, the high cost of living or a family problem may open up the way for a further discussion and witness concerning God’s Kingdom. Younger ones often get a hearing ear from relatives.
7 While we are zealous in presenting the good news and endeavor to speak a word at the right time, we need always to be discerning and considerate of others. Remember the importance of being friendly and showing a real interest in the other person.​—Prov. 15:23; 1 Pet. 3:15.
8 Vacation time and the summer months come and go quickly. For Jehovah’s people, the most treasured memories usually include the fine experiences resulting from time spent giving a Kingdom witness. Take the initiative in telling others about our loving God and his Kingdom rule. As you do, look to Jehovah to bless your efforts.

