Growing Spiritually as a Family
1 “In an age that emphasizes maximum personal expression and gratification,” comments a family magazine, “many parents don’t want to sacrifice anything of themselves for their children, who are viewed as a burden.” A news magazine also reports that the current tendency of parents to give ‘priority to their own right to self-fulfillment’ leaves their children emotionally crippled and without a moral code. This is just as the Scriptures foretold, “that in the last days . . . men will be lovers of themselves, . . . having no natural affection.”—2 Tim. 3:1-5.
2 Clearly, to attain the goal of family unity and happiness, the Christian family must resist such tendencies and follow the instructions provided by the Founder of the family, Jehovah God. (Ps. 100:3; Prov. 3:5, 6) Fathers, particularly, are charged with the responsibility of “bringing them up in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.”—Eph. 6:1-4.
WHAT CAN BE DONE
3 Happily, Jehovah has provided parents with many valuable aids to help the family grow spiritually, but it does take a measure of self-discipline, or even self-sacrifice, to make use of and to benefit from them. For example, the Yearbook provides a Bible text and upbuilding comments for consideration each day. Is considering that information a part of your family’s daily routine? Showing the benefits of daily discussing a Bible text, a report from an African country where the work is banned tells how the imprisoned brothers assigned a different one of their group each day to think up a Bible text for discussion. Then each brother would give a comment on that selected text. Later they explained how very helpful it is to know many Bible verses in advance of such tests of faith. Yes, how beneficial it is for each family to cultivate such useful habits as regularly setting aside a time that is practical for a discussion of the daily text from the Yearbook.
4 Family Bible reading is another means by which the whole family can be helped to grow spiritually. (Rom. 15:4) Surely each family needs such instructions in resisting the temptations and wicked influences in these perilous times. To bear out the truth in Paul’s statement, a high school counselor with a number of educational degrees said: “I discovered that the Bible’s counsel on such things as having a successful marriage, preventing juvenile delinquency and how to gain and keep friends is far superior to anything I had read or studied in college.” Parents who take the time to read the Bible with the family each day are also fulfilling the command given at Deuteronomy 6:6, 7.
5 Parents who are concerned about the spiritual growth of the family appreciate the importance of helping their children to get the most out of congregation meetings. To help their very young daughter benefit from the weekly Watchtower study, a couple noticed that there was usually a picture in each magazine by which she could remember what she had learned at the meeting. So they referred to these pictures and had many delightful discussions with her, even telling her bedtime stories thereby.—Heb. 10:24, 25.
6 When it comes to relaxation and entertainment, parents who are concerned about the spiritual development of the family will wisely guard against the insidious encroachment of the spirit of the world. For example, many family members admit that they feel farther apart when they spend too much time viewing television. Some even say that television is the main cause of the communication gap that exists in many families. Interestingly, some families have set aside certain “NO TV” evenings for family discussions, reading, or other types of recreation that involve the entire family, and have found the family atmosphere greatly improved.
7 It surely is a course of wisdom to follow Bible guidelines to keep our families united in these “critical days.” This contributes toward family happiness. A happy, united family ascribes glory and strength to its Founder, Jehovah God.—Ps. 96:7.

