Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 5
10 min: Song 71 and local announcements.
15 min: Discussion of article “Serving Jehovah as a Family.” Handle with appropriate questions directed to audience. In connection with paragraphs 4 to 8, ask for suggestions or results obtained by families working together in field service.
30 min: “Training Our Children to Be Lovers of Jehovah.” What key points do you remember from symposium on Saturday afternoon at “Divine Love” District Convention? Chairman should use appropriate questions to draw out audience on main points and consider local application of the following:
(1) In raising our children to become disciples, emphasize that effort must be put forth; does not happen automatically. Discuss following scriptures, noting what action must be taken:
Proverbs 22:6: “Train up a boy . . . ” Time and effort needed.
Ephesians 6:4: Greek expression for “bringing them up” means “nourishing out,” spiritually feed, nurture and develop them; “in the discipline” refers to instructing, involving training, education, and correction; “mental-regulating of Jehovah” means ‘putting in [the child’s mind] the mind of Jehovah.’ The mind and will of Jehovah are found in the Bible. Suggest that children memorize basic Bible texts. How many have been doing so, and what are the effects? (Can review texts such as Acts 20:35; John 3:16; Eph. 6:1; Mic. 6:8; Matt. 24:14; Ps. 83:18; Prov. 22:15, and so forth.)
2 Timothy 3:15: “Infancy” can refer to a newborn (Luke 2:12) or a three-month old (Acts 7:19, 20; Ex. 2:2). Point is, start immediately while child is still like young twig. Baby’s brain reaches three quarters adult size by age two; heart doubles in size in first year. Important to reach heart.—Matt. 15:18; Luke 6:45.
(2) Goal of training is in the way of God’s righteousness; must be done according to Bible standards, using Bible principles. Time and patience needed; also consistency from both parents, where possible, is important. (Col. 3:21) Chairman should briefly recount demonstrations seen at convention or have audience relate what was remembered.
Scene 1: Child speaks disrespectfully to parents in front of visiting adult. Some texts discussed were Prov. 23:22; 13:24 (obedience to parents required by God); Rom. 13:1 (disrespect of parental authority can lead to rebelliousness).
Scene 2: Child refuses to let a visiting child play with his toys, displaying selfish attitude. Texts used: Acts 20:35; Matt. 20:28 (Jesus’ own example); 1 Tim. 6:18 and 1 John 4:20.
Scene 3: Child throws tantrum when not allowed to take playthings to Kingdom Hall. Texts considered: Deut. 21:18 (self-will can lead to rebelliousness with serious consequence); Deut. 31:12 (even little ones to listen and learn at meetings); Prov. 22:15; 23:13, 14 (why physical rod of punishment may be necessary).
Basic course is to reason with child, showing undesirable outcome of bad course followed, using Scriptural principle to set things straight. Rod of discipline applied when and where necessary. Remember, goal is to raise Christian that will be loved by Jehovah and bring honor to his name.
 5 min: Song 24 and prayer. (Remind audience to read October 22 Awake! and bring it to next week’s meeting.)
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 12
10 min: Song 31, Announcements and accounts report.
12 min: “Presenting the Good News—As Families, Using Awake!” Question-and-answer discussion of article. When considering paragraph 3, ask audience for suggestions on talking points from October 22 Awake!
15 min: Keeping Clean for the Service of God. Talk with audience participation. Carefully consider how the material applies in your area and focus on aspects needing attention.
In many areas there is increasing lack of concern about cleanness and appearance. What have you observed in your area? How is it affecting our brothers and sisters?
Bible’s emphasis on spiritual cleanness (Lev. 19:1, 2; 1 Pet. 1:15, 16); also evidence that physical cleanness is important. Customs of Israelites and early Christians marked them as clean people. For example, man’s leaving hair untended and garment unwashed considered signs of mourning. (2 Sam. 19:24) Hospitality included washing feet of guests, likely dirty from walking on dusty roads in sandals. (Judg. 19:21; John 13:5) (If time permits, can consider other examples: Ex. 30:17-21; Lev. 17:15; 15:13, and so forth.)
God’s counsel “YOU must be holy” applies to us today and shows importance of personal cleanness. Christians, as ministers, have good reasons for proper grooming and personal hygiene. If we are neat, clean and well-groomed, not gaudy or untidy, it will reflect well on message we bring and on the God we worship. (2 Cor. 6:3, 4; 1 Tim. 2:9, 10) Children need to be instructed on cleaning, handling clothes, eating habits, and so forth. Help them to realize it is not just to aid mother, but is related to worshiping God.
Christians also concerned about keeping home and possessions clean and orderly. Whole family should cooperate, for a clean and presentable home reflects on one’s worship. Cars and other equipment used in preaching work may also need attention.
Commendation is due for vast improvement many have made since learning truth. Encourage all to keep clean for service of God.
15 min: Elders can use this time to consider local needs or arrange to have several publishers relate experiences found on the last page of recent issues of The Watchtower. Local experiences may also be used.
 8 min: Song 9 and closing prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 19
Theme: Growing Spiritually as a Family.
10 min: Song 63 and local announcements.
18 min: “Growing Spiritually as a Family.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. Ask audience what they have been doing or how they intend to apply suggestions mentioned in paragraphs 3 to 6.
25 min: Showing Neighbor Love—Week by Week. Chairman can handle introductory part and then include audience in discussion, emphasizing Bible principles.
(10 min.) Throughout history man has functioned on weekly basis
  God’s work relative to earth done on weekly cycle of seven days (Gen. 2:2)
  Israel observed seven-day cycle
Nearly all functions done weekly: shopping, washing, secular work, and so forth
Our worship also on weekly basis: five meetings per week
  How can we show love for others on weekly basis?
  How would 1 Corinthians 13:8 apply to our preaching activity?
Schedule weekly service where possible
  Each one’s circumstances and responsibilities differ (2 Cor. 8:12)
    Everyone has 168 hours per week
    Showing neighbor love should receive high priority for Christian
    What are various opportunities for organized field service and group witnessing in local congregation?
What are advantages of weekly service?
  Interview two or three congregation publishers of various ages who are exemplary and who share in service weekly
    When do they go out? Why do they consider weekly service important? What are the advantages of being out at least once each week?
(13 min.) Stimulating the Pioneer Spirit
Many who publish weekly have pioneer spirit but cannot be regular pioneers
  Such appreciate opportunities to be auxiliary pioneers
  Appreciate need for whole-souled service (Col. 3:23, 24)
    Circumstances of individual dictate what is required to serve whole-souled (Gal. 6:4)
Auxiliary pioneer work is an aid in whole-souled service
  Interview several publishers with varying circumstances who find it possible to be auxiliary pioneers from time to time. Could include housewife, older publisher, school-age child, elder or ministerial servant, some who auxiliary pioneer during circuit overseer’s visit, or others. Stress how auxiliary pioneer arrangement suits circumstances of many
Regular pioneers a blessing to congregation and community
  One of best ways to show neighbor love week by week
  Increased service makes for increased results (2 Cor. 9:6)
  “Art of teaching” cultivated to greater degree (2 Tim. 4:2)
  Interview, if possible, some who are presently pioneering or have pioneered in the past
    Ask what moved them to take up pioneer work, and how have they benefited spiritually from pioneering?
(2 min.) Our Neighbors Need Love
Time left to warn neighbors being reduced weekly (1 Cor. 7:29, 31)
  Do not hold back from helping week by week as a regular publisher, auxiliary or regular pioneer (Prov. 3:27)
 7 min: Song 32 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 26
10 min: Song 62 and local announcements.
25 min: The Family Unit in True Worship. Scriptural discussion involving young and old in audience. Read Scripture texts as time permits. (Chairman can select texts to develop from those listed.)
Jehovah the originator of family unit (Gen. 5:3)
  Hebrews worshiped Jehovah as family unit
    What responsibility rested on Hebrew parents? (Deut. 6:6-8)
    How were children to view their parents? (Lev. 19:3; Deut. 27:16; Deut. 5:16)
    How were parents to protect spirituality of children as children approached age of marriage? (Deut. 7:1-4)
    When might families get together for fellowship and spiritual instruction? (Deut. 16:16; Luke 2:41, 44)
Christians also encouraged to worship as family unit; strong families needed in congregations today
  What counsel is given to Christian family heads? (Eph. 5:25, 28-30; 6:4; also Chap. 4 in Family Life book)
  How are Christian wives encouraged in the Scriptures? (Eph. 5:22, 24; Prov. 31:10; see also Chap. 5 in Family Life book)
  What responsibility is placed on Christian youths? (Eph. 6:1-3)
  How does 1 Corinthians 12:25, 26 show that all in the family “body” should progress as Christians? (See also pp. 186, 187 of Family Life book.)
  How can families effectively worship together at home? at Christian meetings?
All Christians should seek to strengthen family ties
  Today the family unit is undergoing most vicious attack yet by Satan
    Results: Breakdown of morals; break up of families (2 Tim. 3:1-4)
    True Christians warned to turn away (2 Tim. 3:5)
  Need to continue helping one another in love to keep our Christian families strong and to help our brothers (Gal. 6:10)
12 min: Discussion of “A Revised Theocratic School.” Highlight changes in school program for 1981. Encourage all to attend school regularly and keep up with Bible reading program.
13 min: Our Field Service Next Month. Briefly outline offer of My Book of Bible Stories for contribution of $2.50. Discuss midweek and weekend field service arrangements. Include some experiences that will build appreciation for group activity. Also encourage all to spend some time in field service next Sunday, the first Sunday of November. Song 112 and prayer.

