Presenting the Good News—As Families, Using “Awake!”
1 The two special issues of Awake! published this month are designed to deal with problems that confront a wide cross section of the people we meet in field service, pointing out Scriptural solutions. Have you read the magazines and thought about how to use them in the field?
2 The October 8 issue develops the theme “How Can You Cope with Stress?” and the October 22 issue focuses on the theme “Does Life Have Any Meaning?” Truly, individuals and family groups everywhere are under tremendous pressure and stress every day—a modern epidemic! Where can relief be found, presently and permanently? On the other hand, many sincere persons are searching for the real meaning of life. Some, unfortunately, have accepted answers that have only brought more disappointment and sorrow. What can they do to make their lives meaningful? These captivating questions are just what some of the most timely articles in the two special issues deal with. What marvelous instruments we have in these two magazines to help those who are “skinned and thrown about”!—Matt. 9:36.
3 How fine it would be for each family to get together and go over these two magazines so that all can benefit personally from the fine information. Groups of publishers may do the same. As you do so, why not let each one present pick out something in the magazine—an article, an illustration, a caption, or a statement—that is especially appealing, and then help one another develop something to say for presenting it in the field. A little practice this way will polish up the presentations and everyone will be ready for a full share in offering the Awake! subscription.
4 Besides offering the subscription from house to house and to friends and acquaintances, be alert to other opportunities to make good use of these fine issues. When the householder is busy, or is on the way out, or does not wish to take the subscription, why not briefly offer the two magazines? Street work is another good way to use these special magazines. By taking the initiative and approaching people, you can simply show them the magazine with the theme on the cover and ask if they would like to find out a little more about the matter. Then turn to an appropriate article and offer the magazines.
5 Some congregations have made a special effort to assist the younger publishers to have a full share in offering the magazines by making arrangements for field service during after-school hours, perhaps on Fridays. Good results have been reported, for it seems that generally more people are at home in the late afternoon, and the younger publishers usually enjoy offering the magazines, if they are well prepared.
6 Let us, as families and as individuals, put to good use these two marvelous instruments, the October 8 and 22 special issues of Awake! Let the “armies of cavalry,” the symbolic “horses” of Revelation 9:16 go forth!

