Serving Jehovah as a Family
1 The family that serves Jehovah together is the basic unit of the Christian congregation today. So, while each individual Christian must have a personal relationship with Jehovah, a family of Christians serving together helps to strengthen such relationship.
2 Evidently this is one reason why Paul encouraged Christians to continue living with mates who were nonbelievers, saying: “For, wife, how do you know but that you will save your husband? Or, husband, how do you know but that you will save your wife?” (1 Cor. 7:16) So, as Christians, we are encouraged to worship and serve Jehovah as families.
HOW TO SERVE AS A FAMILY
3 Among early Christian families, one that was noteworthy was that of Philip “the evangelizer.” He was an active, hospitable Christian. (Acts 21:8) But his service did not stop there. As an evangelizer he apparently assisted his family to be regular in Jehovah’s service, too, for the record mentions that his four virgin daughters “prophesied.”—Acts 21:9.
4 How can Christian families today be active, evangelizing families? All in the family must appreciate the privilege of serving Jehovah, preaching and teaching the Christian good news. (Matt. 28:19, 20) But to enjoy such godly service, each one must be prepared. So married Christians should recognize the need to prepare for service together as a family, discussing points in the literature that could be used, appropriate Scripture texts and other talking points.
5 Scheduling time for all to share in field service is also very important. Therefore, many families are using the first Sunday of the month to work together. Concerning families working together in service the first Sunday each month, one brother wrote: “Field service has really picked up. The friends are responding to the recommendations of assisting one another, especially the youth.” Does your family thus serve together each month?
6 It is very encouraging to see entire families working together with their book study groups. In this way children as well as adults share in covering the territory assigned to the group. Such working together with the group will assist parents to instill in their children greater appreciation for our responsibility to preach the good news and care for the “sheep.”
7 Many parents assist their children in establishing magazine routes. This is very commendable! Yet, we do not want to overlook the possibility of starting Bible studies with these readers. A pioneer couple made it a goal to develop their magazine calls into Bible studies and reported: “It has been surprising to us how many have said yes, they would like a study.” So we encourage families to work together also in making return visits and conducting Bible studies. This way children can develop the fine art of teaching the truth to others.
8 Some families find it very enjoyable to work together in assisting other families to get into the field service. Such kind, Christian assistance is usually appreciated very much. One sister, the mother of seven young children, wrote: “I’m thankful to Jehovah and his earthly organization for having been helped to have a larger share in the work.” If you are part of a Christian family, small or large, can you find ways to encourage the entire family to serve Jehovah together?

