Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Search for Bible Truth Rewarded in Israel
MORE and more people in Israel as elsewhere are seeing the futility of man’s efforts to bring lasting peace and provide a hope for the future. The 370 Jehovah’s Witnesses in that beautiful, historic land are bringing life-giving hope to those seeking God. (Isaiah 55:2, 3) The following reports from the Watch Tower Society’s branch office in Tel Aviv show that God rewards those who seek Bible truth.
“The disturbances by rowdy religious fanatics have died down, and their previous efforts to interfere with our meetings continue to boomerang. For example, an elderly Russian couple were associating with an Adventist group but were dissatisfied with what they were learning. They saw no evidence of the persecutions that were prophesied to mark true Christianity. Then one day they found an old, discarded Romanian-language news magazine that carried a report about violent mob attacks back in 1985 on the Society’s branch office building and the Kingdom Hall in Tel Aviv. With their interest stirred, they traveled to Tel Aviv and walked around for four hours until they located the building described in the newspaper article. They enjoyed receiving answers to some of their questions and stayed for the evening meeting, where they were happy to meet some Russian-speaking Witnesses. Since then, a regular Bible study has been held with them. The more they learn, the more they are convinced that they have found just what they were searching for​—the truth!
“In another instance, a brother witnessed to a young family man who did not agree with some of the points he tried to explain and so did not continue to look into the Kingdom message. Some years later, this same man’s daughter fell sick, and he was told by superstitious friends that the problem was likely connected with the mezuzah attached to his doorpost. They recommended that he have it checked by the rabbi. This he decided to do. At the same time, he prayed earnestly to God for guidance in finding the truth.
“On his way to the rabbi’s home, the man suddenly decided to go and pick up a medical prescription at the health clinic. When he arrived, who should he find sitting there but the Witness who had preached to him some years before! The brother states that he had had no plans to go to the clinic that evening until suddenly he remembered something he needed. The brother and the man sat and talked for a couple of hours that evening, and a Bible study was arranged with the young man. He started to attend meetings, his progress was steady, and he joined the Theocratic Ministry School. Soon he was going in the field ministry, and he is now a baptized brother. He never did get as far as the rabbi’s house!”
These persons’ search for Bible truth was richly rewarded, as they have found a treasure more precious than fine gold.​—Proverbs 3:13-18.

