A Different Struggle for Survival in Taiwan
STRUGGLES for survival are not new to the human race. Man has faced many such crises ever since people have been on this earth. In our own time, whole nations have struggled to survive. So have individuals, often because of economic problems and pressures.
However, a struggle for a different kind of survival began in Taiwan back in the 1930’s. During that decade the Taiwanese, then under the yoke of Imperial Japan, first had the opportunity to hear how they could survive into a righteous new system of God’s making. A public lecture in Taipei attracted the attention of at least one person who embraced the truth of God’s Word with eagerness. He, along with special pioneers (full-time Kingdom proclaimers) from Japan, later made diligent efforts to declare this message throughout the island. Initial response was slow among the Buddhist Taiwanese. Yet, after a grueling bicycle ride on a rough dirt road through the mountains to the east coast, what did the special pioneers find? Why, among the Amis tribe of aboriginal people some embraced Bible truth eagerly. These, in turn, talked to relatives and friends who readily accepted the word of trusted and respected members of the tribe and were baptized.
Among those presenting themselves for baptism in 1938 was a 12-year-old lad surnamed Lin. The Japanese pioneer wondered if one so young should be baptized. So the ceremony was stopped while some questions were asked. Surprised at the boy’s determination to serve Jehovah, Brother Oh allowed the baptism to take place. To this day, that baptismal candidate, Brother Lin, has continued to serve in a whole-souled manner, he and his wife having spent most of the last 21 years as special pioneers. A number of others baptized at that time also have remained faithful to Jehovah through many trials.
During World War II those who had the hope of survival into Jehovah’s promised system of things had to put up a vigorous struggle. The Japanese rulers did everything they could to make these humble persons worship at Shinto shrines or compromise in some other way. Two of the special pioneers who had spearheaded the work here were imprisoned for many years. One died in prison and the other mysteriously disappeared after his release at the end of the war. Local Witnesses believe that he was quietly exterminated. A number of other Christians showed that their faith was of the fire-resistant quality that would enable them to survive.​—1 Cor. 3:10-15.
MISSIONARIES AID IN THE STRUGGLE
With the end of the war, Taiwan reverted to Chinese rule. The missionaries working in Shanghai eventually were able to contact the Amis and others who were trying to serve Jehovah. Eventually, approval was obtained for J. McGrath and C. Charles, graduates of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead, to enter Taiwan and work among the Amis. Their assignment was not an easy one. Difficult living conditions, malaria, jaundice and the language barrier were among the problems they encountered. Also, much time was spent trying to help officials, whom clerics of Christendom had influenced against Jehovah’s Witnesses, to understand the true nature of our work. All of this tested the faith and love of the missionaries. They saw the need to build up faith in these humble people, many of whom had been baptized only because their relatives had told them about the hope of a righteous ‘new heavens and new earth.’ (2 Pet. 3:13) Painstakingly, some material from the Bible study aid “Let God Be True” was translated into Japanese, then widely spoken here. Using the Bible and a blackboard, the missionaries conducted studies with the large crowds that gathered at village halls.
To spread the hope for survival to other villages, a special preaching tour was undertaken by two groups of Witnesses. One missionary accompanied each group. For one group the trip was particularly difficult because they had to cross high, rugged mountains, and rain had made the clay path treacherously slippery. Their path snaked down a cliff face where one slip would mean a 600-foot (183-m) fall!
Brother Charles’ rubber-soled shoes were dangerous, and he tried walking barefooted but could not. So the brothers loaned him their shoes, which had deep treads. They linked hands and, with many a prayer, finally made it to the bottom of the cliff face. As they crossed the next range of mountains, heavy rain made progress difficult. United prayer for a safe return was offered. And how thankful they were to meet the other group after two weeks of walking!
However, because of the aforementioned action by Christendom’s clergy restrictions were placed on the work and the missionaries were forced to leave Taiwan. The local Witnesses were harassed and some were imprisoned. Eventually though, the authorities came to understand that they had nothing to fear from Jehovah’s Witnesses. In 1955 recognition was given to a local International Bible Students Association, and this opened the way for more missionaries to enter Taiwan.
THE CHINESE FIELD IS REACHED
The new missionaries, Clarence and Louise Halbrook, concentrated on helping the Chinese to learn about the hope of survival. They, therefore, studied Mandarin Chinese, the official language of the island. Before long they were joined by two other missionaries. By January 1957, when a branch office of the Watch Tower Society was established here, there were some 2,000 Kingdom proclaimers, almost all of whom were of the Amis tribe. But did they have faith that would ensure survival? This was to be shown in due time.
A couple of years later, eight missionaries joined the four already here. They were beginning to locate some Chinese individuals desiring to learn about survival. One of the first to be helped was a government geologist known for his bad temper. But Bible truth changed that and now, many years later, he serves as an appointed Christian elder dearly loved by many who have learned the truth since then.
Besides having to communicate in one of the more difficult languages of the world, the missionaries had to deal with such things as materialistic thinking, superstitions connected with ancestor worship, resistance to things foreign and other pressures. But spiritual progress was made and new missionary homes were opened in the south, at Kaohsiung and Tainan.
Two fields of activity developed in Taiwan. The first was comprised primarily of the tribal peoples, the Amis tribe ultimately producing the greatest number of Kingdom proclaimers. The second is the Chinese field, composed of families that have been in Taiwan for many generations and of those who have more recently come from mainland China. The tribal people are farmers and/​or hunters having little of this world’s goods and generally little or no formalized religious background, although many have accepted some nominal form of Christianity. On the other hand, the Chinese are noted for ancestor worship, Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianist thinking, and for their quest for material prosperity and good education.
PROBLEMS IN THE TRIBAL FIELD
The simple openness of the tribal people enabled them to accept the Bible’s message of survival readily. But would they be able to defend and hold fast to their hope under trial? Late 1961 brought a test that revealed a weakness. The first Amis man to accept the truth before World War II was disfellowshiped, and immediately he set out to capture the whole organization for himself. Many of the 2,500 reporting field service up to that time were his relatives and friends, and quite a number of these succumbed to his threats and persuasions.
Sadly, many from the tribal areas have continued to fall away because of the enticements of materialism and other factors. This has largely been due to the inability of many to study for themselves. Their language had been unwritten until 1963, when it was put in writing by Bible translators. To help these people who could not read any language and had to rely on hearing others translate from Chinese, the Watch Tower Society published a monthly Amis Watchtower and other Bible study aids. At last these people could study the Scriptures for themselves. But just as they were starting to make progress in this regard, the Taiwan Education Department forbade the further publication of this Amis literature, citing the government policy that these tribal people were now Chinese citizens and had to use publications in that language. This was a great setback for older people who had never been to school.
As an aid, however, the Society now prepares Amis cassette tape summaries of Watchtower study articles and other material to help individuals to learn the truth. Additional efforts have been made in the form of study courses to aid those conducting meetings to become better teachers, extra visits by circuit overseers, and so forth. Since a new generation has grown up with Chinese education and a poor understanding of their parents’ language, it is difficult for uneducated Christian fathers and mothers to teach their offspring. The result? Many of their children never have made Bible truth their own. Because of such factors, a large number of persons in the tribal field have stopped pursuing the Christian way of life.
PROGRESS IN THE CHINESE FIELD
In the Chinese field, however, there is much to encourage the 60 missionaries and others working to help many to survive the greatest tribulation to come upon mankind. (Matt. 24:21) Ten years ago an assembly for the Chinese Witnesses might have an attendance of up to 200. The two Chinese circuit assemblies in April 1979 had a total of 659.
For many, spiritual survival has meant a real struggle. As an example, consider the case of a young woman in a Buddhist family. Her oldest sister accepted the truth, and she herself studied the Bible periodically for several years, but hesitated to take up the struggle for survival. When her father died, she knew that her sister would not worship their deceased parent. But what about her? Refusing to share in idolatry would bring severe family opposition. Her decision? She would please her Creator, and intense opposition did result. She was accused of not loving​—in fact, of dishonoring—​her father. Nevertheless, she relied on Jehovah and won that round in the struggle for survival.
When the time came to exhume and polish her father’s bones, it was found that the flesh was not completely gone. Superstition demanded reburial in a new location or direction. Refusal to have part in this resulted in further persecution. Over the years, the woman’s husband also has opposed her intensely, but all of this has not diminished her determination to survive. She loves the Kingdom-preaching activity and her joy is great as she helps others in their struggle for spiritual survival.
CONTINUING TO AID OTHERS TO BECOME SURVIVORS
Diligent efforts are being made to help more of Taiwan’s 17,000,000 inhabitants to learn the vital truths of God’s Word. To that end, during the 12 months ending August 31, 1978, 1,044 praisers of Jehovah in this country distributed 48,997 Bibles and books and obtained 8,421 subscriptions to the Watchtower and Awake! magazines.
A source of great encouragement was the “Victorious Faith” International Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses held in Taipei during August 1978. That spiritually rewarding assembly was attended by 1,692 persons.
This is, indeed, a critical time for Taiwan and for every nation. With joy, however, true Christians here and elsewhere are declaring the heartening message that all who call on Jehovah’s name will be saved. With earnestness, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Taiwan continue urging people to take action that will place them among the “great crowd” who will “come out of the great tribulation.”​—Rev. 7:9-14.

