Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 30
Song 43
10 min: Local announcements and Announcements that apply to congregation. Encouragement to share in house-to-house work on the first Sunday. Brief comment on the day’s text.
20 min: “Keep Doing It More Fully.” Questions and answers. When covering paragraph 5, have two or three selected publishers or pioneers express which suggestions in the April 1983 Our Kingdom Ministry insert they believe helped them to improve their effectiveness in offering subscriptions.
15 min: Topic for Conversation. Have demonstration of Topic for Conversation and subscription offer by an experienced pioneer or publisher. Also, discuss how to drop down to offering the two magazines when subscription offer is refused and how to arrange to come later to get subscription.
Song 130 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 7
Song 126
10 min: Local announcements, including accounts report. Also encourage support for magazine work on second Saturday. As time permits, have one or two experiences in obtaining subscriptions. These should be prepared in advance.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Effective Use of Magazines.” Discussion of article. Have two well-prepared publishers demonstrate 30- to 60-second presentations, one featuring an article in the October 8 Awake! and the other featuring an article in the October 15 Watchtower.
15 min: Getting Acquainted With Newer Ones. Interview two or three dedicated and baptized exemplary publishers who may not yet be well known to others in the congregation. If some were just baptized at recent circuit or district assemblies, it may be well to interview these. Those being interviewed may wish to call attention to specific provisions of the congregation that helped them progress to dedication and baptism. These interviews should help all present to appreciate their share in present Kingdom increase.​—Isa. 60:22.
Song 92 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 14
Song 128
15 min: Local announcements. Discuss outstanding July service report and any positive aspects of congregation’s report for that month. Call attention to items in Theocratic News.
18 min: “Working Toward Theocratic Goals.” Discussion by elder who has some background in full-time service, otherwise by the service overseer. Interview one or two regular pioneers or youths reaching out for a career in full-time service. Let them express why they are pursuing such goals rather than a career in this system. Also reflect on some lessons remembered from the drama Divine Education at the “Kingdom Increase” District Convention.
12 min: “Make Yourself Available!” Review highlights from The Watchtower (w84 5/1 pp. 17-22). Put special emphasis on points under the subheadings “A Great Need Is Met” and “Respond With Faith in Jehovah.”
Song 9 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 21
Song 216
10 min: Local announcements and preselected experiences had in subscription campaign.
25 min: “Skillfully Use the Book United in Worship.” Questions and answers. When considering paragraph 4, have qualified publisher demonstrate how to use material at a Bible study to help student reason on problem of bad association. With paragraph 6, get comments from audience on how they were helped by studying the chapter “The Meaning of Your Baptism.” Encourage use of this book and specific points discussed to stir to action any holding back.
10 min: Discussion and demonstration of magazine presentations that can be used on the fourth Saturday of the month. Encourage publishers to support the magazine work this Saturday.
Song 203 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 28
Song 213
15 min: Local announcements. Encourage support of house-to-house work on first Sunday. Highlight points in Survival Into a New Earth that can be tied in with the Topic for Conversation.
12 min: “Would You Spread a Rumor?” Talk based on The Watchtower (w84 9/1 pp. 20-3).
18 min: Arrange locally. May want to include Scriptural and practical points based on the last report of the circuit overseer.
Song 211 and concluding prayer.

