Presenting the Good News​—By Effective Use of Magazines
1 The Watchtower and Awake! are beneficial aids in keeping us well informed on vital matters. For this reason, we do well to read our personal copies right away. By doing so, we can familiarize ourselves with the material in the articles and take note of points that may be of particular interest to people in our territory.
2 Generally when offering the magazines, it is best to highlight briefly just one point in one issue. When a series of articles is involved, attention could be called to the subject matter of that series. Or a practical point can be highlighted at times by actually reading a statement from the article being featured.
3 When offering the October 8 Awake!, the article “The Near-Death Experience​—Proof of Immortality?” could be featured by saying: “Good morning. I have the latest Watchtower and Awake! magazines; they answer Bible questions most of us have wondered about. This article ‘The Near-Death Experience​—Proof of Immortality?’ mentions visions some persons have experienced when near death. Some believe such experiences to be proof of immortality. But you might be surprised at what the Bible says on this. I believe you will enjoy reading this article.” You may then wish to hand the magazines to the person and say: “May I leave these with you for the printing cost of 40 cents?”
4 If a young person is contacted, you could feature the article “Is Winning Everything?” This material may also be of interest to parents who want to help their children cope with the competitive spirit so often generated in school. You might say: “You may agree that we all need recreation of some sort for a change of pace from the normal daily routine. But what if a person becomes obsessed with the desire to win? This article presents some interesting points you will enjoy considering.”
5 The October 15 Watchtower, with its cover theme “Our Critical Times,” could be featured by saying: “Most persons will agree that we are living in critical times. No doubt you are concerned as to how your family is affected by rash acts of individuals or entire nations. Just a few years ago many persons would have suggested religion as a solution in resolving long-standing problems. Now, an increasing number do not share that viewpoint but feel some religions are contributing to the increasing world tensions. You may find good reasons to agree after noting some of the points made in this article, ‘Can Religion Meet the Crisis?’”
6 By being well acquainted with the information found in the magazines, we will be able to present them effectively. Perhaps others too will gain an appreciation for The Watchtower and Awake! and develop a “longing for the unadulterated milk belonging to the word.”​—1 Pet. 2:2.

