Skillfully Use the Book United in Worship
1 Words, words, words​—billions are printed every day. No words, however, can have as powerful an effect for good as those that are based on Jehovah’s wisdom. For example: Did you feel a strong impact on your thinking and attitude when the United in Worship book was discussed at the Congregation Book Study? Indeed, “the words of the wise ones are like oxgoads, and just like nails driven in are those indulging in collections of sentences; they have been given from one shepherd.”​—Eccl. 12:11.
2 Our Shepherd, Jehovah, has given us ‘wise words’ in the book United in Worship. Like an ‘oxgoad,’ which is used to move and direct animals, this fine publication can be used to help newly interested ones to keep on making advancement in the way of Jehovah. Elders making shepherding calls on the inactive and others needing exhortation can skillfully use certain chapters or portions thereof “like nails driven in” to give support to those buffeted by pressures of the world and help stabilize their faith.​—Isa. 32:1, 2.
SKILLFULLY USE ON BIBLE STUDIES
3 Think about the one with whom you study, whether newly interested or an inactive one. What step must he take next in order to keep making progress? Is there something hindering him from taking that step? Have you discussed this with him? Is there some portion of the book United in Worship that could effectively help him? Let us consider some possibilities.
4 Does he still have bad associations? Take a few minutes to discuss portions of the material on pages 44 and 45, looking up the Scriptures. You can ask him if he thinks his associates are helping or hindering him in applying the truth. From the Scriptures discussed, what does he think he should do to remedy the problem? Where can good associations be found?
5 Is he fearful of preaching in public? Consider some of the Scriptural points on pages 172 and 173. Help him to see that Jehovah will support him just as he supported his faithful witnesses in the past. Explain what you do to prepare yourself for Jehovah’s service and the joys that result from fearlessly preaching.
ELDERS​—USE IN SHEPHERDING
6 Elders, how can you use the Scriptural discussions to incite your brothers to love and fine works and refresh them spiritually? For example, how about those who are irregular in service? Information under the subtitles “Do Not Let Kingdom Truth Be Choked Out” and “Keep the Kingdom First in Your Life” in chapter 11 will provide a basis for a stimulating discussion. Also, it may be refreshing for those who dedicated their life to Jehovah long ago to have reviewed with them Scriptural points from chapter 12, “The Meaning of Your Baptism.”
7 Have you noted a brother growing weaker on account of excessive attention to pleasures or worldly entertainment? Consider with him the wise admonition contained in the chapter ‘Wrestling Against Wicked Spirit Forces.’ If he has strayed, the inspired counsel from Jehovah could move him to change his course.
8 Are there some having difficulty in getting along with others? Points from chapter 17 under the subtitles “What to Do When Problems Arise” and “Seek Ways to ‘Widen Out’” may provide the stimulus needed to overcome these problems.
9 Satan’s world produces a multitude of books offering the conflicting opinions of imperfect man. How frustrating or wearisome these can be! (Eccl. 12:12) Happily, Jehovah has provided clear, wise direction through the Bible and Bible study aids. Our skillfully using this printed wisdom from Jehovah will without doubt help many to stay on the road that leads to everlasting happiness.

