Working Toward Theocratic Goals
1 Why should we all set theocratic goals for ourselves? One reason is that they stimulate us to work harder in Jehovah’s service. Paul stated: “For to this end we are working hard and exerting ourselves, because we have rested our hope on a living God, who is a Savior of all sorts of men, especially of faithful ones.” (1 Tim. 4:10) Yes, we work hard to the end of gaining salvation for ourselves and helping others to be faithful also. Toward what theocratic goals are you now working?
PURSUE DIVINE EDUCATION
2 The various features of full-time service are fine theocratic goals to set for oneself. But what could divert a brother from such theocratic goals? One thing might be secular education, especially after finishing high school. At the “Kingdom Increase” District Convention we were stirred by the drama on Friday, entitled Divine Education Increases Kingdom Fruitage. No doubt you still remember the point made: The best secular education in the world does not mean a thing if you have not maintained your spiritual goals and continued to expand your divine education! Is this the view you have taken?
3 Jesus asked, “For what benefit will it be to a man if he gains the whole world but forfeits his soul?” (Matt. 16:26) Many of our youths have seen the futility of pursuing worldly, material goals, including advanced secular education. Along with their parents, they have concluded that such goals are not worth the dangers to be encountered. At best, benefits from attaining such goals can last only as long as this system, which is now hastening toward its complete end. A thorough divine education will prepare us for pursuing worthwhile theocratic goals, such as the various features of full-time service, and lead ultimately to eternal salvation.​—2 Tim. 3:1-5, 14-17.
GOALS IN FULL-TIME SERVICE
4 Many parents and youths are to be commended for their spiritual progress realized in recent years. It has been noted that more youths are putting Kingdom interests first. In November of 1982 there were 1,288 young people under 20 years of age in regular pioneer work in the United States. In May of 1984 there were 1,945. This means that in 18 months there was an increase of 51 percent in the number of those who entered regular pioneer work shortly after high school. Many are the benefits being realized by parents and children who have worked toward such theocratic goals.
5 We all rejoice that Jehovah is bringing the increase. This increase creates a need for additional literature. Hence, more brothers are needed to serve at Bethel. During the period from August 1977 to May 1984, there was a need to call in 800 more brothers for service at Brooklyn Bethel and Watchtower Farms. These brothers have not only kept theocratic goals clearly in focus but have had to meet the high theocratic standards required for this unique privilege of service. The same could be said for those who have pursued Gilead training and missionary work as their goal.
HELP YOUTHS SET GOALS
6 Wise parents have helped their children set theocratic goals from an early age. Some have accomplished this by bringing their children into association with those in full-time service, taking advantage of opportunities to entertain traveling overseers and their wives, missionaries, Bethelites and regular pioneers as guests. Thus the children have observed firsthand the joy of these full-time servants. Many who now enjoy successful careers in the regular pioneer work, Bethel service or missionary work recall with fondness such wholesome association during youth. Make such theocratic goals a part of your family’s regular daily discussions.
7 Our youths need to have a realistic view of spiritual goals. Especially help them to see the advantage of a career in full-time service. In the conclusion of the drama Divine Education at this past summer’s district convention, it was said: “If you are inclined to esteem highly an advanced secular education, remember this: To increase Kingdom fruitage requires that we give more than the usual attention to divine education.” Like Paul, parents and youths in the Christian congregation want to appreciate “the excelling value of the knowledge of Christ Jesus.” (Phil. 3:7, 8) Divine education will assure that we keep theocratic goals in clear focus.

