Announcements
REMAINING FEARLESS TO THE ACCOMPLISHED END
Today fear and anxiety grip nearly all of earth’s inhabitants, as they look ahead to what is coming upon mankind. Foretold in Bible prophecy, the approach of the accomplished end of this present old world is marked with mounting troubles and woes, of kinds and intensity without parallel in human history. For these very days of uncertainty and insecurity Almighty God has decreed that a comforting, confidence-inspiring message be taken to all willing hearers. Support and strength can come only from the true Source: “God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear.” (Ps. 46:1, 2) To find this refuge, and to learn how to gain this strength, we must study God’s Word, both individually and with others, and then share in announcing Jehovah’s kingdom. Have you prepared to participate in this work during September, by fearlessly making known this good news in your neighborhood, offering the book “Let God Be True” and a 32-page booklet on a contribution of 35 cents? Report your activity as you help others in remaining fearless to the accomplished end.
“NEW WORLD TRANSLATION”
In the field of modern Bibles, none excel the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures. In it is found a rendering that offers the best in a faithful reproduction of the Sacred Scriptures (“New Testament” only). It has the benefits of the latest finds in ancient manuscripts. It includes the advances gained through study of ancient languages. Archaic English is omitted. Instead, use is made of present-day common English, retaining the literal meaning of the original language. This book of 800 pages, bound in attractive green cloth with gold-embossed title, contains an extensive array of marginal cross references, helpful foreword, footnotes and appendix. It is a “must” for your library. Postpaid, $1.50.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 16: The Lord’s Prayer Nears Complete Answer; also, “Let Your Kingdom Come,” ¶1-3.
Week of September 23: “Let Your Kingdom Come,” ¶4-11; also, Daily Bread, Forgiveness, and Deliverance, ¶1-13.
Week of September 30: Daily Bread, Forgiveness, and Deliverance, ¶14-31.

