Announcements
● Literature offer for January and February: Any 192-page book published prior to 1980 that the congregation has in stock for the reduced contribution of 50¢, with the following exceptions: Family Life, Great Teacher, This Life, Truth, and Youth. There is a limited supply of Commentary on James that may be ordered from Brooklyn. (For obtaining credit, elders should refer to the guidelines in the Society’s letter of December 21, 1988.) If the congregation has no stock of books to be offered at the reduced rate, the Worldwide Security book should be offered for a contribution of $1.00. This book may be ordered from Brooklyn. March: The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? for a contribution of $1.00. April and May: Watchtower subscription. Where a subscription is not obtained, two magazines and a copy of any brochure may be offered for the contribution of 80¢.
● Congregations should be sure to order an ample supply of the God’s Word book well in advance of the month of March.
● Starting in February and no later than March 1, the new public talk for circuit overseers will be “Exulting in Jehovah at Poland Conventions.” This will be a slide presentation recounting some of the highlights of the 1989 “Godly Devotion” District Conventions held in Poland.
● The special public talk for the 1990 Memorial season will be given worldwide on Sunday, March 25, 1990. The subject of the talk will be “Reach Out for the Real Life!” An outline will be provided. Those congregations having the visit of the circuit overseer, a circuit assembly, or a special assembly day that weekend will have the special talk the following week. No congregation should have the special talk before March 25.
● U.S. Selective Service regulations require that all men register when reaching 18 years of age. All of those required to do so should take care of the matter promptly, viewing it as a Christian’s obligation to the superior authorities. Elders will want to have this in mind and give appropriate reminders to young brothers nearing the age of 18. Questions as to the young Christian’s responsibilities in this regard may be answered by the elders.
● New Publications Available:
Aid to Bible Understanding, Volume 6 (Li-Oven)​—Dutch
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? (Small size)​—Croatian, Polish
My Book of Bible Stories​—Icelandic
Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work—​Japanese
The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s?​—Japanese, Korean
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Swahili
Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace”​—Ukrainian
Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood​—Arabic
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide—​Tamil, Turkish
School and Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Chinese
Should You Believe in the Trinity?​—Dutch, Hungarian, Korean
“This Good News of the Kingdom”​—Haitian Creole
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Listening to the Great Teacher (set of five cassettes and a book in an album; congregation and public: $11.25; pioneers: $9.50)​—Greek
A Revelation to John (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)​—Portuguese

