Be Alert to Offer Bible Literature
1 How thankful we are for the Bible literature Jehovah regularly provides through his organization! We highly value this spiritual food. Upon receiving a new publication, we eagerly leaf through it. Then, as we read it carefully, we gain understanding. Our appreciation for Jehovah and his purposes grows.
2 The personal benefits we receive move us to share with others the good things we have learned. (Matt. 24:14) We are anxious to get the Society’s publications into the hands of as many people as possible. This enables them also to learn the truths contained in these instructive Bible publications. If we are well prepared and alert to take the initiative to present the current literature offer, we may be able to help other sincere people turn to Jehovah and join us in his service.
FROM HOUSE TO HOUSE
3 During January and February we will be offering a variety of 192-page books on a contribution of 50¢ each. The books to be offered include any 192-page book published prior to 1980 except Family Life, Great Teacher, This Life, Truth, and Youth. Congregations that do not have these books in stock may offer the Worldwide Security book for a contribution of $1.00.
4 Sometimes people are genuinely very busy when we call. Under those circumstances, we may want just to offer the book as suggested in the second example on page 20 of the Reasoning book. Or we might express in our own words something along the lines of the third example on that page, showing appreciation of the householder’s situation and saying in a persuasive way: “But since you don’t have time to talk now, we suggest that you accept these two magazines on a contribution of 50¢ and read them when it is more convenient. You will enjoy learning about God’s promise of something new.” These approaches show consideration for the householder’s circumstances, and at the same time, the literature is presented.
5 What can be done if a person already has the publication we are offering? Why not apply the Bible principle found at 1 Corinthians 3:6-9? The seed has already been planted. Take advantage of the opportunity to water it by giving a further witness to the individual. Or we might say something like: “I am very pleased that you already have a copy of this publication. No doubt you have enjoyed reading it. If I may, I would like to point out how you can benefit even more from the book. It will only take a few minutes.” Then demonstrate how we study the Bible with the help of the publication. Our purpose at the door does not change when the householder already has a book. Remember, our primary goal is to “make disciples.”​—Matt. 28:19.
INFORMAL WITNESSING
6 We should also be alert to the many opportunities we may have to present literature in informal witnessing. Think of ways to witness to visitors, relatives, workmates, schoolmates, people we meet when shopping, and those we meet between homes or doors when we are in the field service. Plan ahead, having literature available to present on such occasions whenever possible. Often, it is not difficult to carry one or more of the small publications with us. Much good can be accomplished through informal witnessing.​—1 Pet. 3:15.
7 Jehovah’s organization has generously supplied us with literature to keep us spiritually strong and to aid us in spreading the good news. Being alert to opportunities to offer Bible literature will help us magnify Jehovah’s name.​—Ps. 34:3.

