Effective Introductions
1 When sharing in the house-to-house work, we are constantly faced with the question, “What will I say first?” Experienced publishers who get good results in the field service offer a number of helpful suggestions. What are some of these?
2 First, it is important to be sincerely interested in the people to whom we speak. Such personal interest is demonstrated in both words and actions. It is important to take into consideration the viewpoint of the householder. Ask appropriate questions and then listen carefully to his response. By all means, we must try to help the householder see how he can benefit personally by considering the subject we are discussing.
CONSIDER THEIR VIEWPOINT
3 When Jesus was witnessing to the Samaritan woman at a well near Sychar, some of his expressions sounded strange to her. They were not in harmony with her thinking or the way she worshiped. Jesus carefully listened, and when making a reply, he took into consideration what she said. He wanted to help her. (John 4:13, 14, 19-26) Do we endeavor to follow Jesus’ example in this respect as we share in the witness work?
4 If people in your territory respond to your opening words by saying, “I have my own religion,” what might you do? The Bible writer said: “The heart of the righteous one meditates so as to answer.” (Prov. 15:28) Do you do this? Have you considered the information on pages 18-19 of the Reasoning book with the principle of this scripture in mind? You might also work with publishers who are effective in field service in order to learn how to make your introductions more effective.
5 In areas where many people use the objection that they have their own religion, you may find it beneficial to anticipate their comment and bring up the subject first. For example, after an initial greeting, you might say: “Do you have your own religion? [Listen to their reply.] I thought you might because most people in this area do. However, the reason for my call this morning is . . . ” Then continue with the subject you wish to discuss.
6 If many householders say, “I’m busy,” you could select one or more of the ideas expressed on pages 19-20 of the Reasoning book and adapt them to the needs of your territory. Variations of these expressions may be used in anticipation of objections that are heard frequently.
USING INTRODUCTIONS FROM THE REASONING BOOK
7 Many are finding good success in using the introductions on pages 9-15 of the Reasoning book. You will notice that these consider the subjects people are generally concerned with, such as current events, personal safety, employment, housing, family life, and the future. However, notice also that the wording of the suggested introductions in the Reasoning book invites the householder to express himself. It helps him to see the importance of the subject presented and that it affects him personally. Effective use of these introductions may prevent householders from using some of the more common objections.
8 Give careful thought to introductions that you believe will be most effective in your territory. Learn to use the introductions in the Reasoning book. Benefit from the experience of other publishers. Pray for Jehovah’s blessing on your efforts. With good effort and Jehovah’s blessing, it may be that more people in your territory will respond favorably to the good news of salvation.

