Improving Our Effectiveness as Ministers
1 Since Kingdom interests take first place in our lives, we should be motivated to excel in the ministry as our chosen career. (Mark 13:10) No matter how long we may have been preaching, we want to keep on improving our effectiveness as ministers. How can we do this?
2 Many people who are successful in professional fields continually seek to update their knowledge and skills. Their livelihood may depend on it. As conscientious ministers, we also need to be diligent to improve our ability to make disciples, teaching others about God’s Kingdom. We should look for new and fresh approaches that appeal to all sorts of people.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
MEET THE CHALLENGE
3 Now that Jehovah is speeding up the ingathering of sheeplike ones, many of us are calling on our neighbors more often. Increased witnessing activity by so many more publishers and pioneers is stirring up the world field. Because of our increased activity, presentations that were effective at one time may no longer appeal to the people we meet. The quality of our ministry may need to be improved.
4 It is necessary to maintain a positive attitude in speaking with people in order to be truly skillful in our work. Making good use of the practical suggestions given in the July 15, 1988, issue of The Watchtower can help us in this. For example, page 16, paragraph 6, discusses how to introduce yourself in a pleasant and positive way in territory where you call every week and you are well known. Information on how to approach a person who told you last week, “I am involved in my own church, and it cares for all my spiritual needs,” is found on page 16, paragraph 5.
5 Have you worked your territory with a direct offer of a free home Bible study? Do you work business territory held by your congregation? Is it possible to do street witnessing at appropriate and productive hours? By all means, review the fine suggestions given in the July 15, 1988, Watchtower. Applying such suggestions can help us to improve our effectiveness as ministers.
6 Being effective also involves thoroughness. (Eph. 6:13) Be alert to notice where more than one family lives in a house. Some people live in basement apartments, above garages, or in other locations not directly accessible from the front door. Seek out various family members​—an older person who may not ordinarily come to the door or someone who may be at work when calls are usually made at the home. It may be that by calling at another hour, you may meet other family members. Evening witnessing often provides such opportunities.
MAKE IT OUR GOAL
7 Improving our effectiveness in the ministry is a worthy goal most of us can attain. It takes heartfelt prayer and advance preparation. As our effectiveness in the field service grows, we may be able to help someone else to make similar progress.​—Gal. 6:6.
8 Remember, our teaching work will not end with the “great tribulation.” (Matt. 24:21) We anticipate years of helping resurrected ones to learn Jehovah’s ways. Our joy during the Millennium will surely abound as we see taught ones loyally submit to Christ’s reign. By improving our effectiveness in the preaching and teaching work, we can accomplish more in our ministry​—to the honor and praise of Jehovah.

