Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 1
Song 25
 9 min: Local announcements. Also, highlight January offer as stated under Announcements. Provide names of older publications in stock locally. Briefly consider introductions that might be used with current Topic for Conversation. If designated older books are not available, highlight use of Worldwide Security book for the contribution of $1.
18 min: “1990 ‘Pure Language’ District Convention”​—Part One. Read December 15, 1989, convention assignment letter. Question-and-answer consideration of paragraphs 1-11 of insert by congregation secretary. Read ONLY paragraphs 7, 9, and 10, and make application of scriptures as time allows.
18 min: “1990 ‘Pure Language’ District Convention”​—Part Two. Discussion with audience of paragraphs 12-16 of insert by presiding overseer. Read scriptures and paragraphs that apply locally, as time allows. Highlight need to select accommodations from Recommended Lodging Locations list, and commend those cooperating with the rooming arrangement.
Song 24 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 8
Song 54
 5 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Announce field service arrangements for the weekend.
25 min: Medical Document and Identity Card. Secretary has cards distributed and thoroughly considers January 1, 1990, letter on Medical Document for baptized publishers and Identity Card for unbaptized minor children of Witness parent or parents. Reason with audience on why instructions should be followed carefully in order to make cards serve most effectively for our protection.
15 min: “Be Alert to Offer Bible Literature.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. When considering paragraph 5, include a demonstration of a publisher’s offering to start a Bible study where the householder already has the publication(s) being offered. Also, conduct brief interview with publisher who has been successful in placing literature and starting studies.
Song 63 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 15
Song 4
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Include Society’s acknowledgment of all contributions as noted on December statement(s). Commend congregation for material support of Kingdom work locally and worldwide.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Using Tracts Effectively.” Questions and answers. When considering paragraphs 5 and 6, include two demonstrations showing how (1) Life in a Peaceful New World and (2) Why You Can Trust the Bible can be used as part of an introduction. Not necessary to give entire presentation but simply demonstrate how to make transition to Topic for Conversation. Stress value of taking initiative to use tracts at every opportunity. Announce congregation’s field service arrangements, and invite all to share.
15 min: “How Can I Cope With Peer Pressure?” Qualified elder tactfully discusses points from chapter 9 of Young People Ask book with two exemplary youths. Acknowledge briefly that the desire to be popular and to be accepted by peers is strong. Even adults can be affected by such pressure. Has it been easy for youths to face this? How have they been successful in resisting it? Use “Questions for Discussion” on page 80 to draw youths out and show how it is possible to develop the strength to stand up to peer pressure. Express appreciation for the good example youths in congregation are setting. Jehovah is well pleased by their fine conduct and is honored by it.​—Prov. 27:11.
Song 188 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 22
Song 171
 8 min: Local announcements. Review congregation’s field service schedule for week. Encourage all who can to make service arrangements for this weekend.
12 min: Territory Seldom Worked. If the local congregation has territory that is seldom worked, encourage more regular coverage of this territory. Read the Society’s letter dated January 1, 1990, regarding territory seldom worked. Make local application.
15 min: “Improving Our Effectiveness as Ministers.” Questions and answers. When considering paragraph 4, include two brief demonstrations of the suggested introductions in paragraphs 5 and 6 on page 16 of the July 15, 1988, Watchtower. These should be given in a sincere and positive manner.
10 min: Local needs or talk on “What It Means to Be a Christian.” This should be based on material in Insight, Volume 1, pages 440-1. Highlight importance of following Jesus’ example in love and self-sacrifice.
Song 168 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 29
Song 135
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. “Identifying Kingdom Halls.” Comment on local application.
15 min: 1990 Yearbook Highlights. Well-prepared talk on introductory material in 1990 Yearbook. Feature outstanding achievements enjoyed by Jehovah’s people as a result of Jehovah’s blessing on their zealous service. As time allows, relate some of the encouraging experiences given. Reports from our brothers worldwide should move all of us to share fully in Jehovah’s service. Encourage all to benefit from reading the Yearbook.
20 min: “Effective Introductions.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Demonstrate introduction outlined in paragraph 5. Demonstrate also one of the introductions in the Reasoning book (pp. 9-15) that would be appropriate for your territory. Encourage brothers to carry the Reasoning book with them in the field service and to use it in answering questions and overcoming objections. Encourage all to share in the field service this weekend.
Song 108 and concluding prayer.

