Presenting the Good News​—By Using Tracts Effectively
1 During the 1987 “Trust in Jehovah” District Convention, four new tracts were released. They are entitled Why You Can Trust the Bible, What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe?, Life in a Peaceful New World, and What Hope for Dead Loved Ones? Have you been using these tracts effectively in the field?
2 Many publishers leave tracts at doors where no one is at home. And they give them to people who are too busy to listen at the time a call is made. Some find that if they use a tract to introduce themselves at the door, it helps to stimulate the householder’s interest. Others prefer offering them as a free gift on calls where no literature is placed but where some interest is shown.
WHEN AND HOW TO USE THEM
3 By being versatile and alert to opportunities, you may find many occasions to offer tracts. For instance, tracts can be helpful when witnessing to relatives. You can use tracts when you are on vacation, while shopping and traveling, at school, or at your place of employment. Do you keep tracts within easy reach, perhaps in your coat or shirt pocket, purse, or briefcase? Having tracts with you at all times may encourage you to witness informally. Why not look for occasions to offer tracts?
4 Regardless of the occasion, you can use the tracts to give a more effective witness. Although the message they contain is brief, what they say is very convincing and is supported with clear Scriptural argumentation. The tracts are colorfully illustrated and can be useful tools to accomplish much good in the ministry. Be alert to offer them to people everywhere.
IN FIELD SERVICE
5 Have you taken advantage of the thought-provoking titles of the tracts to cultivate interest in the Kingdom message when working from house to house? Some publishers highlight the title of a tract right away in their introduction. Why not try this approach yourself? You might say: “Hello. I’m glad to find you at home. I have volunteered to share in delivering a very important message. It is found in this tract Life in a Peaceful New World. This is your copy. It is free. [Give it to the householder, and direct attention to the cover.] Wouldn’t you like to live in such peaceful surroundings?” If circumstances then allow, continue with the Topic for Conversation, and tie in the offer for the month.
6 Depending on where you live, you may find it beneficial to state that your message is from the Bible. The tract Why You Can Trust the Bible may be very effective in your area. For instance, you might say: “We are leaving a free Bible message with our neighbors today. Here is your copy. [Give it to the householder.] Notice the subject is about the Bible. Do you think that people have lost confidence in the Bible today? [Allow for a response.] This tract will help you see why we can trust what the Bible says.” Continue with the Topic for Conversation, showing the blessings God has in store for the earth.
7 Distributing Bible tracts is a time-tested and effective means of presenting the “good news.” (Matt. 24:14) They play an important role in our public ministry and when we are witnessing informally. Let us use our beautiful tracts effectively to give a fine witness and thus help others learn about God’s Kingdom.

