
Do You Remember?




Have you carefully read the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
What type of sin was Jesus speaking of in the counsel outlined at Matthew 18:15-17?
He was speaking of matters that can be settled between those directly involved. But the sin is serious enough to merit disfellowshipping if the matter is not settled. For example, the sin might be slander, or it might involve fraud.​—w16.05, p. 7.
What can you do to make Bible reading more beneficial?
You can do the following: Read with an open mind, seeking lessons that you can apply; ask yourself such questions as ‘How can I use this to help others?’; and use available tools to do research on the material you just read.​—w16.05, pp. 24-26.
Is it wrong for a Christian to grieve even while believing in the resurrection?
Faith in the resurrection does not eliminate the deep loss a Christian may feel. Abraham mourned the death of Sarah. (Gen. 23:2) In time, the grief will soften.​—wp16.3, p. 4.
Whom do the man with the secretary’s inkhorn, mentioned in Ezekiel chapter 9, and the six men with weapons symbolize?
We understand them to picture heavenly forces that were involved in the destruction of Jerusalem and that will be involved in bringing destruction at Armageddon. In the modern-day fulfillment, the man with the inkhorn represents Jesus Christ, who marks those who will survive.​—w16.06, pp. 16-17.
The Bible survived what sorts of threats?
It survived (1) the threat of decay of the materials used to write on, such as papyrus and parchment; (2) opposition by political and religious leaders who tried to destroy it; and (3) attempts by some to alter its message.​—wp16.4, pp. 4-7.
What are ways in which a Christian might simplify his life?
Identify your actual needs, and eliminate unnecessary expenses. Prepare a realistic budget. Dispose of things you do not use, and pay off debts. Cut back on your employment, and plan how to expand your ministry.​—w16.07, p. 10.
The Bible identifies what as more valuable than gold or silver?
Job 28:12, 15 shows that divine wisdom is better than gold or silver. As you seek it, strive to remain humble and strong in faith.​—w16.08, pp. 18-19.
Is it proper for a brother today to have a beard?
In some cultures, a neat beard may be acceptable and may not detract from the Kingdom message. Still, some brothers might decide not to have a beard. (1 Cor. 8:9) In other cultures and localities, beards are not considered acceptable for Christian ministers.​—w16.09, p. 21.
Why can we trust the Bible record of David versus Goliath?
The height given for Goliath is just six inches (15 cm) taller than that of the tallest man documented in modern times. David was a real person, as confirmed by an ancient inscription that mentions the house of David and by what Jesus said. The recorded geographic details match known facts.​—wp16.5, p. 13.
How do knowledge, understanding, and wisdom differ?
A person who has knowledge takes in information, or facts. Someone who has understanding can see how one fact relates to another. But a person who has wisdom is able to combine knowledge with understanding and use them well.​—w16.10, p. 18.




