Act On the Call for Kingdom Proclaimers
1 “Say among the nations: ‘Jehovah himself has become king.’” This call, found at Psalm 96:10, is a call to action. It reminds us that there is a work to be done. Personal and family study, also meeting attendance, are vital in our lives. They have various purposes, and one is to make us better preachers and teachers of the good news. Yes, Jehovah’s people are evangelizers and that requires that we act. Studying and meeting together take place primarily at home and at the Kingdom Hall. Heeding the call issued at Psalm 96:10 means moving out into the territory and becoming a proclaimer.
2 And what joy is to be found in that activity! You represent “Jehovah himself,” the Creator and universal Sovereign, by His invitation. The work is under angelic direction. (Rev. 14:6) The truths preached are of the utmost importance, involving the lives of those with whom we speak. We please the One we serve. (Prov. 27:11) We ourselves are rewarded with eternal life. (Rom. 10:10) So there are many reasons for being joyful in Jehovah’s service.
3 While we do not exert any pressure on our brothers to engage in the field ministry, it is entirely appropriate for us to set a good example of zeal in the field ministry and then lovingly invite or even exhort them to share our happiness in speaking the truth to others. Is it possible that every publisher in the congregation could be helped to share in April? Surely the spirit of the entire congregation would be strengthened if this took place, and what a mighty shout of praise to Jehovah that would be!
4 To whom is this call addressed? Not alone to the experienced publishers in the congregation. Is this not a good time to direct some attention to those with whom we have been studying for a while? If they have come to an accurate knowledge of the truth, if their hearts have been appreciatively touched by what they have learned and if they are ordering their lives so as to conform to Christian principles, then should we hold back from inviting them to accompany us in the field ministry?
5 This month will provide many occasions for upbuilding association and activity. Having been stirred to increased appreciation by the theocratic events of March, fellow workers with God eagerly look forward to the service in which he now allows us to share. April with its five weekends should prove to be an outstanding magazine month. The April 15 Watchtower will contain the special talk “Mankind’s Deliverance into God’s New Order,” and the Awake! of April 22 will have revealing information on the theme “Where Is Religion Leading Mankind?” What a fine thing it would be if all in our territories could be given the opportunity to read these two timely issues!
6 This is also the final month for the Watchtower campaign and there will be many promises to follow through on and other prospects on which to make back-calls. Then there is the special talk to be given on Sunday, April 23, entitled “Jehovah Has Become King​—How We Know It.” Here is “food” we will thank Jehovah for as we listen attentively along with interested ones we have invited.
7 How many will act on the call for Kingdom proclaimers? The command to make disciples, as found at Matthew 28:18, 19, does not say. Neither does the command to preach the good news to all nations, as given at Matthew 24:14, mention any number. But Revelation 7:9, 15 very encouragingly foretells that “a great crowd” would respond and enthusiastically serve Jehovah in his temple day and night. Why not be certain that we personally are responding to the call to act, and then patiently take note of Jehovah’s maneuvering of matters to His praise? There is much with which to be occupied during April, and God’s promise is that there will be rich fruitage.
[Blurb on page 1]
Act on the call for Kingdom proclaimers

