Presenting the Good News​—With Special Magazines
1 Recently you contacted many of the public officials concerned with law enforcement to make available to them the Awake! magazine discussing the question “Are Prisons the Answer?” The response was excellent. Both prison officials and police officers wrote letters of appreciation. In one locality, it was reported, that issue of Awake! was even made required reading for rookie policemen.
2 This kind of response is not new. People representing various professions have, in the past, expressed similar appreciation for special articles in magazines that you have distributed. This, of course, is in addition to the regular distribution of the magazines to people of all kinds from week to week.
3 You might wonder just what is accomplished by such special magazines and the unusual efforts to distribute them to those persons who are particularly concerned with that problem or subject. One of the good things that results is the building of respect for Jehovah’s people, the Bible principles they live by and the work they do. Additionally, they learn that there is a group of people practicing these righteous principles and who, as a result, do not cause or add to the problems of the community but, rather, are an influence for good. Thus prejudice is broken down and the way opened for an additional witness at some future time.
4 We believe that many of those same men, mentioned above, who read the articles on prisons would appreciate the excellent articles in the May 1 issue of The Watchtower. Because of what they have already read, they should be quite receptive. As a result, some of them may be aided to appreciate the truth. And as Paul wrote to Timothy, it is God’s will that “all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.”​—1 Tim. 2:1-4.
5 The May 1 issue of The Watchtower is particularly appropriate for distribution to judges, the police and prison officials because it discusses matters that are of special concern to them. One of the main subjects is “How Do You View Authority?” This is a serious problem to these men, and many of them will no doubt appreciate the viewpoint that The Watchtower takes on this matter. Also, there is one of the articles dealing with the problems of young folks, which is another matter with which officials constantly struggle. The same magazine contains a fine discussion of the subject “Why Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Call on You Repeatedly?” This should help in giving a fine witness. We suggest that you put forth the same effort to reach officials with this magazine as you did with the Awake!
6 There are other people who might also be appreciative of the information in this issue of The Watchtower. We have in mind those who are employers. Also, school teachers, counselors and school administrators. Disrespect for authority is a common concern of all these people, and their problems are given attention in this magazine. What can you do as an individual​—and perhaps working together with others in the congregation—​to get this issue of The Watchtower into the hands of the people who may be benefited from it most in seeing that God’s Word has the solution to the problems with which they are faced?
7 There are sincere persons in the world today who want to accomplish good on behalf of their fellowman. But they are often frustrated in their experimenting with various man-made remedies that really never work. They find that things just get worse. Then if they read what God has to say, they may realize that this is what they have been looking for all the time.
8 Jehovah is accomplishing a marvelous work in these “last days.” Not only are people hearing the good news preached orally as we speak the truth on every appropriate occasion but many are reading the publications that we distribute.
9 Are we making the best use of the magazines in presenting the good news? Appreciating the good that can be accomplished, are we presenting them with confidence? Why not use them fully both in our regular witnessing and for special groups that might be interested?
[Blurb on page 4]
Offer special magazines everywhere.

