Strength for All Things
1 There is much to do, isn’t there? Study, attending meetings, field service, visiting and encouraging others, to say nothing of the unexpected things that come up. No matter who we are or what position we hold in the congregation, there are times when it seems there is more to do than time permits. When those times come, do not forget Paul’s words at Philippians 4:13: “For all things I have the strength by virtue of him who imparts power to me.”
2 Yes, Paul was referring to God, who has unlimited power and who backs up his servants as they have need. That does not mean that he will perform a miracle on our behalf just because we have an unusual amount of work to do. We must put forth a real effort, using our various capabilities, but God will help us, strengthening us to accomplish any divinely assigned task. Note what Paul further says at 2 Corinthians 4:7: “However, we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the power beyond what is normal may be God’s and not that of ourselves.”
3 So, it is obvious that there is no reason to be discouraged when there is much to do. In fact, it is good to have much to do in Jehovah’s service. First Corinthians 15:58 says: “Consequently, my beloved brothers, become steadfast, unmovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.” Rather than our experiencing discouragement when there is much to do, God provides for us to be happy as we keep caring for his interests. If we are unhappy in our abundance of work, could it be because we do not have quite the right Scriptural view?
4 Do you sometimes struggle with a student talk for the ministry school, spending quite a bit of time on it to the exclusion of other things? Well, it does take time to prepare a good talk and fix the thoughts in mind. Find joy in the fact that here is a subject that you will learn thoroughly and remember for a long time, maybe forever. Be happy in knowing that in delivering a good talk you will contribute a great deal to the spirituality of the congregation. Find satisfaction in completing an assignment and doing it well.
5 Do others seem to find more time to engage in the field ministry than you do? Well, maybe they have more experience in being good organizers and will be willing to help you with some practical suggestions. Possibly they have eliminated some worldly distracting activity in order to bring about more favorable circumstances for themselves, and from this you can learn. (Eph. 5:15, 16) But, it might also be true that you have family or other responsibilities that they do not have and thus they actually have more time available to devote to the field ministry. So after considering your own circumstances and making any advantageous adjustments possible, rest assured that Jehovah knows your circumstances. He does not withhold his approval because someone else, in different circumstances, is able to do more than you can do. (Luke 21:1-4) Rejoice in what you are able to do. Remember, though, that field service schedules can often be improved, and thus continue seeking ways to make such improvements, looking to Jehovah to bless your efforts. Proverbs 16:3 says: “Roll your works upon Jehovah himself and your plans will be firmly established.”
6 Are you a servant who has much responsibility? When you have put forth your best efforts, there is no need to be depressed about the things you cannot get done. It is good to be sure, however, that you are well organized so as to get the most important things done. Keeping a daily reminder will help you so that nothing is forgotten. Maybe someone can be assigned to assist you in some appropriate matters. Shouldering responsibility takes time and effort, but what a joy to realize that Jehovah counted you worthy of that position and that you have the confidence and respect of your brothers. Conform fully to what Jehovah in his Word has said concerning serving your brothers, appreciating that success comes only in this way. Proverbs 3:5, 6 says: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.” Jehovah’s active force, along with your sincere efforts, will accomplish the desired results.
7 Yes, there is much to do in Jehovah’s service in these “last days.” But to what other work would we rather devote our time? There is nothing that is more joyful and satisfying than having a part in the Christian ministry. And as we keep applying ourselves, always seeking to do Jehovah’s will, finding happiness in his work, it will be true of us as was true of the apostle Paul: “For all things I have the strength by virtue of him who imparts power to me.”

