Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING APRIL 9
Theme: Serve Jehovah the King Whole-souled. (Ps. 96:10; Col. 3:23, 24) Song 1.
 7 min: Introduction, text and comments. Include some Theocratic News items along with congregation report for March.
15 min: “Act On the Call for Kingdom Proclaimers.” Questions and answers. Might demonstrate points in paragraph 6 regarding following through on all back-calls and promises for subscriptions. Emphasize the importance of this. Can show two publishers discussing what they are determined to do. One tells of how she has gone through her witnessing case and searched out all house-to-house records, notes, expired-subscription slips and is in the process of arranging all of these calls in an orderly fashion and will schedule her affairs so as to contact each one of these persons so that they can have the subscriptions if there is interest. If people are not home, she will phone or make calls on different days and at different times of the day. She may even write some letters. The other publisher is impressed by the plan and is determined to do the same thing. They arrange to check with one another during the month and also make some arrangements to work together.
27 min: The Benefits of Being Long-suffering. (“Aid,” pp. 1073, 1074) In introducing this part, stress the need for us to imitate Jehovah in his expression of long-suffering, a fruitage of his spirit. While it will not be necessary to read all the scriptures, be sure that the ones used are explained and applied in such a way as to make the main points stand out. The main goal is, not rapid coverage, but imparting understanding. (a) What is long-suffering? (“Aid,” p. 1073) (b) How have we personally benefited from Jehovah’s long-suffering, and how should this affect our attitude toward those who transgress against us? (Rom. 9:22-24; 1 Thess. 5:14, 15) (c) Why should Jehovah’s exercise of long-suffering deter us from violating his laws? (2 Cor. 6:1) (d) When we are undergoing ridicule at work or at school, why can we, as Colossians 1:11 says, “be long-suffering with joy”? (Prov. 27:11; 1 Tim. 4:16; Heb. 6:10-12) (e) What does Jesus’ example of long-suffering teach us about our responsibilities toward brothers who are very sensitive about such matters as food or drink? (Rom. 14:1-3; 15:1-3; “Aid,” p. 1392, par. 2) (f) Why would our failure to manifest long-suffering toward those who are spiritually weak be injurious to them as well as to ourselves? (Mark 9:42; 1 Cor. 10:30-33) (g) From what will long-suffering protect us when one of our brothers or sisters speaks somewhat harshly to us? (Prov. 25:28; Eccl. 7:9) (h) What will enable a sister to be long-suffering with an unbelieving husband? (1 Pet. 3:1-6; “Aid,” p. 1073, par. 6) (i) How can Jesus’ example help a husband to be long-suffering toward his wife? (Eph. 5:25-29) (j) When children do not respond to the truth, what hope can assist parents to be long-suffering? (Luke 15:20-24)
 3 min: Accounts report.
 8 min: Concluding comments. Discuss highlights of special April 15 “Watchtower” and April 22 “Awake!” with suggestions on what to say in presenting them. Remind audience to bring April 1 “Watchtower” to next two meetings and to prepare well in advance as material on “A Test of Humility” will be covered in regular “Watchtower” study fashion. Song 22.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 16
Theme: “Humble Yourselves, Therefore, Under the Mighty Hand of God.” (1 Pet. 5:6) Song 23.
10 min: Introduction, text and comments. Incorporate major thoughts from Branch Letter.
20 min: “A Test of Humility.” From “The Watchtower” of April 1, 1972. Consider first half of article. Last half to be considered next service meeting. To be covered in regular “Watchtower” study fashion. Chairman should make up his own questions, taking paragraphs singly or in groups, as material and available time dictate. Look up and read scriptures. Read all paragraphs. Involves the appointment of elders and ministerial servants; possibly congregation servant or other member of committee could handle this.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Special Magazines.” Present in form of talk, but draw audience into discussion freely. If time allows, demonstrate how a special issue of the magazines might be presented to one who likely would be interested in the subject. Include use of special issues being distributed during April.
12 min: Concluding comments. Mention special talk on Sunday, “Jehovah Has Become King​—How We Know It.” Encourage all to be in attendance with interested ones. Song 43.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 23
Theme: Strength from the Right Source for All Things. (Phil. 4:13) Song 77.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “Strength for All Things.” Questions and answers.
20 min: “A Test of Humility.” Conclude study of article from April 1, 1972, “Watchtower,” following the same suggestions for handling as mentioned in last week’s service meeting. Same brother or another capable brother could conduct this part.
12 min: “What Do You Really Know About God?” Discussion of Bible study folder. Distribute copy of folder to each one in audience.
(2 min.) Chairman: Folder gives fine witness concerning Jehovah. Acquaints one with “Know Jehovah” book, but outlines study arrangement in such a way that you can use any book you choose. Leave folder with literature or when literature refused, also when no one at home, or any other time. Prepare by studying it carefully. Discuss it with family. Remember, goal is to give a witness and to start studies.
(4 min.) Discuss with audience the contents of study folder. Isolate and make clear just what questions are asked and how answered in folder. Get publishers to think and then make expression.
(4 min.) One or two brief demonstrations of how folder can be used under different circumstances.
(2 min.) (Chairman: Summarize points. Emphasize being alert to opportunities to use it and also being flexible in various situations. Many new studies will undoubtedly be started as good use is made of this folder.
 8 min: Concluding comments. Bring meeting to close with Scriptural discussion of subject “Do You Keep Your Word?” from “Watchtower” of January 1, 1972. Song 87.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 30
Theme: Let People Know the Prophetic Truths. (Isa. 12:5) Song 91.
12 min: Introduction, text, comments and Question Box.
20 min: “Living a Dedicated Life.” From “The Watchtower” of February 15, 1972. Can be given in the form of a talk but also drawing the audience into the discussion. This information sets out the principles involving dedication and its relationship to problems that many brothers are now facing. Thus the one assigned should prepare thoroughly so that important points are made clear.
15 min: Encouraging Others to Know Jehovah.
(2 min.) Chairman: Offer for May will be the “Know Jehovah” book. Publishers enjoyed presenting this book in November and placed many of them. We want to be prepared to present it effectively this month. We are better acquainted with it now, having been studying it at our book studies and having heard the eight public talks on it. Good to review some points from book now that can be used in field to demonstrate purpose and value of it. What did publishers find successful in creating interest in November? Can also select points from insert in “Kingdom Ministry” of October 1971 and mention some of these.
(6 min.) Comments from audience on what worked for them in presenting the “Know Jehovah” book. Chairman could talk to some publishers beforehand so that they can give consideration to this in advance and thus discussion will provide profitable suggestions.
(5 min.) Demonstration of how book might be presented, using the “Know Jehovah” sermon as outlined on page 2 of October “Kingdom Ministry.”
(2 min.) Chairman: Summarize points. Encourage publishers to have full share in distribution of “Know Jehovah” book in May.
13 min: Concluding comments. Bring meeting to a close with talk on theme for May, “Let People Know the Prophetic Truths.” (Isa. 12:5) Song 59.
WEEK STARTING MAY 7
You may plan your own service meeting for this evening.

