Communication That Leads to Life
OF ALL earth’s creatures, humans are the only ones not content simply to communicate with one another. Regardless of nationality, social status, gender, or educational level, humans have demonstrated an innate desire to communicate with the highest being, namely, God.
Is that just a foolish superstition? By no means! As mentioned in the preceding article, God created humans in his image. He placed within us a spiritual capacity. This includes the desire to communicate with him as our heavenly Father. (Genesis 1:27; Matthew 5:3) In fact, God views communication with him as so important that he is referred to as the “Hearer of prayer.”—Psalm 65:2.
What an honor it is to pray to the Almighty! Most people would consider it a privilege to speak privately with an important dignitary, such as a president or a prime minister. Yet, Jehovah God is the highest personage in the universe! And we do not have to make an appointment to speak to him. We can pray anytime, anywhere. We can even address God silently from the heart. (1 Samuel 1:12-15) However, Jehovah does require that we be sincere and that we listen obediently to him. (Micah 6:8; Matthew 6:5-13) After all, good communication is a two-way process, is it not?
Do You Listen to God?
How does one listen to God? Primarily by reading and applying the teachings found in his written Word, the Holy Bible. (2 Timothy 3:16; 2 Peter 1:20, 21) “Man must live . . . on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth,” said Jesus. (Matthew 4:4) Do you listen to God by reading and applying his written Word?
Those who regularly communicate with Jehovah gain his favor and enjoy “the peace of God that excels all thought.” (Philippians 4:6, 7; Proverbs 1:33) They also have the prospect of everlasting life on a paradise earth, free from all the anxiety and suffering we experience today. (Psalm 37:29; John 17:3) What wonderful rewards for making the best possible use of the miracle of intelligent communication!
[Picture on page 10]
Communication with God involves reading the Bible and praying

