Announcements
● Literature offer for July and August: Any 32-page brochure except the School brochure. September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? October: Subscription to either Awake! or The Watchtower or both.
● Anyone making plans to begin regular pioneer service on September 1, 1990, should fill out an application promptly and submit it to the elders for review. After the application is approved and signed by the Congregation Service Committee, it should be mailed to the Society by the early part of August. By forwarding approved applications early, requests for retroactive appointments can be avoided.​—See August 1986 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, paragraphs 21-26.
● An adequate supply of forms for use during the 1991 service year is being sent to each congregation. These forms should not be wasted. They should be used only for their intended purpose.
● A supply of Medical Document and Identity Cards is being shipped to the congregations. These cards are not to be given out immediately upon their receipt but should be held until further direction is given on issuing them to the brothers at the end of the calendar year. Publisher identification cards (S-65) may be issued according to what was stated in the February 1989 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4.
● Beginning in September, circuit overseers will give the public talk “Live With Soundness of Mind in a Depraved World.”
● New Publications Available:
Bible Topics for Discussion​—Samoan
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Tiddim Chin
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Chitonga
Watch Tower Publications Index 1986-1988​—German
Watch Tower Publications Index 1987​—Portuguese
Tract No. 13​—Hmong
Tract No. 14​—Hmong
Tract No. 15​—Hmong
Tract No. 16​—Hmong
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
My Book of Bible Stories (set of four cassettes in an album)​—Croatian
The Second of Kings (set of two cassettes)​—Italian
Judges, Ruth (set of two cassettes)​—Spanish
Kingdom Melodies Album (empty)​—Spanish

