Encourage Bible Students to Progress
1 The world thinks of progress primarily from a technological or material standpoint. But Jehovah’s people are not that way. Rather, we exert ourselves to be spiritually progressive. We are glad to have received the encouragement that led us to become active and fruitful disciples of Christ.​—John 15:8; 2 Pet. 1:5-8.
2 In the Gospels the term “disciple” is applied principally to those who not only believe in Christ’s teachings but also follow them closely. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Do Bible students appreciate that fact? How can we encourage them to make progress in becoming disciples?
DIRECT INTEREST TO THE ORGANIZATION
3 The student’s progress is definitely linked to his appreciation for Jehovah’s organization. Therefore, part of our responsibility as teachers is to direct the student’s interest toward God’s organization. The brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide provides an excellent framework for doing this. Does your Bible student have a copy? If not, see that he receives one right away. Encourage him to read it, and explain to him that you will be considering just a brief portion of it at each study.
4 The information on pages 14 and 15 of the Doing God’s Will brochure is designed to build appreciation for each of the congregation meetings. Why not cover just one or two paragraphs each week? Show how each meeting gives training and instruction to fill a particular need. Help the student to see that spiritual growth results from “the gathering of ourselves together.” (Heb. 10:24, 25) Warmly encourage him to join us at the Kingdom Hall. There he will personally experience the unity and love we enjoy as Jehovah’s congregated people.​—Ps. 133:1; John 13:35.
STIMULATE SPIRITUAL GROWTH
5 New ones need to become true students of God’s Word, progressing in knowledge, understanding, and application of its principles. For this reason we will continue the study in the Live Forever book and United in Worship or True Peace book even if the student gets baptized before completing these publications. The student can receive copies of these books even if he will not be ready to begin studying a second book for several months. This may whet his spiritual appetite, stimulating him to do additional reading that will hasten his progress. Also, we should point out the value of having Watchtower and Awake! subscriptions and obtaining other publications of the Society in order to keep up with the “measure of food supplies at the proper time.” (Luke 12:42) Those who do so will be rooted, built up, and stabilized in the faith.​—Col. 2:7.
6 As prospective fellow Witnesses of Jehovah, Bible students need our help if they are to grow to maturity. (Heb. 5:14) We should offer appropriate commendation to encourage progress. (Phil. 3:16) Is he sharing with family and acquaintances the things he is learning? If he qualifies, has he joined the Theocratic Ministry School? Is he desirous of becoming a publisher of the good news?
7 If we as teachers do our part, we can look forward to Jehovah’s rich blessing. (2 Cor. 9:6) Never should we forget the power of prayer in behalf of Bible students. Ask Jehovah to direct them to respond to what they are learning. (1 Cor. 3:6, 7) May they take decisive action to become actively associated with the congregation and thus add further glory and praise to Jehovah’s name.

