Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JULY 2
Song 174
10 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Highlight articles that might be used in magazine activity this Saturday. Two demonstrations, each highlighting an article from one magazine.
25 min: “Use Summer Wisely.” Question-and-answer coverage. Include ten-minute demonstration of current Topic, offering “Look!” brochure, and demonstrating how to use it as outlined in paragraph 7. Include definite arrangement for return visit.
10 min: Brochure Talking Points. Involve audience in pointing out some highlights from various brochures congregation has in stock for use in service. May want to have some capable publishers assigned ahead of time.
Song 20 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 9
Song 156
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Include any donation acknowledgments. Commend congregation for financial support of worldwide Kingdom work as well as caring for local needs.
20 min: “Encourage Bible Students to Progress.” Question-and-answer discussion. In considering paragraph 4, have well-prepared demonstration showing how an experienced publisher encourages student to make progress during their discussion of paragraph 3 on page 14 of Doing God’s Will brochure.
15 min: When May a Bible Student Share in the Public Ministry? Talk by elder based on December 1, 1989, Watchtower, “Questions From Readers,” page 31. Emphasize that new ones, aside from our own children, should not be invited to accompany us in the field ministry until two elders have spoken with them and have determined that they qualify.
Song 217 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 16
Song 220
10 min: Local announcements. Review highlights of April report. Commend congregation for accomplishments locally. Encourage share in field service this coming weekend.
20 min: “Your Part in Making Meetings Beneficial.” Elder handles question-and-answer discussion. Emphasize what needs attention locally. Commend where appropriate.
15 min: Weighing Your Prospects for Becoming a Pioneer. Encouraging talk with interviews. In the United States, we now have more than 60,000 regular pioneers from all walks of life and various circumstances. What has moved them to pioneer? Love for Jehovah and neighbor (Matt. 22:37-39); deep concern for people and a desire to help more get saved (1 Tim. 2:4); a self-sacrificing spirit in behalf of Kingdom interests. (1 Cor. 9:23) Desire must be cultivated. Are you doing this? Steps to take if you desire to pioneer: (1) Take matter to Jehovah in prayer (Matt. 7:7, 8; Phil. 4:6); (2) discuss with pioneers and elders (Prov. 15:22); (3) put tentative schedule in writing, weighing how it affects other Christian responsibilities (Luke 14:28); (4) set starting date, not waiting for totally ideal circumstances. (Eccl. 11:4) September a good time to start; may qualify for Pioneer Service School the following year. Interview one or two pioneers on how they overcame obstacles to pioneering. Be positive.
Song 128 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 23
Song 39
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Highlight main points in “Stay Awake and Keep Your Senses.”
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Telephone.” Question-and-answer coverage by service overseer. Include two demonstrations to show how telephone witnessing can be done and how to overcome common objections. Emphasize that this is an organized activity under the supervision of the service overseer and that good records must be kept.​—See November 1985 Our Kingdom Ministry, pages 5-6.
15 min: Local needs. Or talk based on article “Will You Benefit From Undeserved Kindness?” on pages 21-3 of the February 15, 1990, Watchtower.
Song 8 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 30
Song 10
10 min: Local announcements. Two demonstrations of suggested presentations, each highlighting an article from one magazine, for Saturday magazine work.
15 min: “Showing Trust in Jehovah by Pioneering.” Elder and ministerial servant discuss article in February 1990 Our Kingdom Ministry. Include practical suggestions that would be helpful to local congregation.
15 min: “Refresh Your Relatives With Waters of Truth.” Talk based on article in February 15, 1990, Watchtower, pages 25-7.
 5 min: Experiences in starting studies with brochures. (If none locally, may have experiences in placing brochures.)
Song 169 and concluding prayer.

