Presenting the Good News​—By Telephone
1 We prefer to preach the good news to people face-to-face, but circumstances may make witnessing over the telephone a necessary alternative. Publishers temporarily or permanently confined to their homes because of illness or physical disability may make good use of the telephone for witnessing. Also, telephone calls can be very successful in contacting the residents of high-security buildings, mobile-home courts, or other areas where one may not be permitted to enter without a prior invitation. Telephone witnessing presents unique challenges, but with careful thought and planning, these can be overcome.
2 Sometimes names may be obtained from directories in lobbies of buildings or from mailboxes. Telephone directories can then be used to locate the telephone numbers. This should be done under the direction of the service overseer so that telephone territories can be organized and complete records kept.
HOW TO PREPARE
3 A warm, pleasing voice is needed for effective telephone witnessing. Avoid making calls early in the day, late at night, and during mealtimes. It is not necessary to let the telephone ring many times. If you reach a telephone answering machine, you might say: “My name is . . . , and I am calling to share the Bible’s hope for the future. I will call you again.” It may be best to treat the call as a not-at-home and telephone again at another time.
4 Thoroughly rehearse your presentation beforehand so that it does not sound as if you are reading it. Make the householder feel that you are personally interested in him by attempting to involve him in the conversation. Personalize your call by using your first and last name in your introduction, and strive to use the householder’s name throughout the conversation.
5 Speak slowly and deliberately, but do not pause unless actually asking a question, as a pause may be interpreted as a question. You might say, “My name is . . . , and I am calling you because I am not able to come to see you personally.” Then, without pausing, you can continue as follows: “The purpose of my call is to invite your opinion on a very interesting question. Have you ever wondered if . . . ?” You can change the question by asking, “Has it ever occurred to you . . . ?” or “Have you ever thought about . . . ?” There are no wrong answers to these questions, and they provide an easy way for the householder to enter the conversation. Do not invite negative responses by saying, “I hope I am not interrupting you” or “I hope you are not too busy.” Assume it is a good time unless the householder tells you otherwise.
6 If the person asks, “Whom do you represent?” simply say without pausing, “I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and I am calling to invite your opinion on this interesting question. Have you ever wondered . . . ?” If the householder asks, “Where did you get my telephone number?” you could reply, “From the directory, and I am calling to invite your opinion on this interesting question. Has it ever occurred to you . . . ?”
7 Some have had success in simply telling the householder that we have a free program for answering Bible questions and then mentioning some of the chapter titles in the Live Forever book. Or you could say, “Since your building is secured due to high crime, I am calling to invite your opinion. Why do you think there is such a high crime rate today?”
8 In one high-security building, not much success was experienced until telephone witnessing was tried. The result was that 14 new Bible studies were started. Thus, limited-access buildings can constitute virtually untouched territory and have tremendous potential. With a positive attitude, knowing that we have Jehovah’s help, we may find telephone witnessing another effective way to present the good news.​—2 Tim. 4:5.

