Stay Awake and Keep Your Senses
1 In view of the oft-changing world scene, how appropriate that the circuit assembly theme for the 1991 service year is “Stay Awake and Keep Your Senses.” (1 Thess. 5:6) This series will begin in September. All of us should make preparations to attend as soon as our circuit overseer informs us of the dates.
2 Some of the program highlights will include a four-part symposium designed to help us ‘keep our senses in all things.’ (2 Tim. 4:5) In spite of a possibly senseless past, how can we now be successful in avoiding Satan’s snares and resisting the spirit of the world? Be sure not to miss out on this vital information. Throughout the two-day assembly, we will also have our attention drawn to practical counsel contained in the publication Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work. You may wish to bring your copy with you. Young ones in particular will want to pay special attention to the information directed to them by the circuit overseer on Saturday. As usual, there will be arrangements for baptism on Saturday, so those desiring to symbolize their dedication at the circuit assembly should let the presiding overseer know in advance as soon as possible.
3 On Sunday morning valuable lessons will be driven home by a series of demonstrations showing how we can benefit from adversities, including our own mistakes. In the afternoon the district overseer will deliver a public discourse on the subject “Acting Wisely in a Senseless World.” All Kingdom publishers and interested persons should make every effort to be present.
4 Since the pressures of life are continuing to mount, we believe all will derive benefit and refreshment from this material prepared for our encouragement. We will see ways by which we can be even more alert to our personal spiritual needs and those of our families and others in the congregation. Determine to be present for the entire circuit assembly and to keep attentive throughout the program, “for now our salvation is nearer than at the time when we became believers.”​—Rom. 13:11.

