Use Summer Wisely
1 Schoolchildren are often asked what they plan to do during the summer, and when they return to school, they may be asked to give a report on what they did. Indeed, all of us, young and old, do well to ask ourselves: ‘What have we planned to do with our summer? When it has passed, will we be able to give a report of a worthwhile, productive summer?’ We will if we heed the advice to ‘buy out the opportune time for ourselves.’​—Eph. 5:15, 16.
BENEFIT FROM CONVENTIONS
2 One thing all of us should have included in our plans is attending the “Pure Language” District Convention. Afterward, we do well to review our notes to see what points we learned and can apply in our lives as praisers of Jehovah. At Ephesians 4:25 we are encouraged to “speak truth each one of you with his neighbor.” By doing this, we will be helping others to “call upon the name of Jehovah, in order to serve him shoulder to shoulder.”​—Zeph. 3:9.
SHARE IN FIELD MINISTRY
3 During July and August, the suggested offer is any brochure except the School brochure. If we are with our own congregation, we will want to support regular field service arrangements. We might be able to participate in evening witnessing, since the period of daylight lasts longer during the summer months. Many people are at home in the evening and tend to be in a more relaxed mood, thus making it easier for us to talk with them about the Kingdom good news that we have been taught.​—Isa. 50:4.
4 When opportunities for informal witnessing present themselves, we can direct attention to one of the brochures. While away from home, we might be able to locate the Kingdom Hall, attend meetings, and share in field service with the local brothers and sisters. This should prove to be a fine source of encouragement for both us and the brothers with whom we associate.​—Rom. 1:12.
5 If we are going to be away from our own congregation at the end of the month, we should mail our field service report to the secretary early enough to be included with the report he sends in on the sixth of the following month.
ENDEAVOR TO CONDUCT STUDIES
6 Usually there are fewer studies conducted in the summer months because some Bible students go away on vacation. The one conducting the study may also go away but at a different time. Rather than allowing weeks to go by with a study not being conducted, might we be able to arrange for someone else in the congregation to conduct the study in our absence? It is good to have the study conducted as regularly as possible to impress on the student’s mind the need for regular spiritual feeding.
7 When we find interest in the territory, we should follow up that interest as quickly as possible. If the householder takes a brochure, we can offer to demonstrate how to use it by considering a few paragraphs together. Then we should endeavor to make an appointment for a return visit at a definite time to continue the study.
8 May all of us be able to look back on the summer of 1990 and feel that, as dedicated servants of Jehovah, we indeed used the time wisely in “holding the pattern of healthful words” and in helping others to learn the healthful words of truth from Jehovah’s Word.​—2 Tim. 1:13.

