Your Part in Making Meetings Beneficial
1 Our meetings help us to get better acquainted with Jehovah. They help us understand his laws and principles and encourage us to live by them. Meetings prepare us for a more effective share in the lifesaving preaching activity. And they aid us in reaching our goal of everlasting life in God’s new world. The hours we spend together in meetings will bring us the greatest benefit if we individually do our part to make the meetings beneficial.
2 There are three keys to making meetings beneficial​—preparation, participation, and practical application. These are interrelated. Good preparation makes participation easy and enjoyable. Joyful, enthusiastic expressions of faith encourage and motivate those listening. (Eph. 4:29) All in attendance are far more likely to use what is presented if they understand it and are helped to appreciate how the information can be applied in practical ways in their own lives and in helping others become disciples.
WATCHTOWER AND CONGREGATION BOOK STUDIES
3 The Watchtower Study and Congregation Book Study are very important meetings because by them “the faithful and discreet slave” feeds the household of faith. (Matt. 24:45-47) Do you set aside time to study the material that will be considered? Are you prepared to comment at the meetings? Obviously, you play a key role in this regard.
4 If you have carefully studied the material for the Watchtower Study or the Congregation Book Study, you will be ready to share in the greater happiness of giving. (Acts 20:35) Many find it helpful to underline key words. By looking up unquoted scriptures and considering how these apply, you will gain understanding of the Scriptural basis for the answers. Can you now answer in your own words, or must you read the answers? Key objectives in theocratic study are to make the information your own and to act on it with heart appreciation and understanding.​—Prov. 2:5; 4:7, 8.
THEOCRATIC MINISTRY SCHOOL AND SERVICE MEETING
5 Do you view your student talks on the school as assignments from Jehovah and reflect this in how you prepare? Make sure you understand the material and can present it appealingly. But even if you do not have a specific assignment, study by reading the scheduled Bible chapters and other material each week. The same should be done for the Service Meeting. If this is done ahead of time, during the meeting you can be thinking actively on what is presented, rather than struggling to acquaint yourself with the material for the first time.
6 Service Meeting demonstrations and student talk settings should be realistic, reflecting local situations to which all can relate. Rehearse your part well. Also, dress appropriately so that your attire is a good example for others.
7 Aim for well-prepared parts enthusiastically presented. Parents, help your children to prepare and answer in their own words when opportunity affords. Indeed, if all make it their personal concern to be on time and ready to participate, our meetings will glow with vital, motivating information presented in a way that holds the attention of the audience. Will you do your part in this regard so that “all things take place for upbuilding” others assembled with you?​—1 Cor. 14:26.

