
AUGUST 5-11
PSALMS 70-72


Song 59 and Prayer | Opening Comments (1 min.)

TREASURES FROM GOD’S WORD


1. “Tell the Next Generation” About God’s Power


(10 min.)

David experienced Jehovah’s protection during his youth (Ps 71:5; w99 9/1 18 ¶17)
David felt Jehovah’s support during his old age (Ps 71:9; g04 10/8 23 ¶3)
David encouraged younger ones by relating his experiences (Ps 71:17, 18; w14 1/15 23 ¶4-5)







ASK YOURSELF, ‘Which longtime servant from the congregation would I like to interview during our Family Worship evening?’


2. Spiritual Gems


(10 min.)

Ps 72:8​—How was Jehovah’s promise to Abraham found at Genesis 15:18 fulfilled during the reign of King Solomon? (it-1 768)

Your answer



What spiritual gems from this week’s Bible reading would you like to share?

Your answer





3. Bible Reading


(4 min.) Ps 71:1-24 (th study 5)



APPLY YOURSELF TO THE FIELD MINISTRY

4. Starting a Conversation


(3 min.) HOUSE TO HOUSE. When the person becomes argumentative, end the conversation on a positive note. (lmd lesson 4 point 5)


5. Following Up


(4 min.) INFORMAL WITNESSING. Continue a previous conversation with a relative who then hesitates to study the Bible. (lmd lesson 8 point 4)


6. Explaining Your Beliefs


(5 min.) Talk. ijwfq 49​—Theme: Why Have Jehovah’s Witnesses Changed Some of Their Beliefs? (th study 17)



LIVING AS CHRISTIANS

Song 76
7. Ideas for Family Worship


(15 min.) Discussion.
















Family Worship evening is an important time for children to learn “the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.” (Eph 6:4) Learning requires work, but it can be an enjoyable experience, especially as children develop an appetite for Bible truths. (Joh 6:27; 1Pe 2:2) Review the box “Family Worship Ideas,” which can help parents make Family Worship evening both instructive and enjoyable, and then discuss these questions:
  Which of these suggestions would you like to try?

Your answer



  Have you found something else that is beneficial?

Your answer





FAMILY WORSHIP IDEAS
BIBLE:
  Listen to an audio recording of the weekly Bible reading, or take turns reading it aloud. Each family member could read the words of a different Bible character

  Prepare questions based on the weekly Bible reading. Have family members choose one question each and research it. Then they can share what they have learned

  Pose a question or describe a situation, and then research the Bible principles in Scriptures for Christian Living that apply

  Reenact a portion of a Bible account

  Prepare a flash card with a different Bible verse each week, such as those from appendix A in the brochure Love People​—Make Disciples, and then try to memorize the verse. Review the cards from previous weeks

  Study a portion of the Enjoy Life Forever! book

  Assign family members to present a report on one of the articles from the series “Bible Questions Answered” or “Bible Verses Explained,” found under the BIBLE TEACHINGS tab on jw.org


MEETINGS:
  Prepare a portion of a congregation meeting

  Prepare and rehearse comments. Take note of timing

  Practice Kingdom songs

  Discuss and practice what to say to encourage someone before or after the next meeting

  Rehearse an upcoming student assignment in front of the family


MINISTRY:
  Prepare for the house-to-house ministry

  Prepare for your return visits

  Imagine an informal setting, and then practice how to start a friendly conversation

  Discuss specific goals for expanding your ministry during the Memorial season or during time off from work or school


NEEDS OF THE FAMILY:
  Have a practice session on how to handle a specific situation that has arisen or that is likely to arise, such as those involving neutrality, bullying, dating, or holiday celebrations

  Have a practice session where parents and children reverse roles. The children research the subject and then reason with the parents


ADDITIONAL SUGGESTIONS:
  Watch and discuss a JW Broadcasting® program

  Read an article or watch a video from jw.org, and then discuss it

  Consider something from the “Teens & Young Adults” or “Children” sections found under the BIBLE TEACHINGS tab on jw.org

  Review notes from a convention or an assembly

  Observe or research an aspect of creation, and then discuss what it teaches us about Jehovah

  Occasionally invite someone to join you, and then interview him

  Set spiritual goals, and discuss how to reach them

  Work on a project together, such as a model, a map, or a chart





Play the VIDEO Keep Improving Your Family Worship. Then ask the audience:
  How can a husband make family worship enjoyable for his wife when there are no children in the household?

Your answer





8. Congregation Bible Study


(30 min.) bt chap. 13 ¶17-24


Concluding Comments (3 min.) | Song 123 and Prayer

