From Our Readers
From the editor: The cover series “Life Is Worth Living” (October 22, 2001) elicited wide reader response. This is gratifying, for “Awake!” endeavors to present practical, Bible-based information that will help people of all national, racial, and religious backgrounds to cope with today’s problems.
I am a longtime reader of Awake! but nothing has ever moved me like the series “Life Is Worth Living.” A year ago I was beaten down by despair, and I wanted to die. These articles reassured me that God understands our weaknesses.
S. H., Japan
I had been feeling despondent because of the attack on the Twin Towers in New York. At times I have had thoughts of suicide but had never faced up to the fact that something was wrong with me. I will get the needed help and follow the suggestions outlined in the article.
M. M., United States
Because of my poor health, I have had thoughts of ending it all. I would talk about it, sometimes jokingly, to see others’ reactions. It brought tears to my eyes when I read that God is always there to listen to us and that he cares. This magazine has totally changed my outlook on life.
T.E.J., Canada
I have been dealing with depression for years, and recently I was seriously thinking of ending my life. As I was ready to walk out the door, I remembered that the last article in the Awake! series said to talk to someone. So I told my husband. That delay kept me from going through with my plan. This series helped save my life!
M. B., United States
A few weeks before this magazine came out, I found myself looking at a cupful of sleeping pills and facing the dilemma described in the article: “Shall I swallow them or not?” Your magazine has given me the determination to live that I need. Some illnesses affect the mind to the point of making us reject the desire to live, but it is moving to see that God even takes an interest in people who seem to lose appreciation for the gift of life.
E. S., Italy
I was able to share the information in these articles with my physician. I told him how much they had helped me. Just being reassured that I have value to God motivates me to live. My constant prayer is that you write more articles like these!
J. S., United States
I thought that no one understood me, and it started to occur to me how much easier it would be if I died. But with these articles, I was able to recall the most important thing in life. I won’t think any more about dying!
M. M., Japan
Battered Women  Thank you for the cover series “Help for Battered Women.” (November 8, 2001) As a child I saw how my father battered my mother day by day. Then, my sisters and I became the target of his attacks. I grew up with a deep hatred for men. In time, though, we started studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. It was not easy for Father to change his ways, but with Jehovah’s help he came to realize that he could not please God if he mistreated His lovely creation. The changes were gradual, but now my father is like a docile sheep. I can love him from the heart.
G. B., United States

