page 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXV. JANUARY 1, 1904. No. 1. 
CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 3 

Pray for the Reapers 4 

The Financial Storm 5 

The World's Outlook 5 

Special Trials Follow Consecration 5 

The Teacher and His Message 

Rejected 11 

The Earth Shall Yield Her Increase 15 

General Conventions, 1904 16 

Public Ministries of the Truth 16 

Special Items: 

Dawn Vol. VI Further Delayed 2 

R3294 : page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (I Pet. 1:19; 

I Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (I Cor. 3:1 1-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of this Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessings shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-I Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; I Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
his joint-heir.-I John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be the kings and priests of 
the next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the 
hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the wilfully 
wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



VOL. V. IN GERMAN. 



This translation is in good stock, and orders will have 
prompt attention. 

DAWN VOL. VI. FURTHER DELAYED. 



Volume VI. seems to be unfortunate. Our printers 
have disappointed us further. However, it is on the 
press and a short time will see copies in the hands of the 
patient watchers. Wholesale rates are granted to our subscribers 
on single copies or more. 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S DISCOURSES EVERY MONDAY. 



By a special arrangement with The Pittsburgh Gazette a stenographic 
report of Pastor C. T. Russell's discourses will be printed 
on Mondays. We will send you "The Pittsburgh Gazette" 
(daily) and ZION'S WATCH TOWER twice a month for a period 
of 12 months for $3.25, which is about the price of The Gazette 
alone. The subscriptions must be paid in advance and sent to us. 

NOTICE.— Where Gazette agencies are established the issues 
desired can be readily obtained through them. The Gazette refuses 
to mail papers to towns where they would interfere with 
the agents already located. 



R3295 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

FROM the standpoint of the Truth and its prosperity 
—its victory over error— no year in the past, 
in our experience, has ever offered so grand a 
prospect. During the past year the Lord has done 
great things for his people, whereof we are glad. 
Viewed from some standpoints it is difficult to imagine 
that the coming year could equal the past one, much 
less excell it. However, as we are learning more of 
the Lord's ways we are coming to have greater confidence 
in his almighty power, which is able to make 
all things work out his glorious plans as the due time 
of each item arrives. 

But our hopes have circumstantial foundations 
supporting our faith. We will mention some of these, 
that we may hope and rejoice together. (1) The number 
of the interested is greater than ever before;— the 
WATCH TOWER list is nearly twenty thousand, which 



represents about 40,000 readers and colaborers. (2) 
The consecration of all seems to be deepening. (3) 
These furnish nearly one thousand "Volunteers," and 
guarantee a circulation of at least three millions of 
tracts which we may hope will find and enlist other 
earnest, consecrated heads, hearts and hands. (4) The 
Colporteur brigade is now nearly 150 strong, and many 
of them well tried and experienced soldiers of the cross, 
whose zeal increases as they realize that "now is our 
salvation nearer than when we first believed." (Rom. 13:11.) 
These will surely put into the hands of the 
Christian people many thousands of volumes of Millennial 
Dawn— which, in turn, should assist much in 
breaking down prejudice and superstition in thousands 
and in bringing hundreds into fellowship with the 
Truth. (5) The Pilgrim service will, we trust, be 
blest of the Lord to those already fully committed. 
(6) The Pittsburgh Gazette each week publishes the 
editor's sermon to from 70,000 to 85,000 readers far 
and near. This should prove a help to some. Many 
will read in a secular journal what they would refuse 
to notice elsewhere. (7) The "Good Hopes" prospects 
are favorable so far, and encourage us to lay our 
plans broad and deep for the year beginning. 

The above prospects relate to the "machinery" 
which the Lord seems to have provided and blessed in 
connection with the "harvest" work. Now let us 
look to the conditions in the world outside our influence. 
We find that an increasingly large number of 
pious, Christian people are losing their prejudice and 
getting their eyes opened, little by little, to the beauties 
of the Divine Plan of the Ages. It may be that the 
millions of tracts and hundreds of thousands of DAWNS 
which we have unitedly circulated, and the other efforts 
put forth to proclaim the truth, have been used of the 
Lord to break down the prejudice and to anoint the 
dim eyes. We are glad to hope so: we would feel 
discouraged indeed with any other view. 

However, we are inclined to think that the results 
are largely the operation of forces at work in an opposite 
direction. While we are busy heralding the Truth 
and endeavoring to show the real meaning of God's 
Word and its sureness of fulfillment, Satan is no less 
busy and has powerful influences at work. For the 
past twenty years he has been carefully sowing and 
watering the seeds of unbelief— "Evolution" and 
"Higher Criticism"— in all the colleges and theological 
seminaries of Christendom. As a result the "leaven" 
—the corruption of faith— abounds in every 
direction. To such an extent is this true, that the 
term "orthodoxy" practically stands for this modern 
form of "rationalism" or unbelief. 

The effect of this growing skepticism, or "falling 
away" from the faith, is two-fold. To a large class 
it is infectious: never well established or convinced of 



R3295 : page 4 

the truth of God's revelation, they needed only the 
word of some one "highly esteemed among men" 
(Luke 16:15), D.D., to turn them away from the 
truth to fables. Soon they plume themselves upon 
their "advanced views," and learn to look down upon 
those who hold fast to the precious Word (Titus 1:9), 
and to think of them and speak of them as "credulous" 
and "old fogy." 

These "snares of the Adversary" will, we doubt 
not, entangle the great mass of professing Churchianity. 
They shall indeed be snared and taken. A 
thousand will fall to one who will stand. (Isa. 28:13; 
Psa. 91:7.) But the Lord's truly consecrated 
people will be kept by the power of God through 
faith. At first they are sure to be bewildered as they 
hear their trusted under-shepherds advance the very 
arguments once set forth by Ingersoll, Paine and 
other opponents of the Word. They wonder whether 
or not they heard correctly, and finally they wonder 
if they have been too slow and stupid and too 
credulous. 

Alas! many of these dear sheep have relied too 
much on the creeds and traditions of men, and have 
not sufficiently "proved all things" before acceptance, 
with the standard of God's Word. And so their faith 
may be sadly shaken and their peace and joy in the 
Lord destroyed. But as surely as they are the Lord's 
sheep he will not abandon them, but if they cry unto 
him he will deliver them from the Evil One. 

Deliverance will come to them just in time;— just 
when they have learned to deplore their loss of faith 
and its connection with the joys of the Lord. We 
are rapidly approaching a time of famine for the hearing 
of the Word of the Lord. Those who have always 
fed on the husks of human theory and tradition 
will not be aware of this famine; but those who do 
know the Lord will begin to feel the pangs of hunger. 
"Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, 
for they shall be filled." The Lord will hear 
their cry for the bread of Present Truth and will send 
it to them by the hand of some of his willing servants. 
Verily they shall be fed and led into green pastures; 
because they are true sheep and under the care of the 
true Shepherd.— Psalm 23. 

It is, therefore, in the interest of the Lord's true 
sheep that the Evolutionists and Higher Critics should 
become more and more bold and aggressive soon. So 
much the sooner will the Lord's true followers discern 
that Babylon has been rejected— that instead of the 
name meaning longer the Gate of God, it now stands 
for Confusion. When once they get their eyes open 
on this subject they will listen more carefully than 
ever for the true Shepherd's voice, and seek for the 
flock he is feeding, that they also may feed in pastures 



green and be refreshed by the still, deep waters of 
Present Truth. 

Our view in this direction is most encouraging. 
The leaders of Babylon are nearly all Evolutionists 
and Higher Critics, and their numbers and influence 
are making them more and more bold and outspoken. 
We welcome this progress of error in this class, realizing 
that it is the Lord's way of letting error and all 

R3296 : page 4 

things work out good to those who really love him;— 
the called ones according to his purpose. Thus God 
will cause the pride and worldly wisdom and wrath 
and boastfulness of Satan and his deluded ones to 
praise him, to serve his cause, to deliver his true 
sheep from the bondage of Churchianity. Let us be 
vigilant to use every opportunity to serve these and 
to do good unto all as we have opportunity; but let 
us not forget that the "strong delusions" the Adversary 
is now permitted to bring upon Christendom will 
not be permitted by the Lord to deceive "the very 
elect. "-Mark 13:22. 

PRAY FOR THE REAPERS IN THE HARVEST. 
-MATT. 9:28- 

Seeing that the fields of Christendom are thus 
white for harvesting, that everything is ripe for the 
gathering of the "wheat" class, what should be our 
attitude toward the Lord's work? The Lord arranges 
matters so as to place opportunities for his service 
within our reach— such opportunities for printing and 
circulating the Truth as never before fell to the lot of 
the Lord's people. Are we doing all that we can for 
the Lord's honor, and for the assistance of brethren 
both in and out of Babylon? Some are doing heroic 
service and are being blest. It is our duty to 
stimulate all as best we can to seize and use the opportunities 
as they are daily passing us. If we fail 
so to do some in the future might reproach us with 
not having done all we could to bring them into the 
place of greatest blessing and security; for it is the 
zealous that are least likely to be ensnared by the 
Adversary— if their zeal be born of love. 

This time of great opportunity for the Lord's 
service is likewise a time of great opportunity for 
self-service— for "money-making," etc. It is a time 
of general activity, and the question is— In what 
direction shall our energies be expended? Whom will 
we serve? The Lord, his Truth and his brethren? 
Or self, or the world, or the flesh, or the devil? 

This is the hour of trial for the consecrated. We 
have solemnly told the Lord that we love him more 
than we love houses or lands, or father, or mother, or 
self, or any other creature, and now he is putting our 



professions to the test. The measure of our sacrifice 
of earthly privileges for spiritual ones will mark the 
degree of our love, our devotion, to the Lord; and 

R3296 : page 5 

our favor with the Lord, our growth in him, in his 
character-likeness, will be proportionate. 

We all see the issue squarely. Let us each resolve 
that by the Lord's grace we will yet hear his 
voice declare of us, as members of his Bride,— "She 
hath done what she could." This will mean more 
energetic and more persistent service. It will mean 
more "Volunteers," and a still greater area of the 
wheat-field attended to. It will mean more WATCH 
TOWER subscriptions (free or paid— for you know 
that the interested poor are as carefully served and as 
much esteemed as those who can and do pay). It will 
mean daily watching and praying, that neither fear 
of man, nor pride, nor sloth, nor any form of selfishness, 
shall hinder us from attesting to the Lord our 
love and loyalty, nor deprive us of the present and 
future joys and rewards of his service. 

We have specified labor in the circulation of our 
Society's publications, because we know of no others 
giving the "harvest" message— no others which the 
Lord is using so specially and peculiarly; and because 
we address those who we believe view the matter in 
the same light. We urge your cooperation, not only 
for the good that may thus be done to others, but also 
for the spiritual profit sure to come to your own souls. 
The work as we view it is one— the Lord's, and hence 
yours and ours, in proportion as we are the Lord's 
and are colaboring with him. TOWER subscribers now 
number 19,000; let us see what, under the Lord's 
blessing, we can make it by this time next year. In 
our last issue you saw the circulation of tracts and 
DAWNS for the past year; let us see what we each can 
do to increase those large figures for the year now 
commencing. The way to accomplish large results is 
not to hope that some one else may do and bear and 
get a blessing in this service; but for each to resolve 
to do what he can. Ask yourself,— What more can 
I do to increase the circulation of the WATCH TOWER 
and the DAWNS? How many more DAWNS can I put 
into circulation than I did last year? How many 
more WATCH TOWER subscriptions can I influence 
than last year? Remember, however, that our desire 
for the list is that it shall represent the interested, 
whether free or paid subscriptions;— especially are we 
desirous of having the Lord's saints on this list. 

Pray for reapers! And ask the Lord to help you 
more and more as one of them, to gather much fruit. 
But in all this labor for others let us not forget that 
our first duty is the cultivation of the graces of the 
Spirit in our own hearts. "He that reapeth receiveth 



wages, and gathereth fruit unto eternal life." 
THE FINANCIAL STORM. 

Whether the financial storm is over, or only begun, 
no man knows; but appearances seem to indicate 
a clearing financial outlook for 1904. In any 
event, care and conservatism, "moderation," is the 
proper course for the Lord's people to pursue. Seek 
first (i.e., chiefly) the Kingdom of God (to be joint 
heirs in it with our Lord), and seek its righteousness, 
—the righteousness it will uphold; and so far as possible 
get out of debt and keep out of it. 

We still think, as a year ago, that the next few 
years will be very favorable ones for the propagation 
of the Truth. This may be by the continuation of 
"good times," permitting the purchase of DAWNS by 
all classes: or it may be by a curtailment of prosperity 
which may give some the time for thought and 
study as well as the inclination now lacking. 

THE WORLD'S OUTLOOK. 

There are strong indications of war between Russia 
and Japan, and there would be no knowing where 
the matter would end if once begun. Alliances might 
involve other nations. We look for a great war in 
which the whole civilized world will be involved (Joel 3:10), 
but know not if the time for it is very near. 
Our confidence is that the Lord is at the helm of national 
affairs in a special sense now, and that all things 
permitted will work favorably to the establishment of 
the Kingdom for which we long and pray. 



R3296 : page 5 

SPECIAL TRIALS FOLLOW CONSECRATION. 

-MATT. 3:13-4:11. -JANUARY 17.- 

Golden Text:— "And lo, a voice from heaven saying, This is 
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased."— Matt. 8:17. 

THIS lesson, relating to our Lord's baptism unto 
death and his temptations in the wilderness, 
which immediately followed, illustrates the experiences 
of all who follow in his steps. In order to become 
Jesus' disciples at all, we must take a step which he 
did not take, namely, that of justification from our sins to 
divine favor and relationship through faith in the blood 
of Christ. Having taken this step the call of the Gospel 
age has been for such as are of right condition of heart 
to forsake all and follow the Lamb whithersoever he 
goeth— in trials, difficulties, oppositions and persecutions 



in this present life and into the glorious honors and 
divine favors of the life which is to come. Our Lord's 
experiences, therefore, furnish a good basis for reflection 
respecting what is to be expected and endured by all of 
his faithful. 

Our Lord's baptism was more than "John's baptism." 
The latter was merely for sinners against the Mosaic 
Law, and indicated a return to harmony with that Law 
and to the relationship with God which that Law 
Covenant through Moses established. Our Lord Jesus 
needed no such repentance and reformation, being holy, 

R3296 : page 6 

harmless, and separate from sinners; hence it was that 
John was astonished when he presented himself for 
baptism. At first John declined, asserting that of the two 
he himself rather than Jesus needed that baptism, since 
they were both heartily obedient to the divine arrangement 
and had not at any time been open transgressors of 
the Law. 

LIKE A DOVE. 

Without explaining to John what the latter would not 
have understood respecting the new dispensation and the 
appropriateness of water immersion as a symbol of his 
consecration unto death, our Lord merely said, Permit 
the service to proceed, John. I have a reason for so desiring 
it, and it is proper that I should do it in the fulfilment 
of certain things which I recognize to be right. 
Then John baptized him, and immediately after Jesus' 
baptism was finished and he had come up from the water 
John beheld and heard peculiar things, which apparently 
others thereabouts knew nothing of. He saw as it were 
an opening in the heavens, and something which he understood 
to represent the holy Spirit, the power of God, 
descending upon Jesus. This was possibly a stream of 
light, which came not violently, like the lightning, but 
gently, like a dove, and he heard a voice saying, "This is 
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." 

Whatever sentiments John entertained toward his 
cousin Jesus previously, he was now convinced by what he 
witnessed that his cousin was the Messiah. Then he bore 
record, saying, "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh 
away the sin of the world," and testified that when he was 
sent with the mission to baptize, and to preach the Kingdom 
of heaven at hand, he was distinctly informed that 
in due time he would know the Messiah by seeing the holy 
Spirit from God come upon him. Nothing in the account 

R3297 : page 6 

indicates that others than John saw this vision, nor was 
it necessary for others to see it. John was to bear record, 
and those who heard him had the same opportunity that 



we today have of knowing about this matter. 
CONSECRATION AND BEGETTING. 

To Jesus this was a great moment— the moment of his 
begetting of the Spirit. He had left the spirit condition 
that he might fulfil the Father's will and plan by becoming 
man's representative, substitute, ransom price; but he 
had been promised that the faithful performance of this 
would bring to him again the spirit nature, with added 
glory and greatness and divine favor. Now at thirty 
years of age, as soon as was possible for him to begin his 
ministries under the Law, he had made a full consecration 
of himself as a man— to give his time, his influence, 
his energy, his life, "all that he had," to purchase the 
forfeited life and inheritance of father Adam and his 
entire posterity. The consecration made by our Lord at 
the moment of his baptism is represented in the Scriptures 
in these words, "Lo, I come (in the volume of the 
book it is written of me) to do thy will O my God; thy 
law is written in my heart." This full consecration to 
death involved every human power, and there— as sealing 
the engagement— the Father gave him the holy Spirit as 
a firstfruits of the new spiritual nature, which he would 
receive completely in his resurrection. That anointing of 
the holy Spirit was the begetting which, in due time, our 
Lord being faithful, would bring him to the birth of the 
Spirit in the resurrection. We know from the Scriptures 
that he was faithful and thus became the firstfruits of 
them that slept, the firstborn from the dead. 

Immediately he was led into the wilderness— Mark 
expresses it "driven into the wilderness"— by the Spirit, 
the holy Spirit, which was now his own spirit or mind or 
will. We can readily understand why the spirit thus 
forced him away from the society of others. Jesus 
realized that he had a special mission in the world, 
different from others; that he had left the spirit plane of 
being and had become a man, that he might accomplish a 
work for mankind. He realized that this work was an 
important one in the Father's sight, and that already for 
centuries his coming and the great work he was to do had 
been foretold in the types of the Law and in the words of 
the prophecies. Even at the early age of twelve years he 
had felt anxious to be about the Father's business, and as 
soon as the legal age for his engaging in the Father's 
business had arrived, he had hastened to make his vow of 
consecration to do the Father's will in everything. As a 
man he could not understand and comprehend clearly 
and fully the meaning of the various prophecies, even as 
the prophets did not themselves understand these; and, 
although familiar with the letter of the Scriptures, he 
had been obliged to wait for a clear understanding of 
them until the time of his anointing of the spirit;— because 
"the natural man [however pure and perfect] 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can 
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned."— 



1 Cor. 2:10. 
"LORD WHAT WOULDST THOU HAVE ME TO DO?" 

Jesus then hastened into the wilderness, away from 
friends and acquaintances and every distracting thing, 
that he might make use of the power of the holy Spirit 
that had come upon him, that he might use the new sight. 
The eyes of his understanding had been opened to comprehend 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths 
of the divine love and plan which he was to fulfil. He 
must not confer with flesh and blood respecting his future 
course, even if there had been any one perfect like himself 
with whom he might have conferred. He must confer 
with the Father. He must take the Father's words 
through the prophecies, and the lessons through the types, 
and must hear and see in these the great work mapped 
out for him. He must make no mistake at the beginning 
of his mission. He must not hastily conclude that the 
suggestions of others respecting the course Messiah 
would pursue were correct. He must not even take his 
own previous conceptions of his work. He must look at 
everything from the new standpoint of the spirit. No 
wonder he wished to be alone with God, and with the 
Word of God, which he had treasured up in his heart 
from infancy, and which, having a perfect mind, he unquestionably 
had before him as plainly as though he had 
the printed book. 

Forty days passed, yet so intent was he upon the study 
of the work the Father had given him to do, and so 
perfect was he physically, that he did not hunger until 
then, as it is written, "He afterward hungered." The 
season had been a precious one, and undoubtedly the 
close of that forty -day period saw the Lord fairly well 
equipped in an understanding of the divine arrangement 
respecting the necessity for his death. He understood 

R3297 : page 7 

that the payment of the ransom price for the world was 
a prerequisite to his coming reign of glory and to its 
privilege of blessing all the families of the earth with 
an opportunity for attaining all that had been lost 
through father Adam's disobedience. But just at that 
juncture, when he was weak from his long fast and 
probably also from lack of sleep— for he probably was so 
deeply engrossed respecting the study of the divine plan 
that he neither ate nor slept those forty days— at this 
juncture of his extreme physical enervation came the 
adversary's chief besetments. True, through the forty 
days, while thinking of the divine arrangements, there 
were opportunities for questioning the wisdom of the 
divine arrangement; but these apparently were all 
nullified in the Lord's zeal to know and do the Father's 
will, and hence the temptations that are recorded are 
those following the fasting. 



"HE WAS A MURDERER FROM THE BEGINNING." 

We may well suppose that the great Adversary- 
through whose deception mother Eve fell into disobedience, 
which brought in its train the wreck and ruin of 
the race— was an interested spectator in everything pertaining 
to the divine plan. Of course he knew the 
prophecies. Of course he knew of our Lord's birth and 
the annunciation of the heavenly hosts that the babe born 
at Bethlehem was to be the Savior of the world, the one 
whose coming was intimated to mother Eve— the seed 
of the woman who was to bruise the serpent's head. No 
doubt Satan had watched Jesus in all of his course up to 
this present time, had seen his baptism of consecration 
and had seen the Father's recognition of him by the 
anointing of the Spirit. No doubt he had kept track of 
him while in the wilderness. All this is intimated in 
the words of one of the fallen angels or demons, who 
subsequently said, "We know thee who thou art, the 
Holy One of God." It may be noted here, however, that 
the Greek word daimonion (demons) is the word 
generally translated devils when speaking of the evil 
spirits which our Lord and the apostles cast out of 
many, but in the narrative of our lesson this is not the 
word used. Here we have the word diabolus, preceded 
by the Greek article thus making it the diabolus, the 
devil, the one whom the Jews sometimes called Beelzebub, 
the prince of the devils— the one referred to in the 
Hebrew as Satan, an opponent of God and of 
righteousness. 

Satan realized that the most favorable time for an 
attack upon the anointed Jesus would be when he was 
weak from his long fast and vigilance, and hence it was 
at the close of the forty days that the temptations 
mentioned in this lesson were set before the Lord. 
It may be wondered by some why the Father would 
permit temptations, or why they would be necessary, or 
how they could be temptations to a perfect one. There 
is a difference between temptations which the Father 
considers proper and the temptations which come of the 
adversary. The former are tests of loyalty to God and 
to the principles of righteousness, and are intended to 
be a blessing and a help to all those who withstand them, 
and who thus demonstrate their loyalty to righteousness. 
The temptations of Satan, on the contrary, are in the nature 
of pitfalls and snares in evil and wrongdoing, 
temptations to make right appear wrong and wrong 
right, putting light for darkness and darkness for light. 
In this sense of misrepresentation and ensnarements in 
evil, God tempteth no man. (Jas. 1:12,13.) It was 
necessary that our Lord should be tested, and he was 
tested all through the three and one-half years of his 
ministry. Since he had consecrated himself and entered 
upon his work, it was necessary that these testings 
should begin at once, for if he manifested disloyalty to 



the Father, if he had a will of his own, a will that was 
not fully submitted to the Father's will in all points, he 
would not be worthy to be the Leader, the Captain of salvation 
to the many sons God intended to bring to glory. 
And unless proved perfect by testing his death should 
not have been accepted as an offset, the ransom price for 
the sin of Adam and for the sins of the whole world. To 
experience temptation does not imply sin, but it does 
imply liberty and freedom of will. 

The three temptations here recorded practically illustrate 
all the temptations that came to our Lord during 
his three and a half years of self sacrifice, and likewise 
they illustrate all the trials and temptations that come 
to his followers. We are not to think of the Lord Jesus as 
being tempted by the weaknesses of the flesh, for he had 
no such weakness. We are not to think of his being 
tempted as a father, for he was not a father. We are to 
remember the statement that he was tempted in all 
points as we are— not we the world, not we believers 
merely, but we the consecrated believers, who are likewise 
begotten of the Spirit and therefore subject to the 
besetments of the adversary along the lines in which the 
interests of the Spirit clash with the interests of the 
flesh, however good and pure the latter may be. 

"COMMAND THAT THESE STONES BE MADE BREAD." 

The first of these temptations related to the Lord's 
hunger. He had possibly been hungry before, but not 
until endued with the holy Spirit after his baptism had 

R3298 : page 7 

he that divine miraculous power at his command which 
would have permitted him to turn stones into bread. 
This temptation, therefore, did not signify that it is 
wrong to eat nor that bread is an improper food, but 
merely that the method of obtaining the food would not 
have been a proper or legitimate one. But why not, if 
he had the power, if he were the Son of God and God 
had given him this ability— why not use this power to 
satisfy his legitimate cravings? We reply, that the 
power that was given him was to enable him to carry out 
the consecration which he had made, and which involved 
the sacrifice of his flesh instead of its preservation. He 
might use this holy power upon others, to demonstrate 
his mission and to draw the attention of the people to 
the glorious restitution times prefigured in his miracles; 
but he might not use this holy power in any selfish 
manner for anything personal. To have done so would 
have been to misuse it and would therefore have meant 
sin. 

Let us stop here and notice the lesson there is in this 
temptation for the Lord's followers. We also have received 
of the begetting of the Spirit; and although we 
have the Spirit in less measure than our Master, it is for 



the same purpose— not to be used selfishly for the feeding 
of our material bodies nor for the healing of our 
bodily ailments, but simply and only for the service of 
the Lord, the brethren, the Truth. As our Lord declared 

R3298 : page 8 

in the garden, he could have asked the Father and have 

had twelve legions of angels to protect him; and so he 

could have asked the Father and have had the stones 

turned into bread, which would have nourished his body; 

but as our Lord declined to do both of these possible 

things, so should his followers, having consecrated their 

lives to the Lord, refuse to ask for divine interference 

for their own personal and temporal convenience or advantage. 

To do so would be to ask amiss, to ask selfishly, 

to ask what would be in opposition to the consecration 

made. 

"THOU SHALT NOT TEMPT THE LORD." 

Satan then tried another plan, suggesting a use of our 
Lord's divine protection which would bring him suddenly 
into notoriety amongst the people, and demonstrate that 
he was not an ordinary person but a special object of 
divine care. The suggestion was that he should go to 
the highest part of the temple structure, which overlooked 
the Valley of Hinnom, at a height of six hundred 
feet from its bottom— that he should leap from this 
prominent place in the sight of the people, and thus 
demonstrate his own faith in the Lord and in his mission 
as the Messiah, and attach to himself the awe and 
reverence of the people who would see the transaction or 
hear about it;— for all would know that without divine 
protection such a leap would mean certain death. The 
temptation had its plausible side. It seemed to imply 
great faith in the Almighty, and a refusal to follow the 
thought would seem to imply doubt on our Lord's part 
respecting his Messiahship and lack of faith in the 
divine power. It was a shrewdly put proposition. Additionally, 
it was backed up by Scripture texts: for Satan 
can quote Scripture when it suits his purpose just 
as, under his guidance, Spiritualists and Christian 
Scientists and other rejectors of the Word of God are 
ready at times to quote what they think will serve their 
purposes. The Scripture quoted was a very able one, 
"He shall give his angels charge concerning thee, and in 
their hands shall they bear thee up lest at any time thou 
shouldst dash thy foot against a stone." (Psa. 91:11,12.) 
It would almost appear that this Scripture implied that 
our Lord was to make such an exhibit as Satan proposed. 

First we inquire wherein such a course would have 
been an improper one— what Scriptural injunction or 
righteous principle would have been violated? We reply 
that if our Lord had been pushed from the pinnacle of 
the temple, or if he had been in a dangerous position in 



discharge of duty and his foot had slipped, and he thus 

had been precipitated to the valley below, he would have 

been quite right in assuming that the divine power could 

protect his interests and cause that all things should 

work for his good according to promise. But to deliberately 

place oneself in danger and to call upon or 

expect God to offset the deliberate act with divine protection 

would be a mistake. It would be tempting God. 

And this was our Lord's reply to Satan, "It is written 

again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." 

We are here furnished a practical lesson in the interpretation 
of Scripture. Where two Scriptures seem to 
conflict we must examine the principles which underlie 
them, and the spirit of a sound mind, the holy spirit of 
loyalty to God and reverence for him, must assist us in 
determining the proper relationship of these Scriptures, 
or which one should be followed when they seem to be in 
conflict. It is quite possible that the time had not yet 
come for the Scripture which Satan quoted to be rightly 
understood. It is possible, therefore, that our Lord at 
that time did not know the proper interpretation of the 
words quoted by Satan; for if he had there would have 
been little temptation in the suggestion. He was guided 
by the principles of righteousness as well as by the 
Scriptural testimony which he quoted. He perceived 
that it would be wrong to do a foolish act and to tempt 
the Lord to shield him from the natural consequences of 
the act. This conclusion of our Lord's mind was fully 
backed up by the Scripture which he quoted. 

RIGHTLY DIVIDING THE WORD OF TRUTH. 

The Scripture quoted by Satan we may now understand 
clearly, and this proves that the due time for its 
comprehension has come. We now see that the Psalm 
from which this is taken refers to the whole Church of 
this Gospel age— Jesus the Head, and his faithful, the 
members of the body. We now see that while there have 
been feet members in some respects all the way down 
through this Gospel age, yet in a particular sense the 
Lord's people of this present time are the "feet of him 
that bringeth good tidings of peace." (Isa. 52:7.) We 
see that as the feet, the last members of the Jewish 
house, stumbled over Christ as the stone of stumbling 
and rock of offence in the end of the Jewish age, so now 
we see the feet members of the spiritual Israel in the 
harvest or end of this Gospel age will be in danger of 
stumbling over the rock of offence. As it is written, 
"He shall be for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of 
offence to both the houses of Israel"— the fleshly and the 
spiritual. (Isa. 8:1,4.) We see that as the fleshly 
house stumbled over the cross (1 Cor. 1:23), so the 
spiritual house is to stumble over the same obstacle— the 
cross. 

We see this stumbling now taking place, that higher 
criticism is undermining true faith in all denominations, 



and that the Evolution theories are making the cross of 

Christ of none effect— implying that Jesus and the 

sacrifice for sins was wholly unnecessary, that men have 

been evolving and progressing upward under a natural 

law of progression and evolution, that he needed no redemption, 

and that restitution to a former estate 

(Acts. 3:21) would be the worst thing which could 

happen to him. We see that in fulfilment of this 

promise the Lord has given his ministers a message for 

the feet class, designed to be helpful to them and to 

assist them over these peculiar stumbling stones of our 

day— to enable them to "stand" (Eph. 6:13); and this 

we see corresponds exactly to the assistance rendered to 

the feet members of the Jewish house— the Israelites 

indeed of that time. We remember how the Lord's dark 

sayings were not for any except those in a special attitude 

of heart, so that others hearing might hear and 

not understand, and seeing they might not perceive. So 

it is now: the great mass of Churchianity hear not, see 

not, and rejoice in conditions which they fail to recognize 

as stumblings and in falling away from the faith once 

delivered to the saints. 

"TEMPTED IN ALL POINTS LIKE AS WE ARE." 

Coming back now to the temptation, let us see whether 

R3298 : page 9 

or not there are temptations before the body of Christ 
similar to this one recorded of our Head. There are. 
Temptations continually assail the Lord's people— suggestions 
to do some wonderful works in his name, and to 
thus prove to themselves and to others that they are 
heaven's favorites. The lesson for us to learn is that the 
work which the Father has given us to do is not a work 
of convincing the world of showing his favor toward us 
and our greatness in him, but rather— "Hast thou faith, 
have it to thyself," as the Apostle says. Rather that we 
should quietly and humbly, yet as effectively as reason 
and propriety will permit, let our lights shine, and show 
forth the praises of him who hath called us from 
darkness into his marvellous light, and from a desire to 
be wonder-workers to the reasonable position of servants, 
ministers of the Truth. Let us fix our Lord's answer 
clearly in our minds, "It is written, thou shalt not tempt 
the Lord thy God." Let us as members of the feet of 
Christ not accept outward deliverances from the trials 
and difficulties and responsibilities of life, but expect 
that our protection, our upholding, will be along 
spiritual lines— that we shall be kept from falling and 
from injury as New Creatures in Christ Jesus, because 
our faith is stayed on him. 

We do not know that Satan was personally visible to 
our Lord during these temptations: we must assume 
that he was not visible, that he did not appear as a man, 



nor in any other tangible form. Undoubtedly, as the 
holy angels had power to appear as men, Satan and the 
fallen angels at one time had the same power or 
privilege. But the divine sentence against them after 
the flood is distinctly recorded in the Scriptures. They 
are "restrained in chains of darkness" until the judgment 
of the great day, until the dawning of the Millennial 
morning. However, it matters not to us in what 
way Satan communicated to our Lord these tempting 
suggestions. In the third temptation, however, it is 
evident that the taking of our Lord to a high mountain 
and showing him therefrom all the kingdoms of the 

R3299 : page 9 

earth, was not a literal taking, but a taking in spirit or 
in mind or in thought. There is no mountain in the 
world from which all the earth could be seen, and even if 
the Roman world were understood there was no mountain 
anywhere in Palestine from which any considerable 
portion of the Roman world could be seen. But the 
mind can be projected to any part of the world in an 
instant or to any part of the universe in imagination. 

Satan called to our Lord's mind, imagination, a great 
mountain or great kingdom, having supervision of the 
entire world. He suggested to our Lord that his mission 
would be accomplished if he should succeed in thus 
establishing a kingdom over all the kingdoms of the 
earth. This to some extent is the spirit of prophecy; 
namely that it is God's purpose to establish through 
Christ a world dominion which will rule all the people 
of the earth to their blessing and uplifting from sin and 
degradation to life, joy, and peace— or so many of them 
as will respond to the blessed influences of that Millennial 
Kingdom. Our Lord certainly understood that this 
was his mission— to lay the foundation for such a Kingdom: 
we cannot, however, suppose that he as yet fully 
understood or comprehended all the steps incidental to 
that Kingdom's establishment. Had he understood this, 
there would have been no temptation in Satan's 
presentation. 

SATAN AS AN ANGEL OF LIGHT WOULD MISLEAD. 

Having stated the proposition in a form that would at 
once appeal to our Lord as being largely in accord with 
the Father's plans he had come to execute, Satan would 
have our Lord feel that he sympathized with Jehovah's 
project and with our Lord Jesus in the execution of it, 
and was willing to render co-operation and assistance. 
In effect he said, Such a universal Kingdom, for the 
civilization, enlightenment, uplifting and blessing of all 
the world I know is your proposition, and I am fully in 
sympathy with it; but there are different ways of getting 
at the matter. If you attempt this great work in the 
wrong way you will merely bring disaster upon yourself 



and failure to your plans, but if you get at the matter in 
the proper manner you will succeed. I am the master of 
the situation— the whole world is under my influence. 
I admit that in many respects it is a painful influence, 
and I shall be very glad indeed to have it rectified and 
the world's government made righteous. My leading of 
mankind into sin and rebellion and superstition was not 
so much because I wish them evil as because I knew that 
only in this way could I hold my power over them. Now 
all that I ask for co-operation with you in this scheme of 
a great kingdom to bless the world is that I receive a 
share of the dignity and honor with you— that you 
recognize me. Let us be partners. I will recognize you 
and you will recognize me, and together we will effect 
this great work of reformation for the whole world, for 
which you have so grandly and nobly sacrificed every 
interest up to this moment. Now be wise, for I assure 
you that any other method will meet only with disaster 
and bring needless and fruitless pain upon yourself. 

As already intimated, the Lord had been studying the 
Scriptures from childhood; his perfect memory had 
grasped every detail of the prophecies, and now, since his 
anointing with the holy Spirit, he had come into the 
wilderness to determine this very point— how the great 
object of his coming into the world was to be made 
effective to the blessing of mankind— how he must proceed 
in order to fulfil the divine projects and become 
King of kings and Lord of lords amongst men for their 
blessing and uplifting. He heard Satan's proposition 
carefully, he noted the weight of the argument, he 
realized the truthfulness of much that Satan had said; 
but he saw in the Scriptures enough to indicate to him 
that the Father's plan was not the smooth one that Satan 
had suggested. He noticed in the Scriptures suggestions 
not only about glory, honor, dominion and power, and 
the bowing of every knee, and the confessing of every 
tongue, and the desire of all nations coming, and the 
knowledge of the Lord filling the whole earth, and the 
time coming when there would be no need to say to one's 
neighbor and to one's brother, Know thou the Lord, because 
all should know him from the least even unto the 
greatest; but he noticed also Scriptures and types which 
clearly intimated that there was to be a sacrificing work 
accomplished. All the sin-offerings implied this, and the 
testimony, "he shall be led as a lamb to the slaughter," 
etc. 

Reasoning on the question he could readily see that 
this sacrificing, slaughtering, etc. could not come after 

R3299 : page 10 

the glory and blessing and enlightenment of the world, 
and hence that it must precede the glory; for, as the 
Apostle Peter points out, the prophets "spake of the 
sufferings of Christ and the glory which should follow." 
Doubtless by this time the Lord had come to see that it 



was a clear teaching of Scripture that without the 
shedding of blood there could be no remission of sins, 
and that this meant that in some manner he should die 
for the people. Supposing that he saw this at the time, 
it meant that the temptation he experienced was all the 
stronger, because here Satan was proposing to him a 
method for dealing with the question from the opposite 
standpoint, without suffering, with exaltation and honor 
from the very commencement. 

COMPLETE CONSECRATION ESSENTIAL TO VICTORY. 

Our Lord was saved from any vacillation or manifestation 
of weakness on this subject by reason of the fulness, 
the completeness of his consecration, which he had 
symbolized at Jordan. There he had said, in heart at 
least, "I delight to do thy will, O my God, thy law is 
written in my heart." This desire to please the Father, 
to obey the divine law in his heart saved our dear Redeemer 
from any yielding to Satan's wiles, and similarly 
our consecration as members of his body must be 
thorough if we would hope to stand the testing which 
must come to each one of us as we pass along the narrow 
way, following in his footsteps, seeking the glory, honor 
and immortality which he has promised us. Our Lord's 
prompt and allsufficient answer was, Leave me, Adversary; 
for it is written, the Lord thy God shalt thou 
worship and him only shalt thou serve. I cannot be a 
co-worker with you in any sense of the word; to do so 
would be disloyalty to the great Jehovah. I must be 
loyal to the Lord and to the commission he has given me 
and to the doing of his will in his way whatever the cost. 

Members of the body of Christ following in his footsteps 
have temptations from the Adversary along similar 
lines. Not that he offers to divide the kingdom of earth 
with us, for so great a proposition would not appeal to 
us, being incredible; but to us he does propose deviation 
from the close following in the Master's footsteps. He 
suggests continually to the Lord's followers easier ways 
by which as much or more good can be accomplished and 
without sacrifice and self-denial. These ways of avoiding 
sacrifice and yet of seemingly attaining good ends 
always imply more or less of co-partnership with the 
Adversary directly or indirectly, an acknowledgment of 
him, a bending to evil— to evil men or evil principles. 

Under such circumstances we should note carefully 
the Lord's method and walk in his steps. We should refuse 
to have any partnership with sin or evil influences 
or methods in our endeavors to serve the Lord and his 
Truth. Satan does not approach us in human form nor 
in diabolic form, but generally through human agencies, 
through human ambitions, parties, sects, etc. If our 
Lord had made inquiry of Satan as to what would be the 
program, doubtless he would have advised him to become 
a Pharisee of the Pharisees at once, and through 
such steps gradually he would have proceeded to elevate 



our Lord over the Jewish people and ultimately over the 
world— if indeed he who was a murderer from the beginning 
and abode not in the Truth could be trusted in 
respect to any promise. 

Similarly, today, he proposes to the Lord's followers 
identification with nominal Churchianity. He flatters 
them with some trifling office larger in name than in 
fact or service; he persuades them that they have a large 
influence and that to withdraw from Babylon would be 
to incur suffering upon themselves and their families 
and to do general injury to the work which they seek to 
forward. By this means, if he cannot lead them onward 
step by step to full co-operation with him in the blinding 
of others, he at least can hinder those who yield to his 
propositions from ever stepping out boldly and courageously 
on the Lord's side and in opposition to superstition 
and error. He can hinder them from being more than 
conquerors and having a place in the body of Christ. 
What shall our answer be to his suggestions? Let us 
answer with our Lord that we can enter into no partnership, 
be members of the institution, nor co-operate with 
any along lines that would be either dishonoring to the 
character of our heavenly Father or in any measure 
contrary to those which he has marked out as the pathway 
for those who love him— the pathway of self-denial, 
and incidentally of suffering for the cause of right and 
truth. 

"ADD TO YOUR FAITH, FORTITUDE." 

Another thought: one great difficulty with the Lord's 
people is that, even when determined for a right course 
and thus resisting the temptation, they do not take 
sufficiently positive action. Many say to the tempter, I 
have concluded not to yield at this time. Thus they 
leave in their own minds an opportunity open by which 
the tempter may return. Our Lord's course was the 
proper one: we should dismiss the tempter once and 
forever. We should take our stand so firmly that even 
the Adversary would not think it worth while to come 
back at us along that line; "Leave me, Adversary," I will 
worship and serve my God alone. 

Our Lord's temptations thus terminated. Henceforth 
he had Satan for his Adversary, but the Father his protector 
and ultimately his deliverer. Had he not reached 
this final decision we may presume that Satan's temptations 
would have continued for days or weeks or years, 
and would have been a hindrance to the Lord in the work 
he had come to do. So with us, we must settle it if we 
would be on the Lord's side; we must decide that in no 

R3300 : page 10 

sense of the word will we yield to the Adversary, either 
from policy or to enter into any transaction either to 
protect life, name or fame. Our decision must be a firm 



one, somewhat as expressed by the poet:— 
"Vain, delusive world, adieu, 
With all thou callest good! 
To my Lord I would be true, 

Who bought me with his blood." 

"MARVEL NOT IF THE WORLD HATE YOU." 

When the Lord's followers take a firm stand on this 
subject as their Leader did, the results are the same. 
Satan is their implacable opponent; he will see to it 
that they do suffer, that there will be opposition not only 
by himself but by the world, which is largely under the 
influence of his spirit and in various ways. Taking this 
stand they must not marvel if the world hate them, and 
if all manner of evil be said against them falsely for 
Christ's sake. And the more prominent they may be, as 

R3300 :page 11 

in our Lord's case, the more virulent we may expect 
attacks against them to be— the more interested will the 
great Adversary be in overcoming them. This thought 
of Satan's opposition to us, and that we are contending 
not merely with flesh and blood but with principalities 
and powers and wicked spirits in high positions of power, 
would be appalling to us did we not on the other hand 
realize that by this same positiveness of decision we 
acquire great helps and assistances by other unseen 
powers. From that moment of our positive resistance of 
temptation and positive standing up for the Lord and his 
cause, we become stronger in the Lord and in the power 
of his might, and greater is he that is for us than all 
that be against us. 

It was so in our Lord's case. At once he was 
ministered to by the unseen messengers of Jehovah, and 
whatever terror lay in the intimated opposition of the 
Adversary was more than counterbalanced by the assurances 
of divine favor and assistance. So it is with us. 
If God be for us who can be against us— what will all the 
oppositions of the world, the flesh and the devil amount 
to since God declares that we are his and all things are 
ours, for we are Christ's and Christ is God's?— 
1 Cor. 3:21-23. 



R3300 :page 11 

THE TEACHER AND HIS MESSAGE REJECTED. 

-LUKE 4: 16-30. -JANUARY 24.- 

Golden Text: "He came unto his own and 
his own received him not."— John 1:11. 



OUR LORD began his ministry in Judea, and is 

supposed to have spent a year there before going 

to Galilee, the province in which most of 

his life had been passed. And even when he did go 

to his home province he chose to visit Capernaum before 

going to his native city, Nazareth. This was a 

wise course, considering the fact that a prophet is generally 

less esteemed at home than abroad. As it was, 

his fame in Judea and still later at Capernaum had 

aroused quite an interest in the people of Nazareth, 

where he had lived from about three years of age until 

thirty. A certain amount of pride in their fellow-townsman 

had thus been awakened, and we may be 

sure that there was a large attendance at the synagogue 

on the first Sabbath day after our Lord's arrival 

in Nazareth. 

But while it was an object of our Lord's ministry 
to awaken and draw the interest of the people of Palestine 
to himself and to the message which he had to 
deliver, nevertheless it was not the object of that message 
to gather all the people to the Lord, but rather to 
separate the wheat from the chaff— to gather the wheat 
to Jesus and, naturally, to array the chaff class in opposition. 
This foretold result of the Lord's ministry we 
see was fully accomplished. "He came unto his own 
[people] but his own received him not, but to as many 
as received him, to them gave he liberty [privilege] to 
become the sons of God"— to be transferred from the 
house of servants, of which Moses was the head, to the 
house of sons, of which our Lord Jesus is the Head. 
We remark incidentally, however, that although faithful 
servants were gathered during our Lord's ministry, 
they were not begotten again until Pentecost. Pentecost 
brought the begetting of the Spirit to such of them 
as were then ready— the begetting necessary to a spirit 
development of character, necessary to an ultimate 
birth of the spirit in the First Resurrection. 

The first verse of our lesson shows distinctly that 
it was our Lord's custom to attend the synagogue 
meetings every Sabbath day, and his custom also to be 
the reader for the congregation. The synagogue services 
were not at all like the temple services. The latter 
was the house of prayer, and the place where typical 
atonement was made for the sins of the people with 
the blood of bulls and goats, etc. The synagogue more 
nearly resembled present day Bible classes, where the 
Scriptures are read and freely discussed, not only by 
the leader but also by all in attendance as they may 
feel disposed. There are certain good features connected 
with this arrangement, one of which is the opportunity 
it affords for bringing out discussion on 
any Scriptural topic. We warmly commend the Bible 
study and Bible-class methods as still appropriate to the 
Lord's people and still beneficial for the elucidation of 
Truth. 



RIGHTLY DIVIDING THE WORD OF TRUTH. 

The Jews had a certain order in which the Scriptures 
were read in the synagogue, and apparently the 
book of Isaiah was the appropriate one for this occasion. 
The Lord turned to what we now call the sixty-first 
chapter of Isaiah and read the first verse and part 
of the second, and closing the book he sat down and 
made certain comments upon the passage read. We 
find that our Lord read discriminatingly, or, as the 
Apostle expresses it, he "rightly divided the Word of 
truth." He read the part appropriate to the time, but 
did not read about the day of vengeance. His teaching 
was to test the people: if his message were received 
no day of vengeance would be necessary; if not 
received the day of vengeance would follow, as it did 
follow upon that nation after it had rejected him. 
There is a lesson for the Lord's people in this: it is 
better that we should read one verse understandingly 
and appreciatingly than that we should merely read 
chapter after chapter of the Lord's Word in a formal 
manner. 

Our Lord brought home to his audience the meaning 
of his text, saying, "This day is this Scripture 

R3300 :page 12 

fulfilled in your hearing." It had been written centuries 

before and read hundreds of times, but now, in 

the harvest of their age, for the first time it could be 

said that it was fulfilled. The holy Spirit had come 

upon the Lord Jesus about a year before, after his consecration 

at Jordan. It constituted his anointing. The 

Jews were accustomed to this thought of anointing: 

their high-priests were anointed, as representing the 

Lord's power or spirit upon the priest, to authorize 

him to perform the sacrifices and to mediate between 

God and the people. Their kings were anointed, representing 

that divine power and guidance was upon 

them, and that they were specially authorized to represent 

the Lord in the government of the people. 

The promise was that the Lord's anointed, the 
Messiah, should by and by come and establish a reign 
of righteousness in the earth, and now our Lord announced 
himself as the anointed of the Father. He 
did not do this in any coarse or rude manner, saying, 
"I am the Messiah. I am the anointed of Jehovah, 
with authority as priest and king;" but he did it in a 
quiet, unassuming manner, by calling attention to the 
prophecy and declaring that its fulfilment had now 
taken place. The announcement was not that the 
Lord had anointed him to rule, but that the first part 
of his mission was to preach, to declare, to be the 
mouthpiece of God to humanity. He had a great 
message, which should ultimately be unto all people, 
but which at that time was only for so many as had 



ears to hear. 

It would undoubtedly be disappointing to many 
to have the royalty feature passed by, and to find that 
Messiah's work as herein delineated by the prophet 
and announced by the Lord, was one of preaching a 
good message rather than of raising a great army— of 
preaching to the meek and poor, rather than of rallying 
round himself the rich and wise and proud. They 
would be disappointed, too, at the part of the message 
which says that he was to bind up the broken-hearted. 
They had expected, perhaps, that, like the great warriors 
and leaders amongst the other nations, their deliverer 
would be the one who would cause the loss of 
many lives and the breaking of many hearts with sorrow 
and with trouble. Even those whose hearts were 
somewhat broken were probably disappointed because 
of their wrong expectations. 

The proclaiming of liberty to the captives and the 
opening of the prison doors to them that are bound, 
our Lord's hearers probably did not understand. Their 
thoughts may have gone out to John the Baptist, who 
at this time was in prison, and they may have wondered 
whether Jesus would take any steps for his release. 
They probably had little conception of the real 
meaning of this Scripture— that it signified the liberation 
of Satan's captives from the bondage of sin, and 
ultimately the release from death and its bondage of 
the millions who have gone down into that great prison-house, 
the tomb. Even the Lord's disciples, who had 
ears to hear his message and hearts to respond thereto 
and become his followers at any cost, could not at this 
time have appreciated the greatness of the Lord's work. 
Little by little he needed to make known unto them 
the meaning of the prophecies and explained that the 
hour is coming in which all that are in their graves 
shall hear the voice of the Son of Man and shall come 
forth. 

R3301 :page 12 

THE ACCEPTABLE TIME. 

"The acceptable year [time, period] of the 
Lord" mentioned by the prophet was not understood 
either. Blessed are our eyes that we now 
see that this acceptable year or acceptable time 
or acceptable period is the entire Gospel age, during 
which God is willing to accept all that come 
unto him through Christ— willing to accept them as 
joint sacrificers with Jesus, as members of the great 
Royal Priest. True, by and by, at the close of the 
Millennial age, the Lord will be willing to accept so 
many of the world of mankind as the great Redeemer 
shall have brought into heart-harmony with him, and, 
by restitution processes, back to the image of God. 
But that acceptance of the world, after restoration by 



Christ, is a very different one from the acceptance of 
the Church in this present time. 

Our acceptance now means our change of nature, 
our begetting to the new nature, the spiritual; and the 
terms or conditions of this acceptance are, as expressed 
by the Apostle, that having been first justified freely 
by God's grace through the redemption that is in 
Christ Jesus, we should, secondly, "present our bodies 
living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God and our 
reasonable service." This acceptable day, then, means 
the day in which our heavenly Father is willing to accept 
the sacrifices of the anointed. He had only 
accepted Jesus' initiatory sacrifice of consecration, which 
later our Lord fulfilled and finished at the cross. It 
was the ground upon which the heavenly Father gave 
him the exceeding great reward of the First Resurrection 
blessing— to glory, honor and immortality. So 
with all the members of the body following in the footsteps 
of the Savior, justified by his blood— their sacrifices 
are counted in as acceptable to the Father during 
this antitypical Day of Atonement; and by its close 
all of these "better sacrifices"— then the typical bullock 
and goat sacrifices— will have been offered and 
will have been accepted, and thereafter no sacrifices 
will be either needed or accepted. 

This wonderful prophecy which our Lord declared 
was being fulfilled in his own person is still in process 

R3301 :page 13 

of fulfilment in the persons of his truly consecrated 
followers— the members of his body. This was shown 
in the type. The holy anointing oil was poured upon 
the head of Aaron, but ran down even unto the skirts 
of his garments, thus anointing in the figure each member 
of his body. So it is with us. We are members 
of the Anointed One, and that which was true of our 
Head is true in a measure also of each one of us. We 
are all anointed to preach, all authorized of the Lord 
to declare the good tidings of the coming Kingdom to 
all the meek and broken-hearted. It is a mistake to 
suppose that our commission and the Gospel message 
given us is intended of the Lord to break men's hearts. 
It is a mistake to suppose that we are commissioned to go 
especially to the froward. Our message, while given out 
broadcast, must not be expected to attract any except 
the meek and broken-hearted. True, the light shining 
in the darkness will reprove the darkness and convince 
of sin, of righteousness and of coming judgment, or discrimination 
between the righteous and the unrighteous; 
but this is an incidental feature. The real mission of 
the Gospel is to the meek and to the broken-hearted. 
As respects the world our general message, so far 
as they are able to hear it, is liberty to the captives 
and ultimately opening of the prison-doors of death, 
that all the families of the earth may in due time receive 



from the Lord through his Anointed the great 
blessing of the knowledge of the Truth, the opening of 
the eyes of the understanding, opening of the deaf ears, 
that they may know their God and be able to return 
by way of holiness and the restitution processes which 
will ultimately be at their disposal during the Millennial 
Kingdom. We can do still more for those who 
have ears to hear now. We can tell them of their liberty, 
of their freedom from the domination of Satan 
and sin and the weaknesses of the flesh. We can assure 
them in God's name, and through the merit of the 
great sacrifice for sins given by our Savior, that their 
past sins are forgiven and that their present weaknesses 
and imperfections are covered, if so be that they 
are trusting in Jesus and seeking to walk not after the 
flesh, but after the Spirit to the extent of their ability. 
This justification by faith is for the Lord's servants and 
handmaidens now, but an actual justification or release 
from the bondage of sin and Satan is the glorious provision 
for the world in general during the coming age, 
when Satan shall be bound, when he will deceive the 
nations (peoples) no more. 

GRACIOUS WORDS TO UNGRACIOUS HEARTS. 

The Lord's discourse is not given, but unquestionably 
it was a grand one based upon so grand a 
text. The record is that all present bore witness to the 
words of grace which proceeded out of his mouth- 
words of favor, of blessing, of comfort, of peace. We 
know not to what extent the Lord may have described 
the blessings yet to come upon the world through his 
Millennial Kingdom, secured by his work of redemption. 
His old neighbors and friends were beginning to 
think very highly of him, and apparently the old 
proverb that a prophet is without honor in his own 
country and amongst his own kin was about to be disproved. 
Apparently, also, the people of his home 
city were about to receive him as indeed being a great 
prophet, and rejoice in him and be proud of him because 
he was of their city— Jesus of Nazareth. 

But how short-lived was their appreciation of him! 
How quickly the natural mind and perverse reasoning 
turned everything upside down, and turned his admirers 
into enemies, hating him and seeking his life! 
They began to say, Is not this the one we have known 
as Joseph's son? And then they began to wonder what 
mighty works Jesus would do in their midst, having 
heard of the great miracles wrought by him in the 
province of Judea and in the nearby city of Capernaum. 
Our Lord interpreted their thoughts and said, 
"Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, 'Physician, 
heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in 
Capernaum, do here in thine own country.'" 

We know not why our Lord refused to perform 
miracles in Nazareth. We may surmise, however, 



that this being his home city, where he was well 

known and where undoubtedly he had previously 

read in the synagogue, the people being in a right condition 

of mind should have been ready to accept the 

good tidings without any attestation of miracles; 

whereas in the other cities, where the Lord was not 

known, the miracles were more or less necessary as his 

credentials, and none might have been expected to 

receive him and to accept his teachings without 

having either a personal acquaintance with him 

or the attestation of miracles. The thought would 

be that the miracles of our Lord were not intended 

to be restitution blessings, because the restitution 

times had not yet come— that the miracles 

performed were merely to witness, to attest, to substantiate, 

fortify and clinch our Lord's teachings. Secondly, 

the people of Nazareth should not have expected 

miracles, did not need miracles, having another attestation 

instead, namely, their acquaintance with Jesus. 

HAVE WE NOT DONE MANY WONDERFUL WORKS IN THY 
NAME7-MATT. 7:22,23. 

A lesson may be drawn from this circumstance 
applicable to our day. Miracles are not necessary today 
amongst the Lord's people, and hence they have 
passed away. Not that the Lord has any the less 
power, but that the time for restitution has not yet 
come, and the necessity for miracles as introductions 

R3301 :page 14 

to the Gospel message is no longer manifest. Hence, 
although not for a moment doubting the divine ability 
to heal all manner of diseases today, we are inclined 
to look with suspicion upon the miraculous healings of 
the present time, whether done by Mormons or by 
Christian Scientists or by Christian Alliance people or 
by Spiritualists or by Mr. Dowie and his followers or 
others. We are inclined to look upon miracles as some 
of the "wonderful works" mentioned by our Lord, to 
the performers of which he will say, I do not recognize 
you as my faithful disciples. 

Satan and his work are undoubtedly opposed to 
life and healing, etc.; nevertheless, he is quite able 
and willing to reverse his processes and to become 
either a preacher or a healer, as may best suit his convenience. 
Our Lord in speaking on this subject implied 
such a course on the part of Satan, but intimated 
that it would mean the fall of Satan's kingdom— that 
it would imply that such efforts were necessary in order 
to perpetuate the superstition and blindness which he 
has been exercising over mankind, necessary in order 
to distract attention from the glorious light of Present 
Truth, gradually breaking in upon the hearts and 
minds of those who are the Lord's truly consecrated 



people. 

The present time, so far as the Lord's people are 
concerned, is a time for sacrifice and not a time for restitution 
—a time for laying down their lives and not a 
time for saving them. It is a time for the binding up 
of their broken hearts, though not a time for the repairing 
of their marred bodies; a time for a reckoned deliverance 
from sin and death, but not a time for actual 
deliverance. As for the world, it has now a sufficient 
witness on every hand to the greatness of Messiah and 
to his merit as a teacher, it needs no temporary healing 
of the sick for this purpose, and as for the permanent 
healing of the world's sickness, the time has not 
yet come for this; but, as the Apostle Peter points out, 
it will come at the establishment of the Lord's Millennial 
Kingdom at his second advent. "The times of 
restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all the 
holy prophets since the world began" shall follow, and 
they will indeed be "times of refreshing." 

The people of Nazareth were interested in Jesus 
from the standpoint of selfishness— pride in him as the 
representative of their city— and hoped that the great 
miracles that he had wrought in other cities would be 
more than duplicated at his home. And so when he 
intimated that he would do no such miracles there 
they were chagrined. His citation of previous similar 

R3302 : page 14 

dealings in no measure placated their anger. They 
were filled with wrath and rose up and thrust him out 
of the city in the direction of a precipitous hill about 
forty or fifty feet high, with the evident purpose of 
killing or maiming him by pushing him over the brink. 

"MARVEL NOT IF THE WORLD HATE YOU." 

What a picture we have here of the natural man 
in his fallen condition! At one moment rejoicing in 
the Master's gracious words, at another desiring to 
destroy him because of the failure of their selfish hopes 
and ambitions. So it has been with the Lord's people 
since, and particularly is this true in the present time, 
the harvest of this Gospel age. Many hear the good 
tidings of great joy for all people, and while declaring 
it to be the grandest Gospel message conceivable, yet 
selfish interests— especially sectarianism, and the feeling 
that instead of this message building up their favorite 
sect or party it will have the effect of discrediting 
the same— seem to evilly influence those who rejoiced 
in the gracious message but a short time previously. 

Apparently our Lord permitted the matter to go 
far enough to show the real spirit of his opposers, and 
then, turning himself, he overawed them with the 
glance of his eye and passed through their midst unmolested. 
He exercised this power because his time 



was not yet come. So, too, we may suppose it will be 
with all the members of his body. As the Father had 
a due time for the Son in which to accomplish his work, 
so, doubtless, divine providence is overruling and guiding 
the affairs of each member of the body of Christ so 
that not even a hair of their heads could fall without divine 
notice; and so, their lives being precious in the 
Father's sight cannot be taken from them in any manner 
until their time shall have come— until they shall have 
finished the work which the Father has for them to do 
—until they shall have experienced the chastening 
and polishing necessary to fit them for the Kingdom, 
or until by their own wilfulness they shall have taken 
their affairs out of the Lord's hands or have refused to 
walk in his steps. 

"HIS OWN RECEIVED HIM NOT, BUT-" 

Our Golden Text was fulfilled not by the above 
rejection of our Lord at Nazareth, but by his rejection 
by the whole nation of Israel. The Apostle, however, 
points out that, while the nation as a whole rejected 
the Lord, there were individual exceptions; and hence, 
while the nation as a nation was rejected by the Lord, 
these faithful individuals who became his disciples 
were received of him, were granted liberty to become 
members of the house of sons, and at Pentecost received 
the spirit of adoption, the spirit of begetting to 
the new nature. 

A parallel to this experience of fleshly Israel is 
to be sought and is readily to be found in antitypical 
Israel— nominal spiritual Israel. At our Lord's 
second advent he comes to Christendom as his professed 
people; and, in harmony with the prophets, 
he is again rejected— yet not by all. As there were 
some amongst the Jews ready to receive him and 
to follow in his steps, so, today, there are some to 
whom his words are applicable, "Blessed are your 

R3302 : page 15 

eyes for they see and your ears for they hear." 
Those of the spiritual house now accepting the Lord 
are in due time to receive a great blessing— the antitype 
of the Pentecostal blessing— it will be glorification. 
Soon shall the wheat class of this Gospel age be blessed 
and changed that they may "shine forth as the sun in 
the Kingdom of their Father." (Matt. 13:43.) Thus 
we see that the Lord will be for a stone of stumbling to 
both the houses of Israel, but for a blessing to some, 
the faithful of each. They shall become as the very elect, 
his body members, his Bride, and be associated with 
him not only in the anointing and sufferings of this 
present age, but also in the glories of the future work 
of blessing all the families of the earth with a knowledge 
of the Lord and with an opportunity to return to 



favor if they will. 



R3302 : page 15 

"THE EARTH SHALL YIELD HER INCREASE." 

THE following is a letter from a brother in the 

Truth illustrates well how all that the Lord 

has promised respecting food for the restored 

millions of our race now in death can be 

fulfilled: 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have recently learned of a matter which I 
believe will be interesting to you. It is this: 

About ten miles from Philadelphia there is a 
small farm of fifteen acres, the owner of which has 
brought it to an extremely high state of cultivation. 
The results are almost past belief. The matter has 
been attracting the attention of the United States' 
officials, who have been keeping tab on the wonderful 
doings of this farm for the past four years. 

I visited the farm and met the owner personally. 
He is a Minister in the nominal Church, and manages 
this little farm additionally. On the fifteen acres he 
was supporting, at the time of my visit, twenty-nine 
head of cattle and three horses. He raised all the 
feed for this stock on the fifteen acres, and sold additionally 
considerable hay and grain which he was 
unable to use. He has a good-sized house and barn 
on the premises, and last year, besides maintaining 
himself and family from the proceeds of the farm, 
cleared from it a profit of twenty-one hundred dollars. 
He has brought his farm to a condition where 
it produces three crops annually without expending 
a dollar for fertilizers of any kind. The vegetation 
is so heavy and luxuriant that weeds are completely 
choked out. There is scarcely a weed to be found 
on the place. All this has been done on an ordinary 
clay soil in only twenty years. About him on 
every side are farms many times as large where the 
owners use large quantities of imported fertilizers, 
gather only one crop a year and only just manage to 
get along comfortably. 

I at once thought to myself, this is an illustration 
of how the wilderness shall blossom as the rose 
and the earth yield her increase, and it is coming 
to the attention of mankind at just the proper time 
—at the beginning of the millennium. I suggested 
this thought to the minister, but to my sorrow he 
replied that he had no faith along that line; that 
he was in accord with Henry Ward Beecher's view 
that the fall of man must have been upward, and 
that we are gradually attaining by evolutionary processes 
the perfection of our race. 



I replied that my loyalty to the Scripture teaching 
that man passed under Divine condemnation 
through disobedience, so that he needed the redemption 
which our Lord Jesus accomplished as a ransom 
for all, and that he still needs the blessing of 
restitution to bring him back to the image and likeness 
of God in which he was created, forbade me 
to accept any such view. 

The minister replied that he once held similar 
views regarding the atonement until he went to college, 
and that there he learned to view matters very 
differently. Seeing that he discarded the foundation 
doctrines of the Divine Word, I felt that it would 
be useless to make further effort to interest him in 
the glorious Plan of the Ages. I said to myself, 
"Here is one of those mentioned by the prophet 
when he said, 'A thousand shall fall at thy side.'" 
This friend has fallen. Doubtless many others are 
similarly falling away from their relationship to our 
Heavenly Father through a loss of faith in the Redeemer 
he has provided. I at once applied to myself 
the words of the Apostle, "Let him that thinketh 
he standeth take heed lest he fall"; and while rejoicing 
that I still stood firm on the ransom, I uplifted 
my heart in prayer to the Lord that he would 
ever keep me loyal to himself and the great Plan of 
the Ages of which our dear Redeemer's sacrifice is 
the center and foundation. 

Returning to the subject of the farm, I made a 
little calculation as follows: In a little country village 
a total annual income of two hundred and fifty 
dollars, used carefully, will easily maintain for one 
year five adult persons who enjoy good health, even 
under present unfavorable conditions as respects the 
quality and prices of commodities. Thus this little 
farm of fifteen acres would maintain the minister's 
family of say five persons and forty-two other 
individuals or forty-nine in all— an average of about 
three per acre or one thousand nine hundred and 
twenty persons per square mile. 

The total land surface of the world is 52,299,431 
square miles, and doubtless under the Divine government 
nearly all of this will be reclaimed for purposes 
of cultivation; but let us suppose that one-third 
of it will always be waste land. This leaves 
34,866,287 square miles for cultivation, and, on the 
basis I have suggested, would support an army of 
66,943,271,040 people. 

It seems to me that the preacher's little farm 
comes pretty near making a basis for a mathematical 
demonstration of the earth's ability to yield crops 
sufficient for the support of all who will be found 
worthy of lasting life at the conclusion of the millennial 
age: even without allowing for supernatural 
power and bettered conditions. 

CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 


