VOL. XXXVII SEPTEMBER 1 NO. 17 
A. D. 1916-A.M.6044 



CONTENTS 

Keeping the Lord's Commandments 259 

Christians have Three Commandments 259 

The Source of Our Severest Trials 260 

"Take Heed to Yourselves" 261 

Sent Into Outer Darkness 262 

The Harvest is Not Ended 263 

Gentile Times Evidently Ended 264 

Jewish and Christian Parallels 264 

The Burning of the Tares 265 

Greater Sufferings-Greater Reward 265 

Fellowship in Christ's Sufferings 265 

Secret of His faithfulness 265 

A Plot That failed 266 

St. Paul Before Felix 268 

A Doctrine Lost Sight Of 268 

The Coming Judgment Day 269 

I.B.S.A. Conscripts in Great Britain 269 

Interesting Letters 270 

When Divorced People Are free to Marry ... 271 

Changed Attitude Toward Spiritism 271 

page 258 

NASHVILLE GENERAL CONVENTION 
AUGUST 24-27 

CORDIAL INVITATION 
Governor Tom C. Rye, of Tennessee; Mayor Robert Ewing, 
of Nashville; Chairman Robert L. Burch, of Nashville Industrial 
Bureau; and President R.B. Brannon, of the Commercial 
Club of Nashville, have each and all extended a cordial 
invitation to the I.B.S.A. to hold its Convention in their 
City, promising a hearty and generous welcome. 

FAVORABLE RAILROAD RATES 
Thirty-five Railroads in the South have joined in making 
us an attractive rate of about l-l/2c a mile to induce the 
largest possible number to attend this Convention. In every 
case, ask your Ticket Agent for the rate covered by Joint-Passenger 
Tariff No. Exc. 6747. 

GOOD LOCATIONS 
The Capitol Building, in which all of the sessions of the 
Convention will be held, is said to be located on the highest 
and coolest spot in the City. The Ryman Auditorium is the 
best in Nashville, and has been offered free by the City to the 
Association for the showing of the greatest Biblical production. 



THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, and has been accepted 
for that purpose. The Princess Theater, which the City has 
provided for Brother Russell's public lecture, is the best. 

AN ATTRACTIVE PROGRAM 

FELLOWSHIP DAY: Thursday, August 24th-Brother P.S. 
L. Johnson, who will be the Chairman of the Convention, will 
give the opening address on "Christian Fellowship." In the 
afternoon short addresses on One Body, One Spirit, One 
Hope, One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism and One God will 
be given by Brothers Riemer, Thorn, Jones, Toole, Stevens, 
Thornton and Wise. 

TRANSFORMATION DAY: Friday, August 25-Pilgrim 
Brother Thornton will speak on "When He Shall Appear," 
and Pilgrim Brother Daniel Toole on "We Shall be Like 
Him." "The Quickening of the Spirit" and its bearing upon 
the Volumteer, Drama, Colporteur and Pastoral Work will 
be considered by Brothers Riemer, Jones, Thorn, Johnson. 

RANSOM DAY: Saturday, August 26— After a discourse 
by Brother Palmer on "The Sufferings of Christ," there will 
be held at 1 1 o'clock in the morning a Question Meeting on 
the great, fundamental subject of THE RANSOM, conducted 
by Brother Russell, who in the afternoon will hold a Consecration 
Service, consisting of the Consecration of Children, 
Sermon on Baptism and Symbolic Immersion in Water. 

KNOWLEDGE DAY: Sunday, August 27th-Pilgrim Brother 
M.E. Riemer will conduct the Berean Lesson for the day, 
and at 1 1 o'clock. Brother Russell will give a discourse on, 
"What, Know ye not,. ..ye are Bought with a Price?" (1 Cor. 6:19, 20.) 
In the afternoon he will speak in the 

Princess Theater to the public on "The World on Fire," and 
in the evening at 7 o'clock, in the Capitol Building, he will 
conduct the closing feature of the Convention— The Love Feast. 

We are hoping for a good attendance at this Convention 
and believe that those attending will be richly blessed. 



R5955 : page 258 

"THIS ONE THING" THE SOCIETY DOES 

Brethren write us from time to time respecting inventions, 
patents, mining claims, etc., desiring that THE WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY should join with them in 
the development of these— kindly offering the principal portion 
of all the profits. 

We greatly appreciate these kind offers, the generous 
hearts behind them, and the love for the Truth and its service 
thus manifested. But we are obliged to refuse all such 
offers, because the Society engages in no kind of business 
for profit. It confines its business transactions to financiering 
the Pilgrim Work, publishing the SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 
etc., and supplying them at cost or below cost; publishing 
THE WATCH TOWER, publishing the BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY, etc., and in the presentation, and formerly in the 



showing, of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. 

The Society engages in no kind of mining or patent business 
or speculations. The money under its control comes 
from the Lord's consecrated people, and often represents 
hard-earned funds and self-sacrificing economy; it is used 
strictly and only for the forwarding of the Truth according 
to the best judgment of the executive officers. 

This does not mean any unwillingness to counsel with any 
of the brethren in respect to their earthly affairs and interests. 
We are glad to give such advice as we may be able 
to give on every matter, temporal or spiritual, involving 
the interests of the Lord's consecrated saints. 



R5946 : page 259 

KEEPING THE LORD'S COMMANDMENTS 

THE Law given to Israel at Mount Sinai and 
summarized in the Ten Commandments was 
not given to any other nation or people. It 
is upon the Jew still, and is a bondage only 
because it was made a part of God's contract 
with that nation. If they would keep 
that Law perfectly they were to have certain 
special and exclusive blessings. If they 
failed to keep it, certain penalties were to 
result. But since that Law was the measure 
of a perfect man's ability, and since no Israelite, any 
more than others of the world of mankind, was perfect, 
therefore none of them could keep that Divine Law. 
None of them could get the blessings which it promised. 
All of them did get more or less of the curse, or punishment, 
which failure to keep the Law threatened. Thus 
Jesus said, "None of you keepeth the Law" (John 7: 19); 
and St. Paul wrote, "By the deeds of the Law shall no 
flesh be justified in His sight."— Romans 3:20. 

Nevertheless, the endeavor to keep that Law proved 
a great blessing to the people of Israel, and some of those 
Ancient Worthies who strove so faithfully and loyally, 
the Apostle assures us, will yet get a rich reward therefor. 
(Hebrews 1 1:38-40.) Messiah, after setting up His 
spiritual Kingdom, will constitute these Ancient Worthies 
princes and rulers in all the earth— under and subject to 
Himself and His Elect Church on the spirit plane. 

Jesus, although a member of our race according to 
the flesh, had an unimpaired life, transferred from the 
spirit plane to His virgin mother's womb. Thus He did 
not inherit either sin or its condemnation, but was born 
"holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." (Hebrews 7:26.) 
Because of this perfection Jesus was able 
to do what no other member of the human family ever 
did or could do. He was able to keep the Law fully and 
completely in its every detail. And He did more than keep 
the Law. He sacrificed earthly rights and privileges 



which the Law declared He had a right to. Thus Jesus 
has a merit— a right to earthly life aside from the life 
which He now has on the spirit plane, and which was a 
reward from the Father for His obedience unto death, 
"even the death of the Cross."— Philippians 2:8. 

It is that earthly life which forms the basis for the 
New Covenant arrangement that God has promised to 
establish through the glorified Messiah. In due time He 
will appropriate the merit of His sacrifice— His right to 
human life— as the full satisfaction for Father Adam's 
disobedience and his death penalty. Thus purchasing the 

R5947 : page 259 

race, by giving a corresponding price, the great Redeemer 
will take over His purchased possession— man and his 
earthly home— and for a thousand years will exercise His 
privilege of assisting all the members of Adam's family 
who are willing to rise up out of sin, imperfection and 
death-conditions to human perfection and everlasting life. 
Those blessings could not come under the Law Covenant, 
because mankind could not keep the Law Covenant; but 
they will come to the willing and obedient under the 
gracious terms of the New Covenant, which promises 
mercy and forgiveness, and the taking away of the stony 
heart and the giving instead the heart of flesh and the renewing 
of a right spirit in all of those who will be rightly 
exercised by the corrections and glorious privileges of 
Messiah's Kingdom. 

CHRISTIANS HAVE THREE COMMANDMENTS 

Christians— disciples or followers of Jesus— from 
amongst the Gentiles never were under the Mosaic Law 
given at Mount Sinai. They are received into God's 
family as sons under a different Covenant— the one which 
reads: "Gather My saints together unto Me," saith the 

Lord, "those who have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice." (Psalm 50:5.) 
Jesus, after keeping fully all the 

conditions and requirements of the Law Covenant, under 
which He was born, was permitted to respond to this Covenant 
of Sacrifice. He was first, the Chief, the Head of 
the Household of Saints who entered into this Covenant 
of Sacrifice with God— agreeing to sacrifice His earthly 
life and all its rights in the doing of the Father's will 
even unto death. It was His faithfulness in this that 
gained for Him the better resurrection to glory, honor 
and immortality— the Divine nature. 

During this Gospel Age, some saintly ones have responded 
to the Lord's invitation to walk in Jesus' steps. 
Through the merit of His sacrifice, Jesus was privileged 
to be the Advocate with the Father on behalf of all this 
company called to be His Bride class and joint-heirs. He 
has imputed His merit to their sacrifice, thus making it 
complete and acceptable in the Father's sight. Each one 
of the followers of Jesus, energized by His spirit of devotion. 



not only makes the covenant, but fulfils it, with 
the assistance of his glorious Redeemer. Thus eventually 
they will come off through Him "more than conquerors," 
and be joint-heirs in the Kingdom. 

To these the Apostle writes, "Ye are not under the 
Law, but under grace." These are not under the Law 
Covenant, requiring of them absolute and perfect obedience 
to every item of the Jewish Law. They are under 
grace, or Divine favor, which does not require the fulfilment 
of the whole of the Law by them— a requirement 
which they could not fulfil. Instead, as the Apostle tells 
us, "the righteousness of the Law [its real requirement, 

R5947 : page 260 

the spirit of its requirement] is fulfilled in us who walk 
not after the flesh, but after the spirit." (Romans 8:4.) 
Thus, although not under the Law Covenant, the will of 
God, which was the spirit of the Jewish Law, is binding 
upon every Christian in proportion to his knowledge of it. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S FIRST AND SECOND COMMANDS 

Speaking of the spirit of the Law, applicable to angels, 
to the world of mankind and to Christians, Jesus declared 
it to be briefly comprehended in two commandments. The 
first of these is, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, mind, being and strength." The second is, 
"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Every Christian 
and every angel recognizes that Law and feels a responsibility 
to it to the extent of his ability; but neither 
angels nor Christians are under the Law Covenant— that 
covenant was made only with the nation of Israel. 

Every follower of Jesus should realize that if he has 
enlisted under the banner of Divine righteousness and 
truth he has pledged his very life in this service as a 
soldier of the Cross. How then could he do less than his 
very best in loving and serving his Heavenly Father with 
all his mind, being and strength? How could he decline 
the Divine requirement to love his neighbor as himself— 
to be kind, generous, not selfish? True, the New Creature 
may find difficulty in devoting all of his mind and strength 
to the Lord and in dealing in perfect fairness with all 
his fellow-creatures. But this is the New Creature's desire 
and intention, and to accomplish which he must strive 
daily, and war a good warfare against the natural inherited 
weaknesses of his old nature— his flesh. In proportion 
to his love for the Lord will be his zeal in this 
warfare; and proportionate also will be the reward that 
will be given him in the end by the Heavenly Father. 

But what an unseen warfare is being waged amongst 
the followers of the Lord wherever they are! The world 
sees not and knows not of this conflict; but it is very real, 
and the Lord takes note of the loyalty and faithfulness of 
these convenantors— these who have made a covenant 
with the Lord by sacrifice— consecrating their little all of 



time, talent, influence, prospects. Having consecrated, 
they are to maintain this attitude of consecration daily, 
hourly— presenting their bodies "living sacrifices, holy, acceptable 
to God, and their reasonable service."— Rom. 12:1. 

If weak or fallen according to the flesh, these are to 
remember that they are no longer fleshly or human beings, 
and that the weaknesses are not theirs; for they are now 
New Creatures in Christ Jesus, to whom old things have 
passed away and all things have become new. They have 
new ambitions, new ideals, and new relationship with 
God. They do not love sin, but love righteousness. They 
hate sin. They have enlisted to death to war a warfare 
against sin, especially in their own flesh. They have the 
satisfaction of knowing that while fellowmen might not 
see their battlings, might not know of the courageous 
effort they put forth in opposition to sin. yet the Lord 
looketh not at the outward man, but at the heart, and His 
judgment is not according to the flesh, but according to 
the spirit— the mind, the intention, the endeavor. Thus 
there are some great, valiant soldiers of the Cross, whom 
the world knows not; but all of these will eventually be 
crowned and have a share with Jesus in His Kingdom. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S THIRD COMMANDMENT 

At first it would appear that these two commandments 
itemized by Jesus would include everything that could be 
required by justice; and so they do. Justice requires 
nothing more than what these two commands include. 
Why then did Jesus give another command— a third one— 
a new one, over and above anything that the Divine Law 
required? We reply that this third commandment is not 
applicable to any except those who become the disciples 
of Jesus. This third commandment the Father did not 
put upon Jesus; He voluntarily put this regulation upon 
Himself, and laid down His life sacrificially— a thing 
which no law could justly demand. The Father did not 
require that Jesus should do this in the sense of commanding 
Him to do it; but He did require it in the sense 
that He promised glory, honor, immortality, the Divine nature 
and the Messianic Kingdom to the saintly One who 
would enter the Covenant of Sacrifice. 

Jesus, therefore, in entering this Covenant of Sacrifice, 
did more than what the Law given to Israel required. 
Therefore, when pointing out to His disciples the conditions 
upon which He would be their Advocate, and the 
conditions upon which He would guarantee to them a 
share with Himself in the Heavenly things. He specified 
the importance of this third commandment. "A new 
commandment I give unto you— that ye love one another 
as I have loved you." (John 15:12.) St. Paul points 
out that Christ loved us to the extent of dying for us, 
and that all of the true followers of Jesus, possessed of 
His Spirit, should likewise count it a joy to be permitted 
to lay down their lives in the service of the brethren. 
"We ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren." 



Gradually the eyes of our understanding have been 
opening wider and wider to see the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the love of God; and as a 
result we have been striving more and more to love and 
to serve our God with all our heart, mind, being, strength. 
More and more, also, we have learned to appreciate the 
necessity for dealing justly and kindly with the members 
of our families, with our neighbors, with all mankind- 
loving our neighbors as ourselves. We may have congratulated 
ourselves on the progress we have been making, 
and surely we all need some encouragements while 
battling with the old nature! 

THE SOURCE OF OUR SEVEREST TRIALS 

But now, behold the New Commandment, requiring a 
still greater devotion to the will of our Father and to the 
leadership of our Savior! The rule of righteousness is 
to be observed toward our Heavenly Father and toward 
all our neighbors; but toward the brethren of the Household 
of Faith we are to do more than the right— we are 
to suffer, we are to sacrifice on their behalf, in their interests. 
"We ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren." Oh, what a searching proposition this Covenant 
of Sacrifice is! How strange that it should be on 
behalf of the brethren that we should be expected to 
sacrifice, to lay down our lives! 

At first some one might say, "To sacrifice will be a 
very easy matter when it is done in the interests of the 
brethren, more so than if done for the world." However, 
experience shows that many of God's dear people, 
striving to keep the first two commandments, find it more 
easy to sacrifice time, influence and strength in the service 
of the world than in the service of the brethren. Somehow 
we are inclined to expect more from the brethren 
than from others, and inclined to make less allowance for 
weaknesses in the brethren than in others. There seems 
to be no condition in which God's people are more tried 
as respects their spiritual graces than by one another, with 

R5948 : page 260 

one another. It is not merely theory; it proves itself out. 
All over the world there are Class troubles. Truly we 
read, "the Lord will judge His people," and again, "the 
Lord your God proveth you"! Testings and siftings are 
coming on and many of the dear saints of the Lord who 

R5948 : page 26 1 

have made a Covenant of Sacrifice with Him do not 
seem to realize that these Class troubles amongst the 
brethren are means which the Lord permits to test and 
to demonstrate the characters of His people— their love 
for Him, His Word, His will, their justice to all men, doing 
unto others as they would that they should do to 



them, and, finally, their spirit of self-sacrifice in respect 
to what they will do for or bear from the brethren in 
laying down their lives for them. 

EXHORTATIONS TO BROTHERLY LOVE 

We fear greatly that some of the Lord's saints, failing 
to appreciate the situation, are failing to be overcomers 
in these matters; and that their place in the Royal Priesthood 
may thus be endangered. We are not rebuking any; 
we are not finding fault with any. But we encourage all 
to remember the Covenant of Sacrifice into which we 
have entered as represented in the Third Commandment— 
that we love one another as the Master loved us— even 
to the extent of dying for us. 

If this matter could be rightly appreciated, if more loving 
sympathy could be felt one for the other, we would 
not be inclined to impute evil motives to each other's 
words and conduct. Rather we would be glad to assume 
that they were sincere, whether we could agree fully with 
all their doings and proposals or not. And being full of 
love for the brethren, our refusal to join with them in 
what we consider unwise or unscriptural arrangements 
would be presented in such kind and considerate, sympathetic 
and gentle terms as would be helpful to them. 

Therefore, let us each strive to judge himself, and 
not to condemn one another. Let us each scrutinize our 
motives in respect to every action, every word of life, and 
especially in all of our dealings with the brethren. Let us 
each assume that the others of the class are as loving 
and as loyal to the Lord as ourself. Let us each remember 
that it is a privilege to sacrifice our own preferences 
and conveniences in favor of the preferences and conveniences 
of others of the brethren, wherever positive 
principles would not thereby be infringed; and we may 
even sacrifice positive principles of justice as respects our 
own interests, if thereby the peace, fellowship and prosperity 
of the brethren will be conserved. 

And even if, despite our every endeavor to the contrary, 
it should finally seem necessary for a class to 
divide, nevertheless love for the brethren ought to be the 
blessed tie that binds, no matter how much the conveniences 
of the class or other reasons might make it necessary 
for us to subdivide. "Love as brethren" ought to 
love. "Be kind, considerate, gentle, one toward another, 
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath 
forgiven you."— Ephesians 4:32. 

"HEREBY WE MAY KNOW" 

It seems remarkable that the Apostle, in pointing out 
one of the surest signs by which the Lord's people may 
know positively that they have been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit, says: "Hereby we know that we have passed 
from death unto life, because we love the brethren." (1 John 3: 14.) 
How strange that love of the brethren 



should be the crucial test, as we have already pointed 
out in the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES-and as we may 
seriously fear will be more and more manifest as we 
come down toward the consummation of our hope! 

As the Apostle has said, "My little children, let us not 
love in word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth." (1 John 3:18.) 
This is a personal matter. Each one of 

us is under this testing. If not yet, sooner or later, undoubtedly, 
this willingness to sacrifice in the interests of 
the brethren will prove each one of us either loyal, faithful 
to our covenant, or contrariwise— unfaithful. Let us 
make this matter of love for the brethren and laying down 
of our lives for the brethren a matter of personal study 
and of practical application to our own hearts, minds, 
thoughts, words, actions. And let us pray for one another, 
as well as exhort one another along these lines, 
striving to be filled with our Master's Spirit. 



R5948 : page 26 1 

"TAKE HEED TO YOURSELVES" 
"Remember Lot's Wife."— Luke 17:32 

IN CONNECTION with our dear Master's 
prophetic warnings respecting the trials and 
testings of the present day. He uttered the 
words of our text. The significance of 
these words should be comprehended by all 
who are walking in the light of "Present 
Truth." The lesson is that those who, under 
the special guidance of the Lord, are now 
fleeing for safety to the Mountain of the 
Lord's Kingdom, will be held to a much 
stricter account than are others. Lot's wife was not accused 
of having shared in the evil practices of the people 
of Sodom, but she had been instructed by the angel of 
the Lord to leave Sodom at once, as it was doomed. 

Her fault was that of looking back to that which she 
had been commanded to leave, and which she had left. 
She was told to flee from the condemned city, and not to 
look back as she fled, but to hasten on to the mountain 
of safety. We may reasonably suppose that her turning 
and looking back toward Sodom implied a heart not fully 
in harmony with her deliverance, but in some degree sympathetic 
with what she was leaving. She at heart clung to 
the accursed things condemned to destruction and was 
loath to give them up. Therefore the Lord brought her no 
further. She became a monument of the folly of sympathizing 
with evil, and with evil-doers, after God has 
given them up. 

We believe there are some now who need to have 
their attention called to the antitype of this typical incident 
referred to by our Lord. Quite a number are disposed 
to sympathize and fraternize with those who have 



come under Divine condemnation. We are told by St. 

Jude that the destruction of Sodom was "set forth as an 

example," or type. Those who assume to be more gracious 

and long-suffering than the Lord, make of themselves opponents, 

who instead of being students of the principles 

of righteousness, attempt to be judges and teachers of 

Jehovah. The proper attitude of heart accepts God's decision 

as not only wiser but more just than our own. 

Consequently, when we see any who have enjoyed the 

light of Present Truth abandoned by the Lord and led into 

outer darkness, we are to conclude that before being thus 

abandoned there must have been in them "an evil heart 

of unbelief in departing from the living God." "He is 

faithful who hath promised" that "if any man will do His 

[the Father's] will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether 

it be of God." (John 7:17.) Whoever, therefore, loses 

the doctrines of Christ after once having had them, has 

surely done more than get his head confused. His heart 

must have been separated from the Lord previously; for 

so long as we abide in Him, it will not be possible for 

any of the snares of this "evil day," this "hour of temptation," 

to entrap us; none shall pluck us out of the Father's 

hand; He is fully able to take care of us. 

R5948 : page 262 

FOUNDATION OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE 

At the very foundation of all Christian doctrine lies the 
doctrine of the Ransom, the Scriptural teaching that "we 
are bought with a price," a corresponding price for Adam's 
sin. Any teaching, therefore, which either openly denies 
or quietly ignores this foundation doctrine, "the Ransom 
for all, to be testified in due time," must be a doctrine 
at variance with God's Revelation. Whether it be old or 
new, whether it be advocated by friends or by foes, by 
the learned or by the unlearned, in the name of Evolution 
or in some other name, our attitude toward it should be 
prompt and decided opposition. If others waver, we who 
have learned that the Ransom is the test by which all doctrines 
are to be proved, need not waver, and should not. 

If our friends get into the quicksands of no-Ransom 
errors, whose name is now legion, and the numbers entrapped 
growing continually, we should lend them a helping 
hand wherever possible, "pulling them out of the fire," 
by reminding them of the Rock Christ Jesus, whereon our 
feet are firmly established, and by throwing to them the 
rope of Divine promises, throughout which is woven the 
scarlet thread of the Ransom of Christ, and exhort them to 
come back to the Rock and not to attempt to find another 
rock at the bottom of the quicksands. And we must use 
great plainness of speech in showing them their danger 
and in pointing out the way of escape. 

But we must not accept their invitation to join with 
them in exploring what men can say or write which would 
tend to make the Word of God of none effect, which would 



claim that God has all along been the sinner and man the 
dupe; or that the hope of mankind is in their own evolution, 
and not in the Ransom and Restitution of the Scriptures; 
or that there is no sin and no death, really, and 
that man therefore needs no Redeemer, but can be his own 
savior. If after kind and faithful remonstrance on your 
part they still persist in exploring and delving into and 
feeding upon such evident contradictions of God's Word, 
let them go. Remember that there must be something 
wrong at their hearts, if they have ever been God's children 

R5949 : page 262 

at all, else they would have no pleasure in the unfruitful 
works of darkness, but would reprove them, and 
their delight would be in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

SENT INTO OUTER DARKNESS 

Let us remember, too, that God has promised to keep 
and guide the minds of those whose hearts are loyal and 
true to Him. We should therefore conclude that if the 
Lord is thrusting any one out of the light as unworthy of 
it, into the outer darkness of the world, if He is permitting 
unfaithful ones to be seduced by the great enemy, it 
is not our mission to follow them into the outer darkness 
by reading, conversation, etc. We are to remain with the 
Lord and those who are walking in the light, and to seek 
others to take the places and crowns of those who now 
deny or ignore the precious blood of the Covenant wherewith 
they were once sanctified. 

Neither are we to waste sympathy upon those who depart. 
If we can neither persuade them nor pull them out 
of the fire, we must let them go, and should turn at once 
and render aid to others more worthy. When the Lord 
has put any out of the light (Matthew 22:13, 14), we 
cannot hope to bring them back. Had it been proper for 
them to remain in the light, if they had been worthy of 
it. He would not have permitted them to be put out of it. 

NO FELLOWSHIP WITH "UNFRUITFUL WORKS" 

We do not here refer to slight differences of understanding, 
which should be patiently dealt with and explained 
or overlooked, as all children in the School of 
Christ have not attained to the same "step," or degree of 
knowledge; but we do refer to those radical differences, 
all of which may be quickly proved by the test of the 
Ransom doctrine. If they agree not with this, "it is because 
there is no light in them." And such are no longer 
to be to us brothers or sisters in Christ, but should be 
considered and treated as of the world— "as a heathen 
man or a publican." These are not to be numbered among 
our friends; for the friendship of such is enmity against 
God. We are not to receive or entertain such at our 
houses, nor bid them or their work God-speed in any 



manner. (2 John 8-11.) Some who have neglected the 
plain statement of God's Word on this subject have suffered 
spiritually for their disobedience. 

Let us more and more be of one mind with the Lord. 
His friends must be our friends; His enemies our enemies. 
If we affiliate with the Lord's enemies, we shall at least 
get into a luke-warm condition towards Him and His 
friends; and the luke-warm, God declares He will spew 
out of His mouth. We should cultivate warmth of heart 
toward all who trust in the precious blood and are consecrated 
to our Redeemer as their Lord and Head. There 
must be no lukewarmness there. Whatever their peculiarities 
according to the flesh, we cannot be other than 
brethren to them in spirit, with all the helpfulness and 
sympathy which brotherhood in Christ implies. But we 
must not, cannot, have any fellowship with the ungodly, 
the sinners against light and Truth, and scorners of the 
grace of God. And although if they were destitute we 
would feed them, yet so long as they are the opponents 
and adversaries of the Lord's Cause and His Truth, they 
are our adversaries and we theirs. The Lord loves positiveness 
with harmlessness, and of us it should be true 
as it is prophetically written of our Lord and the true 
members of His Body in Psalm 139: 19-24. 

This injunction of our Lord, to "remember Lot's wife," 
also applies particularly to the Lord's people who have 
heard His call of the present time to "come out" of Babylon, 
and have left this condemned "city." Whoever, therefore, 
is being led of the Lord's angels (messengers) to a 
place of safety ere the foretold destruction overtakes the 
present Order, as were Lot and his family before the destruction 
of Sodom, let him not look back or otherwise 
manifest sympathy with that which is condemned of the 
Lord to overthrow and destruction. 

HEART LOYALTY AND OUTWARD LOYALTY IN NEXT AGE 

In the next Age, when the world shall have been 
brought to a knowledge of the Truth, the opportunity will 
be granted them to show forth what is the real attitude 
of their hearts toward God. Some after coming to see 
the goodness and loving-kindness of the Lord, will still 
prefer sin; and God's sentence upon them will again be 
the sentence of death— Second Death. A certain period 
will be granted them to learn of the great goodness of the 
Lord and of their opportunity of gaining eternal life. If 
they do not then manifest an interest in their own salvation 
and an appreciation of God's goodness in Christ, and 
a desire to be helped up out of sin and degradation, they 
will receive the final wages of sin, utter and eternal destruction 
in the Second Death. 

There will apparently be some in that time who will 
seem to desire assistance up to a better life, a righteous 
life, who will yield obedience in perhaps only an outward 
way to the laws of the Kingdom. These, we understand, 
will be permitted to live on and be gradually brought up 



to a condition of physical and mental perfection; they may 
live through to the full end of the thousand years of 
Christ's Reign. At the end of that time they, with all 
others then living, will be turned over by Christ to the 

R5949 : page 263 

Father for a final crucial testing. If these then prove 

that their wills have not been wholly given up to God, 

that they do not yet appreciate the costly provision made 

for their salvation, and the value of righteousness, they 

will be destroyed as unworthy of Divine approval and unworthy 

of everlasting life. If the demonstration which 

will then have been given them of the Wisdom, the Justice 

and the Love of God will not have changed their 

hearts to entire devotion to Him and to His glorious and 

righteous will, any further opportunity would be utterly 

useless. They will be cut off from earth as cumberers 

of the ground, that only the righteous, the holy, may live 

throughout the ages of eternity. 

Of the world God will require a full consecration to 
do His will. It must include their entire selves, their 
wills, their bodies— their whole-hearted allegiance. It will 
not be a consecration unto sacrifice, unto death, as is now 
the case with the Church; but they must become wholly 
devoted to God and must realize and recognize that they 
belong to God, that they have been bought, purchased back 
from death, and may, if obedient, live forever. We all 
see how reasonable is this requirement. Adam, who was 
created in God's likeness, should have said, "I belong to 
God. He gave me my life and all I have." But he had 
not fully learned to trust the Wisdom and Love of his 
Maker. He had a perfect brain, a perfect organism; but 
he lacked full knowledge of the character of the Lord and 
of the justice of all His requirements. His incomplete 
knowledge, therefore, rendered him to some extent excusable 
in God's sight. If he had taken the stand of opposition 
to the Lord with clear knowledge and experience, apparently 
he would not have been accounted worthy of redemption. 
The whole world will, then, when they reach 
perfection, realize that they owe everything to God, and, 
if loyal at heart, will wish to render all to Him in glad 
service— to the praise of His name. 

While it would have been eminently proper for the 
world, as with Adam, to render perfect obedience to God, 
even if man had never sinned and been redeemed, the fact 
that they have sinned, and yet have been redeemed 
through God's abounding love and mercy, and will be 
given another opportunity, a full individual opportunity, to 
gain life eternal, furnishes a double reason why they 
should devote themselves fully to God and His service 
forevermore. Those who are bought with blood— the 
precious blood of the Son of God, through whom they 
were created— who were redeemed by such a Sacrifice, 
should rejoice to bind themselves to all eternity to the 
God who so loved them, and should count it their most 



precious privilege to render homage and worship and 
praise forever to such a Creator and such a Redeemer. 

"NOT MY OWN, BUT SAVED BY JESUS" 

The Church of Christ realize, as none others can, the 
mighty significance of the words, "Ye are bought with a 
price, and ye are not your own." Our decision has been 
made that we will indeed be the glad bond-servants of 
Him who thus loved and bought us. We have no rights 
left. Our all is on the altar of sacrifice with our Lord; 
and God has ratified our decision. We are now under 
the most binding of obligations. Unless our lives are laid 
down in harmony with our contract we can never have 
eternal life on any plane. 

Of these who have assumed this obligation there are 
two classes. There is one class who will do all they have 
covenanted to do. These will "receive the full reward." (2 John 8.) 
Then there is the other class who, having 
made the same covenant, fail to fulfil their contract. But 
just as the endorser of a note is responsible, so the Lord 
Jesus will see to it that these finish the sacrifice which 
they have covenanted to make. Their lives must be yielded 
up. If they rebel against the enforced destruction of their 
flesh, they will be sinning wilfully, and will die the Second 
Death, from which there will be no recovery. 

All the Covenantors have agreed to glorify God in 
their bodies, to lay them down faithfully in His service. 
Anything less could not be acceptable; and we should not 
think of rendering anything less. Let us, then, proceed 
with the work of sacrificing these earthly bodies, which 
are the Lord's— not that we should use them up in a suicidal 
way, without regard to the strain upon the flesh, but 
in a reasonable, sane manner let us daily, hourly, glorify 
God in our bodies, continuing our sacrifice even unto the 
end, whether that end be a few weeks off or a few months 
or a few years. 



R5950 : page 263 

THE HARVEST IS NOT ENDED 

SOME of us were quite strongly convinced that 
the Harvest would be ended by now, but our 
expectations must not be allowed to weigh 
anything as against the facts. The fact is 
that the Harvest Work is going grandly on; 
it is not ended by any means. As far as our 
present judgment goes, it would appear that 
there is a considerable Harvest Work yet 
to be done. This is not discouraging, but 
encouraging to us. We are glad to know 
of the grace of God reaching other heads and hearts and 
blessing them as ours have been blessed. We are glad 



to know that others are daily coming into blessed relationship 
with the Lord under the Covenant of Sacrifice, and 
are giving evidence of having been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit. We are glad to note their zeal, and rejoice with 
them that they, as well as we, can share in this glorious 
opportunity of making our calling and election sure by 
the character development which we are daily learning 
to appreciate as the prime essential of the "more than 
conquerors." All those must be copies of God's dear Son. 
our Lord Jesus. We would have been glad to have 
entered upon our work beyond the veil; but we are better 
pleased to continue our labors on this side the veil, because 
such is the Lord's will for us. 

At first we were inclined to surmise that the Harvest 
proper had closed in October, 1914, and that the work 
since going on was a gleaning work; but the facts seem 
not to bear this out. The progress of the work and the 
numbers who are being brought to a knowledge of the 
Truth and separated to the Lord are far too great to be 
styled a gleaning. Evidently it is a part of the regular 
Harvest. Besides, we are being more and more impressed 
with the closing features of the Elijah and the Elisha 
type. More and more we are impressed that Elijah's 
smiting of the river Jordan, the waters thereof being 
thus divided, pictures a mighty work yet to be accomplished, 
and apparently in the very near future. What will 
be the antitype of the folding up of Elijah's mantle, symbolizing 
his power? and how long it may require to thus 
concentrate the forces for the smiting? we do not know. 
We must wait, watch, and do our parts. Then how long 
it will require to accomplish the smiting of the waters is 
also an uncertainty; and how quickly the people will be 
divided by the Truth is also an uncertainty. 

But admitting that even so great a work could be accomplished 
under the Lord's blessing and direction in a 
very short time, we could still not expect the results in 
less than about three years. We are not fixing the time, 
however, for we know of no time features applicable before 

R5950 : page 264 

us— even as Elijah and Elisha were not sent to any 
definite place after reaching Jordan. We are merely 
giving our surmise— that a great work is before us, and 
that we cannot see how it could be accomplished in much 
less than three years. 

It will be after the smiting of Jordan— after the division 
of the people by the Message of the Truth and the 
mantle of Elijah's power— that the separation of the 
Church into two classes will take place. Thereafter, the 
Elijah class, the Little Flock Class, will be clearly manifested, 
separate and distinct from the Great Company 
Class. The division, be it remembered, will be caused by 
the fiery chariot— some very severe, trying ordeal, which 
the Elect Class will promptly accept and enter into; the 
Elisha Class holding back from the persecution, but not 



drawing back to sin or to a repudiation of the Lord. It 
will be but a little later on that the whirlwind (probably 
anarchy) will bring about the "change" of the Elijah Class. 

GENTILE TIMES EVIDENTLY ENDED 

It still seems clear to us that the prophetic period 
known as the Times of the Gentiles ended chronologically 
in October, 1914. The fact that the Great Day of 
Wrath upon the nations began there marks a good fulfilment 
of our expectations. The Gentile nations were 
guaranteed a certain amount of possession and control 
for a certain period of time. That time having expired, 
dispossession proceedings are now in process. The winds 
of strife, winds of war, are let loose with great damage 
to the whole world, weakening the kingdoms of Europe 
in respect to their best blood and their financial strength. 

How long the war may yet last, who could say? All 
the belligerent nations are proud and self-confident. The 
humbling, which the Bible mentions, has not yet been accomplished. 
It is possible that the war may continue for 
quite a while yet, before the nations shall have been 
weakened and humbled sufficiently to desire peace. Then 
will come other troubles. Revolutions will threaten; the 
governments will associate themselves still more firmly 
with the nominal church systems, both seeking protection 
and strength. Next we may expect the great collapse of 
Spiritual Babylon, leading on to the great revolution-earthquake 
of Revelation, "So mighty an earthquake as 
was not since men were upon the earth." (Revelation 16:18.) 
This in turn, will lead on, according to our understanding 
of the Bible, to the terrible anarchy, in which 
all present institutions will succumb before the fire of 
human passion, prejudice, etc. Then, at the auspicious 
moment, the Gentile dominions having passed away, Messiah's 
Kingdom will manifest itself for the blessing of 
the whole world, and will prove to be "the desire of all 
peoples."— Haggai 2:7. 

We see no reason for doubting, therefore, that the 
Times of the Gentiles ended in October, 1914; and that 
a few more years will witness their utter collapse and the 
full establishment of God's Kingdom in the hands of Messiah. 
But by that time, the Elijah Class will have passed 
beyond the Veil; for "when He [Jesus] shall appear in His 
glory, we [the Church] also will appear with Him." 

OUR MISTAKE RESPECTING THE HARVEST 

Our readers will remember that the basis of our expectations 
respecting the Harvest time was the parallelism 
between the closing of the Jewish Age and the closing of 
this Gospel Age. We found the beginning of the Harvest 
time clearly marked by the 1335 Days of prophecy, 
and by the fulfilment amongst God's people of the declaration: 
"Oh, the blessedness of him that waiteth and cometh 
to the end of the 1335 days!" (Daniel 12:12.) Surely 



great blessedness, great enlightenment of the eyes of understanding, 

great appreciation of our God and His glorious 

purposes came to the Lord's people at that time in 

full agreement with that prophecy! Ever since then a new 

song has been in the mouths of the Lord's people, as they 

have learned of His goodness through the Divine Plan of 

the Ages. We see no reason to question the date, October, 

1874, as the beginning of the Harvest time and the parallel 

to the time when Jesus began His ministry in the Harvest 

time of the Jewish Age. 

Our mistake was along the very line that we pointed 
out. Time and again, we reminded our readers that the 
parallelism between the Jewish Age and the Gospel Age 
could not include anything belonging to the New Dispensation. 
The parallels affected merely the nominal Jewish 
House there and the nominal Christian House here. Both 
were rejected because of failure to be in the right condition 
of heart for the truths that were due to them— both 
rejected for destruction. The Jewish System was a 
Church-State affair, paralleled here by the great Church-State 
systems of Europe, whose destruction began in 1914. 

Let us remember, however, that the three and a half 
years of Jesus' ministry were more a time of preparation 
of the Apostles to be the instruments for the harvesting 
and a sharpening preparation of the Sickle of Truth for 
the later work, which began at Pentecost. There was no 
"garner" into which to gather the wheat prior to Pentecost. 

JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN PARALLELS 

JEWISH-NOMINAL CHURCH CHRISTIAN-NOMINAL CHURCH 

A.D. 29-33 A.D. 1874-1878 

"They knew not the time of their visitation." 

A.D. 33-36 A.D. 1878-1881 

The Most Holy Anointed, Divine favor prolonged 
for three and a half years to complete the 
70 weeks of favor promised to Israel, their rejection 
being deferred. 

A.D. 36-73 A.D. 1881-1918 

Because of the overspreading of abominations, He 
shall make it desolate, even until the consummation 
of utter destruction— until all that God has predetermined 
shall be accomplished.— Daniel 9:24-27. 

No parallels as between the Pentecostal Church and the 
true Church now are to be looked for. But the resurrection 
of Jesus before the Church harvesting began may 
well be considered to have its parallel here in the resurrection 
of the sleeping members of the church— 1878 A.D. 

We should not have looked for parallelisms between the 



starting of the Gospel Church and its experiences, and 
the starting in the Harvest time of the Heavenly Church 
and its experiences. These are no part to the parallel. 
The parallel belongs to the nominal Jewish System, which 
went to destruction, and to the nominal Gospel Church, 
which is now going to destruction. 

We imagined that the Harvest work of gathering the 
Church would be accomplished before the end of the Gentile 
Times; but nothing in the Bible so said. Our thought 
was purely an inference, and now we see that it was an 
unjustified one. This Harvest work belongs to the New 
Dispensation and cannot be identified with the Old. Anyway, 
the harvesting of the Jewish Age, gathering "Israelites 
indeed" into the Gospel Church, did not close with 

R595 1 : page 264 

A.D. 70, but progressed in various parts of the world 
thereafter. Quite a good many Jews, doubtless, profiting 
by their terrible experience, were all the better prepared 
to be gathered into the Gospel Garner after the destruction 
of their national polity. Similarly, we may expect 
that quite a good many will yet be gathered to the 
Heavenly Garner, and we know of no time-limit here. 
Incidentally we remark that some historians put the 

R595 1 : page 265 

end of the Jewish Time of Trouble as April A. D. 73. 
which would correspond to April 1918. 

Are we regretful that the Harvest work continues? 
Nay, verily; we rejoice and have the pleasure each day 
of showing forth the praises of Him who hath called us 
out of darkness into His most marvelous light; and we 
delight in seeing how others are being benefited and made 
to rejoice. Are we regretful of the experiences we have 
had in coming to this present point? Do we feel like 
repining that the Lord did not force upon us more careful 
attention to the parallelism? Nay, verily; the Lord's leadings 
have been good. Perhaps, indeed, we got benefit 
from the thought that the Harvest work would soon be 
ended. Perhaps it led us to deeper consecration and 
greater activity in the service of the Lord, in ourselves 
and for others. We therefore have nothing to regret. 

"Who led us first, will lead us still. 

Calmly we sink into His will." 

THE BURNING OF THE TARES 

In the parable of the "the Wheat and the Tares," the 
Master puts very prominently the gathering of the tares 
and the binding of them in bundles for burning. We assumed 
that this burning would not take place until all 
the wheat had been gathered into the Heavenly Garner; 
but apparently this was an incorrect thought. The garnering 
of the wheat continues; but apparently the consuming 



of the tares will correspond very closely with the division 
of Jordan. The tares are a class of (often) noble people 
who have risen up out of the world infused with hopes 
and aims of a benevolent character, but misled into thinking 
that they are the Church. From the tare viewpoint, 
the wheat are an abnormal growth, a peculiar people, few 
in number, and not held in high esteem. The smiting of 
the waters will reveal the truth in respect to what is the 
real Church of Christ, and what are imitations; and the 
honest-minded Tare Class will be undeceived, and cease 
to longer pretend that they are the Church of Christ— 
thus they will be burned or cease to be as tares, continuing 
however as noble-minded worldly people and will have a 
share in the general blessings of the "sweet by and by" 
under the Kingdom, for which we still pray. 

Our present attitude, dear brethren, should be one of 
great gratitude toward God, increasing appreciation of 
the beautiful Truth which He has granted us the privilege 
of seeing and being identified with, and increasing zeal 
in helping to bring that Truth to the knowledge of others. 
In the meantime, our eyes of understanding should discern 
clearly the Battle of the Great Day of God Almighty now 
in progress; and our faith, guiding our eyes of understanding 
through the Word, should enable us to see the 
glorious outcome— Messiah's Kingdom. Furthermore, we 
can be fully content not to know how long the Harvest 
Work will last— content that the great Captain, who by 
Divine appointment has the entire matter in charge, is too 
wise to err, and has promised us that all of our experiences 
shall work together for our good if we love Him and are 
of "the called ones according to His purpose," seeking to 
make our calling and election sure. 



R595 1 : page 265 

GREATER SUFFERINGS-GREATER REWARD 
-SEPTEMBER 24.-2 CORINTHIANS 4:16-18.- 

FAINT NOT IN TRIBULATION-THE NATURAL MAN PERISHES- 
THE NEW CREATURE GROWS-WHAT ARE LIGHT AFFLICTIONS? 
-WHAT IS THEIR DURATION7-WHAT IS THEIR 
OBJECT?-HOW SHALL WE ATTAIN THIS OBJECT? 

"The things which are not seen are eternal."— Verse 18. 

WHAT great Christian courage St. Paul's words 
and deeds manifest! He that endured so 
many hardships, a veritable thrashing-machine 
experience, nevertheless writes: "We 
faint not; for though our outward man perish, 
yet the inward man is renewed day by 
day." Ah, that was the secret of the matter— 
the renewing of the inward man, the 
New Creature! The tribulations of the 



outward man would have been terrible experiences 
indeed had there been no inward man to take a 
different view of matters and to learn valuable lessons 
and experiences from the outward man's tribulations. 
The inward man had God's assurance that if God were 
for him the opposition of all others would be as nothing. 
He had the assurance that God would overrule all of his 
experiences for his highest welfare. He had the assurance 
of the Lord, too, that the glories of the future would 
be proportionate to the trials faithfully endured. 

FELLOWSHIP IN CHRIST'S SUFFERINGS 

Ah, here we have the secret of the Apostle's great 
zeal for God, for the Church, for the Truth! He endured 
as seeing Him who is invisible to natural eyes. (Hebrews 1 1:27.) 
St. Paul lived a double life, in the 
sense that to man he was Saul of Tarsus, but in reality 
he was Paul, the servant of God, the New Creature in 
Christ Jesus. The world knew him not; but he knew 
himself, knew his God; and he was energized by the power 
Divine and by the Message of God's Word, which spoke 
to him peace and relationship to God through Christ, and 
also informed him of the glory, honor and immortality 
awaiting all the faithful ones at the end of the way. 

And this secret of the Apostle's own experience is an 
open one to all of God's family of spirit-begotten children 
who faithfully are continuing to walk in the footsteps of 
Jesus and to be taught of Him through the Word. We 
do not have so large a manifestation of Divine favor as 
had Jesus, the Head of the Church, and the Apostles, 
the foremost members of the Church; but still we have in 
a general way the same favors of God, the same promises 
of God, the same inspiring hopes which they had. Let us 
not forget the Apostle's endurance when we read his 
words: "Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, 
worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory."— 2 Corinthians 4:17. 

The Apostle gives the same thought when, writing 
about the resurrection, he declares how it will be with the 
Church in the resurrection. All the faithful will be glorified, 
honored, blessed, perfected— not blessed in the 
same degree, however; but, "As star differeth from star 
in glory, so also it will be in the resurrection of the dead." 
(1 Corinthians 15:41, 42.) The same lesson is given us 
in Daniel's prophecy, where the resurrection is referred 
to and the resurrected ones are illustrated by the stars, 
whose beauty and brilliancy vary.— Daniel 12:1-3. 

The Apostle's argument was that if the sufferings of 
Christ, in the Divine arrangement, are to measure the 
coming glories of Christ, then he desired to be a participator 
with the Lord in the present sufferings in order that 
he might also be a participator with Him in the coming 
glories. Instead, therefore, of saying to himself or to 
others: "I am doing more than my share of the Gospel 
work; and some others of you should come and help me. 



and give me a rest." St. Paul took the other view. He 
declared himself willing and anxious to fill up as much as 
possible that which was behind of the afflictions of Christ 

R595 1 : page 266 

(Colossians 1:24.) He counted it all joy to have tribulation, 
knowing that tribulation would work out the fruits 
of the Holy Spirit in his character, and thus prepare him 
for the Kingdom. (Romans 5:3-5.) Incidentally, we 
remember the assurance of the Bible— that only if we 
suffer with Christ shall we reign with Him, and that only 
those who become dead with Him shall live with Him. 

THE SECRET OF HIS FAITHFULNESS 

Many find it easy to make a start in the Christian way 
when everything is favorable. Some run briskly for a 
while, and then grow weary in well-doing. But the Apostle 
seemed never to weary. He was always on the alert, 
in season and out of season, so far as his own convenience 
was concerned. He was ready to preach the Gospel anywhere, 
everywhere, to all who had the hearing ear. The 
secret of his perseverance is given us in Verse 18, in the 
words: "We look not at the things which are seen, but 
at the things which are not seen." 

What do these words mean? They mean that St. Paul 
had spiritual eyesight. He indeed saw earthly attractions, 
but they lost their drawing power upon him because of 
his spiritual sight— his perception of the things unseen. 
With the eye of faith he saw the Heavenly Father, the 
glorified Lord Jesus, the Heavenly hosts, the coming Kingdom 
of glory, honor and immortality. By faith he saw 
the great Millennial Kingdom spreading out before him, 
and heard the Divine invitation to become an heir in that 
Kingdom, to be joined in heirship with the Master and 
Redeemer. He had accepted this invitation. He had enlisted 
under the banner of the Master; and he realized 
that everything else in the world was of practically no 
value in comparison with these eternal things which God 
had promised. His confidence was in the Word of God. 

R5952 : page 266 

So it is with the Lord's people today. We may see 
the advantages of politics, social standing, wealth, business, 
etc., etc. But all these earthly aims and ambitions 
are of comparatively little value to us because we have 
seen, with the new eyesight of the New Creature, the 
Heavenly things. Our ears have heard God's Message. 
We have been able to discern the things of the Spirit— the 
things which God hath in reservation for them that love 
Him, the things which eye hath not seen nor ear heard, 
neither have entered into the heart of the natural man. 
(1 Corinthians 2:9.) We realize more and more that 
all the things of the present evil world are temporal in 



character; that they are to pass away with the New 
Dispensation which is just at the door; and that earthly 
honors and powers are all of less value every minute. 

On the contrary, we see that the things which God 
offers us are eternal things. Is it any wonder that the 
Bible sets forth the importance of doctrine? Whoever 
is well indoctrinated from the real Bible viewpoint is 
strong in the Lord. Whoever is without this knowledge 
of the Kingdom and without this spiritual sight and hearing 
will necessarily be weak, and will lack the evidence 
of being a New Creature in Christ Jesus.— 2 Cor. 5:17. 



R5952 : page 266 

A PLOT THAT FAILED 
-OCTOBER l.-ACTS 23:14-24.- 

THE WRATH OF MAN OVERRULED-ST. PAUL BEFORE THE SANHEDRIN- 

THE HIGH PRIEST REBUKED-ST. PAUL AS A GENERAL- 
THE SANHEDRIN DIVIDED IN OPINION-DISSENSION 
AMONGST THE MEMBERS-THE APOSTLE TAKEN BACK TO 

THE CASTLE-ENCOURAGED BY A VISION-THE CONSPIRACY 
AGAINST HIM-INFORMATION CONCERNING THE PLOT 

GIVEN TO COLONEL LYSIAS-ST. PAUL SENT TO CAESAREA 
FOR SAFE-KEEPING. 

"They shall fight against thee; but they shall not 
prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith 
Jehovah, to deliver thee."— Jeremiah 1:19. 

IN THE morning after the riot and St. Paul's 
rescue by the Roman soldiers. Colonel 
Lysias in perplexity called together the Jewish 
Sanhedrin, in order that they might pass 
upon the Apostle's case; for by this time he 
had recognized that the point of dispute was 
a religious one, and that his duty was merely 
to preserve the peace. Thus St. Paul was 
afforded another opportunity to witness the 
Gospel to the Jews— to their most learned 
body of men, their most influential Court of Seventy. 
Perhaps by this time the Apostle began to realize that his 
trying experiences were furnishing him with superior opportunities 
as a herald of the Gospel. 

Looking back with the eye of faith, we can perceive 
that this is always so; that, as from the very first, the 
Lord is supervising His own work. But only in proportion 
as we know what constitutes the Lord's work can we 
have and use the eye of faith. We must see that the 
Divine Program is not to attempt the conversion of the 
world at the present time, but to leave that work for the 
future, to be accomplished by Christ's Millennial Kingdom. 
We must see that during the present Age His work is 
merely that of selecting, or electing, the Church, to be His 



Bride-Consort in His Kingdom— His Associate in the great 
work which will then be accomplished for the whole world. 

As St. Paul realized the opportunity granted him of addressing 
the leaders of his nation, he sought to make wise 
use of it. Hence the earnestness of his countenance. 
"Looking steadfastly" at his audience, he began by reminding 
them of his faithfulness as a Jew. He had ever 
been a model citizen, never lawless. He addressed the 
Council as "Brethren," thus putting himself on an equality 
with them, in respect to both religious zeal and general 
learning. Indeed, it is quite generally supposed that at 
the time of the stoning of St. Stephen Saul of Tarsus— 
afterwards St. Paul— was a member of the Sanhedrin. 

"SPEAK EVIL OF NO MAN" 

The address which St. Paul had planned to deliver was 
interrupted by the high priest, who commanded those who 
stood by the Apostle to smite him on the mouth. This 
was a special mark of indignity and a protest against the 
words uttered. It is not unfair to assume that the high 
priest felt his own course in life especially condemned by 
St. Paul's words; for, as the Master declared, "the darkness 
hateth the light." Josephus charges Ananias with 
having been a hypocritical grafter of the baser sort, but 
so crafty that the public in general esteemed him. Suddenly 
checked in his speech, the Apostle shouted, "God 
shall smite thee, thou whited wall." The prophecy came 
true. Within two years Ananias was deposed. Within 
six years he met a horrible death, his own son being associated 
with his assassins, who drew Ananias from his 
hiding place in a sewer and slew him. 

The term "whited wall" was applied to ordinary graves, 
which were covered with a stone slab bearing the inscription. 
These were frequently whitewashed, so as to be 
easily discernible, lest any traveler should tread upon them 
and, according to Jewish ritual, be defiled. (Numbers 19:1 1-16.) 
The pure, glistening white stone was beautiful; 
but beneath it was corruption. The strength of the 
symbol as representing hypocrisy is manifest. 

R5952 : page 267 

Some of the bystanders who heard the Apostle asked, 
"Revilest thou God's high priest?" St. Paul rejoined, "I 
wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest; for it is 
written, "Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy 
people." (Exodus 22:28.) It will be remembered that 
the Apostle never fully recovered his eyesight after having 
been struck blind on the way to Damascus. (Acts 9:8, 9.) 
Of his imperfect vision, his "thorn in the flesh" 
(2 Corinthians 12:7-10), the Lord refused to relieve him, 
but assured him that in compensation he should have the 
more of Divine grace. This answer to his prayer the 
Apostle gladly accepted. It is possible, therefore, that he 
did not discern the high priest, or else did not know that 



the indignity was suggested by Ananias. 

A COMMON, BUT DANGEROUS PRACTICE 

It is claimed by some that Ananias had usurped his 
office, and that hence the Apostle's words may have meant 
that he did not recognize that the true high priest was 
present. The latter view is implied by the fact that St. 
Paul did not apologize for his words, but merely showed 
that he fully recognized the Divine Law that rulers should 
not be slandered. 

This is a good rule for every one today. The tendency 
to speak evil of dignitaries, to belittle them, to caricature 
them, is a prevalent sin, which is doing much more to 
undermine good government than the fun-makers seem to 
realize. Undoubtedly there are times and ways for protesting 
against things and methods with which we do not 
fully agree. But the people of God should preeminently 
stand for law and order, with as much justice as may be 
attainable, waiting for absolute justice until the King of 
kings shall take His Millennial Throne. His command to 
us meantime is that we "be subject to the powers that 
be," and "follow peace with all men," so far as possible. 
-Romans 13:1; Hebrews 12:14. 

Incidentally we remark that some are disposed even to 
speak jestingly of the Lord and the Scriptures. This is 
a dangerous practice. "The REVERENCE of the Lord 
is the beginning of wisdom"; and it must continue in us, 
and increase as the years go by, if we would make our 
calling and election sure to the glorious things which God 
has in reservation for them that love Him and reverence 
Him.-Job 28:28; Psalm 111:10. 

ST. PAUL'S READY TACT 

This incident had interrupted in its beginning the 
hoped-for presentation of the Gospel. St. Paul perceived 
that the prejudice against him was such that no speech 
of his could affect his hearers; for they were dominated 
by the high priest, whose lack of justice had found so 
early a manifestation. Like a general who, finding his 
front attack useless, wheels his forces and, by a flank 
movement, captures the enemy, so St. Paul captured the 
sympathies of fully one-half of his auditors. At the same 
time he secured an opportunity for showing that the doctrine 
which he preached was the logical outcome of the 
faith of the large sect of Pharisees. 

The Apostle did this by shouting, "I am a Pharisee, 
the son of a Pharisee; and I am being persecuted because 
of my belief in the doctrine of the resurrection." This 
statement was strictly true. The word Pharisee signifies 
a person who professes entire sanctification to God. St. 
Paul had never ceased to maintain this attitude. His experiences 
on the way to Damascus had changed his course 
of conduct, but not his attitude of heart, which from the 
first was loyal to God— "in all good conscience." 



St. Paul well knew that the Sanhedrin was about 
equally divided between the ultra-orthodox, holiness-professing 
Pharisees and the agnostic, higher-critical Sadducees, 
who numbered amongst them many of the most 
prominent Jews, including priests. The effect of his shout 
was instantaneous. The Pharisees took his part as one who 
in some respects believed as they did, although they could 
not endorse all of his teachings. As between the infidel 
Sadducees and an out-of-the-way Pharisee, they promptly 
espoused the cause of the latter. 

R5953 : page 267 

A tumult ensued, some seeking to take the Apostle's 
life, and others endeavoring to protect him. Again Caesar's 
soldiers needed to intervene between warring factions 
of the people of God. How sad a scene! How pitiable 
that those who possessed much advantage every way, as 
did the Jews under Divine instruction, should so sadly 
neglect the lessons of the Divine Law in respect to justice 
and to one another's rights, not to mention the Divine 
instruction, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself"! 
(Leviticus 19:18.) How pitiable it is that this is sometimes 
true of Christians possessed of still higher appreciation 
of the Divine standards and under covenant vows to 
lay down their lives for the brethren, and indeed exhorted 
that they cannot win the prize which they seek unless they 
reach the point of loving their enemies! 

True, fisticuffs are not so popular today amongst civilized 
people. But cannot even greater cruelty be accomplished 
by the tongue than by the hand? Is it not true 
that even amongst those who have named the name of 
Christ and who have taken upon themselves a consecration 
vow to do His will, many bite and devour one another, 
under the influence of the spirit of the Adversary- 
anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife? As we see these 
things, shall we not learn a valuable lesson, one which will 
enable us the better to glorify our Father in Heaven? 

A CONSPIRACY EXPOSED AND FOILED 

Back in safety to the castle, the Apostle doubtless 
wondered in what manner the Lord had been glorified by 
this, his latest experience. Often it is thus with ourselves. 
But where we cannot trace the Lord's providence 
and see the outcome, we have all the better opportunity 
for cultivating the faith which "can firmly trust Him, 
come what may." 

Meanwhile, Colonel Lysias was evidently learning that 
his prisoner was no common man; for one who could 
remain calm, alert, dignified, humble and self-possessed, 
while his opponents were the reverse of all these, evidenced 
to an unprejudiced mind that he was probably in 
the right of the controversy. This change of the Roman 
officer's attitude toward St. Paul was manifested in his 
kindly treatment of the Apostle's nephew, who had brought 



word to his uncle that a band of forty men were plotting 
to take his life. 

These conspirators, forty professed religionists, forgetful 
of the Divine Law, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor 
as thyself," had bound themselves to each other by an 
oath that they would neither eat nor sleep until they had 
killed St. Paul— a man who had done them no harm, but 
who had, on the contrary, merely endeavored as wisely as 
possible to do them good. At the instance of his mother, 
who was the Apostle's sister, the lad had gained access 
to the castle and had explained the plot to his uncle, who 
sent him to the commandant. The latter took the boy by 
the hand to a private place, heard his story and dismissed 
him, telling him to keep the matter quiet. 

Perceiving that he was in conflict with at least one-half 
of the influential of Jewry, the commandant concluded 
that the wisest course for him to pursue would be 
to put his prisoner under the protection of Felix, the Roman 
Governor, at Caesarea. Accordingly, at 9 o'clock 
that very night, two hundred infantry, two hundred spearmen 

R5953 : page 268 

and seventy horsemen took the Apostle to new quarters, 
where as an ambassador in bonds he would have 
fresh opportunity for representing his great Master. 

This Study shows us that God prefers to use natural 
means rather than supernatural agencies; and that all of 
His children should be on the alert to serve His Cause at 
any and every moment. God's purposes will be accomplished. 
But happy is he who is accounted worthy of the 
privilege of any service to the Lord or to the least of His 
brethren. Let us, then, be continually on the lookout, 
in an inquiring attitude of mind, desirous of knowing the 
mind of the Lord in every matter. As for the Apostle, 
doubtless he learned a lesson which we might all profitably 
consider; namely, that while having full confidence 
in the Divine will, it is ours to protect reasonably and 
properly our lives and interests as well as those of others. 



R5953 : page 268 

ST. PAUL BEFORE FELIX 
-OCTOBER 8.-ACTS 24:1-21.— 

ST. PAUL AT CAESAREA, THE ROMAN CAPITAL OF JUDEA- 
HIS TRIAL BEFORE THE ROMAN GOVERNOR-THE CHARGES 
BROUGHT AGAINST THE APOSTLE-ST. PAUL'S DEFENSE- 

THE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION THE THEME OF 
HIS PREACHING-THIS DOCTRINE LOST SIGHT OF BY MANY 

PROFESSED CHRISTIANS OF OUR DAY-THE ROMAN 
GOVERNOR INTERESTED IN THE APOSTLE'S TEACHINGS- 
ST. PAUL A PRISONER FOR TWO YEARS. 



"Herein I also exercise myself to have a conscience void 
of offense toward God and man always."— Verse 16. 

FELIX, the Roman Governor of Judea, received 
St. Paul as a prisoner. The Apostle's 
enemies, the high priest and other Jewish 
rulers, hastened down from Jerusalem to 
Caesarea, thirsting for his blood. They 
brought with them a Roman lawyer, named 
Tertullus, whose knowledge of Roman usage 
would, they hoped, enable them to prove that 
St. Paul was a dangerous character— a sort 
of anarchist. Felix was the judge. There 
were no jurors. Tertullus, skilled as a pleader, made his 
charges and confirmed them by witnesses from Jerusalem. 

Shrewdly the Roman attorney complimented the Governor 
along the lines of his hitherto efficiency in preserving 
the peace, in putting down every form of insurrection 
and in maintaining quiet and order. This very completely 
paved the way for the lawyer's request that the Governor 
should continue this praiseworthy course and rid the land 
of an obnoxious trouble-maker— the Apostle. Witnesses 
were produced who testified respecting the first tumult in 
the Temple at Jerusalem and also respecting that of the 
following day, in which the Sanhedrin became divided 
into two parts and a general uproar ensued. The Apostle 
was charged with being a ringleader of a sect called 
Nazarenes; and the claim was made that he had caused 
trouble amongst both Jews and Greeks the world over. 

This was Tertullus' case. He charged that the prisoner 
was guilty of sacrilege— that St. Paul had defiled the 
Temple; and the inference was deducible that the Apostle 
had caused rioting within the holy sanctuary. Witnesses 
were procured to prove that these charges were true. 

Governor Felix motioned to the Apostle that he was 
at liberty to answer the charges. Then St. Paul opened 
his defense with the remark that he was gratified that his 
judge had been on the bench for some time and was well 
acquainted with Jewish customs; that he would therefore 
understand what a novice could not— why the Apostle had 
come to Jerusalem to worship after the manner of the 
Jews, to celebrate one of their religious festivals. He had 
come, not to raise an insurrection, but to worship God 
after the Jewish custom; and no witness had testified that 
he was found in the Temple either disputing or gathering 
a crowd. The charge was untrue. He did not do these 
things in the synagogues or anywhere else; and his enemies 
could not prove the tilings whereof they accused him. 

The Apostle's answer was both logical and complete. 
Still the Governor could not understand why, under the 
circumstances, there should be a commotion. Hence it was 
necessary for St. Paul to explain that the Jews had an 
antipathy against him because of his different religious 
belief, not because of any wrong-doing on his part. 

THE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 



St. Paul avowed that he had experienced no change in 
his Jewish belief— that he still believed the teachings of 
the Law and the writings of the Prophets; that he still 
held to the fundamental Jewish doctrine of the necessity 
of a resurrection of the dead; and that he still had faith 
in the Promise that through the resurrection of the dead 
God's blessing should ultimately come to Israel, and 
through Israel to all the families of the earth. Furthermore, 
he exercised himself, trained himself, disciplined 
himself, to keep his conscience pure, free from violation 
of Divine and human laws. 

This was a grand testimony. Its force should have 
had weight, not only with the Governor, but also with 
the Jews, who murderously sought the Apostle's life because 
of a little difference of opinion on religious questions. 
What a lesson we have here! A Roman Governor 
and judge of not too savory a reputation: a prosecuting 
attorney willing to sell his talents for money, regardless of 
the principles of justice; the Jewish high priest, typical 
of the great Messiah, associating himself with those who 
were endeavoring to pervert justice and to destroy one 
of "the salt of the earth" ! 

Our Lord had foretold that some of His disciples 
would stand before kings and princes, but that they should 
not be dismayed. He would stand by them to give them 
assistance. (Matthew 10:17-22.) How literally this was 
fulfilled in St. Paul's case! How evidently the Lord stood 
by him and gave him the suitable words! 

The Apostle proceeded to explain that he had brought 
alms to his nation, the offerings of Gentiles who had heard 
his Message of the grace of God. Certain Jews from 
Asia Minor had found him purified in the Temple, but 
without cry or tumult. These Jews should have been 
brought forward as witnesses. Or those who were making 
the charges against him should have been specific; 
they should have said on the day following the attack by 
the mob— the day when he was brought before the Sanhedrin— 
what he did tumultuously in the Temple or what 
wrong-doing they had found in him. Only one charge 
could they make; namely, that while standing amongst 
them he had cried out, "Touching the resurrection of the 
dead I am called into question this day!" Surely the Governor 
could not think that in this there was anything akin 
to rioting or anarchy! The prisoner had been in the right; 
but those who were accusing him had been in the wrong. 

A DOCTRINE LOST SIGHT OF 

The Apostle's testimony shows us that in all of his 
preaching he laid special stress upon the doctrine of the 
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust. 
Alas, that in our day this doctrine has been measurably 

page 269 



lost sight of! Few Christians ever think of the 
resurrection. Few have ever heard a sermon upon this 
subject. Why is this? 

We reply that it is because a great error has come in 
amongst Christian people in respect to the condition of 
the dead. According to both Catholics and Protestants, 
only the saintly are fit for Heaven at death. Both agree 
that only finished characters could properly be admitted 
there. Both agree to our Lord's words respecting the 
Kingdom: "Few there be that find it." (Matthew 7:13, 14.) 
Our Catholic friends tell us that nearly all mankind 
—heathens. Catholics and Protestants— go to Purgatory, 
where for centuries they will undergo terrible sufferings, 
which will purge them from sin and prepare them for 
Heaven. Many Protestant friends tell us that they do not 
see even this hope; that from their standpoint only the 
"little flock" go to Heaven; that all the great mass of mankind, 
unprepared for the presence of God, must go somewhere; 
and that the only place for them is a Hell of 
eternal torture, from which there will be no escape. 

We shall not quarrel with either party. Both views 
are too horrible to be reasonable or just, not to mention 
loving! We prefer to go back to the words of Jesus and 
the Apostles, and to note that according to their teachings 
the dead are really dead, and that their only hope is, as 
the Apostle expresses it, a resurrection hope— "the hope of 
the resurrection," the hope "that there shall be a resurrection 
of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust." 
-Acts 24:15. 

It is not the resurrection of the body that the Bible 
teaches, but the resurrection of the soul; and "God will 
give it a body" at the time of the awakening. 
(1 Corinthians 15:38.) We could wish that all Christian people 
would arouse themselves to a thorough study of the Scriptures. 
Then the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead 
would be given its proper place; and much of the fog 
of the Dark Ages would thus be gotten rid of— the fog 
which has troubled us, saddened our hearts and turned 
many away from God and the Bible into infidelity. 

THE COMING JUDGMENT DAY 

After having heard both sides of the case, the governor-judge 
set it aside until Claudius Lysias, the commandant 
of Fort Antonia, the Roman officer who had 
made the arrest, should be heard. Meantime, St. Paul 
was given great liberty, the real status of his case evidently 
being quite clearly understood by Governor Felix. 

Subsequently the governor, apparently much impressed 
by the Apostle's demeanor, called for him again, at a time 
when his wife, a Jewess, was present. He wished her to 
hear the Gospel Message, which seems to have appealed 
to him as reasonable. St. Paul doubtless reviewed much 
of his previous testimony, and then reasoned respecting a 
coming judgment, or trial— that eternal destinies are not 
fixed as a result of the present life. 



Assuredly the Apostle explained that God has appointed 
a Day of trial, or judgment, for the whole world 
of mankind— the Millennial Day, a thousand years long. 
(2 Peter 3:7, 8.) During that period all mankind shall 
have a full trial as to worthiness or unworthiness of human 
perfection and life everlasting. The obedient shall 
be blessed, uplifted, raised up, up, up to perfection. The 
wilfully disobedient shall be destroyed in the Second Death. 

"A JUST RECOMPENSE OF REWARD" 

If, then, the trial of the world is to be in the future 
Age, and if in the present Age God is merely electing, or 
selecting, the Church to be the Bride of His Son and 
Joint-heir in the Messianic Kingdom, which is to bless the 
world, how could these matters have any special influence 
upon Felix and his wife? We reply. In two ways: 

(1) It might influence them to accept Christ and to 
seek to be of the elect Church; 

(2) Knowing of their future trial, they should know 

that the words and the deeds of the present life have much 
to do with the status of the individual when he is awakened 
from the tomb. The vicious, the hypocritical, the 
self-righteous, the wanton, the profligate, degrade themselves 
and increase the number of steps which they must 
retrace during the Millennium. On the contrary, every 
good deed, every victory gained, every practice of moderation, 
will make the individual correspondingly the better 
prepared for the next life. Every generous deed of the 
present life makes its impress upon the character, and will 
bring proportionate blessings in that Millennial Judgment 
Day. On the other hand, every evil deed, every violation 
of conscience, will receive its "stripes," or just punishment. 

As Felix listened to the Apostle, he was conscience-stricken. 
According to this teaching, he would have much 
for which to give account as one of the "unjust" in the 
resurrection. We note that St. Paul said nothing about 
fiery tortures, which an intelligent mind must repudiate 
as unreasonable; but his argument was all the stronger 
without such assertions. His forceful declaration was, 
"A just recompense of reward both for the just and for 
the unjust." Finally the governor dismissed him with the 
memorable words, "Go thy way for this time. When I 
have a more convenient season I will call for thee." 

Time and again Governor Felix called for the Apostle; 
but apparently never did he find his heart in a sufficiently 
mellow and humble condition to accept the Apostle's Message 
and to surrender to the Lord. A lesson in this connection 
for us all is that we should do promptly whatever 
we realize to be our duty. For two years St. Paul 
remained a prisoner at Caesarea, comfortably provided 
for, preparing for the further services of his life, and 
writing several epistles to the various Churches. 



R5953 : page 269 

I.B.S.A. CONSCRIPTS IN GREAT BRITAIN 

THE LONDON OFFICE WRITES:- 

"Measures taken by the Government during the present 
year have drawn all men of Military age (18 to 41) into 
the Army, automatically, the only exceptions being those 
prescribed by the Act itself. Among these are Men of 
Holy Orders and regular Ministers of any Religious Denomination. 
As some 160 of the Elders of various 
Ecclesias were affected by this, we thought it wise and 
proper to see if they were not properly excepted from the 
Act, especially on account of the need of their services in 
the Ecclesias. A test case, on a friendly basis, was arranged 
with the War Office and tried at Edinburgh on Monday 
(17th inst.), when the Crown was represented by counsel. 
The decision given by the Court was entirely in our 
favor, the Sheriff ruling that this Association is a properly 
constituted Religious Institution, and that the Elders are 
Ministers within the meaning of the Act, and therefore 
properly excepted from the Act. 

"We do not know, as yet, whether the War Office will 
require further proof before acknowledging our status, but 
we are corresponding with them as to this. If this matter 
is finally settled in our favor, we are hopeful that the 
Colporteurs, etc., will be granted a special concession as Lay 
Evangelists and Agents of the Association. 

"At the present time those of our Brethren who have been 
conscripted can be described as follows: 

Doing work of a combative character 

Doing work of a non-combative character 20 

Imprisoned through failure to obey Military orders .58 

Given work of National Importance apart from 
the Military, having satisfied the Tribunals of 
the genuineness of their conscientious objection 103 

R5953 : page 270 

"Quite a number have been medically rejected and a few 
have been given exemption on account of the important religious 
work they have on hand. 

"At the Court in Edinburgh quite a good witness was 
made. Brother Shearn was chief witness and he was before 
the Court 1-1/2 hours, one -third of the time explaining 
wherein our teachings differ from those of the Denominations. 
The Court seemed really interested as well as satisfied. 
The hand of the Lord was manifestly with us." 



DEATH SENTENCES COMMUTED-ALL SERENE 
BOULOGNE, FRANCE. 
Loving Christian Greeting to all the dear ones in Christ 
Jesus! We were "read out" on Saturday last, and the verdict 
you will be anxious to hear is now public: "Sentenced 



to suffer death by being shot, but commuted to 10 years' 
Penal Servitude." We are still peaceful in the knowledge 
of our Heavenly Father's loving care, and are not too 
greatly concerned, for have we not agreed to be faithful to 
the Lord, come what may? and we came out here in full 
reliance upon the Lord's grace and prepared in the strength 
He supplies for anything He should deem good for us. 

And now for the future: I suppose we shall see the 
inside of a prison for a while; but as to whether we shall 
serve so long remains to be seen. I do not consider the 
sentence to be as big as it looks. They have to keep up 
appearances out here, you understand. I expect we shall 
leave here about Tuesday or Wednesday, so do not send 
any particular communication after this reaches you. 

We have had some nice studies; Lot as a type of Great 
Company, more of Psalm 89, and also Hebrews 7. 

The way before us is uncertain, but we have learned so 
much of the Lord's care during the past few weeks that 
we are prepared to leave all in His hands. We have this 
confidence, born of our Christian experience, particularly 
that of recent days, that He who is for us is more than 
all that can be against us. There is not the least doubt 
in our minds that if we trust Him, we shall not be confounded, 
though storm and tempest may come. Oh, what 
a joy and peace this knowledge brings to our souls! Here 
is another "mystery of the Kingdom." Those with whom we 
have come in contact cannot understand our being so quiet 
and confident, when, as they say, the situation is so serious; 
and we do not murmur at our trials, because we count it a 
privilege to suffer for righteousness' sake. 

Continue to pray for us that we may come out of the 
fire purified and made white. 

Love to all the dear brethren. (Romans 15:5-7.) 
ROWLAND JACKSON. 



R5954 : page 270 

ARMY'S CALL TO AN EDINBURGH COLPORTEUR 
BELIEFS OF THE I.B.S.A. 

"The plea that he was a regular minister of a religious 
denomination, and therefore not liable for service, was advanced 
on behalf of a young man named James Frederick 
Scott, residing at 2 Leslie Place, Stockbridge, and connected 
with the International Bible Students Association, who 
pleaded not guilty at Edinburgh Sheriff Court today before 
Sheriff-Substitute Orr to a charge of having failed to appear 
at the recruiting office when called up under the Military 
Service Act. 

"The Honorable Secretary of the I.B.S.A., Mr. H.J. 
Shearn, examined by Mr. M'Laren, counsel for the defence, 
explained some of the work of the Association. Its meetings, 
he said, were open to the public, and they never took 
collections. To disseminate the Gospel and to establish 
Christians in churches for their spiritual education was the 



purpose of the Association's centers for Bible study. There 
were about 300 of these centers in Great Britain, of which 
there were about thirty in Scotland. They believed they 
were at present near the end of a Dispensation, and so were 
not surprised that things in the world were disturbed now. 
Mr. Scott was an Elder of the Edinburgh Church, or center 
of the Association. 

"Witness, cross-examined by Mr. Wark, advocate, said 
there were in Great Britain about 160 Elders of military 
age. There was adult baptism, but not baptism of infants. 

"Replying to the Sheriff, the witness said that members 
of the Association did not believe many things believed by 
other denominations. Members of the Association did not 
believe that the conversion of the world had commenced. 
Rather did they believe that God was gathering out now 
those who would deal with the world later on as Abraham's 
true sons. They did not understand that the human family 
was to share with God a heavenly home. They understood 
that man's future home was the earth, made glorious, and 
man restored to the perfection lost through Adam's transgression. 
They did not believe in the immortality of the 
soul, but they did believe in the resurrection of the just and 
unjust. They looked upon their Elders as regular ministers 
set apart for the spiritual instruction of members. 

"When the accused entered the witness-box he told the 
Court that he was twenty-five years of age, and unmarried. 
He joined the I.B.S.A. at Dundee in 1909, and was an 
Elder of the Edinburgh Church, a post for which he received 
no payment. He made his living as a Colporteur for the 
Association, and his pay was the profits on the sale of literature. 
The duties of an Elder in the Edinburgh Church 
of the Association were to minister to the spiritual needs 
of the Church, to conduct public and private meetings, and 
to assist members to a proper understanding of the Word 
of God. They had to attend to the sacraments, baptisms, 
and the Lord's Supper, and visit the sick. 

"He himself had taken part in a baptismal service in the 
Dairy Baths. He was one of the two Elders who took part, 
and about a dozen people were baptized. He had also taken 
part in communion services, but he had not officiated at a 
marriage or a funeral. 

"Amongst other evidence put forward on behalf of the 
accused was that of a Patrick man, who was married by 
an Elder of the Association, and the latter's signature was accepted 
by the Registrar-General as that of a 'regular minister.' 

"The Sheriff held that accused came under the exception 
provided by the Act, and found him not guilty of the 
charge."— Evening Dispatch. 



R5954 : page 270 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
LEARNING THE TRUE SECRET OF TRIALS 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Joyous greetings in the name of our blessed Master. For 
many months I have desired to write to thank you for all 
the help I have received through STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
THE WATCH TOWER, etc. 

In THE WATCH TOWER of April 15th, 1915, you published 
an article on "Love," desiring to know the progress made by 
those who particularly desired the growth of the chiefest of 
spiritual graces. At that time I was on a bed of sickness and 
much pain. The message of joy and peace which that WATCH 
TOWER brought to me I can never fully express in words. 
I longed to grow more in love, and I prayed earnestly that 
the Lord would grant my desire. He has, more abundantly 
than I had thought possible. 

I have learned that trials and difficulties, under Divine 
providence, are intended to develop our characters and to 
make us copies of the Master, thus preparing us for the Kingdom 
and for the great work of blessing others. They are 
but stepping stones, helping our progress in the narrow way 
of self-sacrifice, helping us to draw closer to the Lord, recognizing 
His hand in all life's affairs toward "the called ones 
according to His Purpose." There is an advantage in every 
trial, if rightly received. I have learned that they really 
assist us to put on the whole Armor of God, assist us in 
growing in the graces of the Spirit and especially in this 
crowning grace of "Love"; and not only in Love, but in 
patient endurance. They help us to tread faithfully in the 
footsteps of our Lord until the Kingdom, for which the 
Church has prayed so long, is attained. 

I have learned, too, that sometimes matters which seem 
dark clouds and insurmountable difficulties, under His loving 
Hand are but messengers bidding me to "yet closer draw"; 
for "He would embrace my care"; and that if loving Him 
and trusting Him, I must "lean hard." 

"He loves me too well to forsake me. 
Or to give me a trial too much." 

With the knowledge of His love and care I go on my way 
rejoicing, praying Him to continue His good work begun 
in me, and to grant by His grace that I may do nothing to 
hinder it. 

I pray daily for you, that God may graciously guide and 
preserve you, and continue the blessing you have heretofore 
bestowed. With much Christian love, 

Your sister in the Master, MABEL STEWARD.-S. Africa. 

R5954: page 271 

WORDS FAIL TO EXPRESS HER GRATITUDE 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR AND BROTHER:- 

Having been told by a brother in the Truth that my experience 
would make your heart glad, I am writing, although 
I fear I cannot put into words my gratitude for this great joy 
which has come into my life through the I.B.S.A. I was 
always longing for more light until God sent someone about 



a year ago to open the eyes of my understanding. I had a 
severe struggle with doubts and fears, as to whether this was 
what I had craved or whether the Church of England and 
others were mistaken. 

For years I had been feeling very sick of what seemed to 
me such shallowness in our religion; but oh, I did not then 
understand the Love of God; how can I thank Him for His 
wondrous love! I now love and understand my Bible and 
am hoping this new year may bring this joy to others who 
are Truth-hungry as I was. 

I enjoy the WATCH TOWERS and pass them on to others 
who are interested. I saw the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, 
and although I could not deny its power, sixteen years of 
Church-of -England teaching then had a hold upon me from 
which I thank God I am now free. I hope to be baptized 
very soon. 

With heart-felt love for your work in His name, I am 

Your Sister in the Truth, PRISCILLA COMPTON.-Eng. 



WHEN DIVORCED PEOPLE ARE FREE TO MARRY 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am well aware that Volume VI., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
seems to touch every phase of the experiences, difficulties 
and proper course of action of the Lord's people of 
the New Creation; nevertheless, a question has arisen which 
is causing some perplexity in our Class and threatens a division. 
A Brother and a Sister, members of our Class, have 
always enjoyed our fellowship, until now it is learned that the 
Sister was previously married, and that her first husband is 
still living and has remarried. 

Some of our Class desire to disfellowship this Brother and 
Sister and to forbid their attendance at the meetings. The 
main contention is based upon the words of Jesus in Matthew 19:9— 
"Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for 
fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery; 
and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit 
adultery." In the case mentioned it is claimed that the Sister's 
first husband had been guilty of adultery; but others 
claim that this would not release her for remarriage; for 
Jesus said that whosoever marrieth a divorced woman 
(whether properly divorced or not) would be committing 
adultery. Please give us a little more light on these points. 

Very truly your Brother, — . 

[The Class is evidently making a mistake in allowing the 
matter here presented to cause any division or disturbance. 
In any event they would seem to have no ground for forbidding 
attendance at meeting. The very most they might 
vote would be to withdraw fellowship and include in this a 
refusal to visit at their home or to invite them to the homes 
of the Class— the Class declining also to appoint the Brother 
to any office, such as Deacon or Elder. As for refusing them 
the privilege of attending public meeting, that would be veiy 
inconsistent; for surely all kinds of people living in all kinds 



of sin come occasionally to meetings, and we hope that by 
coming they may be benefited and recovered. 

In this case, where it is admitted that adultery was the 
basis of divorce and that the fault was with the husband, it 
plainly comes within the exception mentioned by our Lord— 
"except for adultery." Besides, if that had not been originally 
the cause of the separation, the fact that the former husband 
had remarried signifies that he had considered the marriage 
tie broken; and therefore the first wife was released from 
its obligation. Evidently the Sister whose case you cite has 
both of these proofs on her side and had every right, therefore, 
to have married, if she thought that the wisest and 
proper thing to do. 

It is not supposable that our Lord meant merely a separation 
between husband and wife; for St. Paul counsels that 
if the unbeliever depart, let him depart— do not consider it 
a hardship, but rather take it as a blessing. He does not 
say that the departing of the husband or wife would be a 
divorce. A divorce is a full breaking of the original marriage 
contract. Jesus was criticizing the too slack observance of the 
marriage tie, and condemning it. He declared that the marriage 
contract could not be fully broken except by adultery. 

In our day these matters are regulated by courts. Very 
properly, Bible Students govern themselves additionally by 
the Word of God. The fact that a court would grant a 
divorce would not by a Bible Student be considered liberation 
from the marriage bonds, unless upon the one ground 
which the Master specified. But a court divorce is to be respected 
when it is backed by the condition of adultery— or 
backed by a second marriage of the separated one.] 



CHANGED ATTITUDE TOWARD SPIRITISM 

DEAR SIRS:- 

I am obliged for your book on Spiritism and several 
papers on this and other subjects. Since writing you, I have 
gotten in touch with your branch at Lancaster Gate, London, 
and have purchased from them twelve booklets and the first 
volume of your Series, THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES, besides 
matter on other subjects of interest. Owing to delay 
in foreign money orders, I will continue to get books from 
your London branch. 

I have now carefully read your book on SPIRITISM, and 
can say that I agree with it entirely. I find your explanations 
in accord with reason and also my eight years' investigation of 
"Modern Spiritism," with which I am not now connected. 

Through your SPIRITISM book my wife and I have 
changed our attitude toward Spiritism. We were developing 
very quickly, and my wife was a clairaudient, clairvoyant and 
trance medium, while she appeared to have materialistic 
faculties. I had not developed far, but was likely to become 
a trance medium and had several experiences and was conscious 
of presences in normal times. 

I think your book not at all overdrawn, and believe Spiritism 



is demoralizing, anti-Christian and the effort and work 
of demon spirits. 

Your SPIRITISM book has enlightened me on many things 
I could not quite see through, and though an investigator 
I was not blind to everything that went on around me, as 
are most of the attendants at "circles." 

I have sent several of your books to friends whom I had 
interested in Spiritism and shall send to others in due time. 

Yours faithfully, ERNEST E. NOBLE.-England. 



page 27 1 

A GREAT CHANGE OF MIND 

MY DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

For a long time I have wanted to write you, but up to 
now have hesitated, lest I should trespass on your valuable 
time too much, knowing that you are very busy. But I 
would do violence to my conscience if I did not tell you that 
only a few years ago I despised even to look at your picture, 
and for years would not read a line written by you! Our 
Father knows them that are His, and He knows exactly how 
to deal with them to bring them into subjection to His will. 

In 1910 dear Sister Lentz, who is now with our dear 
Master, led me into the Present Truth, by leaving the Fifth 
Volume in my office, requesting me to examine it. This I 
did after telling her a lie about it. Before opening the book 
I got down on my knees and asked my Heavenly Father 
to guide me. I got up and read two chapters, with Bible in 
hand, when I received such a blessing, that when the Sister 
called the next morning I asked if she had any more books 
like that, what was the price and how soon could I have them. 
She gave the price and I handed her the money, and told her 
to bring them at once; for I had found what I had been looking 
for for years. Yet I objected to taking the Vow; but 
continuing to read, I decided that I would best take it; and 
now I do not see how I could get along without it. The most 
helpful clause in it, to me is, "I vow to further scrutinize my 
thoughts, words and doings." 

I will close by thanking you for being the instrument in 
God's hand of leading me into the absolute Truth. Pray for 
me! With Christian love, I am 

YOUR BROTHER, — M.D. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR OCTOBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
October follow: (1) 149; (2) 145; (3) 50; (4) 299; (5) 38; 
(6) 7; (7) 188; (8) 155; (9) 103; (10) 333; (1 1) 95; (12) 
221; (13) 273; (14) 286; (15) 313; (16) 123; (17) 102; (18) 



130; (19) 60; (20) 326; (21) 165; (22) 312; (23) 252; (24) 
105; (25) 14; (26) 65; (27) 108; (28) Vow; (29) 32; (30) 4; 
(31) 186. 



page 273 
