From Our Readers
CRITICISM OF CATHOLIC CHURCH
I like your magazine. I really thought you were above prejudice and I am very disappointed. I’ve noticed a few times the Catholic Church is the butt of your criticism. Slurs at the Church, the pope and now at the Catholic schools. Of course, I am referring to your story “Controversial Fishing.” It is too bad you didn’t stay with just the tuna story instead of bringing his religious convictions into it. It all seemed so untrue. In bad taste, to say the least. I am so sorry. I really admired your people. Why are you not like Jesus? Perhaps your motive was good.
A subscriber, New York.
We published the true life story of a man and his wife and their observations. He tells about his fishing, and also why their religious convictions changed, as well as why he left his fishing to become a fisher of men in the Biblical sense. Our purpose is not to criticize the Catholic Church, but to help all people to see what is Scripturally right. Jesus had great love and compassion for his fellowman. And it was this love, plus his honesty and zeal for righteousness, that moved him to expose falsehoods wherever such appeared, especially falsehoods in the matter of worship. Please read the account in Matthew chapter 23. We are moved by the same love for our fellowman and the same zeal for truth and righteousness.​—ED.
IRRITATION
I enjoyed your article “When People Irritate Us.” It is really going to help me with my brothers and sisters. I learned that I need to exhibit the qualities of humility, mildness and love. [From a young girl]
D. P., Florida
WE KEEP OUR HOMES CLEAN
I liked your article on “We Keep Our Homes Clean Despite the Neighborhood!” It helped me to think about trying to keep my home more clean. I will be 10 years old in September.
C. P., Florida
I am seven years old. I liked the article about “We Keep Our Home Clean Despite the Neighborhood!” After my mama read the article to us we went from room to room and did just as the article said.
R. P., Florida
Your household hints for cleaning were appreciated. Lining the bottom of the oven with aluminum foil does make for easier cleanup. However, a recent newspaper article stated that this procedure could cause oven problems due to uneven heat distribution from the element.
M. B., North Carolina
KILLER WHALES
The article on killer whales was nice because it was an interview. It is enjoyable to have interviews in the magazine.
S. B., New Jersey
I just wanted to thank you for the article about killer whales​—that they are not really killers but are pussycats. The article says ‘it kissed the lady on the cheek.’ [From a young boy]
K. D., Massachusetts

