





The Truth About the Future

Have you ever wondered what the future holds? The Bible shows that significant events just ahead of us will affect all people on earth.




Jesus explained how we would “know that the Kingdom of God is near.” (Luke 21:31) He prophesied that, among other things, there would be great wars, major earthquakes, food shortages, and pestilences​—the very things we are witnessing today.​—Luke 21:10-17.
The Bible further shows that the “last days” of human rulership would be identified by the way people behave or, more precisely, misbehave. You can read the description at 2 Timothy 3:1-5. When you see these attitudes and actions today, no doubt you agree that this Bible prophecy closely matches what is happening now.
What does this mean? The time is near for God’s Kingdom to make big changes that will significantly affect life on earth for the better. (Luke 21:36) In the Bible, God promises good things for the earth and for the people who will live on it. Here are a few examples.



GOOD RULERSHIP

“And to him [Jesus] there were given rulership, honor, and a kingdom, that the peoples, nations, and language groups should all serve him. His rulership is an everlasting rulership that will not pass away, and his kingdom will not be destroyed.”​—DANIEL 7:14.
What this means: You can enjoy life under a superior global government that God sets up with his Son as King.



GOOD HEALTH






“No resident will say: ‛I am sick.’”​—ISAIAH 33:24.
What this means: You will never get sick or be disabled; you will be able to live without ever dying.



TOTAL PEACE






“He is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth.”​—PSALM 46:9.
What this means: There will be no more threat of war and all the suffering it causes.



THE EARTH WILL BE FILLED WITH GOOD PEOPLE

“The wicked will be no more . . . The meek will possess the earth.”​—PSALM 37:10, 11.
What this means: There will be no more evil people, only people eager to obey God.



THE EARTH WILL BE A GLOBAL PARADISE

“They will build houses and live in them, and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.”​—ISAIAH 65:21, 22.
What this means: The whole earth will be made beautiful. God will fulfill our prayer that his will be done “on earth.”​—Matthew 6:10.








