Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Since the earthquakes in Guatemala many calls have been received at Brooklyn about our brothers there. Though the tremors were severe, we are thankful to Jehovah that not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses has been reported killed. A number of injuries were sustained, such as broken arms, and the injured are being given attention.
Damage to property has been great. Many brothers’ homes have been damaged and several Kingdom Halls made of adobe were knocked down. The Society’s branch building was not damaged.
Food, water, clothing and fuel were immediately taken to Guatemala City by the brothers from El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua. Supplies have also been taken in from Mexico. Funds were sent in from El Salvador and Brooklyn, where the Society maintains a fund for disaster relief work. As needs are reported, appropriate relief will be sent to the stricken areas.
Here in Brooklyn it has been exciting to receive reports about work in starting studies with the booklets. Among them, a circuit overseer in Florida wrote: “The new booklets are going like hot cakes. . . . One sister started six new studies during the week of our visit.” In New Jersey a circuit overseer reports that during one week the congregation he visited began 27 new studies and the following week the next congregation started 24 new studies.
The presses have been busy here. Over ten million booklets were produced in the first printing. Since then, the orders have been so numerous that we’re now on the fifth printing, which will bring the total up to eighteen million!
Publishers report that it is very easy to start conversations using the warm appeal and convincing logic featured in the booklets. Haven’t you found that to be so? Many have said that the booklets can be used quite effectively to stir interest where response in the past has been minimal. We are all happy to have these new instruments that help us to be more successful. May your blessings be many as you continue using these new booklets to make disciples.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

