How Crime and Violence Will Be Stopped
1 Does that title spark your interest? What law-abiding person is not interested in hearing about it? Kingdom News No. 22 will present the Bible’s guaranteed promise of relief. Upward of fifty million tracts are being printed and its distribution has been set for May 1-10. Plan now to share in efforts to give your congregation’s territory thorough coverage.
2 Six tracts have been distributed since September of 1973. Have they successfully called attention to the Kingdom message, prompting sincere people to act? Judge for yourself. The Society has so far received 26,240 requests for literature sent in by individuals who received the tracts, maybe from some persons with whom you left tracts. Additionally, 3,042 persons specifically asked for a Bible study. Also, many congregations reported numerous requests and inquiries received locally from persons showing interest. Arrangements for distribution have intensified our own efforts to do more, most congregations reporting new peaks during each tract campaign. No doubt about it; the impact has been great!
3 Kingdom News No. 22 will be different. Yes, a different subject. But it will also have a different appearance. It will be the size of a four-page booklet. You will find it convenient to carry, to hand out and to slip under the doors. It will be necessary to separate and fold every other one before distribution. However, there will be no need to stamp them.
4 How can we prepare in advance to ensure the best results? New ones may find this to be a fine opportunity to share for the first time in house-to-house activity. Encouragement and assistance by experienced publishers will add measurably to their confidence. Parents may want to plan extra arrangements for family participation, especially for the younger ones. Book study conductors can discuss it with their groups, perhaps arranging additional meetings for service for those who are able to share during the week. Brothers assigned to care for territory should see that adequate territory is available, concentrating first on territory not covered in the last tract distribution. Elders may contact neighboring congregations about assistance in covering territory and making sure that tract supplies are distributed.
5 In making your plans, keep uppermost in mind that the purpose behind this work is to help people. We want to cover territory, but, more importantly, we want to help any who show interest. Where circumstances permit, try to speak personally to each householder. If offering the tract prompts a listening ear, why not be ready to point out a Bible text that ties in with the tract’s message? Psalm 37:10, 11 might be effective. You can also carry copies of the new booklets and the magazines. Be sure to take written note of any good response and call back.
6 The Society is very much interested in the results accomplished by tract distribution. We will be pleased to receive any outstanding experiences showing response in your territory. We can be confident of Jehovah’s blessing as we use this as still another means to keep “bringing good news of something better” to the attention of sincere people who are seeking hope for a happy future.—Isa. 52:7.

