Manifest Your Appreciation
1 When you genuinely appreciate something good, don’t you show that by your attitude and actions? Regarding the goodness and loving-kindness that Jehovah extends to us through Jesus, the apostle Paul exclaimed: “Thanks be to God for his indescribable free gift.” (2 Cor. 9:15) But consider, was that merely talk on Paul’s part? Not at all. In a multitude of ways he manifested his deep appreciation to God. Paul’s actions, how he lived his life, displayed his gratitude toward God.
2 Do we not also have much for which to be thankful? Jehovah has given us life now as well as the hope of living forever in paradise. Even now, walking in the way of truth has brought us the priceless blessings of peace of mind, much security in a close relationship with fellow Christians and the assurance that our material needs will be filled. The majority of mankind remain unthankful toward one another. Worse still, they show no gratitude toward God. (2 Tim. 3:2) In contrast, our genuine appreciation should move us to express our thankfulness joyfully.—Ps. 107:21.
AN OPPORTUNITY TO SHOW APPRECIATION
3 The public declaration of our hope gives a most convincing evidence of our appreciation to God. It manifests our intense love for God and neighbor. Such displays of gratitude are very pleasing to Jehovah. (Ps. 147:1, 11) Any reasonable effort to increase such public declaration is sure to receive his blessing. Thankfulness should prompt us to be whole-souled, doing the best we can. That viewpoint often causes many to think seriously about how they might take up the pioneer service.
4 Some thoughtful reflection may cause you to view it as something your circumstances will permit. Ask yourself: Am I convinced that my present effort is all I can do? Since I really want to manifest my appreciation to God and see others saved, is there some way that I can become a pioneer? Why not talk to an experienced pioneer or the circuit overseer, who may be able to give helpful suggestions on scheduling time, finding part-time work or getting someone with whom to work.
5 Young people have a special reason to consider this now. If your life is to have meaning and purpose, you must set and strive for worthwhile goals in youth. How do you want to use your life? What career can you choose that will prove to be the most satisfying and produce lasting benefits? Might pioneering be the answer? Like many other young people who have taken up this activity, you may find that this career offers a joy and peace of mind that have eluded those pursuing goals based on material desires. This would surely be a fine way of expressing your appreciation to God.
OPPORTUNITIES OPEN TO ALL
6 Some brothers and sisters must realistically acknowledge that, as much as they want to do so, they are not in position to serve as regular pioneers. Still, appreciation gives them the same wholehearted spirit. For many of them, holidays, vacations or work layoffs become choice opportunities to serve as temporary pioneers. Some families pool resources, assisting one or more family members to pioneer. Others on occasion can add to their activity as congregation publishers, planning full days of service periodically. Maybe they can occasionally join a pioneer in service for a full day. Those pioneering often encourage others to become more active, while publishers can help the pioneers by providing transportation and someone with whom to work. When appreciation moves us to give our best, we usually discover a wide range of opportunities to increase our praise to God.
7 There are many new ones attending meetings, and the good things they are learning, combined with the loving interest shown in their welfare, may have stirred feelings of gratitude in their hearts. Their newly acquired hope may be seeking expression in public declaration. (Rom. 10:10) The special activities connected with the Memorial observance, the distribution of special magazines, and the tract work in May, could provide opportunities for them to join the ranks of Kingdom praisers. Those of us who are close to them can give encouragement and help. If they have the desire and qualify, by all means extend a warm invitation for them to join in expressing appreciation to God through the field service.
8 All that is stated in the foregoing encourages us to think about doing more in Jehovah’s service. This is similar to Paul’s admonition that his brothers “keep on doing it more fully.” (1 Thess. 4:1) For what reason? Not to compile an impressive field service record. Neither is it for reasons of personal pride or comparison with others. It is because gratitude for Jehovah’s marvelous provisions causes our hearts to overflow with thankfulness. A desire to do more springs from a deep appreciation of all that he has given us and a genuine interest in helping others to receive these same blessings.
9 Because they manifested their appreciation with zeal, Paul commended his brothers for ‘their faithful work and loving labor and their endurance due to hope.’ (1 Thess. 1:3) Can you see some way that you can more fully demonstrate your appreciation?

