Presenting the Good News—Using Expiration Slips Effectively
1 Our heartfelt desire is to help persons to learn the truth and become disciples of Jesus. Accordingly, we spend much time in the service looking for persons who are “rightly disposed for everlasting life.” (Acts 13:48) An expiration slip is an excellent aid in finding and helping such persons. Why is that so?
2 Because an expiration slip can lead you to someone who has been regularly receiving publications that are of interest to individuals who may be inclined to become true Christians. But how will you use such a slip if you receive one from the Bible study overseer?
3 The former subscriber may simply have forgotten to renew the subscription. Yet it is also possible that interest may have waned a bit or become crowded out by the cares of life. Hence, as a step toward making disciples, we should try to rekindle or increase that person’s interest in the good news.
4 When calling back with an expiration slip, many have found it helpful to mention right away something like, “I am connected with the Awake! [or the Watchtower] magazine; from time to time we make brief visits on persons who have received and enjoyed this fine publication.” The householder thus can know that your visit is not unusual and that you are not there solely to renew the subscription.
5 After introducing yourself, how can you stimulate interest in the good news? It will help to have in mind an interesting subject found in one of the current magazines. You can bring up that topic and perhaps tie in an appropriate text. Here is an example with the special Watchtower of April 15: You could mention that, while human experts have often shed light on some fact, 2 Timothy 1:10 shows that Jesus is the one who has shed light on life itself; through him eternal life is possible. (Acts 4:12) Next, you might mention that the April 15 special issue deals with this matter; you are bringing it so the householder will not miss it, since his subscription has expired. Offer to provide free assistance in gaining the knowledge that can lead to eternal life, and explain that you will be happy to renew the subscription.
6 Depending on the householder’s time, interest and how the discussion has been going, you may be able to demonstrate briefly the Bible study arrangement, using one of the new booklets.
7 Underscoring the fact that expiration slips can be a real aid toward making disciples is the experience of one pioneer. On what he planned to be his last call for the day, he contacted a former subscriber at about 1 p.m. What happened? Listen: “That call stretched to 3 p.m. The woman we called on not only renewed her subscription for Awake!, but also then subscribed for eighteen other persons—family members and friends.” And this brother feels that on his next visit he will be able to establish a Bible study.
8 Yes, subscription expiration slips are a valuable aid toward finding interested persons and making disciples. If you have any expiration slips in your witnessing bag, use them during April in your disciple-making work.

