Using Magazines to Build Faith
1 Our efforts in the preaching work are directed toward making disciples. Over the years, Jehovah’s people have used a wide variety of means to do that. The Watchtower and Awake! magazines have played a large role in achieving the marvelous increase that now brings us so much joy. Jehovah’s direction has resulted in their effective use in building faith in the hearts of sincere people the world over. His blessing encourages us to keep using them to the full, making them regularly available to still greater numbers of people.
2 We appreciate that the distribution of magazines has not been our sole objective. Rather, we rejoice over the part they have had in building up enduring qualities in persons as part of the disciple-making work. (1 Cor. 3:10-15) Our aim is to help people, and magazines are useful in doing that. Is that what you have in mind when you share in magazine work? When we want to help people, we will equate our success, not with the number of placements, but with the extent to which we are able to use the magazines to help people to learn something that can save their lives.
EFFECTIVE USE OF MAGAZINES
3 With this in mind, how can magazines be used effectively? A primary objective when one is approaching another person should be to get a chance to talk to him. If he is willing to speak with us, likely we can help him. Many householders are reluctant to talk, usually because of apathy, prejudice or worldly ideas. If we can overcome these initial barriers and get a listening ear, even though momentarily, we may be able to say something that will touch the heart. Magazine activity can help us to do that.
4 The magazines contain a fresh slant on the news. Many articles deal with things people are talking about. There are illustrations that tell a story at a glance. There are items to spark the interest of even the nonreligious. Well-written articles present powerful arguments with the simplest of logic. Titles are purposely chosen to be thought provoking. If you can use anything in the magazines to elicit even a small response, you may create an opening that can lead to an extended witness.
5 Before sharing in the magazine activity, you may want to try this: (1) Look over the magazines, picking out a few eye-catching features that you feel are appealing. (2) Try to think of just one or two sentences you could say that would prompt some comment by the householder on one subject. (3) Put a mark in your Bible at a text dealing with the Kingdom message and that you feel you can tie in with that subject in some way. You may get a chance to read it if you get a favorable response. (4) Finally, look over the three new booklets we use to start studies. Note something you can refer to in a booklet if you get a listening ear. Now, you are better prepared, not just to place magazines and booklets, but to take the first step toward building faith in the heart of a new disciple.
6 As you go from door to door, keep in mind starting studies. Many persons will show minimal response, so presentation of the magazines may be the extent of your effort. But when someone shows any inclination to converse, be ready to say something to stimulate further interest. If interest is limited, perhaps you can leave a brief Scriptural thought, making a note on your House-to-House Record to call again with the next issues. When you find a willing listener, try to start a study using one of the booklets and make definite arrangements to call back soon.
7 Magazine activity in this manner extends our objective beyond placements. The emphasis is on people and what we can do to help them. It would be a fine thing for the elders in each congregation to arrange for a magazine day each week, encouraging all to share.
8 It is our desire that sincere ones respond as those did long ago who came to learn of Jehovah’s marvelous acts: “Then they had faith in his word; they began to sing his praise.”—Ps. 106:12.

