Keeping Busy in Jehovah’s Service
1 We are indeed privileged to serve Jehovah. Having taken in accurate knowledge about him and his only-begotten Son, Jesus, we are moved by love to expend ourselves fully in doing His will. (John 17:3) We may get tired, but Jehovah gives us power so that we can abound in full might.​—Isa. 40:29.
2 How can we best show our appreciation for the great love that Jehovah God and Jesus Christ have expressed toward us? (2 Cor. 5:14, 15) A primary way is by imitating Jesus, who tirelessly witnessed about his Father’s name and Kingdom. (1 Pet. 2:21) If we have strong faith, our lives will revolve around the God-given work of preaching the good news.​—Matt. 24:14.
3 Is there some minimum amount of time we should be devoting to the field ministry? Circumstances vary. We may be limited by advanced age, poor health, or family responsibilities. Yet, all of us are required to be wholehearted in our service to Jehovah. This means that we should individually demonstrate the depth of our devotion and the genuineness of our dedication by doing our utmost in the ministry. (2 Tim. 2:15) There are opportunities open to each of us according to our individual situation. What are some of these?
4 Ways to Expand Our Ministry: We should first be interested in improving the quality of our ministry. This can be accomplished by developing more skill as a teacher. One of the main objectives of the Theocratic Ministry School is to help us to become more effective in the field ministry. Do we think in terms of field service when preparing our assignments? Do we apply counsel we receive so that we can improve our personal ministry? (sg pp. 96-9) Likewise, many suggestions for the field ministry are given during the Service Meeting. Let us use these as soon as possible.
5 Next, consider the possibility of adjusting your circumstances so as to share in the auxiliary or regular pioneer work. Doing so will certainly keep you busy in the service of our Father, Jehovah. (1 Cor. 15:58) What if you are not able to pioneer? You can demonstrate a pioneer spirit by cultivating a genuine love for the ministry and a deep concern for people in the territory. You can also use every opportunity to help sincere ones to know Jehovah and his wonderful purposes by making return visits and conducting Bible studies.
6 Responding to the call to serve where the need is greater may also be part of our advancement. (Isa. 6:8) Those who have moved to a congregation that needed help on the servant body or that was looking for assistance in covering its territory have certainly reaped many blessings.
7 When we first learned the truth, love for Jehovah and Christ Jesus moved us to make major adjustments in our lives. Now, as we grow in appreciation of our relationship with our heavenly Father and of what his Son did in our behalf, are there other adjustments that we can make in order to expand our ministry? Let all of us expend ourselves by keeping busy in Jehovah’s service.​—Rom. 12:11.

