Pioneering​—A Service That Brings Rich Rewards
1 Jehovah wants us to rejoice and to see good for all our hard work. (Eccl. 5:18) The most important work we can be involved in is the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making activity. Paul exhorted Timothy: “Do the work of an evangelizer, fully accomplish your ministry.” (2 Tim. 4:5) He encouraged Timothy, and Paul’s words encourage all of us today to be whole-souled in our ministry. For some, whole-souled service may include serving as a regular pioneer. Why not prayerfully consider whether your circumstances will allow you to take up the full-time ministry?
2 Positive Action Needed: To get into the pioneer work requires taking decisive steps in harmony with our prayers. Cultivate a heartfelt desire for Jehovah’s service, along with a love for people. Increase your activity in the field, building up return visits and Bible studies. Work at developing a practical schedule; be realistic. Seek out suggestions from the elders and pioneers. Stick to a well-thought-out routine for sharing in the preaching work. Self-discipline, initiative, and determination are necessary. (1 Cor. 9:23, 25, 27) These are among the positive steps taken by more than 10,000 who have enrolled in recent months.
3 Setting definite goals and diligently working toward them will enable us to be progressive in our preaching as we refine our abilities. Can we improve our introductions at the door or the way we deal with objections? Do we make full use of all the literature available? Are we conducting a progressive Bible study? Can we begin auxiliary pioneering now with the thought of regular pioneering later? Goals must be practical and set according to what we are able to accomplish. Attaining such goals will improve our effectiveness and bring us much satisfaction.​—1 Tim. 4:15, 16.
4 A Rewarding Way of Life: Pioneering with a proper motive and the desire to make spiritual progress brings many benefits. We develop a stronger reliance on Jehovah. Greater skill in handling God’s Word comes from regular use of it in the ministry. A wholesome influence is exerted on the congregation, and others may be encouraged to have a greater share in the ministry because of our zealous example. Pioneering can help us gain a more spiritual outlook on life and serve to protect us from worldly ambitions, desires, and associations.
5 Jesus told his followers: “The harvest is great, but the workers are few. Therefore, beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.” (Matt. 9:37, 38) The need for workers is even greater now than it was in Jesus’ day. Pioneering allows us the opportunity to have a full share in this urgent, lifesaving work. There is nothing that can match the contentment and satisfaction that come with using one’s life in the full-time service of our Grand Creator.​—Prov. 10:22.

