Presenting the Good News​—Using The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived
1 Over the years, virtually every one of our publications has in some way touched on the life and ministry of Jesus Christ. That is very fitting, since “there is no salvation in anyone else, for there is not another name under heaven that has been given among men by which we must get saved.” (Acts 4:12) This new book is unique in that it is the first time one of our books has been devoted exclusively to the life of Jesus.
2 Offering It to Others: What are some interesting features in this publication that we can point out? Chapter 5 raises an appropriate question for this time of year, “Jesus’ Birth​—Where and When?” You might capture the interest of a youngster with the exciting account in chapter 44, “Silencing a Terrifying Storm.” A person experiencing physical illness or infirmity would surely be comforted by chapter 57, “Compassion for the Afflicted.” Chapter 90, “The Resurrection Hope,” should appeal to any person who has ever mourned the loss of a loved one. A discussion about distressing world conditions could lead into chapter 111, “Sign of the Last Days.”
3 At the door you might say this: “What does God expect of us as Christians? The Bible directs us to imitate the example set by the world’s greatest man, Jesus Christ. [Read 1 Peter 2:21.] He taught his followers to love their neighbors, keep morally clean, and pray for the coming of God’s Kingdom. Our salvation depends on recognizing and obeying Jesus as our Savior. [Read John 14:6.] Jesus was no ordinary man. This book describes him as the greatest man who ever lived. Chapter 59 confirms this, identifying him as ‘the Christ, the Son of the living God.’ Since we depend on him for salvation, don’t you feel there is a need for us to learn as much as possible about his work and what he taught? This book has been prepared especially for that purpose, and I would be pleased to make this copy available to you.”
4 Likely you will find many sincere people who will accept and read this book. Be sure to follow up all your placements. In some instances you may decide to use this new book for starting home Bible studies. It will be especially good for a family study and for studies conducted with youngsters. Sharing The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived with others can help them find the way to everlasting life.

