Question Box
▪ How can joy be expressed by those attending baptisms?
Baptism is a joyful occasion. We delight to see new ones taking their stand on Jehovah’s side, publicly demonstrating their faith. (Ps. 40:8) Jesus said that this was cause for great joy in the heavens. (Luke 15:10) Family members and publishers who studied with those getting baptized are especially joyful to see new ones take this essential step. But how can such joy be properly expressed?
Jesus’ baptism set the example for Christian baptisms today. He appreciated that it was a serious and solemn step he was about to take. He was praying as he was baptized. (Luke 3:21, 22) He knew that baptism is a time for meditation and sober thought. His disciples also recognized the importance of baptism. Following the outpouring of holy spirit on the day of Pentecost 33 C.E., about 3,000 were baptized. What was the reaction of the disciples who witnessed that event? “They continued devoting themselves to the teaching of the apostles and to sharing with one another, to taking of meals and to prayers.” (Acts 2:41, 42) The disciples reflected on spiritual things and shared hospitality with one another.
Christian assemblies in modern times have been highlighted by baptisms. It is certainly proper to express our joy by applause and commendation when we see individuals take their stand for Jehovah. On the other hand, displays of unrestrained cheering, whistling, waving of arms overhead, and calling out names would be inappropriate. Such conduct shows a lack of appreciation for the seriousness and sacredness of this expression of faith. Neither would this be an appropriate time for a showy display of giving flowers or other gifts to baptized ones as they emerge from the pool. Baptism marks the beginning of the Christian race for salvation. We can rejoice and be encouraging to those being baptized by helping them appreciate the close relationship with Jehovah that baptism opens up for them.
The baptism site would not be a proper place for jesting, playing, swimming, or other conduct that would detract from the seriousness of the occasion. Our joy should be expressed in a dignified manner. Our orderliness and seriousness will contribute to the joy of all present.

