Service Meetings for December
Week Starting December 2
Song 168
15 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. “Kingdom Ministry School Provides Theocratic Education.” Include comments on December magazines dealing with holiday celebrations. Mention specific points that can be featured in field service. Encourage support for Saturday magazine activity.
18 min: “The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived.” Question-and-answer consideration. When covering paragraph 4, arrange for a brief demonstration showing how to offer the book. Emphasize importance of being familiar with the publication.
12 min: Local needs or “Do You Deny Sinful Tendencies?” Talk based on The Watchtower, August 15, 1991, pages 29-31.
Song 31 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 9
Song 166
 5 min: Local announcements.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Using The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived.” To be handled as a discussion with audience participation. Have two demonstrations. The first should use the suggested presentation found in paragraph 3. The second should briefly show how a Bible study can be started using the new publication.
20 min: “Sharing in Kingdom Expansion.” Question-and-answer discussion of insert article. Intersperse with brief expressions from brothers regarding their appreciation for Society’s publications that have been of particular benefit to them, or brief experiences may be related about the use of literature in field service. Publishers who have served as temporary construction workers at Patterson may be invited to make a brief expression of their appreciation for the work being done there. Others who may have served as temporary workers at Brooklyn Bethel or Watchtower Farms may have brief comments that would encourage the brothers and help all to appreciate more fully the work being done. Only a few pointed expressions should be used.
Song 196 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 16
Song 169
10 min: Local announcements. Include accounts report along with Society’s acknowledgment of contributions by congregation. Outline local arrangements for holiday witnessing. Encourage all to dress appropriately for the winter weather.
20 min: “Keeping Busy in Jehovah’s Service.” Question-and-answer discussion. Demonstration with family of four. Using the 1992 calendar, father discusses with family their scheduling of time in January. He considers which days to set aside for field service and how he will work with each member of the family.
15 min: “Pioneering​—A Service That Brings Rich Rewards.” Question-and-answer consideration. Interview two pioneers. What obstacles did they have to overcome to enter pioneer service? What motivated them to pioneer? What has helped them to make a success of their pioneering? Encourage all to consider prayerfully their own circumstances.
Song 40 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 23
Song 197
15 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Demonstrate presentations of current magazines. Show how to determine if the householder is genuinely interested before offering the magazines. Discuss what can be done when sincere interest is not evident.
15 min: Question Box. To be handled by an elder. Emphasize why attention should be given to our conduct at baptisms and how it reflects on Jehovah and the Kingdom message.
15 min: “Read to Expand Your Horizons.” To be handled by the Theocratic Ministry School overseer. Talk based on the Awake!, July 22, 1991, pages 25-7, emphasizing the need to become better readers. Help audience to appreciate that just being able to read fluently is not sufficient; we must develop good comprehension.
Song 201 and concluding prayer.

