Sharing in Kingdom Expansion
1 “What amazing changes!” “How fast it happened!” “What a blessing for our brothers in the Soviet Union!”
2 These expressions were heard in late August and early September when a series of conventions in the Soviet Union was successfully held despite potential interference. Altogether, 74,252 attended seven Soviet conventions this summer, and 7,820 were baptized. In addition, 295,924 more assembled in Eastern European conventions.
3 Surely, as in the first century, the prophet Isaiah’s words are having a fulfillment: “The people that were walking in the darkness have seen a great light. . . . You have made the nation populous; for it you have made the rejoicing great. They have rejoiced before you as with the rejoicing in the harvesttime.” Yes, Kingdom expansion is moving forward! Jesus Christ rules! And as the prophecy continues: “To the abundance of the princely rule and to peace there will be no end.”​—Isa. 9:2, 3, 7.
4 Caring for the marvelous increase in Eastern Europe has required the ongoing construction of much larger printing facilities in Germany. Our brothers there are delighted to support this expansion, which contributes directly to the fulfillment of Jesus’ historic prophecy: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.”​—Matt. 24:14.
5 Even greater expansion is proceeding here in the United States. At the Gilead graduation in September, it was announced that the next class of Gilead, beginning in April, will be doubled to about 50 students! Eventually, the school will be located at the Watchtower Educational Center, which has been under construction now for almost three years at Patterson, New York. No wonder many are heard to ask: “How are things going at Patterson?”
6 The Patterson Complex: We are happy to report that the work is going along at a fast pace and is ahead of schedule. All seven buildings of the Patterson Inn​—a 150-unit hotel located within a short walking distance of the educational center—​have been completed, as well as all the attendant work on roads, parking lots, and landscaping. When the educational center is finished, the nearby inn will be used to accommodate visitors from around the world. In the meantime, however, it is occupied by about 300 Bethel family members who are engaged in construction of the complex.
7 Altogether, there are now over 650 volunteer workers on the project! Many of these have been provided housing in the area, and they commute daily to and from the work site. Earlier this year a New York Times reporter wrote: “Sitting like a city on a hill overlooking Route 22 here in northeastern Putnam County, the complex is a beehive of construction activity . . . All​—engineers, architects, draftsmen, carpenters, concrete workers, electricians, plumbers and laborers—​are church members who volunteer to work from weeks to years. They receive no pay, but get a monthly stipend for incidental expenses.”
8 The educational center will eventually consist of 17 buildings, including a kitchen, classrooms, offices, garages, six residence buildings that will accommodate 1,200, and a dining room and an auditorium, each of which will seat 1,600. At this time, two buildings of the complex have been completed, four are under construction, and five more will be started during 1992. Construction of the final six buildings will begin later. A milestone was reached this summer when accreditation of the wastewater treatment plant and water treatment plant was received from state and local authorities.
9 The volunteer workers on the project are receiving fine spiritual benefits. In fact, all who qualify as volunteers must be spiritual persons. (1 Cor. 2:14, 15) Each work morning a discussion of the day’s Bible text is enjoyed. Three days a week, preassigned commentators from among the volunteer workers themselves share in the discussion, and on other mornings an audio hookup allows the Patterson volunteers to listen in on the discussion coming from the Brooklyn headquarters. In addition, on Monday evenings a Watchtower Study is conducted for the benefit of all the volunteers on the project. Yet, Patterson is not the only major construction project in progress in New York.
10 How About Brooklyn?: On August 30, 1990, a happy Bethel family applauded the announcement that a building permit had been issued to the Society to erect a 30-story residence facility. The following month demolition began on the old nine-story factory standing on the site. Then, in January 1991, excavation began on the new building’s 100- by 200-foot foundation. Soon that excavation, 30 feet below sidewalk level, was completed. Engineering precautions were needed because a subway tunnel lies on one side of the building site and an existing factory of the Watchtower Society on the opposite side.
11 Within six months the foundation work was completed. The two floors located below ground level will accommodate a kitchen, food storage, and other support services, as well as a dining room for over a thousand persons. The massive steel columns and beams that make up the framework of the building weigh over 7,000,000 pounds. In July the erection of this framework began. By September the brick masonry work was started, and soon the building’s color and shape will be a feature of the Brooklyn skyline!
12 The work by the commercial construction company engaged by the Society will be completed next summer. This means that the shell of the 378-foot-high building will then be turned over to the Society, and Witness volunteers will finish the building. We hope to have the first 12 floors, including the lobby, dining room, and kitchen, ready for use late in 1993. Since all available living accommodations in Brooklyn are occupied, this new home is vital to the fulfilling of our Scriptural commission.​—Matt. 24:14.
13 What Can You Do?: Already brothers and sisters have done much. Over the years more than 14,000 volunteers from all over the United States have come to New York and helped with various building projects. Their labors of love have been very much appreciated, and the Society wants to thank them, as well as their wives and other family members who have supported their efforts. The question is, Can you make yourself available to work on these present projects?​—Heb. 13:16.
14 Obviously, not all can. But you can still do much. For example, many elders and ministerial servants can assist in caring for congregation needs while volunteers are serving temporarily at headquarters. (Compare Nehemiah 4:19-22.) Another vital way to assist is through voluntary contributions to help with the expenses. An estimate published in The New York Times “valued the new [Patterson] complex when completed at about $130 million.” With volunteer help the final cost of the project will probably be less than half of that, but it will still be very substantial. Millions of dollars are now being spent each month.
15 There was also need of considerable material wealth to build the tabernacle in Moses’ day, as well as the temple that was constructed under Solomon’s direction. However, Jehovah moved the hearts of the people to provide all that was needed. (Ex. 35:4-6, 21, 22; 36:3-6; 1 Chron. 29:3-9) In our day individuals, congregations, and circuits have been contributing for these building projects that will no doubt have an important part in the expansion of the Kingdom proclamation worldwide. Can you share in supporting this marvelous expansion work?
16 If you can, please send such contributions to Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc., 25 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, New York 11201.
17 If you are not in a position to make an outright donation but you do have some funds that you would like to let the Society use for a period of time and then receive back at your request, please write to the Society concerning the conditional donation arrangement. Details explaining it will be mailed to you.
18 Whether you are able to volunteer to work at the construction sites or to contribute in a monetary way or not, all of us can pray for the success of these building projects to the end that God’s Kingdom interests are expanded earth wide. May our heavenly Father prosper all of us as we endeavor to finish his work.

