The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived
1 When we received this new book, we were intrigued by its title, The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived. To single out one man as the greatest would mean that he excels above all the billions of humans who have ever lived upon this earth. “Great” is defined as being “superior in character or quality.” The man who qualifies for that designation must be outstanding indeed!
2 Jesus Christ, the Son of God, fully deserves such recognition. What he achieved on earth had nothing to do with wealth, secular accomplishments, or political rulership. He came from a humble background and spent most of his life in relative obscurity. When he turned 30 years of age, however, he began to capture the attention of all in the land of Palestine by what he said and did. He revealed the personality and purposes of Jehovah God in a way never before experienced by man. He accomplished the greatest preaching work ever done by one man, performed outstanding miracles, and laid the foundation for a new world society.
3 The Need for This Book: Paul urged us to “look intently” at Jesus as our exemplar and role model. (Heb. 12:2) From 1985 to 1991, the Society published in The Watchtower 149 consecutive articles on the life and ministry of Jesus. These articles made all of us more keenly aware of what Jesus said and what he did for us. They emphasized the need for us to imitate his example. All this material has been condensed and made available to us in book form. What a fine instrument to help others to look intently at Jesus and to become subjects of the one that Jehovah has placed “far above every government and authority and power and lordship”!​—Eph. 1:21.
4 Outstanding Features: When offering the book, you might ask: “What made Jesus the world’s greatest man?” You could answer that by pointing to a few of the 133 chapters that focus on his life, his personality, his teachings, and his works. Chapter 24 explains his purpose in coming to earth. Chapter 35 reviews his famous Sermon on the Mount. Chapter 43 highlights Jesus’ remarkable ability to teach others by illustrations. Chapter 133 gives a glimpse of the blessings mankind will enjoy when he completes his work. You may find it helpful to use the questions at the end of each chapter to stimulate discussion; the cited scripture references show where the account can be found in the Bible. You can point out the striking illustrations that reveal the force of Jesus’ personality, the depth of his compassion for others, and his tireless zeal in preaching.​—Note chapters 44, 95, 117, and 123.
5 We will be offering this new book during December. Its unique features give us good reasons to recommend and offer it to others with great enthusiasm. Everyone who wants everlasting life must take in knowledge about Jesus Christ. (John 17:3) Our zealous efforts to distribute this book can make it possible for the lives of many sincere ones to be touched by the greatest man who ever lived.

