Kingdom Proclaimers Report
God’s Blessing Evident in Venezuela
THE activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Venezuela has truly been blessed. (Psalm 3:8) During 1985 the number of publishers increased by 16 percent over the previous year and in February 1986 reached an all-time peak of 31,247 proclaimers of the good news. Regular pioneers jumped to 2,291 in February, the 38th consecutive peak! A total of 50,659 Bible studies are being conducted with interested persons. Some of these individuals have come in contact with the truth under unusual circumstances.
□ A young married man had quite a reputation as a woman chaser. Things were not going well for him. He felt sure that his wife had gone to a witch and had a curse put on him because of his extramarital affairs. So he looked for a witch to counteract the curse and was referred to a certain woman. She, though, had studied the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses and had given up her practice of witchcraft. She told him that she could not help him, but she would give him an address where he could go and get help. It was the address of the Kingdom Hall. He showed up​—long-haired, unshaved, and badly dressed. He enjoyed the meeting so much that he returned that weekend, along with his three small children. This time his hair was cut, and he was well dressed and clean shaven. Today, he is a publisher of the good news. Was his wife happy that he had stopped chasing other women? No, instead she became very opposed! But the changes he made in his life have greatly impressed many others that he knew, opening the way for them also to hear the message of truth.
□ In a town near the Colombian border, the local priest mounted a campaign against the Witnesses. He put the name “Jehovah’s Witnesses” in large red letters on his church information board and below it some bad propaganda against them. A church member saw the name prominently displayed and, without reading the information that followed, came to the conclusion that the church approved of Jehovah’s Witnesses. So she went to a meeting of the Witnesses and liked what she saw and heard. “In fact,” says the report, “the priest’s campaign has generated much interest rather than the opposite.” Many are now willing to study and will even approach the Witnesses on the street and ask when they are going to call again.
□ It was a short funeral talk at the graveside of a newly baptized sister that enabled another family in Venezuela to come in contact with the truth. An army major and his family, relatives of the deceased, paid close attention to the Scriptural presentation and afterward invited the speaker to their home to check the Bible texts mentioned in greater detail. The result? Let the major answer:
“My wife and I both became curious and wanted to investigate the Bible. At first my wish was to demonstrate that I was right in professing the Catholic religion. However, each time I refuted a point, the brother conducting the study would come back with the logical Biblical viewpoint. Humbly, I came to recognize that the truth was with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Today, my wife and I are Jehovah’s Witnesses, and my children are studying the Bible. I thank the only true God, Jehovah, whom I am happy to serve as a soldier, not with the fleshly weapons of war but with the ones that God’s spirit gives, according to 2 Corinthians 10:4, 5.”
Yes, Jehovah has richly blessed his servants in Venezuela. With an extraordinary Memorial attendance of four times the number of publishers, there is great potential for further increases in the years to come.
[Chart on page 21]
Some peaks for Venezuela based on February 1986 reports:
31,247 publishers
 2,291 pioneers
50,659 Bible studies
“Your blessing is upon your people.”​—Psalm 3:8

