
Learn From God’s Word
Why Should We Use God’s Name?

This article considers questions you may have raised and shows where you can read the answers in your Bible. Jehovah’s Witnesses would be pleased to discuss these answers with you.
 1. Why has God given himself a name?
Undoubtedly, you like to be called by your personal name rather than by a title, such as “man,” “mister,” “madam,” or “woman.” A name helps to distinguish you as an individual. God is called by such titles as “Sovereign Lord,” “God Almighty,” and “Grand Creator.” (Genesis 15:2; 17:1; Ecclesiastes 12:1) But he has also given himself a name to help us to establish a personal relationship with him. In English, God’s personal name is Jehovah.—Read Isaiah 42:8.
Although many Bible translators have replaced God’s name with such terms as “God” and “Lord,” that name is found nearly 7,000 times in ancient Hebrew manuscripts of the Bible. Clearly, God wants his name to be known.—Read Isaiah 12:4.
 2. Why is knowing God’s name vital?
Knowing God’s name means more than merely knowing how to say it. To know God by name means to have a close relationship with him. The name Jehovah means “He Causes to Become.” It is an assurance that God will become whatever is needed to fulfill his purpose. So, knowing God’s name implies believing that God will fulfill his promises. (Psalm 9:10) The faith of people who know and use God’s name moves them to trust in him and to put him first in their life. Jehovah God will protect such people.—Read Psalm 91:14.
 3. Why does God want his name to be known?
God wants people to know him by name because it benefits them. It enables them to become a friend of God, with the hope of living forever. No wonder Jehovah wants us to make his name known!—Read John 17:3; Romans 10:13, 14.
Jesus made God’s name known by teaching people about God’s ways, His laws, and His promises. Today, Jesus’ followers continue the work of making God’s name known in all the nations. They do so as a united “people for [God’s] name.”—Read Acts 15:14; John 17:26.
 4. How will God glorify his name?
Jehovah God wants to glorify his name because it has been slandered. For example, some people say that he did not create life and that we do not need to obey him. Others say that he does not care about us and that he is responsible for suffering. Such people defame God’s name. But they will not do so forever. God will act against those who dishonor his name.—Read Psalm 83:17, 18.
Jehovah will glorify his name when his Kingdom brings an end to all human rulership and restores peace and security to mankind. (Daniel 2:44) Soon, everyone will have to know that Jehovah is the true God.—Read Ezekiel 36:23; Matthew 6:9.
What should you do? Draw close to God by studying his Word and associating with people who love him. When Jehovah glorifies his name, he will remember his faithful servants.—Malachi 3:16.
For more information, see chapter 1 of this book, What Does the Bible Really Teach?, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Picture on page 16]
God’s name in an early Hebrew manuscript

