A People of Today That Live in the Past
By “Awake!” correspondent in Mexico
MEXICO holds many a surprise for the visitor. Among the interesting people that one can observe in this country are the Tarahumara Indians. Have you ever heard of them?
This tribe numbers about 70,000. They dwell in the mountainous region of Chihuahua State, toward the northwest of Mexico. Life for the Tarahumaras has continued unchanged for centuries.
Their dress and grooming are quite simple. The men wear loincloths. The women put on a number of skirts, one atop the other, as well as bright-colored shirts and necklaces. Both men and women cut their thick, straight black hair at shoulder length.
Some of these natives construct simple wooden houses. Those living in ravines and lowlands, however, may prefer caves or other rock shelters for their dwellings.
Living Off the Land
Tarahumaras have an unusual hunting procedure. They will track deer by running after them, even for several days. When the animals become exhausted, it is easy to make the kill. They also hunt for squirrels, lizards and small frogs. These Indians have amazing endurance when it comes to running. In this regard we read in the National Geographic magazine:
“Possessed of fantastic stamina, Tarahumara Indians compete in barefoot races that often continue for 48 hours. As they run, they kick wooden balls which are as large as oranges when the race begins but wear down to half that size.”
Some Tarahumaras cultivate the land, growing corn, potatoes, beans, and so forth. But their type of agriculture calls for a nomadic way of life. The soil is thin, and erosion is intense due to heavy rains and strong winds. When the soil disappears in one area, families must move on to new locations.
The Family and the Community
Tarahumaras have peculiar viewpoints on marriage and morals. If two young persons develop an attraction for each other, a celebration is arranged. In attendance are the couple, their parents and the siríame, or local governor, who effects the marriage. Very rarely do Tarahumaras go to a city to legalize their marriage in a civil office.
Couples united in this way live together as long as they desire. If individuals no longer wish to remain with their mates, they split up. When meeting another person of the opposite sex that is appealing, they can unite again. As to sexual offenses, if a Tarahumaran violates a girl, he must pay a dowry to the girl’s father. In such a case the father sets the price.
This tribe recognizes the authority of Mexico’s federal and state governments. In addition to these, however, they have their own local administration, one that combines both pre-Hispanic and Colonial Jesuit characteristics.
Each town has an assembly composed of residents of the town. The siríame presides over this gathering, and is assisted by lesser authorities. The assembly meets each Sunday to hear and resolve problems of the community. As a symbol of authority, the siríame bears a sacred staff known as a disora.
Little Desire for Progress
Both the government of Mexico and the Jesuits have arranged educational courses for the Tarahumaras, providing basic training in arts and crafts. Some natives have taken advantage of these provisions. A few have gone on to become schoolteachers. Others have started businesses in cities where they can sell their own handmade products.
But, for the most part, Tarahumaras show no desire to modernize their primitive way of life. They prefer to live in the past. What is the reason for this?
Generally speaking, the Tarahumaran is a conformist. He is content to carry on traditions handed down for many generations. Traditional activities include making guares (baskets made from palm), woollen blankets, and earthenware bowls and pots.
Also working against progress is the fact that some of these Indians go down into cities where people pity them and give them alms. Persons who get by in such a way have little desire to look for work.
A Mixture of Religious Beliefs
The religious beliefs of the Tarahumaras are a mixture of Roman Catholicism and traditional Indian teachings. Long ago the Spanish clergy influenced them to believe in Jesus Christ, but only in a superficial way. They will readily change their professed religion, if it seems advantageous to do so. Where the Catholic Church provides means of livelihood, they agree with Catholicism. But if a segment of Protestantism offers goods such as food and clothing, they go along with Protestant teachings.
The Tarahumaras believe in immortality of the soul and conduct public worship of both the sun and the cross in connection with certain festivities. Also, occult practices are common. There are herb doctors and “healers” who impose and remove curses. As their pay, these healers demand a pot of tesgüino, a potent type of corn liquor. At times these individuals resort to trickery. Before visiting a sick person, some put a stone in their mouth. After examining the sick individual, they pretend to suck out impurities from the patient’s wrists. Then they remove the stone from their mouth, claiming that it came from the sick person’s body, and that he is therefore free from his illness. In spite of such fraudulent tactics, these healers have large followings of believers.
Response to Cultural Work
Happily, a number of these natives have responded to the cultural work done by persons who distribute the Awake! magazine. This work began for the Tarahumaras in 1956, when a “pioneer” (one who does such work full time) came to the area where they reside. He began placing literature with them, making return visits and conducting studies in the homes of persons showing interest.
By 1958 meetings had begun in that area and three years later two Tarahumaras were immersed. By 1965 the number of Tarahumaras doing this cultural work in this little zone had grown to 14, a figure that has doubled since then. And, at a recent local convention, attendance at the public talk on Sunday was 94. Showing the effect of the cultural education are comments of a traveling overseer:
“Those who now do cultural work in Agua Caliente, Chihuahua, were formerly the terror of that region. They were arrogant and would regularly cause trouble after excessive drinking of tesgüino. To keep the chabochis (white men) from coming to the locations where they did their drinking, they would put at the entrance an herb called frijolillo. When dried, this herb gives off a hissing sound like that of a snake due to the vibration of tiny beans in its pods. This had the effect of scaring away the chabochis.
“Now these individuals are known throughout the region for being peaceable, hardworking persons. No more do they get drunk or engage in violence. Instead, they have won praise for the best conduct in their town and are known throughout the entire region as excellent Christians.”
Among one group of such Christians in Chihuahua are 10 men of pure Tarahumaran stock. All of them learned to read and write through cultural programs. This is true also for other Tarahumaras in nearby groups. Earnest effort has enabled progressive-minded natives to read for themselves, and also to their neighbors, the wonderful promises of God contained in the Scriptures.
The Tarahumaras are indeed an interesting people. Though very much alive and active in the 1970’s, they follow a way of life reminiscent of the distant past.

