Announcements
● Literature offer for January and February: Watchtower subscription for one year for a contribution of $4.00. Six-month subscriptions are $2.00. If subscription is not taken, offer two magazines and a brochure for 70¢, or one brochure and one Watchtower magazine for 50¢. March: Any of the following 192-page books for a contribution of 50¢: Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” Evolution, Holy Spirit, Life Does Have a Purpose, Peace and Security, This Life, World Government. Congregations may request credit for all books placed. Supplies of Choosing, Commentary on James, and Holy Spirit may be ordered from the Society. April and May: True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? for a contribution of $1.00.
● At circuit assemblies having the new program starting in February, district overseers will give the public talk “A Worldwide Brotherhood Saved From Calamity.” Starting in February, circuit overseers will be giving the public talk “Who Are True Christians Today?”
● Subscriptions and distributors’ orders for the large-print edition of The Watchtower in Japanese and Portuguese are now being accepted. The printing will not be handled in the United States but by other branches. Due to the distance and mail service, the magazines may not arrive in time for use at the Watchtower Study. However, these large-print editions are being made available so that the visually impaired are able to receive spiritual food in a form easy to read. The regular Watchtower subscription slip (M-1) and Distributors’ Order form (M-202) should be used. Please mark clearly in the upper right-hand corner, “LARGE PRINT.” Some may be interested in receiving airmail subscriptions for these large-print foreign-language magazines in order to receive them in time for the Watchtower Study. This would involve extra cost to the subscriber for the airmail postage. Any who might be interested in this special service may inquire of the Society.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (1985 edition with marginal references; congregation and public: $3.50; pioneers: $2.00)​—Spanish
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 5, Jo-Ni)​—French
Life Does Have a Purpose​—Hebrew
My Book of Bible Stories (Small size)​—Spanish
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Italian
“Singing and Accompanying Yourselves With Music in Your Hearts” (Paper)​—Arabic
The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever​—Shona
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Ukrainian
● The following publications are now available in grade-two English Braille:
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? (4 volumes) may be requested on a loan basis or purchased for $5.00.
The Government That Will Bring Paradise (1 volume) may be requested on a loan basis or purchased for $1.00. (Also available in grade-one Spanish Braille.)
Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1986 (1 volume) FREE upon request.
To obtain Braille publications, please send in a separate order (including the remittance, if purchased), and the name and address of the person that will use them. Mark your order: ATTENTION: BRAILLE DESK.
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Psalms (set of five; congregation and public: $7.50; pioneers: $6.25)​—Italian, Spanish

