Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom
1 Since the year 1939 the words “Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom” have appeared on the cover of every issue of The Watchtower, and how appropriate this is! People everywhere need to know about God’s Kingdom. Why? Because the Kingdom is the solution to all the problems that distress mankind and because the very lives of people are at stake. It has been by reading the Bible along with this magazine that people by the thousands in all parts of the earth have come to know and love Jehovah, and they are enthusiastically joining the growing number of loyal supporters of his Kingdom.
2 It is appropriate, then, that we begin the 1986 calendar year with the 48th annual Watchtower subscription campaign. While emphasis should be placed on The Watchtower, excellent results may come from offering the Awake! subscription too.
USING THE WATCHTOWER TO HELP OTHERS
3 We will want to take advantage of every opportunity to offer subscriptions. A few ways in which this can be done are from house to house; on return visits; in street and business witnessing; to neighbors, fellow workers, or schoolmates; and as gifts to relatives. No doubt you can think of other ways to offer subscriptions. Helpful suggestions were given in Our Kingdom Ministry for April 1983.
4 The opening articles in the January issues should stimulate us to make an enthusiastic presentation of the magazines. For example, the January 1 Watchtower cover title is “The Horsemen of the Apocalypse​—The Mystery Solved” and for January 15, “The Horsemen of the Apocalypse—​How Their Ride Affects You.” The February 1 and 15 issues will feature a continuation of this theme with the cover titles “The Beasts of the Apocalypse​—What Do They Mean?” and “The Apocalypse​—When?” What a powerful aid these magazines will be in helping people to learn about Jehovah’s Kingdom!
5 In order to impart something meaningful, advance preparation is essential. Become well acquainted with the material you are going to feature. Highlight specific points.
6 Be ready also to describe the purpose and contents of The Watchtower in a general way. Interest may be shown in such things as the number of languages in which The Watchtower is published, how many copies of each issue are printed, the number of lands in which it is distributed, and the fact that it is read by people of all religions.
POINTS TO REMEMBER
7 The real purpose behind our work is to give a witness and cultivate interest in God’s Word. The Watchtower is a valuable aid for helping people to understand and respect the Bible. Show conviction and sincerity as you successfully announce Jehovah’s Kingdom with The Watchtower subscription during January.

