How to Prepare Magazine Presentations
1 If you wanted to show someone how to cope with today’s problems, what would be your source material? If you wanted to give the real meaning behind current events, yet remain politically neutral and not exalt one race above another, where could you turn? If you wanted to help someone keep watch on world events as they fulfill Bible prophecy, what information could you confidently refer to? If you wanted to offer something that encourages faith in the now-reigning King, Jesus Christ, and exalts Jehovah God as the Sovereign of the universe, what is the best printed material available? The answer to all these questions is The Watchtower and Awake!
2 Truly, we have in these two magazines the reading material needed by mankind today. Are we offering these magazines with conviction, enthusiasm, and zeal? Are we well prepared so as to make time count? Could we improve our presentations?
ADVANCE PREPARATION
3 One of the best ways to become immediately familiar with what is in each issue of The Watchtower and Awake! is to read what appears on page 2 in the sections “In This Issue” and “Feature Articles.” Many publishers get ideas on what to feature just from reading over this brief material. But this is only a beginning.
4 Next, look through the pages of each issue and read over the article titles and subheadings. Then pause and reflect on who in the territory might be interested in these subjects. Thereafter, read through the magazine, article by article, making note of interesting talking points. Occasionally, important points are highlighted in italics or bold type right in the articles themselves. Refer to these when showing the magazines to individuals.
5 As you read through each magazine, determine which articles would fit various types of people in the territory. Certain articles are especially suited to a particular segment of the population. Articles have appeared concerning single parents, abortion, nuclear warfare, child abuse, and accidents, plus a host of other specific topics. So, as we read the variety of articles published, look for and note points that would best fit people in your territory.
IN THE FIELD
6 All our advance preparation will not help those in need of the information in The Watchtower and Awake! unless we get out in the field. If we appreciate these magazines, we will regularly set aside time to engage in the magazine activity. Make a special effort to support field service arrangements on the second and fourth Saturdays of every month. Make it your goal to increase your magazine distribution, if possible. Keep in mind the importance of knowing what is contained in each issue. Do not hesitate to offer them at every opportunity. Prepare well so as to do your utmost in handling the word of truth aright.​—2 Tim. 2:15.

