Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 29
Song 136
 5 min: Local announcements, including title of first talk on Creation book to be given this Sunday. Remind all to bring personal copy of book for use as directed by speaker. Bring Reasoning book to Service Meeting next week for use in discussion of introductions.
10 min: Topic for Conversation. Service overseer or other qualified brother to conduct brief review of new topic and then present well-rehearsed demonstration showing how to make an effective transition to subscription offer. Publisher could say: “Truly there are many conditions existing today that cause us to be concerned about the future, are there not?” Allow for a reply and then cite an example or two illustrating the concern. Then state: “While world problems seem to perplex many, did you know that long ago God revealed what will shortly take place in our day? What he said in the Bible book of Revelation reveals much about our future.” Read Revelation 1:1 and then refer to a particular point in the cover article of the January 1 or January 15, 1986, Watchtower that shows how the prophecy is being fulfilled today. Continue by saying: “Even though distressing conditions exist today, note the happy future God has promised. [Read Revelation 21:3, 4.] This issue of The Watchtower discusses in greater detail what the Bible foretold about the future. You can receive 24 issues of this magazine in one year for $4.00.” Conclude this part by encouraging participation in offering Watchtower subscription on first Sunday in January.
30 min: “1986 District Convention Arrangements.” Question-and-answer discussion by convention coordinator. Please read paragraphs 2-4, 6, and 8-14, and make application of scriptures as time allows.
Song 36 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 5
Song 193
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Briefly review instructions in the December 1, 1984, Watchtower, page 25, regarding use of the Medical Alert card, and distribute new cards. Encourage brothers to fill out card promptly, having it properly signed, witnessed, and dated. Second talk on Creation book this Sunday. Announce title.
12 min: “Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom.” Question-and-answer discussion. Encourage all to be out in magazine work this Saturday and share in Sunday witnessing with subscription offer.
15 min: “Introducing the Good News.” Discussion of article with audience participation. In connection with paragraph 3, have capable publisher briefly demonstrate one or two introductions appropriate to the local territory. Chairman should comment on other introductions in the Reasoning book but demonstrate only those most likely to be used locally.
 8 min: “Love for the Worldwide Brotherhood.” Encouraging talk on benefits of circuit assemblies, highlighting the theme of assemblies to begin in February.
Song 92 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 12
Song 20
10 min: Local announcements. Include accounts report, giving a breakdown on expenditures for the month, and comment on how the congregation did in contributing to cover the expenses. Adapt to local needs and give appropriate commendation. Encourage all to share in magazine witnessing this Saturday. Give title of talk for Sunday.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Following Up on Expiring Subscription Slips.” Questions and answers. Also, have a demonstration of publisher calling on subscriber, based on paragraph 6. Publisher should be sure to feature some point of interest in current issue of the magazine. Stress the importance of a positive, optimistic approach. Chairman should ask all to check the information board for the new instructions on how to handle subscriptions. Congregation secretary and the brother caring for the subscriptions should take special note. It would be good for the chairman to make reference to the S-11 form, “How to Handle Subscriptions Properly,” and see that it is posted before this Service Meeting.
15 min: “Why Clothe Ourselves With Mildness?” Talk based on Watchtower article, November 15, 1985, pages 6-8.
Song 211 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 19
Song 8
10 min: Local announcements. Announce title of talk on Creation book for this Sunday.
20 min: “How to Prepare Magazine Presentations.” Cover all paragraphs by question-and-answer method. Arrange for an eight-minute demonstration of two publishers, preferably regular pioneers, discussing with each other how they prepare in advance to offer the magazines. They should base their comments on the examples found in paragraphs 3-5. Use the latest magazines available. Conclude with a 30- to 60-second magazine presentation. Encourage participation in magazine work on fourth Saturday.
15 min: “Do You Remember?” Review by Watchtower Study conductor, based on feature in the December 15, 1985, Watchtower, page 30.
Song 192 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 26
Song 130
10 min: Local announcements. Outline local arrangements for midweek and weekend field service. Encourage support for service arrangements on first Sunday in February. Fifth talk on Creation book will be given this Sunday. Give title of talk.
20 min: Be encouraged by 1986 Yearbook reports. Animated talk encouraging brothers to make good use of new Yearbook. Refer to Theocratic News for this month and point out that Yearbook reports fill in greater detail. Suggest reading Yearbook as family group where practical. All are encouraged by seeing evidence of Jehovah’s blessing upon his organized people.
15 min: Local needs or may cover article “Do You Honor Jehovah With Your Valuable Things?” in December 1, 1985, Watchtower. Make local application of information.
Song 151 and concluding prayer.

