United in the Best Way of Life
If the world’s population continues to climb, there will soon be six billion people on earth. Though all stem from a common ancestor, most do not seem to acknowledge that they are members of a global family and are accountable to a wise and loving Creator. The disunity and strife between nations, races, and cultures bear grim testimony to this sad state of affairs.
IN VIEW of present world conditions, global unity may seem to be an unattainable goal. The Columbia History of the World states: “On the all-important question of how to live together, the contemporary world has not a single new idea to offer, not one.”
However, the bringing about of unity among all earth’s inhabitants does not require a new idea. The path to unity is set out in the Holy Scriptures. It centers on the worship of the One who created the earth and all life on it. True unity of thought, purpose, and way of life already exists among God’s people. Numbering more than five and a half million in 233 lands, they are united in their conviction that God’s way of life is the best way. Like the psalmist, they pray: “Instruct me, O Jehovah, about your way. I shall walk in your truth. Unify my heart to fear your name.”​—Psalm 86:11.
This uniting of people in pure worship was foretold long ago by the prophet Isaiah. He wrote: “It must occur in the final part of the days that the mountain of the house of Jehovah will become firmly established above the top of the mountains, and it will certainly be lifted up above the hills; and to it all the nations must stream. And many peoples will certainly go and say: ‘Come, you people, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths.’”​—Isaiah 2:2, 3.
The unity of Jehovah’s Witnesses is unique. In over 87,000 congregations worldwide, they partake of the same spiritual food at their meetings week after week. (Matthew 24:45-47) From the middle of 1998 until early 1999, however, the Witnesses displayed their unity in another way​—by gathering at their three-day “God’s Way of Life” Conventions throughout the world. In 13 countries, these gatherings included large delegations from various lands and were called international conventions. Others were designated district conventions. But all these conventions presented the same program of spiritually good things.
How pleasant it was to behold happy, well-dressed delegates streaming into auditoriums and stadiums to be taught by Jehovah! Typical was the expression of one delegate to the international convention held in Michigan, U.S.A. She said: “It was such a joy to see our brothers from all over the world​—the Czech Republic, Barbados, Nigeria, Hungary, England, Holland, Ethiopia, Kenya, and many other lands—​embracing one another! It was beautiful to see brothers dwelling together in unity, shedding tears of joy because of the love they have for one another and for their great God, Jehovah.” The next article will examine the convention program enjoyed by millions throughout the earth.
[Picture Credit Line on page 3]
Mountain High Maps® Copyright © 1997 Digital Wisdom, Inc.

