
August to Be a Historic Month of Activity!
A New Tract Will Be Distributed Earth Wide




 1. What special campaign will be held earth wide as we approach the 100th anniversary of the Kingdom?
1 The 100th anniversary of the birth of God’s Kingdom is approaching. How appropriate it is that we honor Jehovah by means of a special campaign! During August we will engage in an earth-wide distribution of a new tract entitled Where Can We Find Answers to Life’s Big Questions? This tract encourages readers to look to the Bible for the answers and explains how jw.org can help them.
 2. How can we contribute to the “loud shout of praise to Jehovah” that will go up during August?
2 Loud Shout of Praise: To help publishers expand their ministry, a special provision has been made for any who wish to auxiliary pioneer in the month of August. During that month, baptized publishers will be allowed to auxiliary pioneer with a 30-hour requirement. Since August has five Fridays, Saturdays, and Sundays, many publishers who work secularly or go to school during the week will be able to auxiliary pioneer. If you have a progressive Bible student or a child who would like to become a publisher, speak to the coordinator of the body of elders right away. How encouraging it would be for such ones to join us as publishers during this momentous month! Although many regular pioneers take vacation during August after fulfilling their yearly hour requirement, it may be possible for them to adjust their schedule in order to have a full share in this special campaign. Now is the time for families to discuss how they will contribute to the “loud shout of praise to Jehovah” that will go up during August.—Ezra 3:11; Prov. 15:22.
 3. What is the hope regarding this special campaign?
3 Although we have engaged in similar campaigns in the past, we hope that this one will be historic. Can we reach new peaks in hours, publishers, and auxiliary pioneers during August? As we end the 2014 service year, may Jehovah bless the efforts of his people earth wide to make the month of August the greatest witnessing month ever!—Matt. 24:14.




