
How to Help Those Who Have Difficulty Reading




 1. Teaching the Bible to those who have difficulty reading presents what challenge?
1 Householders who have difficulty reading may be interested in spiritual things, but they could be intimidated by the Bible and other books. Offering such people the Bible Teach book, at least initially, may meet with little success. How can we help them spiritually? We asked experienced publishers from over 20 different countries what they do. Their suggestions follow.
 2. What tools are effective in helping someone who has difficulty reading?
2 If the student has limited or no reading ability, you might start with a brochure, either Listen to God or Listen to God and Live Forever. One pioneer from the United States shows the person both brochures and asks which one he is more comfortable with. The branch office in Kenya reports that these tools have been very effective there because in African society, people are traditionally taught through storytelling rather than question-and-answer discussions. Whereas an educated person might easily accept reading and questioning, that method might make someone with little formal education uncomfortable. If the student has some reading ability, many publishers like to start in the brochures Good News from God! or You Can Be God’s Friend! or perhaps My Book of Bible Stories.
 3. What insights regarding those who cannot read will help us to be effective in teaching them?
3 Commend: Those who have not learned to read may feel embarrassed, and many have low self-worth. Helping them feel comfortable is often the first step toward teaching them the truth. Most people who cannot read are intelligent and are able to learn. Show them due respect, and treat them with dignity. (1 Pet. 3:15) They will be motivated to continue the study if they feel that their efforts are worthwhile and that they are making spiritual progress. So be generous in commending them.
Those who have not learned to read may feel embarrassed, and many have low self-worth. Helping them feel comfortable is often the first step toward teaching them the truth

 4. How can we encourage those with limited reading ability to prepare for the study?
4 Even if the student has limited reading ability, encourage him to prepare for his study. Some publishers in South Africa encourage their students to ask a family member or friend who can read well to help the students. A publisher in Britain motivates his students to prepare by letting them use his book for a few paragraphs during the study so that they can see how much easier it is to find the answers when they are underlined. One brother in India encourages his students to look at the pictures in the lesson for the next week and meditate on them in advance.
 5. How can we demonstrate patience when conducting the study?
5 Be Patient: Regardless of the publication you use, focus on the main points, and help your student to understand them well. In the beginning, discussions of 10 to 15 minutes may be best. Do not try to cover too much material, perhaps just a few paragraphs each session. Be patient if the student reads slowly. He will likely be motivated to improve his reading ability as he develops appreciation for Jehovah. To help your student do that, it is good to invite him to attend the meetings from the start.
 6. How can we help individuals learn how to read?
6 If Bible students learn how to read, they will make faster spiritual progress. (Ps. 1:1-3) Many have helped their students by using the publication Apply Yourself to Reading and Writing for a few minutes at the end of each study. If the student gets discouraged, perhaps you can build up his confidence by pointing out some things that he was able to learn how to do. Assure him that Jehovah will bless his efforts, and encourage him to pray for help. (Prov. 16:3; 1 John 5:14, 15) Some publishers in Britain encourage their students to set reasonable but progressive goals—perhaps first mastering the alphabet, then finding and reading selected scriptures, and finally reading from simplified Bible publications. Helping people learn how to read often involves motivating them to want to do it, not just teaching them how.
 7. Why should we not hold back from introducing the truth to those who have difficulty reading?
7 Jehovah does not look down on those with little secular education. (Job 34:19) It is the person’s heart that Jehovah is searching. (1 Chron. 28:9) So do not hold back from introducing the truth to those who have difficulty reading. You have many excellent tools that you can start with. Eventually, you can transfer the study to the Bible Teach book and give him a more rounded understanding of the Scriptures.



If the householder cannot read, try this:
  Initially use Listen to God, Listen to God and Live Forever, or another suitable publication.

  Treat him with dignity, and commend generously.

  Keep discussions brief, and do not try to cover too much material.

  Help him develop his reading skills.


As he demonstrates appreciation for the truth and an appetite for learning, you may be able to transfer the study to the Bible Teach book.



