
Remember Those in Nursing Homes




 1. Why is there a need to reach those in nursing homes with the good news?
1 Many people are facing the debilitating effects of advancing age. (Eccl. 12:1-7) Some older ones live in nursing homes, so it is not always possible for us to reach them through house-to-house preaching. This is true even in lands where aging parents traditionally move in with their children or other relatives. Although perhaps limited in mobility or memory, elderly ones and others who live in nursing homes may still be able to learn about, appreciate, and come to love Jehovah. How can we reach out to share the good news of “the happy hope” with them?—Titus 2:13.
 2. How can we compile a list of nursing-care facilities to visit?
2 Getting Started: Usually a list of nursing-care facilities can be compiled by searching the local telephone directory. Check categories such as “nursing homes,” “group homes,” and “residential-care facilities.” The service overseer can take the lead in arranging for qualified publishers to visit each facility. With good planning and reliance on Jehovah, it is often possible to start a group Bible study.—Prov. 21:5; 1 John 5:14, 15.
3, 4. (a) Whom should we approach to introduce the group study? (b) How might we outline the study arrangement?
3 The manner in which the study is introduced depends on the type of facility. In large facilities with many residents and staff members, it is best to approach the receptionist and ask to speak with the director of activities. In small group homes for seniors—homes with a few residents and two or three caregivers—it may be best to schedule a time to speak directly with the owner of the home.
4 In either situation, explain that you are volunteering your time to encourage individuals who enjoy reading and discussing Bible accounts. Ask if there are any residents who might like to participate in a group Bible discussion for about 30 minutes a week. A variety of publications can be used, but many find that My Book of Bible Stories and The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived are well received. You may wish to show the publications to the director. The day, time, and meeting room location can be worked out with him or her and will typically be posted on an activities calendar in the nursing home. Do not shy away from identifying yourself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. At the same time, help the director to understand that you would not be coming to conduct a religious service but, rather, to promote Bible education.
 5. What practical suggestions will make the study enjoyable and beneficial?
5 Conducting the Study: How you conduct the study depends on the circumstances and environment at the facility, so be flexible and discerning. The conductor should bring several copies of the publication being considered and should collect them at the end of the study. It may be necessary to bring enlarged copies of the material for some. Paragraphs can be read, questions can be asked, and responses can be given in our usual manner. Those willing and capable may be invited to read the paragraphs or Bible passages. During the study, be engaging, positive, and friendly. With the permission of the director, you can occasionally show one of the organization’s videos that builds faith in the Bible or highlights lessons from a particular Bible account. It may be possible to open and close the study with a simple prayer. Some publishers have even introduced Kingdom songs.
 6. How might an objection be handled?
6 What if a resident objects to something that is read or stated during the study? Use discernment when you reply. (Col. 4:6) Perhaps you can share a brief Bible text that clearly addresses his concern. If it is not practical for you to do so, then it would be best to acknowledge his comment and offer to consider the matter with him separately after the study.
 7. What can you do if a resident has a personal question or shows exceptional interest?
7 On occasion, a resident may ask a question or express a desire to learn more. One sister uses this approach: “That’s a very good question. But since that is your personal question, let’s wait until the end of our reading. Then you and I can discuss it together.” It is often possible to arrange to conduct a personal Bible study with interested ones at another time and in a different setting.
 8. How should group studies and any personal Bible studies that result be counted?
8 It is usually best for the same Witnesses to conduct the group study at the facility each time. Any publishers who participate may count the time. Once the study is established, the publisher taking the lead may count one return visit every time the group study is conducted and one Bible study each month. Bible studies that are started with individual residents who are able to understand and learn may be counted in the usual way.
9, 10. What qualities are necessary for those involved in this work? Explain.
9 Keeping It Going: It is best to have a set day and time for the group study. The residents and staff will expect it to be held regularly and to start and end on time. (Matt. 5:37) Therefore, commitment, diligence, and orderliness are required. Experience has shown that it is best if two qualified publishers work together to conduct the group study. (Eccl. 4:9, 10) In large facilities, more publishers might be needed.
10 Friendliness and personal interest are also important. (Phil. 2:4) On the first visit, take time to meet each resident who attends. Make note of and try to memorize their names before the next study. However, some older people are offended if someone they do not know addresses them by their first name. Patience and compassion will make everyone feel welcome and appreciated.
11. How can those conducting the group study show respect for the staff and family members of the residents?
11 It is also essential to demonstrate respect for and show kindness to the facility staff and family members of the residents. Once the study arrangement is set, it is wise not to change the time or format without first discussing it with the director. From time to time, ask the director for input on how the study is going. When family members visit during the study, take the initiative to meet them. Explain to them the purpose of the Bible study activity. Reassure them of your sincere interest in their family member. Invite them to sit in and listen to the study.
12, 13. Relate experiences illustrating the benefits of witnessing in nursing homes.
12 Results: Traveling overseers and congregations report encouraging results from this avenue of service. In one case, about 20 residents attended the first discussion. This led to individual Bible studies with six residents. One was eventually baptized. A study in another home motivated an 85-year-old woman to associate with the local congregation and express her desire to be baptized. When one facility decided to consolidate its activities—eliminating the group study conducted by Jehovah’s Witnesses—the residents complained to the facility director! Eventually the study was started again and thereafter between 25 and 30 people attended.
13 The love we show to those in nursing homes leaves a deep impression on more than just the residents. For example, it is not unusual for staff members to sit in on and even participate in the study. The effort we put forth to show personal interest to those in nursing homes also gives a favorable witness to the community. (1 Pet. 2:12) After being told the purpose of the study, one administrator said: “What took you so long? When can you start?” Another director wrote: “I would heartily recommend this group study to any nursing-care facility in the area. Jehovah’s Witnesses provide this free service as part of their ministerial work in the community.” One nursing home in Hawaii gave Jehovah’s Witnesses a Volunteer Service Award that described the volunteers as a “priceless treasure” to those in that facility.
14. Why should we want to reach out to assist those in nursing homes?
14 The elderly are invited by Jehovah to praise him. (Ps. 148:12, 13) That invitation includes those in nursing homes. Are there nursing homes within your territory where elderly ones would benefit from hearing the good news? With the help of the local elders and the nursing-home directors, we may be able to give a good witness to those in nursing homes. When we remember those of advancing years, we imitate Jehovah.—Ps. 71:9, 18.



Group Discussions at a Nursing Home
  Check in with the receptionist and director of activities when you arrive for the scheduled session.

  Bring enough copies of the study publication for the group. Carry the publications in a dignified bag, and collect them following the study.

  Be relaxed, friendly, and outgoing. Use the residents’ names.

  Read and discuss one paragraph at a time.

  Use short questions. Warmly commend all for their comments.

  Defer doctrinal or controversial questions to a time and setting where they can be considered privately with the inquirer.

  Answer questions from staff and family members in a simple, direct manner.

  Take advantage of opportunities to start personal Bible studies with residents, relatives, and staff members.





