Vol. XX. AUGUST 15, 1899. No. 16. 

SEPTEMBER & OCTOBER ISSUES 
Will Be Millennial Dawn, Volume V. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 211 

The Peace Conference Failure 211 



Presbyterianism in Scotland 212 

Conventions— Boston and St. Louis 212 

Poem: The Only Begotten 213 

"Unto the Pure all Things are Pure" 214 

Some Antidotes for Heart Impurity 215 

"Give to Every Man that Asketh" 217 

"I, if I be Lifted up, will Draw all Men" 218 

Encouraging the Temple Builders 219 

"My Grace is Sufficient for Thee" 221 

An Interesting Letter 224 

page 210 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



THE AT-ONE-MENT 
BETWEEN 
GOD AND MAN. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. V. 



We have pleasure in announcing that Volume V. of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series is now on the press. It will (D.V.) be sent to 
all paid up subscribers to ZION'S WATCH TOWER (including those 
who have requested credit for the year, and those who are receiving 
it free as the Lord's poor)— as September 1st and 15th, 
and October 1st and 15th issues of this journal. There will be 
no other issues for the four dates named. If you do not receive 
a copy before Sept. 30th it will not be our fault. If your account 
differs from ours be sure to let us know all particulars. Notice 
the tag on the wrapper. Jun. 9 means that your subscription 
is settled for only to and including June, 1899— that you are in 
arrears. Dec. 9 means that your subscription is settled for, up 



to the end of the year and should be renewed in December 
or written about. 

This volume will, we believe, furnish an abundance of spiritual 
food for the two months (September and October). It 
should be thoroughly masticated, that it may be well digested 
and give strength to head and heart and hand. It is our prayer 
and hope that it may be a great blessing to the readers of this 
journal; and that through them as fellow servants of our one 
Lord and Master it may honor him and bless many. 



R2515 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE PEACE CONFERENCE FAILURE. 



CZAR NICHOLAS II. was no doubt greatly disappointed 

with the barren result of his recent 

Peace Conference. Called specially to induce a general 

disarmament on the part of civilized nations and 

for the institution of national courts of arbitration, 

the convention may be said to have failed utterly, in 

that the question of disarmament was totally rejected 

by Germany and therefore of necessity by her neighbors. 

The German emperor evidently realized that 

the disbandment of his great army would not only 

leave him with less power, but would throw another 

million able-bodied men upon Germany's labor market 

seeking employment, further depressing wages and 

precipitating a panic and anarchy. He did the wisest 

thing for the present: but no human wisdom can long 

avert the impending time of trouble when there shall 

be no hire for man nor hire for beast, and no peace to 

him that goeth out nor to him that cometh in, because 

every man's hand shall be against (in competition 

with) his neighbor. (Zech. 8:10.) The growth of intelligence 

is being fostered by the schooling connected 

with these standing armies, and labor-saving machinery 

is fast bringing these to the place where their increased 

intelligence will make them the more discontented 

and the less willing to step backward into serfdom 

at the command of giant Trusts. 

Of the twenty-seven nations represented at the 
Conference, sixteen agreed to favor and to seek to promote 
arbitration in settlement of national disputes, and 
about as many agreed to certain modifications of cruelties 
of war, which they evidently do not hope are 
ended. How evident it is that not humanity and not 
councils, but God who shall "speak peace to the 
Gentiles [the nations]."— Zech. 9:10. 



And his voice commanding "Peace" will be in a 
very different tone from what is generally expected. 
—In tones that will shake not only the earth [social 
structure] but also the heavens [the ecclesiastical 
structure], he shall, by that awful time of anarchy 
when all the selfish passions of mankind shall be let 
loose, say— "Be still and know that I am God. I 
will be exalted among the Gentiles, I will be exalted 
in the earth. "-Psa. 46:8-10. 

"KNOWLEDGE SHALL BE INCREASED"-AND "THERE 
SHALL BE A TIME OF TROUBLE SUCH AS WAS 
NOT SINCE THERE WAS A NATION." 



Another illustration of the fact that the impending 
trouble is being hastened and not hindered by education, 
comes to our knowledge. The security of the 
past was due, less to the fact that men were better in 
olden times than now, than to the fact that general 
intelligence being less men did not so well know how 
to do evil. A general increase of knowledge not accompanied 
by a conversion to righteousness and subjugation 
to the law of Love is dangerous at the present 
time. The time for such general enlightenment 
will come safely when the Kingdom of the Lord has 
been established and when its iron rule will hold in 
check the evilly-disposed, and teach them lessons of 
swift retribution. 

The illustration of this subject is again in Russia, 
where, as noted a short time ago, the privileges of 
high-school and college education were greatly restricted 
by government authority. Now we clip the 
following respecting the unrest of the educated classes 
in Russia from the London Spectator:— 

"The signs of unrest in Russia multiply. Apart 
from the local insurrections caused by the prevailing 

R2515 : page 212 

scarcity, which in some places, notably Kazan, are 
serious, there are the artisan troubles which we noticed 
last week; and now the University students are in 
mutiny. Their real grievance is the brutality with 
which every expression of their feelings is suppressed 
by the Cossack police, who strike them with their 
whips, arrest, and otherwise maltreat them. The 
students have combined to protest against this treatment, 
and between their strikes and expulsions thirty 
thousand young men have left the universities, whose 
doors are closed in St. Petersburg, Moscow, Kieff, 
Kharkoff, Odessa, Kazan, Tomsk and Warsaw. The 
female students will, it is stated, follow the example 
of the men, and are much more dangerous, as they at 
once become revolutionaries. Indeed, there would 



seem from some documents published to be small revolutionary 

parties embedded in the movement. As 

each student has many families interested in his success, 

the matter is a serious one for the government, 

which once again finds itself in collision with the whole 

educated class. Nothing will, or can, happen in Russia 

until the military class is discontented, or the Empire 

finds a reforming Czar, but no government likes to 

feel itself hated by the class, from which, after all, it 

must draw all its own agents. There is, however, no 

remedy to be perceived, except through the Emperor, 

and Nicholas II., tho he wishes thoroughly well to his 

people, has no strength of initiative." 

PRESBYTERIANISM IN SCOTLAND. 



The claim is often set forth that Presbyterianism 
is drifting from its ancient moorings: and we regard 
this as having both a favorable and unfavorable aspect. 
It is favorable to the intelligence and heart of 
these people to find increasingly large numbers of 
them unwilling to admit the unreasonable side of the 
doctrine of election— that God predestinated the torture 
of hundreds of millions of his creatures before 
their creation and made provision for it by the creation 
of a vast torture-chamber called "hell" and the 
preparation of vast quantities of fuel for their torture. 
It is unfavorable when we find them drifting toward 
infidelity— the rejection of Christ's redemptive work 
and the gospel set forth in the Bible— under the influence 
of a Higher Criticism and Evolution doctrine. 
And it appears that this movement is not confined to 
this country. An evidently well informed writer in 
the N.Y. Tribune says of this progress in Scotland,— 

"Professor Briggs would not have been molested 
in the church founded by John Knox. On the contrary, 
he would have found in it scholars and thinkers 
like-minded with himself. Open-mindedness is the 
characteristic of the Scottish church. Implicitly, if 
not explicitly, truth is the first article of its creed, 
and all the other dogmatic articles of its creed are interpreted 
in the light of the truth. It is true the biblical 
scholars and theologians of Scotland are more 
conservative than those of Germany. But, for all 
that, some of them would have as hard a time in the 
American Presbyterian church as Professor Briggs 
had. Nor is that all. A ritualistic tendency has 
grown up in the Scottish church that has for its object 
the restoration of some liturgical and ceremonial features 
that were discarded at the Reformation. This 
movement meets with a sympathetic response from 
the people in the larger towns, and bids fair to revolutionize 
the church. Only in the remote country 
districts will one find the typical Presbyterians of the 



old days, and as they die there are none to take their 
places. Thus, in spite of its strong government and 
its uncompromising creed, Scottish Presbyterianism 
finds itself moving along in the stream of tendency. 

R2516 : page 212 

"But most remarkable of all is the drift away 
from the severe conception of life and religion that 
characterized the Scottish reformers. During the last 
few years there has been a noteworthy change of sentiment 
in regard to the observance of the Sabbath. 
Not long ago Principal Story, the Moderator of the 
General Assembly of the Scottish church, preached a 
sermon on Sabbath observance in Edinburgh. In this 
sermon he made a strong plea for a less rigid observance 
of the day, and especially for the opening of 
clubs, public gardens, museums, art galleries and 
libraries." 

If all the "old fashioned" Christians are dying 
out of the Presbyterian Church and few or none of 
this class now being developed, and if this church is 
a fair sample of all churches, what can we expect? 
Just what the Master implied when speaking of the 
present time he said, "When the Son of Man cometh 
shall he find the faith on the earth?"— Luke 18:8. 

It is the errors in the creeds of all churches that 
are causing the overthrow of the truths which they 
all hold, and which the errors discredit. Let all who 
have the true light now shining be zealous to lend a 
helping hand to these dear brethren— especially to the 
"old fashioned" ones. 



R2516 : page 212 

BELIEVERS' CONVENTIONS-BOSTON AND ST. LOUIS. 



TWO MORE Believers' Conventions are called 
under the auspices of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
AND TRACT SOCIETY, as follows:- 

At Boston, Mass., commencing Friday, Sept. 22d, 
at ten o'clock A.M., and lasting three days. 

At St. Louis, Mo., commencing Friday, Oct. 6th, 
at ten o'clock A.M., and lasting three days. 

At this writing we are unable to give full particulars 
respecting the program and speakers, except that 
the Editor of this journal will probably speak each 
afternoon, and that Pilgrim McPhail is expected to 
take part in the Boston Convention, while Pilgrims 
Draper, Willis and Ransom may be expected at St. 
Louis. The hours for meetings will be the same for 
both conventions; viz., 



Friday, 10 A.M., opening "rally" led by representatives 

R2516 : page 213 

of the home churches whose guests we will 
be, and who promise us a warm welcome. At 2 P.M., 
a Testimony Meeting. At 3 P.M., a discourse. At 7 
P.M., a Testimony Meeting. At 8 P.M., a discourse. 

Saturday, 9 A.M., a Testimony Meeting; at 10:30 
A.M., a discourse; at 2:30 P.M., a discourse on Baptism, 
its import and its symbol,— with opportunities offered 
for its symbolization by any who may so desire. At 
7 P.M., a Praise Meeting; at 7:45 P.M., a discourse illustrated 
by a large Chart of the Ages. 

Sunday, at 9 A.M., a Prayer and Testimony Meeting; 
at 10:30 A.M., a discourse illustrated by the Chart 
of the Ages; at 2 P.M., Praise Service; at 3 P.M., a discourse; 
at 7:30 P.M., several speakers, subject, Preserving 
the Unity of the Spirit in the Bonds of Peace. 

All Christians who trust in the precious blood of 
Christ for justification are cordially invited to convene 
with us for the study of our Father's Word;— 
and especially such of these as have made or desire 
to make full consecration of their justified selves to 
the service of the Father through the merit and mediation 
of our Redeemer-King. 

RAILROAD RATES, ETC. 



The Boston Convention is timed so as to give us 
the advantage of the "Congregational Convention," 
held at the same time. Special tickets should be inquired 
for at once, that the Railroad agents may have 
them on hand at proper time. These special tickets 
will cost full fare going; and will have an agreement 
attached, pledging the Ry. to sell a return ticket for 
one-third of full fare for return journey. Thus the 
round trip rates will be two-thirds of the usual. Get 
full particulars of your ticket agent. 

The St. Louis Convention is timed to take advantage 
of the low rates granted to the "St. Louis Fair," 
viz., one fare for the round trip. These tickets will 
be on sale Oct. 2d to 7th and will be good for return 
until Oct. 10th. Remember that our Convention date 
there is 6th to 8th. 

ACCOMMODATIONS, ETC. 

Good, comfortable, clean accommodations will be 
arranged for at the rate of one dollar per day— board 
and lodging,— two in a bed (fifty cents extra where 
separate bed is insisted on). WATCH TOWER subscribers 
too poor to pay these moderate charges will 
be provided for, if they will request entertainment as 



"the Lord's poor." 
DECIDE AT ONCE AND, IF COMING, NOTIFY US. 

This will be the only notification of these Conventions, 
as there will be no other issue of this journal in 
this form until Nov. 1, the special issue (DAWN, VOL. 
V.) taking the place of the Sept. and Oct. issues. 

Therefore, decide as quickly as possible whether 
or not you will attend either of these Conventions. If 
your decision is to go, write to the Watch Tower Office, 
heading your letter with the word Convention. 
Tell us how many there will be of your party— males 
and females— and whether you desire us to secure $1. 
a day accommodations for you, or whether you desire 
provision as the Lord's poor, as above. Also state by 
what railway you will come and, if possible, the hour 
of your arrival. So far as possible there will be a Reception 
Committee to take charge of all comers at trains; 
and they may be known by their displaying a copy of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN or the WATCH TOWER. But more 
than this, your letter will be so answered as to give 
you full information how to find the lodging and meeting 
places. 

Dear Brethren and Sisters, let all who attend these 
Conventions go to them full of earnest desire to get 
good, and so far as possible to do good to others;— full 
of the spirit of loving devotion and prayer. All such 
will surely experience a great blessing— a feast of fat 
things, in fellowship with our Lord and his brethren. 



R2519 : page 213 

THE ONLY BEGOTTEN. 



From far in the great aions of eternity, 
From space unlimited, unmeasured by the steps 
Of worlds, from silence broken only by the voice 
Of him, the Self-Existent One, whose skilful word 
Created him,* came forth the glorious Son of God. 

(O sacred moment! which with shaded eyes we dare 
With holy boldness to approach; not with a vain 
Desire to see and know what God has hid, but drawn 
Thereto by that blest Spirit which in reverence 
Delights to search the deep and precious things revealed. +) 

O glad Beginning of Creation's early morn! 
O glorious Finish of Creation's noon and night! 
O blessed Son, begotten of the Father's speech, 
Thou Only Well-belov'd, in whom all fulness dwells! 
Silence and space alone were found to worship thee! 



But deep within the counsels of th' Eternal One 

Lay countless hosts whose praise should celebrate the Son; 

And to the Son was giv'n prerogative++ to call 

Them to existence, in abodes of him prepared, 

And crown with happiness each creature in its sphere. 

Rich in insignias of his high rank, he still 

Delighted in the emblems of humility; 

And wore upon his heart the gem obedience, 

And clothed his arm with zeal, his feet with haste, to do 

The holy will of Him who loved and cherished him. 



*Rev. 3:14. +1 Cor. 2:10. ++John 1:3. 

R2519 : page 214 

And now reigns silence, solemn, still, as that which on 
His natal day received him; for the angels watch, 
With awe constrained, while he divests himself of all 
His wealth and glory, and becomes a babe; then loud 
Hosannas sing, "On earth be peace, good will to men!" 

And lovingly they watch him as the perfect man's 
Estate he magnifies with like obedience, 
Unflinching loyalty and firm humility; 
Till, daunted not by Calv'ry's cross and shame, he gives 
His life— a ransom for a helpless, dying race. 

That awful day the darkened sun and quaking earth 
Creation's anguish voiced; but One yet reigned supreme, 
Who loved him with the power of infinity, 
And in His master-hand the mighty issues held— 
The matchless Son had won the title to a throne! 

What throne? Could all the boundless universe produce 
A worthy coronet for his escutcheon which 
Nor honor, glory, shame nor death could mar? Behold, 
The heav'nly myriads worship, while the Father crowns 
The risen Son— divine,* immortal,+ Lord of all.++ 

O hail, Immanuel! Prince of life and glory, hail! 
Let earth with heaven unite in adoration, praise, 
Thanksgiving to thy God, whose attributes thou hast 
Exalted, and to thee, whose love and sacrifice 
Constrain a race redeemed to endless gratitude! 
-R. B. HENNINGES. 



*Heb. l:3-Diaglott. +John 5:26. ++Rom. 14:9. 



R2516 : page 214 

"UNTO THE PURE ALL THINGS ARE PURE.' 



"Unto the pure all things are pure: but unto them that are defiled and 
unfaithful nothing is pure; but both their mind and conscience are 
defiled: they profess to have known God, but by their works they 
renounce him, being abominable and disobedient, and to 
every good work worthless."— Tit. 1:15,16. 

NOT SINNERS, not the worldly, are thus spoken 
of by the Apostle, but those who have enjoyed 
the truth, and who have enjoyed at least the 
first step in heart-purification, namely, justification; 
and whose hearts have become defiled through a failure 
to maintain in them the law of love as the ruling 
principle. Instead of being filled with love, selfishness, 
with its defilement, has been received back as 
the ruling principle of the heart. Such have the spirit 
of the world, and sometimes exercise it with a much 
greater degree of animosity than the world exhibits. 
They are specially ready, as the Apostle intimates, to 
impugn the conduct and motives of others: being selfish 
themselves, they attribute selfishness to everyone 
else: being impure themselves, they attribute impurity 
to others: having lost the spirit of love which thinketh 
no evil, their hearts rapidly fill up with selfish, 
envious, uncharitable, ungodly, unkind sentiments, 
toward those who are true, sincere and noble. 

We have known such to go even to the extreme 
of impugning the motives of the great Jehovah and 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Unable to think of love and 
benevolence as motives for conduct, and accustomed 
in their own hearts to think merely of selfishness and 
personal aggrandizement as motives, they view the 
divine course from this standpoint, and esteem that 
God was moved by pride to recover man from sin and 
death, or by vanity, to show what he could do. They 
claim that our Lord Jesus was moved by selfish motives, 
of self-gratification, honor, increase of power, 
in becoming our Redeemer. They think of the loyalty 
of the angels from a selfish standpoint, as in hope 
of advancement, or in fear of punishment. Who can 
bring a clean thought out of an unclean heart? Who 
can expect benevolence, generous feelings, sentiments 
or words, except hypocritically, from a heart in which 
selfishness has the control? Who would expect generous 
considerations in a mind full of envy and 
self-seeking? 

The Apostle suggests of such that not only their 
minds become corrupted, but also their conscience; so 
that they will do evil, speak evil, think evil, and yet 
their consciences do not reprove them; because their consciences 
and minds work in harmony, and, as the Scriptures 



declare, they become blinded, self-deceived. What 
a terrible condition this is, and how careful all of the 
Lord's people should be, not only to have pure hearts, 
pure minds, but also to keep their consciences very 
tender, in close accord with the word of the Lord. 
This condition can only be maintained by judging 
ourselves, and that strictly and frequently, by the 
standard which God has given us, his law of Love. 

R2517 : page 214 

"I want the first approach to feel 

Of pride or fond desire; 
To catch the wandering of my will, 

And quench the kindling fire." 
As the Apostle points out, those whose minds become 
impure, poisoned by ambition or pride or selfishness, 
the spirit of evil, profess to have known God 
they are apt to profess as loudly as ever, sometimes, 
indeed, becoming boastful of how much they know of 
God, and of his Word, and of how wise they are as 
respects its interpretation. Not by boasting or professions, 
therefore, can we always judge who are of 
the pure minds and of good consciences, and in full 
harmony with the Lord. Rather by their fruits we 
shall know them, as the Master said— by their works, 
as the Apostle here points out. If any profess to know 
God, and yet by their works renounce him, we are 
fully justified in questioning whether or not they may 
not be self-deceived, whether or not their consciences, 

R2517 : page 215 

as well as their minds, may not have become defiled. 

To renounce the Lord in our works, does not necessarily 
mean a resort to murder, robbery, licentiousness, 
etc. It means rather, in the beginning at least, 
that from the hitherto good fountain of a cleansed or 
renewed heart or will, from which issued purity, truth, 
sweetness, kindness, encouragement and refreshment 
for all who drank of its waters, in the home and family 
and neighborhood and amongst the Lord's people, 
would issue instead bitter waters, producing bitter 
feelings, watering and nourishing roots of bitterness, 
stirring up malice, envy, hatred, strife, etc. No wonder 
the Apostle says of such that they are abominable! 
All who have the spirit of the Lord must abominate 
the spirit of evil, however surprised and grieved 
they may be to find it issuing from one who previously 
gave forth sweetness, love, kindness, good works. 

As the Master declared, if the professedly sweet 
fountain sends forth bitter waters, we may know that 
there is something wrong, something defiling, in the 
fountain, and are not to deceive ourselves respecting 
its waters, and to partake of its bitterness. 

Commenting along the same line the Apostle James 



declares, "If any man among you seemeth to be religious 

and bridleth not his tongue, that man's religion 

is vain." Because the tongue is the index of the 

heart, because "out of the fullness of the heart the 

mouth speaketh," therefore the unbridled tongue 

speaking selfishly, enviously, bitterly, boastfully, slanderously, 

proves that the heart from whose fullness 

these overflow is unsanctified, unholy, grievously lacking 

of the spirit of Christ,— hence, whatever religion 

it may have attained is thus far vain, as that heart 

is not saved nor in a salvable condition. No wonder 

the Apostle comments in our text, that such are "disobedient:" 

only by disobedience to the law of the New 

Covenant, Love, could anyone reach such a condition 

of heart and conscience defilement, after he had been 

purified through faith in the precious blood, and consecrated 

to the Lord. 

The final statement of our text is that such an 
one, having lost the spirit of the truth, and having obtained 
instead a spirit of bitterness, rancor, evil, having 
a poisoned or defiled mind and conscience, is "to 
every good work worthless." No matter what work 
such an one might undertake to do, it would surely 
be spoiled, because the spirit of evil, the spirit of pride, 
the spirit of selfishness, the spirit of malice and envy, 
are so violently in opposition to every feature of righteousness 
and goodness and truth and love, that there 
can be no peace, no cooperation between them. And 
this reminds us of our Lord's words, to the effect that 
those who are his people and who have his spirit, are 
"the salt of the earth,"— preservative, so long as they 
have this spirit; but, as he suggests, if the salt lose 
its saltness— if the Christian lose those peculiar features 
of the spirit of Christ which constitute him different 
from the world, separate from the world, and a 
salting or preservative quality in the world— if he 
should lose these, what?— he would be worthless as 
bad salt, "to every good work worthless."— Tit. 1:16. 

What course should be pursued by those who find 
themselves possessed of impure minds,— minds inclined 
to surmise evil rather than good, envious minds, selfish, 
resentful, bitter, unforgiving, minds which love 
only those that love and flatter them? Is there any 
hope for these? Would God not utterly reject such? 

God is very pitiful; and it was while all were thus 
"in the very gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity" 
that he provided for our redemption. There is hope 
for all such who see their defilement and who desire 
to be cleansed. 

"His blood can make the foulest clean; 
His blood avails for me." 

But true repentance means both contrition and 
reformation: and for help in the latter we must go to 
the Great Physician who alone can cure such moral 
sickness; and of whom it is written, "Who healeth all 
thy diseases." All of his sanctified ones, it is safe to 



say, were at one time more or less diseased thus, and 
proportionately "worthless" for his service. True, it 
is worse for those who were once cleansed, if they 
"like the sow return to the wallowing in the mire" of 
sin,— but still there is hope, if the Good Physician's 
medicine be taken persistently the same as at first. 
The danger is that the conscience, becoming defiled, 
will so pervert the judgment that bitterness is esteemed 
to be sweetness, and envy and malice to be justice and 
duty, and the "mire" of sin to be beauty of holiness. 
Then only is the case practically a hopeless one. 

SOME OF THE GOOD PHYSICIAN'S ANTIDOTES FOR 
HEART IMPURITY. 



The Good Physician has pointed out antidotes 
for soul-poisoning,— medicines which if properly taken 
according to directions will sweeten the bitter heart. 
Instead of envy it will produce love; instead of malice 
and hatred and strife, love and concord; instead 
of evil-speaking and backbiting and scandal-mongering 
it will produce the love which thinketh no evil 
and which worketh no ill to his neighbor; which suffereth 
long and is kind, which vaunteth not itself, is 
not puffed up, which never faileth and which is the 
spirit of the Lord and the law of the spirit of life 
in Christ Jesus. Let us all take these medicines, for 
they are good not only for the violently sick, but for 
the convalescing and the well. The following are some 
of the prescriptions:— 

R2517 : page 216 

(1) "He that hath this hope in him purifieth 
himself even as he [the Lord] is pure."— 1 John 3:3. 

The hope mentioned is that we have been adopted 
as sons of God, with the promise that if faithful we 
shall be like him and see him as he is and share his 
glory. As our minds and hearts expand with this 
hope and we begin to measure its lengths and breadths, 
its heights and depths, it surely does set before us the 
Heavenly Father's love and the Redeemer's love in 
rainbow colors and we more and more love the Father 
and the Son because they first loved us. The divine 
form of love becomes more and more our ideal; and 
as we seek to reciprocate it and to copy it, the cleansing 
and purifying of our hearts follows: for looking 
into the perfect law of liberty— Love— we become 
more and more ashamed of all the meanness and selfishness 
which the fall brought to us. And, once seen 
in their true light as works of the flesh and of the 
devil, all anger, malice, wrath, envy, strife, evil-speaking, 
evil-surmising, backbiting and slander become 
more and more repulsive to us. And finally when we 



see that such as to any degree sympathize with these 
evil qualities are unfit for the Kingdom and to every 
good work worthless, we flee from these evils of the 
soul as from deadly contagion. Our hearts (wills, 
intentions) become pure at once and we set a guard 
not only upon our lips but also upon our thoughts— 
that the words of our mouths and the meditations of 
our hearts may be acceptable to the Lord. 

(2) "Who gave himself for us, that he might 
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself 

a peculiar people zealous of good works."— Titus 2:14. 

We might theorize much and very correctly upon 
how and when and by whom we were redeemed; but 
this all would avail little if we forgot why we were 
redeemed. The redemption was not merely a redemption 
from the power of the grave;— it was chiefly 
"from all iniquity." And the Lord is not merely 
seeking a peculiar people, but specially a people peculiarly 
cleansed, purified. This medicine will surely 
serve to purge us from iniquity if we are anxious to 
make our calling and election sure. 

(3) "Pursue righteousness, fidelity, love, peace, 
with all who call upon the Lord with a pure heart." 
—2 Tim. 2:22. 

We not only need to start right, but also to pursue 
a right course. We may not follow unrighteousness 
even for a moment; whatever it may cost, justice and 
righteousness must be followed. But here a difficulty 
arises with some: they do not know how to judge 
righteous judgment. They are too apt to judge according 
to rumor or appearances, or to accept the 
judgment of scribes and Pharisees, as did the multitude 
which cried, "Crucify him! His blood be upon 
us and upon our children." Had they followed righteousness 
they would have seen the Lord's character 
in his good works as well as in his wonderful words 
of life: they would have seen that so far from being a 
blasphemer he was "holy, harmless, separate from 
sinners:" they would have seen that his accusers were 
moved by envy and hatred. 

And it is just as necessary as ever to follow the 
Lord's injunction, "Judge righteous judgment," and 
whoever neglects it brings down "blood" upon his 

R2518 : page 216 

own head and becomes a sharer in the penalty due to 
false accusers. For as the Lord was treated so will 
his "brethren" be treated. And the more pure our 
hearts the less will they be affected by slanders and 
backbitings and evil-speakings, and the more will we 
realize that those who have bitter hearts from which 
arise bitter words are impure fountains in which is 
the gall of bitterness and not the sweetness of love. 

Next comes fidelity, that is, faithfulness. The Lord 
declares his own fidelity or faithfulness and declares 



himself a friend that sticketh closer than a brother. 
And even the worldly recognize fidelity as a grace: 
and by such it is often given first place; for many 
would commit theft or perjury through fidelity to a 
friend. But notice that God's Word puts righteousness 
first. Fidelity, love and peace can only be exercised 
in harmony with righteousness; but unrighteousness 
not being proven against a brother, our fidelity 
and love and peace toward him must continue, and 
indeed must increase in proportion as envy and slander 
and all the fiery darts of the Wicked One assail 
him "without a cause." This valuable prescription 
will help to keep our hearts free from the poison and 
bitterness of roots of bitterness which the Adversary 
keeps busily planting. 

Justice is purity of heart,— freedom from injustice. 

Righteousness is purity of heart,— freedom from 
unrighteousness. 

Love is purity of heart,— freedom from selfishness. 

(4) "Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying 
the truth through the spirit [the spirit of the 
truth] unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that 
ye love one another with a pure heart, fervently."— 
1 Pet. 1:22. 

This medicine is for those who have used the other 
prescriptions and gotten clean. It points out that the 
purity came not merely through hearing the truth, nor 
through believing the truth, but through obeying it. 
And not merely a formal obedience in outward ceremony 
and custom and polished manner, but through 
obedience to the spirit of the truth— its real import. 
All this brought you to the point where the love of the 
"brethren" of Christ was unfeigned, genuine. At first 
you treated all with courtesy, or at least without impoliteness; 

R2518 : page 217 

but many of them you did not like, much 
less did you love them: they were poor, or shabby, or 
ignorant, or peculiar. But obeying the spirit of the 
truth you recognized that all who trust in the precious 
blood and are consecrated to the dear Redeemer and 
seeking to follow his leadings are "brethren," regardless 
of race or color or education or poverty or homeliness. 
You reached the point where your heart is so 
free from envy and pride and selfishness, and so full 
of the spirit of the Master, that you can honestly say, 
I love all the "brethren" with a love that is sincere 
and not at all feigned. 

Now having gotten thus far along in the good 
way, the Lord through the Apostle tells us what next 
—that we may preserve our hearts pure,— "See that 
ye love one another with a pure heart fervently [intensely]." 
Ah, yes, the pure heart must not be forgotten, 
else it might be but a step from pure love into 
a snare of the Adversary, carnal love. But the pure 



love is not to be cold and indifferent: it is to be so 
warm and so strong that we would be willing to "lay 
down our lives for the brethren."— 1 John 3:16. 

With such a love as this burning as incense to 
God upon the altar of our hearts there will be no room 
there for any selfish, envious thoughts or words or 
deeds. Oh how blessed would all the gatherings of 
the "brethren" be, if such a spirit pervaded all of 
them! Can we doubt that, if it held sway in one-half 
or one-third or even one-fourth, it would speedily exercise 
a gracious influence upon all— for righteousness 
and fidelity and love and peace, and against envy, 
strife, malice, slanders and backbitings? 

Let all the "brethren" more and more take these 
medicines which tend to sanctify and prepare us for 
the Master's service, here and hereafter. 



R2518 : page 217 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



HOW CAN WE "GIVE TO EVERY MAN THAT ASKETH"? 



QUESTION.— What is the meaning of our Lord's 
words in Luke 6:30, "Give to every man 
that asketh"? 

Answer.— Our Lord's discourse, of which this is 
a part, is given more fully, more completely, in Matt. 5:40-44. 
From Matthew's account it would appear 
that our Lord meant that when we are brought under 
compulsion, legally, we are to submit gracefully, and 
not to harbor resentment or grudgings. For instance, 
he says, "If any man sue thee at the law, and take away 
thy coat [by legal process], do not refuse him the 
cloak also." It does not follow that we are to allow 
him to take coat and cloak, etc., without the process 
of law-suit and compulsion. But whether we think the 
legal decision a just or an unjust one, we, as the Lord's 
disciples, are to be so law-abiding that we will offer 
not the slightest resistance to the enforcement of the 
legal decision, tho it take from us everything. 

We should interpret Matt. 5:42, and Luke 6:30 
in harmony with the foregoing, and assume that the 
asking means a demand, a compulsion. As for instance, 
if a highway robber were to "ask" or demand your 
money (as was much more customary in olden times 
than now, under present police regulations), surrender 
it without a fight. That this is the proper view is 
proven by the preceding statement, "If any man sue 
thee at the law, and take away thy coat," etc. If the 



coat were to be given freely for the asking, the injunction 
respecting the law-suit to obtain it would be 
meaningless. 

The succeeding statement is in harmony also, 
"From him that would borrow of thee turn not thou 
away." Here the attitude of the borrower stands out 
in contrast with the attitude of the highway robber, 
who demands absolute possession. The Lord's followers 
are to be generously inclined toward all men, 
anxious to "do good and lend," and to use hospitality 
without selfishly hoping for return favors. If so situated 
that an enemy could demand of us our goods, 
we are to submit; but if so situated that we can resist 
legally, we are to resist any unjust demands, and compel 
a suit at law. If the suit at law shall go against 
us, we are to submit gracefully and heartily. The 
teachings of this verse seem to be that the Lord's people 
are to seek to be generous, peaceable and law-abiding 
under all circumstances and conditions. 

WAS THE GOSPEL PREACHED IN ALL THE WORLD 
IN PAUL'S DAY? 

Question.— Please harmonize Matt. 24:14 and 
Col. 1:23, with your teachings. 

Answer.— The statement of Matt. 24:14 does 
not imply that the whole world will receive the gospel 
and be converted by it, before the end of the Gospel 
age. Quite to the contrary, it expressly states that 
the preaching is to be for "a witness to the nations." 
From the form of your question, it would appear that 
you consider Col. 1:6 to mean that the gospel had 
already been preached to all the world in the Apostle 
Paul's day. If this be your thought, it is evidently 
quite incorrect, because, if the gospel had already 
been preached to every nation at that time, the end of 
the Gospel age should have come at that time, as our 
Lord declared, and the Millennial Kingdom should 
have been set up and Satan been bound eighteen centuries 
ago. Besides, as we look over all the world to-day, 

R2518 : page 218 

we know that neither now nor at any time in the 
past has the gospel converted all the world: the most 
we can say to-day is that now, finally, the gospel has 
been preached as a witness to every nation— the Bible, 
which is the gospel message, has been translated into 
all the national tongues of the world, and thus every 
nation (through some representatives) has been made 
acquainted with the letter of God's message, at least; 
and this is in full agreement with our position that we 
are now in the "harvest" time or end of this gospel 
age, and in the dawning of the Millennium. 

In respect to Col. 1:23, we will suppose that you 
refer to the clause which says, "The gospel which ye 



have heard, and which was preached to every creature 
which is under heaven." To assume, as you evidently 
do, that this implies that the gospel was already 
preached to every creature under heaven in the Apostle's 
day, and hence that there would be no need of a 
presentation of Christ to any in the future, because all 
have had a full and fair opportunity of knowing of the 
grace of God in the present life, is a most unreasonable 
interpretation of the Apostle's words. We submit 
to you that his meaning is as follows:— 

God's grace for over two thousand years was restricted 
to Abraham and his seed,— the one nation of 
Israel; and was not sent to any other nation under 
heaven. (Amos 3:2.) And even when the gospel 
"began to be preached by our Lord," it was restricted 
to the same "lost sheep of the house of Israel" 
(Matt. 15:24): it was not until Israel had stumbled 
through unbelief, and been rejected of God (Matt. 23:37,38), 
and after our Lord Jesus had "tasted death 
for every man," "for the sins of the whole world," and 
had risen from the dead, "Lord of all," that he authorized 
the preaching of the gospel to others than the 
Jews— to the Gentiles. His message was, "Go ye and 
teach all nations," etc. In harmony with this the 
Apostle tells us in Col. 1:23 that the gospel which 
we have heard is open to every human creature under 
heaven— there is no longer any restriction of it to the 
Jews. The difficulty in the translation is in the word 

R2519 : page 218 

to: the proper thought would be better conveyed by 
the word for. The Greek word here is en, and altho 
its strict meaning is in, yet it is frequently used in the 
sense of for, being so translated six times in the New 
Testament. Instances: "If ye be reproached for the 
name of Christ." (1 Pet. 4:14.) "Well reported of 
for good works." (1 Tim. 5:10.) "Think they shall 
be heard for their much speaking" (Matt. 6:7), etc. 

"I, IF I BE LIFTED UP, WILL DRAW ALL MEN." 



Question.— What is meant by "lifted up" in our 
Lord's expression, "I, if I be lifted up, will draw all 
men unto me"? 

Answer.— The primary thought undoubtedly is 
our Lord's crucifixion— his lifting up on the cross, as 
the great sin-offering on behalf of "the sins of the 
whole world." It is as a result or consequence of this 
sacrifice that all the blessings which God has purposed 
and promised shall eventually come to our race. Until 
the atonement for our sin had been made, nothing 
permanent could be done for man's release; for the 
sentence upon him was a death sentence. Our Lord's 



lifting up was as the antitype of the brazen serpent 
which Moses lifted up in the wilderness, looking to 
which the Israelites, bitten by the fiery serpents, were 
healed,— in type of how the world of mankind, bitten 
by sin, poisoned and dying, may have life through the 
exercise of faith in the Redeemer, based upon his great 
sacrifice— his lifting up as our redemption price. 

A secondary thought connected with this passage 
would be that our Lord's obedience in laying down 
his life as our sin-offering led directly to his own exaltation 
to power and great glory, as the Apostle has 
stated it, "Wherefore God hath highly exalted him, 
and given him a name that is above every name, that 
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, ...and 
that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is 
Lord, to the glory of God the Father."— Phil. 2:10,11. 

It is by reason of our Lord's lifting up, in both of 
these senses, that the blessing is to come to the world. 
His lifting up as the sin-offering was our purchase-price; 
his lifting up in exaltation as our great Prophet, 
Priest and King, is equally necessary to the drawing 
of the world of mankind, and the resultant blessing 
upon all who yield to the drawing influence. 

While considering this passage, it is well to have 
a proper thought in mind respecting the drawing. 
That our Lord is not drawing all men to himself at the 
present time is evident to every one: moreover, the 
Scriptures assure us that he is not drawing men at the 
present time: on the contrary, his own words are that 
during the present age the Father does all the drawing: 
"No man cometh unto me, except the Father 
which sent me draw him." The drawing by the Son 
will not begin until the drawing by the Father has accomplished 
its intended purpose. That purpose, as 
Scripturally expressed, is "to take out of them a people 
for his name"— to gather out of the world an elect 
Church as a bride for his Son, to bear the name of 
Christ, to be his Bride and joint-heir, "members in 
particular of his body." 

When the election of this Gospel age shall have 
accomplished this purpose, and the Church shall have 
been glorified, Bride and Bridegroom made one, then 
will begin the time in which the Son will "draw all 
men," the world of mankind, as the Father has been 
drawing the Church during this age. In this work of 

R2519 : page 219 

drawing all men, the Church will be associated with 
the Lord as "members of his body," of which he is 
"the head over all, God blessed forever." 

It has required this entire Gospel age to lift up, 
first the Head, and afterward the members of his body, 
joint-sacrificers with him. When all the sufferings of 
Christ are ended, and the last member of the body 
has finished his course in death, then, through the 



power of the first resurrection (which began with our 
Lord, and will finish with the change of the last member 
of his body) the entire Church will be lifted up in 
the secondary sense, of exaltation, and then will begin 
the work of drawing the world— pointing all to the 
great sin-offering finished at Calvary. 

That our Lord meant by this expression, "lifted 
up," more than his own crucifixion is evident from 
his words, "When ye have lifted up the Son of Man, 
then shall ye know that I am he." The Jews do not 
yet know Christ as the Messiah: and this is an additional 
proof that his words include the lifting up, the 
crucifying, of all the members of his body— the Church. 

The drawing does not mean, as some have erroneously 
supposed, a compulsory forcing of mankind. 
Some Universalists have used this passage as tho it 
supported their contention; but rightly understood it 
is quite to the contrary. It intimates that the Lord 
will exert a drawing and helpful influence upon all 
men, but nevertheless leave their own wills free to act; 
for he seeketh such to worship him as worship him in 
spirit and in truth. In proof that the word, "drawing," 
as used in the Scriptural sense, does not signify 
compulsion, note well the fact that the Father's drawing 
during this Gospel age has not been compulsory: 
it has consisted of enlightenment and help and opportunities 
which may be either accepted or resisted by 
all who experience the drawing. Thus we are distinctly 
told concerning this calling and drawing that "Many 
are called, but few chosen;" because few make their 
calling and election sure by obedience to the terms of 
the call. So, too, it will be during the Millennial age; 
the light, the opportunities, the general influence of 
that time, will be so favorable, that "all shall come to 
a knowledge of the truth" (1 Tim. 2:4; Isa. 1 1:9) and 
to opportunities of harmony with God. And it shall 
come to pass that the soul who will not hear (obey) 
that Prophet, Priest and King, then in power, shall 
be cut off from amongst his people— in the Second 
Death. -Acts 3:23. 



R2520 : page 219 

ENCOURAGING THE TEMPLE BUILDERS. 

SEPT. 10.-HAG. 2:1-9. 

"Be strong, all ye people of the land, saith 
the Lord, and work, for I am with you." 

HAGGAI'S prophecy dates from a period fifteen 
years after the return of Israel from Babylonian 
captivity. In our last lesson we saw the corner-stone 
of the Temple laid with much rejoicing and 



hope, but it would appear that the builders soon became 
discouraged, and practically gave up the work. 
We are to remember that the work of reconstructing 
their homes, gardens, etc., would be considerable, and 
would keep them very busy for years. Besides, a new 
ruler of the Medo-Persian empire had succeeded Cyrus, 
viz., Cambyses, and he with his hordes of soldiery 
had passed through Palestine en route for Egypt, 
which he conquered, and doubtless both going and returning 
the large number of poorly disciplined soldiers 
did considerable looting, and thus discouraged 
the hopes of those who so confidently looked for a 
return of national prosperity. 

But apparently a considerable portion of the difficulty 
lay in a lukewarmness toward religion. The 
people, it would seem, had provided themselves with 
comfortable houses, gardens, etc., while the Temple, 
the Lord's house, lay desolate. This is implied in the 
Prophet's words. (Haggai 1:4-6.) Haggai not only 
came as a reprover of the people's neglect, but also as 
an encourager to a reformation in this matter. He 
pointed out to them that their crops were small, and 
prosperity was lacking, because they had neglected to 
honor the Lord with their substance. We remember 
that this was the Lord's covenant with Israel as a nation 
—that they should have temporal prosperities as 
a reward for faithfulness to the Lord, and temporal 
adversities as a punishment for neglect of their religious 
obligations. Hence the Prophet's words would 
be recognized by the people as in full accord with the 
Lord's predictions through Moses. (Deut. 28:1-42.) 
And the appeal seems to have had the desired effect. 
The people began to realize that in neglecting the 
Lord's cause, and merely caring for their own temporalities, 
they had not only dishonored God, but 
had also justly hindered their own temporal prosperity. 
In consequence, a revival of religious interest 
followed, and the Temple reconstruction began again. 

Many have failed to note the distinct difference 
between God's covenant with fleshly Israel and his 
covenant with Spiritual Israel, and therefore are inclined 
to apply the above reasoning to Christian people 
of the present time, and to say that if anyone is 
not prosperous financially and socially it is an indication 
of his lack of religion and of divine disfavor. But 
the very reverse of this is frequently true now. If we 
see an individual, or a company of individuals, very 
prosperous in temporal things, experience would lead 

R2520 : page 220 

us to question whether or not the prosperous ones 
were living as near to God as when they were less 
prosperous, and whether or not their prosperity might 
imply extra danger from "the cares of this life and 
the deceitfulness of riches."— Mark 4:19. 



True, riches do not in every case indicate worldliness. 
Apparently the Lord occasionally finds some 
earnest and faithful children to whom he can entrust 
a stewardship of riches for the furtherance of his 
cause, without injury; but observation shows that 
such instances are rare, and that as a rule not many 
great, not many rich, not many wise, not many learned, 
hath God chosen, but the poor of this world, rich 
in faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom.— 1 Cor. 1:27. 

If it be inquired, then, Wherein is the parallelism 
which we should expect to find between God's dealings 
with fleshly Israel under the Law Covenant, and 
his dealings with Spiritual Israel under the New Covenant? 
we answer, The parallelism is there, but on a 
higher plane. The Spiritual Israelite who is faithful 
to God will grow rich spiritually in deed and in truth, 
but if unfaithful to God he will grow poor spiritually 
in deed and in truth. And those who are poor in temporal 
things may be rich in spiritual things, but in 
any case will find that "godliness with contentment is 
great gain"— true riches. 

The date of Haggai's prophecy is given as the 
second year of the reign of Darius (1:1), but this 
Darius was not the one who succeeded Belshazzar, 
but Hystaspes, who succeeded Cambyses. 

Haggai's message, as presented in the first chapter, 
had evidently aroused an interest in religion, as 
intended; and so we find that the second chapter, of 
which our lesson is a part, is in the nature of an exhortation 
and encouragement to "the people of the 
land." And by the way, this expression, which fifteen 
years before was considered applicable to the foreigners 
residing in Palestine, is now applied to the 
returned exiles; they were henceforth the people of the 
land,— God's people in the Land of Promise. The 
encouragement, extended to the governor, the chief 
priest, and the people in general, was an exhortation 
to be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might; 
and the basis of the encouragement was in the declaration, 
"I am with you, saith the Lord of hosts." 

It is a mistake to suppose that God's people always 
need a berating. It is well to remember the 
weaknesses and discouragements with which all contend, 
and to administer the oil and wine of consolation 
and encouragement. We are to remember that 
when the Lord's people are weak in confidence in 
themselves is the most hopeful time to cultivate in 
themselves and each other a spirit of reliance upon the 
Lord and confidence in him. Fain would we say to 
the Lord's spiritual children these words of the Prophet, 
"Be strong, saith the Lord, and work, for I am 
with you." 

It is when the Lord's people begin to feel that the 
Lord is afar off, and that they are depending on themselves 
or on each other, and when they realize their 
weaknesses, that discouragement is apt to creep in— 



especially upon those who, having returned from mystic 
Babylon, are seeking to build again the spiritual 
Temple, the Church, the Temple of the living God. 
There are many temptations to these to attend to 
earthly affairs, to build their own reputations and 
earthly prosperity, and to neglect the great work for 
which ostensibly they came out of Babylon. Let all 
such take courage from the Word of the Lord, through 
Haggai, "I am with you; be strong and work." To 
those who have no interest in the work the message 
respecting the Lord's presence will be undesirable; 
but it encourages and strengthens the truly devoted 
who are merely discouraged by the fightings without 
and within. 

The Lord, through the Prophet, called the attention 
of the Israelites to the fact that he had made a 
covenant with them after they had come out of Egypt, 
assuring them of his willingness to perform it; and 
that his spirit, his power, his energy, was in their 
midst to guide, to overrule and to bless, and on this 
account they should not fear nor be discouraged. And 
if that Law Covenant, given at the hands of Moses, 
and ratified with the blood of bulls and of goats, was 
a cause of encouragement to fleshly Israel, much more 
should Spiritual Israel remember the New Covenant, 
and its new Mediator, who ever liveth to make intercession 
for us, and to regard our welfare at the throne 
of the heavenly grace; and the precious blood by 
which this New Covenant was ratified. Spiritual Israel 
may well say, I will not fear; for if God so loved 
us while we were yet sinners, much more now that we 
are accepted in the beloved are we the special objects 
of divine care and grace. 

The message of vss. 6-9 was doubtless considerable 
of a riddle to the Israelites who heard it. It seemed 
an extravagant statement; indeed, it was so, if applied 
to the house which they were seeking to reconstruct. 
But the holy spirit, through the Apostle, shows us 
that this prophecy did not relate wholly nor even specially 
to the literal Temple at Jerusalem, but to the 
symbolic Temple, the Temple of God, "which temple 
are ye"— the Church of the living God, whose names 
are written in heaven. This Gospel Church is the 
"latter house" or Temple, Spiritual Israel, as the 
former house was natural Israel, represented in the 
natural Jerusalem and its Temple. Ours is the New 
Jerusalem and our Temple is being built by the new 

R2520 : page 221 

Master-builder himself, as it is written, "Ye are his 
workmanship." (Eph. 2:10.) The Apostle shows 
us that Christ Jesus himself is the great Corner-Stone 
of this house of sons, and that all of the faithful followers 
of Christ are being shaped, fitted, polished, prepared, 
as "living stones," for places in this an ti typical Temple, 



whose builder and maker is God.— 1 Pet. 2:7; 
Heb. 11:10. 

It is only when we get a glimpse through the 
New Testament of the glory, honor and immortality 
which shall attach to the great spiritual Temple now 
under construction, and realize by faith the "glory 
that shall be revealed in us," in God's due time, that 
we can realize even slightly the significance of the 
words of the Prophet, "The glory of this latter house 
shall be greater than of the former, saith the Lord of 
hosts: and in this place will I give peace." 

The peace and joy and blessing which the world 
needs and craves cannot come, will not come, until 
this latter house of the Lord's building shall be completed 
and filled with his glory— until the elect Church, 
whose Head is Christ Jesus, shall be given the Kingdom, 
the dominion of earth— then a King shall reign 
in righteousness and princes shall execute judgment, 
the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth, 
and none shall need to say to his neighbor, Know 
thou the Lord, and great shall be the peace of that 
Millennial day, when the Prince of Peace shall reign. 
-Luke 12:32; Rev. 5:10; Isa. 11:9; 32:1; 54:13. 

R2521 : page 221 

This prophecy respecting the shaking of the heavens 
and the earth is quoted in Heb. 12:26, and we 
there have an inspired comment upon it, showing that 
it will be fulfilled in the end of this Gospel age, and 
that it is a symbolic shaking and signifies the removal 
of everything that is unstable, transitory, imperfect, 
—in the great time of trouble with which this age will 
end and the Millennial age be ushered in. The Apostle 
assures us that the expression, "Yet once more," signifies 
a finality; that there will never more be requirement 
for shaking, for revolution, for changes, because 
with this great shaking, this great change, will be 
ushered in that perfection of the new order of things 
which cannot be shaken— the Kingdom of God 
conditions. 

The shaking of all nations is here, as everywhere, 
associated with the glory of the Temple: in other 
words, the Scriptures show that the time of great 
trouble upon the world, in which all the Kingdoms of 
this world and its various institutions, religious, political, 
social, shall fall, will be the very time when 
God's Kingdom, God's Church, shall be "set up" in 
power and great glory; to be his agency in blessing 
the world. And not only here but elsewhere we are 
assured that when this shall take place the Desire of 
all nations shall come. 

All peoples have been looking with more or less 
earnestness and sincerity for a just and good government, 
however blindly they may have sought it, because 
the prince of this world has blinded the minds 



of them that believe not through the weakness of their 
judgment and the selfishness of their hearts. But 
when the vail shall be taken away, and the blind shall 
see out of their obscurity, and God's Kingdom shall 
have come and established peace and good will amongst 
men, and when the knowledge of the Lord shall have 
been caused to fill the earth, and when the evil-doers 
shall have been cut off from life, in the Second Death, 
verily then the Desire of all nations will have come, 
and the desire of the Creator will have come too,— for 
God's will shall yet be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven, as prophesied in our Lord's prayer.— 
Matt. 6:10. 

Silver and gold, in the restoration of the Temple, 
seem to have been lacking; hence the Lord's declaration 
that all the gold and all the silver are his. In the 
antitypical Temple construction, it at times appears as 
tho the silver of divine truth were lacking, and the 
gold of the divine character insufficient, but all who 
have confidence in the Lord may rely upon his assurance 
that he has all things needful for the accomplishment 
of his purposes— "the Lord knoweth them 
that are his," therefore, in the language of the text, 
let us all be strong, and work, for God is with us; we 
are merely co-workers together with him. He will 
surely accomplish the great work he has promised; 
the spiritual Temple shall be built: but our individual 
blessing in connection with it will be in proportion as 
we have been strong in the Lord and full of faith and 
full of zeal, co-workers together with him. "I am 
with you,. ..work!" 



R2521 : page 221 

"MY GRACE IS SUFFICIENT FOR THEE." 

SEPT. 17.-ZECH. 4:1-14. 

"Not by might nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the Lord of hosts. 

ZECHARIAH the Prophet was a priest as well, 
and was a young man at the time of his return 
under the governor, Zerubbabel, from the Babylonian 
captivity. As a prophet he was the successor 
of Haggai, who was now old, and his career as such 
began in the second year of Darius Hystaspes, and 
continued about two years. It was part of his mission 
to encourage Zerubbabel and all who labored in the 
construction of the Temple, and who were beset by 
innumerable oppositions, difficulties, etc.— Neh. 12:4-7; 
Zech. 1:1; Ezra 5:1; 6:14; 7:1. 
There are two general views respecting this and 

R2521 : page 222 



all prophecies; one of these, the one favored by the 
"higher critics," is that the prophets of the Old Testament 
Scriptures were men of high moral attainment 
and faith in God's promises, who realized in advance 
of others and more keenly the true situation of things, 
and of their own volition, prompted by their own 
faith and zeal, exhorted the people, in parables that 
would be helpful, instructive, encouraging, etc. The 
other view is that God had the faith in his own promises 
and arrangements, and that he miraculously operated 
upon certain chosen persons, so that "holy men 
of old spake as they were moved by the holy spirit" 
—things which were not their own thoughts, but 
which encouraged themselves and inspired their own 
faith and zeal, as well as the faith and zeal of all about 
them. This view of the prophets and their prophecies 
gives the glory to God, and makes of the words of the 
prophets messages from God, and hence authoritative 
and reliable, while the fervent utterances of the very 
best men could not be considered reliable; but, as we 
all know, are frequently faulty, because of the fallibility 
of their authors. The Apostle Peter asserts 
this last view of the matter, and contradicts the former 
one.-l Pet. 1:10-12. 

Any other view than the latter would make the 
prophecies valueless as prophecies to the Church of 
to-day. It is not until we realize that the prophecies, 
altho having some force and application to the times 
in which they were written, have a special force and 
application to us, as the antitypical Israel, and to the 
building of the antitypical Temple, that we get the 
true force, value and beauty of these prophecies— a 
force and meaning that is entirely lost to those who 
take the higher criticism view, and reduce the prophets 
of olden times to the level of street-corner preachers, 
who expressed truth in crude forms and figures, 
blended with considerable of untruth and human 
misjudgment. 

Altogether the Lord gave the Prophet Zechariah 
seven different visions; and the fifth of the series is 
the subject of this lesson. It showed a large golden 
candlestick, or, as we would say, lampstand, with a 
large central bowl, and seven branches therefrom, 
each of which terminated in a lamp. The prophet, 
no doubt, was somewhat familiar with such a lamp, 
since it in many particulars corresponded to the one 
made by divine direction, and kept in the holy apartment 
of the Tabernacle, and later of the Temple. The 
Prophet knew that this lamp represented in some manner 
divine favor, enlightenment and blessing as connected 
with the promises made to Israel. But the 
lampstand of the vision had a peculiarity all its own, 
for the Prophet beheld also two olive trees connected 
with it by golden pipes. (Vs. 12.) Thus the Lord indicated 
that the supply of oil for Israel's candlestick 



and the supply of Israel's light was an inexhaustible 
one. 

No doubt the Prophet himself, and those in that 
day who heard his prophecy, drew from this vision a 
considerable amount of blessing and encouragement. 
To them it would speak of the Lord's continued favor 
with them, notwithstanding the persecutions and difficulties 
on every hand. Quite probably they interpreted 
these two olive trees to represent in some manner 
the kingly and the priestly offices in Israel, which 
offices were now represented by Zerubbabel, the governor, 
and Joshua, the high priest, God's special representatives 
in the work of restoring Israel. No doubt 
the Lord wished those to whom Zechariah prophesied 
to get just such encouragement, and arranged that 
these two leaders of the people should be types of the 
Royal Priest— Christ Jesus. 

Nevertheless, we believe that there is a much 
higher significance to the vision than this, for we find, 
not only the golden candlestick, but also the two olive 
trees, mentioned six hundred years later, in our Lord's 
revelation given to the Apostle John on the Isle of 
Patmos: and this is conclusive proof that the vision 
was more than merely a parable by Zechariah, and 
farther reaching than merely the encouragement of 
the builders of the typical Temple. We will not here 
enter into the subject in detail, but merely call attention 
to the fact that the seven lamps or candlesticks 
shown in united form to the Prophet are shown 
as separate and distinct in the Book of Revelation, 
where each of the seven Churches, or the seven epochs 
of the history of the Church, is represented by a separate 
candlestick, or lamp.— Rev. 1:12,20; 2:5; 11:4. 

The message sent to Zerubbabel, the governor, no 
doubt carried with it the intended blessing and encouragement 
to that officer, and was in full accord 
with the candlestick vision. He was to learn, and all 
the people with him, that the success of their work 
was not by the might, influence and favor of the Persian 
monarch to whom they were subject, nor by the 
power and numbers and ability of themselves, as laborers 
and defenders of their cause against their nearby 
neighbors, the Samaritans. They were to learn that 
the success of their efforts should be attributed to God, 
whose holy spirit, power, influence, would guide and 
control the affairs of that nation, and accomplish in 
his own time and way the gracious things which he 
had promised them. 

"Who art thou, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel 
thou shalt become a plain." 

This probably referred to the mountain of difficulty 
which stood in the way of the Lord's work, and 
which had for some time prevented its completion, and 

R2522 : page 223 



at the present moment was a serious menace. The 
Lord's assurance, through the Prophet, was that the 
Temple should be completed, shall be finished; and not 
only so, but that Zerubbabel, who had laid the foundation 
stone, should also have the honor and privilege 
of completing it with the head-stone or cap-stone, and 
that when completed there would be great rejoicing 
and appreciation of the work, acclamations of "Grace, 
grace, unto it!" In harmony with this, Israel was 
exhorted, "Despise not the day of small things"— 
small beginnings, feeble efforts, discouraging conditions, 
etc.,— but to consider Zerubbabel the master-builder, 
the plummet-user, and to recognize the Lord's 
wisdom and power with him. 

But the language used in this connection is entirely 
too strong to be applied solely to the insignificant 
little temple built by Zerubbabel and his associates. 
As we have seen that the former part of this vision 
applied to fleshly Israel only typically, so we see that 
this part also applies to Israel, and to Zerubbabel and 
to Joshua only typically. 

Looking for the antitype, we find it in Spiritual 
Israel, the spiritual Temple, which God is building. 
In Zerubbabel and Joshua we find the kingly and 
priestly offices of our Lord Jesus represented in two 
parts— the word Joshua in the Hebrew signifies Savior, 
and in the Greek is Jesus, and the name Zerubbabel, 
as we have already seen, signifies Born in Babylon. 
The particular time typified would be the present time, 
when God's people are returning from Babylon, and 
when the work of Temple-reconstruction is in progress. 

Our Lord Jesus himself laid the foundation of the 
spiritual Temple, and he himself will complete it as its 
top-stone, and it shall be acclaimed glorious, not only 
by men, but by angels, in God's due time. The work 
is in his hand, and altho from outward appearances at 
the present time there may seem to be discouragements, 
and little progress may seem to have been 
made, yet his servants should be of good courage and 
should remember that their victory is to come, not 
through human might, popularity and influence, nor 
by their own power, but by the Lord's spirit. The 
possession of his faith and his spirit will give us the 
victory over the world, the flesh and the Adversary, 
and make us more than conquerors through him who 
loved us and bought us with his own precious blood. 
Our struggles, our efforts, our building, are all on a 
discouragingly small and insignificant scale, but we 
see not and build not the real Temple, the living 
stones. We see each other according to the flesh, to 
some extent, despite our efforts to know no man 
after the flesh, and to recognize each other only as 
new creatures in Christ. We look more or less, however 
unintentionally, at the things that are seen, 
which are temporal and imperfect. We think more or 
less of the work of construction from the standpoint 



of numbers, influence, outward polish, etc. Instead, 
we should be looking unto Jesus, the author of our 
faith, who laid the foundation-stone, and who is to be 
the finisher of it, and is the cap, the climax, of his 
great and wonderful work, the new creation in glory. 
-Heb. 12:2. 

The "great mountain" of the present is the great 
kingdom of the Evil One, which has the appearance 
of being immovable, but which now speedily, in the 
great time of trouble and "shaking," shall pass away, 
leaving a plain, a highway of holiness on which whosoever 
wills of the world of mankind may return by 
restitution to full harmony with God under the great 
Prophet, Priest and King. 

The antitypical Temple will be complete when 
the power of the most high, represented by the oil of 
the candlestick, the holy spirit, shall rear up the living 
Temple in resurrection power (from the dead) in 
the likeness of our Lord, in glory, honor and immortality. 
Then the glory of the Lord will fill the spiritual 
Temple! Then will be the shoutings, "Grace, 
grace, unto it!" Then will begin the great work of 
blessing all the families of the earth, and the blessing 
shall flow from this spiritual Temple, a river of water 
of life, clear as crystal,— as seen in our lesson of 
August 20. 

From this standpoint only, as applicable to the 
antitypical Zerubbabel, can we understand the reference 
to the "seven eyes" of the Lord which run to and 
fro through the whole earth. We can see that the 
eyes of the Lord (his perfect and much diversified 
wisdom) are necessary to be exercised throughout the 
whole world in connection with the work of preparing 
the living stones and rearing up the antitypical Temple 
in the hands of the antitypical Zerubbabel, but we 
could not see how divine wisdom would be necessary 
in all parts of the earth to take supervision of the 
building of the little typical temple by the typical 
Zerubbabel. 

No one can rightly appreciate the hopes and ambitions 
aroused in the minds of the Jewish nation by 
the Lord through the holy prophets, except as he realizes 
the fact that Spiritual Israel has taken the place 
in large measure of natural Israel, whose branches 
were broken off, that we who were of the Gentiles 
might be grafted in and become heirs of the chiefest, 
the heavenly, the spiritual features of those promises. 
Nevertheless, we are to remember that there are also 
earthly features of those promises, which the Apostle 
assures us are still sure, and reserved for the natural 
seed of Abraham, and through the latter to extend to 
all the families of the earth, that whosoever will may 
become of the earthly seed of Abraham: for Abraham's 
seed is to be of two parts— "as the stars of heaven" 
and "as the sand of the seashore."— Rom. 11:26-33; 
Gen. 22:17. 



SEPT. 24TH.--REVIEW. 



page 223 

Golden Text— "The angel of the Lord encampeth 
round about them that fear him, and delivereth 
them."-Psa. 34:7. 



R2522 : page 224 

AN INTERESTING LETTER. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I thought I would 
drop you a few lines as to my experience in my recently 
begun work as a colporteur. In company with Brothers 
Richardson and Barbour I came to Washington, Pa., 
a nice town of about 20,000 population. For the most 
part its people are very intelligent and independent. 
I found DAWNS and tracts in many of the houses, and 
a strong feeling of suspicion as well as of opposition 
against both. For this the ministers of the place are 
evidently responsible; the most of them had never 
read what they blindly oppose. Thus they are guilty 
of expressing judgment in advance of knowledge! 

The WATCH TOWER readers have just distributed 
The Bible vs. the Evolution Theory. In a majority of 
the houses at which I called I found that excellent 
booklet, and upon inquiry learned that nearly all who 
had it had read it with benefit, and some were loud 
in their praise of such "a good and timely tract." On 
the strength of this tract many gave me their orders 
for DAWNS, saying that "the author of such a tract 
would certainly produce a readable and profitable 
book." One old "brother" said he "knew something 
heavier was coming." He gave me his order for the 
books that he might learn more of the truth. 

One of the ministers of the city was very industriously 
engaged in misrepresenting the DAWN, going 
about from house to house counseling his flock not to 
read the book, but to exercise the same caution concerning 
it as they would relative to a dose of poison. He 
told some of them that if they had any faith at all the 
book would eclipse it with the darkness of unbelief. 
That if they had the least hope, they would be deprived 
of it should they read the DAWN! This "shepherd" 
and I came near forming acquaintance; he was 
always one door ahead of me! The first house I saw 
him come out of I went into. The "lady of the house" 
recognized me as if by instinct. "Good morning," 



I said. "Good morning, Sir; you are the man that's 

around with that book, MILLENNIAL DAWN?" "Yes; 

and I will be only too glad to call your attention to 

the book for just a few moments." "Oh, no! our 

minister was just here and told me not to read the 

book, nor receive you into my house, nor bid you God-speed, 

for your book was full of infidelity, and neither 

you nor the book believed in God, heaven or hell." 

I replied, "Sister, I am confident the minister never 
read the book,— does not know what it contains, and 
am sure he is entirely wrong, for the book treats on 
all these subjects; and, besides, if you will read it, 
you will find as much hell taught as you could 
wish." "Oh, well, if that is the kind of a book it is 
you may bring it to me," said she. I thanked her, 
and in leaving the house was just in time to see the 
good minister emerging from another house. 

I made my way to this residence and was received 
with a way-below-zero air, and at once told that "We 
do not want the book, and would not give it house-room." 
The minister, she said, had told her not to 
read the book, and that was enough for her! I said, 
"Lady, do you do everything your minister tells you 
to do?" She said, "No, not everything." I said, "If 
he would tell you to put your head in the fire, would 
you do that?" "No," said she. Then with true 
womanly curiosity she inquired: "What's in the book, 
anyway? It must be a funny book, everybody has so 
much to say about it." This opened the way, and 
after rehearsing some of the leading points she said: 
"If it's a book like that you may bring it, for I have 
often wondered what was to become of the heathen, 
anyway!" I recorded her order, and in leaving was 
just in time to catch a glimpse of my adversary leaving 
another house. I was soon in the presence of the 
"lady of the house," who at once advised me that I 
was wasting time at her house with the book; that 
when she wanted to read Ingersoll she would procure 
his works! I said, "Now, lady, why don't you want 

R2523 : page 224 

my book? I am sure it contains heart-satisfying and 
mind-catching explanations of the very things you wish 
to know about, and concerning which you have inquired 
of your minister and others many times, only to 
be left in the dark. You have, I am sure, been all 
your life querying respecting how the death of your 
Redeemer and the love and justice of God can and will 
affect the heathen. How and what will be the general 
judgment? When and how God's Kingdom will 
come and his will be done on earth as it is in heaven? 
Why God has permitted evil so wide an influence? etc. 
You have never found satisfactory answers to these 
questions, but can have them now in the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. Besides, a lady of your intelligence should 



read for herself, as I am sure you do." "Well," said 
she, "bring me the first volume, and if it holds out, I 
will have the rest." I thanked her, adding, "I am 
confident you will have all the books. You do not 
look like a woman who will abide having her reading 
matter selected for her. The book may cut the corners 
of your creed, but"—. "I don't care anything about 
the creed, I never read the creed! I don't know it. 
Bring me all the books! How much are they?" she 
interrupted. 

It is strange how little mental and moral independence 
some people have! Yet, there are instances 
where some go to extremes with what they do possess. 
For instance, in this town of Washington is a beautiful 
college building filled with the young of both 
sexes. The learned "Doctor" who presides over the 
institution, told Brother Barbour, who was presenting 
the claims of DAWN, that when he was a young man 
the question of the second coming of Christ troubled 
him very much. But as he grew in years and wisdom 
(?) the question did not bother him any more, 
and said: "I have absolutely no interest in the question 
of the second coming of Christ, and do not wish 
anything to do with the question." "No, young 
man, I don't want your book." 

Altho I have been a minister of the gospel for 
nearly a quarter of a century and thought I knew 
something about matters and things, yet I realize that 
much of that service, tho rendered in all good conscience, 
seems to have been worse than wasted, for 
evidently my conceptions of the character and work of 
God were to a considerable extent decidedly wrong. 
Now with more correct and enlightened views of the 
lengths and breadths, and heights and depths of the 
justice, wisdom, love and power of our Heavenly 
Father, I am glad to avail myself of this new ministry 
which enables me to leave from sixteen to fifty printed 
sermons with the truth-hungry with whom I meet. 

Praying the blessing of our Heavenly Father upon 
you, dear brother, and that you may be spared to us 
and to his service unto the end, I am, 

Yours in his service, C. W. COOPER. 



page 209 



SEPTEMBER & OCTOBER ISSUES 
Will Be Millennial Dawn, Volume V. 



page 209 



SEPTEMBER & OCTOBER ISSUES 
Will Be Millennial Dawn, Volume V. 



page 224 