From Our Readers
Balance  After reading the article “God’s Gift of Balance” (March 22, 1996), I felt moved to thank you. I am currently studying audiology, and not one of my textbooks has information that is as complete and easy to understand as the Awake! article. The drawing of the ear was also excellent.
J. P. A., Brazil
Neckties  Thank you so much for the article “Who Invented the Necktie?” (May 8, 1996) As a minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I have worn a necktie in 90-degree [30°C]-plus heat while engaging in the door-to-door preaching work. I have often theorized that the necktie must have been invented by some cruel 13th-century inquisitor who in order to wring a confession from a heretic threatened him with either the rack, thumbscrews, being boiled in oil, or wearing a necktie on a summer afternoon.
W. B., United States
Some may feel that wearing a tie is torture in any weather. Commendably, though, in cultures where a necktie is considered proper attire, Jehovah’s Witnesses generally put up with the inconvenience of wearing a tie while engaging in the ministry and while attending Christian meetings.—ED.
Smokeless Tobacco  In our school health class, we were studying about drugs. I showed my teacher a copy of the April 22, 1996, issue of Awake! with the article “Young People Ask . . . Smokeless Tobacco—Is It Harmless?” He let me make 30 copies of the article so he could give them out and read the article with his classes. The kids in my class enjoyed it, and I even placed a few magazines with them.
M. C., United States
Sexual Harassment  Thanks for the series “When Sexual Harassment Will Be No More!” (May 22, 1996) In sharing the magazine with others, I found that many women were grateful for the suggestions on how to avoid harassment and what to do when harassed. Some weeks later I personally experienced molestation at work and reported it to the police. I was commended for the way I handled the situation.
Name withheld, Germany
I’m truly grateful for the articles. I’m now in my second year of secondary school, and I’ve experienced harassment, though I’ve never told anyone about it. These articles encouraged me to confide in my parents and my teachers. Now I am able to take a stand against harassers.
K. Y., Japan
I am a 21-year-old secretary and was recently sexually harassed by my employer. While I was trying to figure out how to approach him to express my feelings, I received this issue of Awake! I gave my employer a copy, which he read. He apologized and promised never to do what he did to me again.
D. N. I., Nigeria
I appreciate your bringing this important matter to light, but according to your photos, only men are doing the harassment. Clearly, you are presenting a biased view.
H. T., United States
Most researchers say that women greatly outnumber men as victims of sexual harassment. Even so, the articles acknowledged that men too can be harassed, citing specific examples.—ED.
Most articles on this subject emphasize only what females should do to protect themselves but neglect to teach males to respect females. After all, if there were no harassers, there would be no harassment. Your article discussed “Proper Conduct for Men.” For this, it is deserving of applause.
O. C., Taiwan

