Benevolent Sovereignty
THE Bible states an obvious truth when it says: “Man has dominated man to his injury.” (Eccl. 8:9) In contrast, Jehovah’s sovereignty through his Messiah is poetically described in this way: “He will descend like the rain upon the mown grass, like copious showers that wet the earth. In his days the righteous one will sprout, and the abundance of peace until the moon is no more. And he will have subjects from sea to sea and from the River to the ends of the earth.”​—Ps. 72:6-8.
Under that sovereignty men will not dominate or injure their fellowman. Neighbor love will be the guideline. It should be now. In these two examples God ordains it: in marriage and in the Christian congregation.
In a marriage the man is to be the head, but not in a domineering way. He is told to love his wife as he does himself. Even more than this, he is to love her as Christ loved his congregation​—and he died for it! Husbands must remember this.
In the congregation the divine arrangement is for elders to have oversight, but never to domineer. (Eph. 4:8, 11-16) Jesus said: “Do not you be called Rabbi, for one is your teacher, whereas all you are brothers. Moreover, do not call anyone your father on earth, for one is your Father, the heavenly One.” (Matt. 23:8, 9) Elders must remember this.
Yes, man should not dominate others to their injury. Under Jehovah’s sovereignty, when only God’s heavenly government rules all the earth, man will not be allowed to do so!
[Box/​Pictures on page 28]
TWO DIVINE INSTITUTIONS
MARRIAGE
FAMILY
‘God said to them: “Be fruitful and fill the earth.”’​—Gen. 1:28.
HUSBAND, FATHER
‘Husbands ought to be loving their wives as their own bodies. Have children in subjection. Train up a boy.’​—Eph. 5:28; 1 Tim. 3:4; Prov. 22:6.
WIFE, MOTHER
‘Love your husbands, love your children, be workers at home, subjecting yourselves to your own husbands.’​—Titus 2:4, 5.
CHILDREN
‘Sons are an inheritance from Jehovah. Children, be obedient to your parents.’​—Ps. 127:3; Eph. 6:1.
ELDERSHIP
EVANGELIZING
‘Preach the word, be at it urgently, do the work of an evangelizer.’​—2 Tim. 4:2, 5.
TEACHING
‘Pay constant attention to your teaching. Exhort, with art of teaching.’​—1 Tim. 4:16; 2 Tim. 4:2.
COUNSELING
‘Though a man takes some false step, try to restore such a man in a spirit of mildness.’​—Gal. 6:1.
SHEPHERDING
‘Shepherd the flock of God in your care, willingly; neither for love of dishonest gain, but eagerly.’​—1 Pet. 5:2.

