1997 “Faith in God’s Word” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
1 “A day in your courtyards is better than a thousand elsewhere.” (Ps. 84:10) When the psalmist worshiped at Jehovah’s temple, he could sense the presence of the almighty God. When the nation gathered for the annual festivals and true worshipers swelled Jerusalem, the Israelites would find sweet fellowship as they congregated in the courtyard of the temple. They were reminded of their national unity as the only people on earth on whom Jehovah bestowed his blessing and favor. Each year, we have the opportunity to share in similar feelings of unity and joy with thousands of our brothers and sisters. In our time annual district conventions are one of Jehovah’s ways of bringing his people together for instruction and fellowship.
2 Caring for the large numbers of Jehovah’s people who lived in and around Jerusalem during the festivals required organization. Maintaining order and peace likely required the giving of instructions regarding accommodations, meeting times, and other arrangements. Since these matters concerned their true worship, the Israelites would joyfully follow these instructions.​—Ps. 42:4; 122:1.
3 Hundreds of brothers have already spent tens of thousands of hours organizing convention departments, meeting hotel personnel and negotiating with them, working with building personnel at nearly 70 convention cities, preparing and mailing Recommended Lodging Lists, and so forth. These brothers work closely with the Society’s Convention Office to coordinate the many details associated with operating a convention. We may not personally see the tremendous amount of time, effort, and expense that goes into our annual district conventions, but all of us certainly appreciate the self-sacrificing spirit of each of these faithful brothers, do we not?
4 As preparations continue for our 1997 “Faith in God’s Word” District Convention, we have some points that require your kind attention and serious consideration. Your cooperation will show your personal appreciation for all the arrangements made in your behalf. Although some of these matters have been discussed before, it is important for each one of us to see clearly our responsibility before Jehovah in supporting our convention arrangements.
5 When to Make a Hotel Reservation: At the Service Meeting for the week of December 30, the Society directs that your district convention assignment letter be read to the congregation. Mailed separately by the local Rooming Department, the Recommended Lodging List for your convention will be posted on the congregation information board after the meeting that night. The elders have been keeping the district convention assignment and the Recommended Lodging List in strict confidence until this Service Meeting. No reservation calls to ANY hotels, by the elders or anyone else, are to be made until after the Service Meeting when the district convention assignment letter is read.
6 So that everyone will be able to obtain a room, the Society has instructed each Rooming Department to place all hotels available for the upcoming convention on the first Recommended Lodging List. Only if those hotels are filled will new hotels be added to subsequent lists. Sometimes, brothers have waited until the second or third Recommended Lodging List to make their hotel reservation. Procrastination may be the reason for this, or perhaps they anticipated that a preferred hotel would show up on a later list. Making reservations at the last minute causes two problems for the Rooming Department. First, it is not possible for the Rooming Department to determine when there is a need for additional rooms. Second, since all Watchtower convention reservations must be received before a cutoff date, there may be no rooms available for those who wait too long to make their reservation. Therefore, we are asking that you make your reservation during January from the first Recommended Lodging List.
7 If the hotel you have selected is full, call another until you have a reservation. If you have called all the hotels on the list and no rooms are available, inform your congregation secretary and he will contact the Rooming Department at the telephone number shown at the top of each Recommended Lodging List. The brothers in the Rooming Department will work with the hotels to secure additional rooms. A new list will then be mailed to your congregation. Please wait for the new list to make your hotel reservation. When you make a reservation, always ask for a confirmation number from the hotel. Provide this confirmation number to the desk clerk when you check in at the hotel.
8 Unless the Recommended Lodging List specifically states otherwise, you should plan for a maximum of four adults in a room. Some hotels have informed the Rooming Departments that five, six, and seven adults have been sleeping in the same room. Because of fire and safety regulations, this not only is dangerous but is against the law in most cities. It also places an unfair demand on the hotel and staff for extra towels, linens, and so forth. Therefore, when planning your rooming needs, do not exceed the maximum number of people allowed in the hotel room.
9 Sending Deposits to Hotels: The Society’s agreement with each hotel states that our delegates will secure their reservation with a deposit. It further says: “Reservation is guaranteed upon receipt of deposit.” So the only way to guarantee a room reservation is if your deposit is received by the hotel. Last year, some brothers arrived at their hotels only to find that their reservation had been canceled weeks before the convention. Without a deposit, the hotel has the right to give your room to someone else, and a one-night deposit is a REQUIREMENT of our rooming arrangement. For each room reserved, a one-night deposit must be made within ten days of making your reservation.
10 We do not recommend sending cash in the mail. It can be stolen, and there is no proof your money was received. If you send a check or a money order, write your confirmation number on the front of it, and contact the hotel about two weeks later to confirm that your deposit was received. If you provide a credit card number for your deposit, you should tell the reservation clerk that you want the deposit to be charged to your credit card immediately.
11 Changing Hotel Reservations or Making Reservations at More Than One Hotel: Before the convention, the Rooming Department calls each hotel on the list to find out how many rooms have been reserved by our delegates. Doing this every two or three weeks enables the Rooming Department to determine if sufficient hotel rooms have been arranged for the convention. In some cities last year, as the convention approached, hotels that started out with many reservations received numerous cancellations, or delegates with reservations did not show up at all. Where did these brothers and sisters go?
12 It is apparent that new reservations were made with hotels closer to the convention site and previous reservations were dropped. Because of this, some hotels are asking for at least a two-night guaranteed reservation; otherwise they will refuse to book rooms for Watchtower conventions. Since this creates problems for the hotels and the Rooming Department, we are asking that once you make a reservation, do not switch your reservation to another hotel, even if one that is closer or more desirable appears on a subsequent list. (Matt. 5:37; compare Psalm 15:4.) That hotel has been added because there are brothers and sisters who still need rooms. It was not added to provide upgrades for those who already have rooms reserved. Whether you have a reservation at a hotel 5 minutes or 25 minutes from the convention site, you will still be spiritually fed and will enjoy the association of your brothers and sisters, will you not? It is our goal to reduce the number of lists sent out by the Rooming Departments each year and to simplify rooming arrangements. This can be accomplished only if everyone cooperates with the principle set forth at 1 Timothy 6:8: “So, having sustenance and covering, we shall be content with these things.”
13 It is equally important to reserve only the hotel rooms you will actually use during the convention. Although it may be desirable to have a larger group stay together at the same hotel, this is not a necessity. Unless you have agreed to do so beforehand and you submit definite names, please do not reserve rooms for other delegates. This artificially inflates the number of rooms reserved for the convention and makes it harder for other delegates to make a reservation from the first list. Each room should be reserved in the name of one of the people who will occupy it.
14 Of course, if you experience a problem with a hotel during the convention, please bring this to the attention of the local Rooming Department at the convention. For any difficulties experienced before or after the convention, you can contact the Rooming Department, using the address and telephone number shown at the top of the Recommended Lodging List. Describe the difficulty in detail, including the steps you have taken to remedy the matter, so that the brothers may assist you.
15 Using Hotels Not on the Society’s Recommended Lodging List: The Society is making an effort to arrange conventions in locations that are more convenient for our brothers and sisters. In 1996, conventions were held in 11 additional locations. Some of these cities had not hosted a Watchtower convention in over 20 years. As a result, the Society has received many letters expressing appreciation.
16 Although the convenience of our convention locations permits many brothers to commute to and from the convention site, hotel accommodations remain a necessity. Last year, 1,076 hotels were used at the 198 conventions held in 65 different cities. In each convention city, a team of brothers contacted many local hotels in an effort to negotiate the best possible room rates for the convention delegates. After months of negotiating, the hotels that agreed to work with the convention’s room rates were included on the Recommended Lodging List.
17 In every city, these brothers contact many hotels that refuse to work with the Watchtower convention. It is understandable that some hotels do not anticipate having space because of other business. Of the many reasons given, however, one that is frequently heard is: “Why should we negotiate lower rates? Your people stayed with us this year at higher rates, and we expect them back next year as well.” Since the hotel is in business to make money, it is difficult to ask them to accept less than they are already receiving from our delegates.
18 Each year, we appeal to the brothers to make reservations only at hotels on the Society’s Recommended Lodging List. Several things are accomplished by heeding this direction:
19 Saves money for our brothers and sisters, the majority of whom have limited resources: When hotels cooperate with the Society’s arrangement, room rates are lower for our brothers. Instead of our resources going to the hotels, they can be put to better use supporting the families of our brothers and sisters and the worldwide work. Even if we personally can afford more expensive accommodations, we should support the efforts of the Rooming Department by using only hotels from the Recommended Lodging List. This is the spirit of concern for others described at 1 John 3:17 and the principle behind 1 Corinthians 10:24.
20 Rewards those hotels that cooperate with the Society’s arrangement: Since the Society has contracted with the hotels on the Recommended Lodging List, we have, in effect, promised them that they will receive our business. In this way they remain willing to participate in the future.
21 Provides incentive for other hotels to work with the rooming arrangement: When hotels not on the Recommended Lodging List are used and higher rates are paid, there is little motivation for those hotels to work with the Society’s arrangement. In time, even hotels that previously cooperated with the Society’s arrangement often refuse to do so because they find out that some of our brothers will pay higher rates. However, if delegates use only the hotels on the Recommended Lodging List, other hotels may see the value of cooperating at a later time.
22 Demonstrates obedience to the Society’s directions: It is this last point that should be one of our main concerns. Hebrews 13:17 says: “Be obedient to those who are taking the lead among you and be submissive, for they are keeping watch over your souls as those who will render an account; that they may do this with joy and not with sighing, for this would be damaging to you.” As our brothers make many arrangements for our district convention, we want them to feel that they have our full support. Since our cooperation in this matter is requested only two or three days each year, this is a fine way to support their efforts. Even if our personal choice is different, our good example, as seen by our brothers and the world, promotes a loving, united, and supportive spirit.​—Phil. 2:1-4.
23 Special Needs: The Society’s Special Needs Room Request form outlines the qualifications for submitting a Special Needs form: “If you are in good standing in the congregation and have special needs that cannot be cared for by the local congregation, you may request accommodations through the Convention Rooming Department.” This provision is only for publishers in good standing, including those with well-behaved children, who have been approved by the Congregation Service Committee. Those with special needs are our brothers and sisters, and we want to be of assistance to them.
24 The elderly, the infirm, those in full-time service, or others may require assistance in attending the convention. Relatives, the elders, and others in the congregation who are aware of their unique circumstances can lovingly make the necessary arrangements, not shifting the responsibility of family and congregation to the convention organization. (Compare 1 Timothy 5:4.) Before filling out a Special Needs Room Request form, carefully read the information located at the bottom of the form. These requests should be sent to the Rooming Department as soon as possible.
25 Attending Another Convention: Each congregation is assigned to the nearest convention. Based on the number of publishers assigned to each convention, the Society estimates the attendance in order to arrange for sufficient seating, rooming, literature, and so forth. If you must attend another convention, you may need information regarding rooming and parking tickets, among other things. If so, you should ask the congregation secretary to provide you with the address of the convention headquarters for the convention you will be attending. This can be found on the reverse side of the Special Needs Room Request form. Be sure to enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope with your request for the current Recommended Lodging List or for any additional information you may need. If there is more than one convention held in that city, be sure to indicate the dates for the convention you will be attending.
26 Conclusion: Letters received by the Society after the district conventions each year provide ample evidence that our brothers and sisters appreciate the arrangements made for them. Regarding the rooming arrangement, a sister attending a convention in Ohio last year wrote: “The rate was exceptional​—their regular rate was $79.00 per night. As soon as we identified ourselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses attending the Watchtower convention, they firmly quoted the price on our list! We thanked Jehovah for such a provision! Jehovah always provides for his people. Through his visible organization, we are always made to feel special. It was a great experience for our family to attend the convention. It would not have been practical or possible without your assistance.” Like our sister, are we not grateful to Jehovah for his help in these ways?
27 It is clear to all of us that Jehovah is supporting the arrangement of annual conventions. Since many of the brothers traveling to district conventions require rooms, we can be assured that Jehovah will adequately provide for these needs. Since these matters concern our true worship, we should joyfully follow the instructions given. Proving that we are “faithful in what is least” puts us in line for receiving the grand blessings that await those whom Jehovah loves.​—Luke 16:10.
28 Isaiah 33:20 says: “Behold Zion, the town of our festal occasions!” We can only imagine the happy crowds that were filling Jerusalem and that willingly responded to Jehovah’s command to “become nothing but joyful.” (Deut. 16:15) Our annual district conventions allow us the grand opportunity both to take in divine instruction and to enjoy the warm association of our brothers and sisters. May Jehovah bless your efforts as you prepare to attend the 1997 “Faith in God’s Word” series of district conventions!
[Box on page 3]
Making Your Hotel Reservation
 1. Call hotel during regular business hours.
 2. Ask reservation clerk for a confirmation number.
 3. Make your deposit. Write the confirmation number on your check or money order. Do NOT send cash.
 4. If you pay by check or money order, contact hotel in two weeks to verify that your deposit has been received.
[Box on page 5]
Do’s
▪ DO make your reservation during January.
▪ DO identify yourself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses or as a delegate attending the Watchtower convention.
▪ DO make your deposit as soon as your reservation is made.
▪ DO reserve only the room(s) you will personally use.
▪ DO keep your first reservation.
[Box on page 6]
Program Times
Friday    and    Saturday
9:30 a.m.  -     4:50 p.m.
Sunday
9:30 a.m.  -     3:50 p.m.

