All Sorts of People Will Be Saved
1 Jehovah wills “that all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) Although people are influenced to some extent by heredity, background, and environment, they have free will and can choose individually how they will use their life. They can do what is good and live, or they can do what is bad and perish. (Matt. 7:13, 14) How does this understanding affect our view of the people we approach with the Kingdom good news?
2 We should not presume that a person’s interest in the truth is dictated by factors such as national or cultural background or by social position. The truth can appeal to those with either limited or advanced education, to those involved in political pursuits, and to professionals, atheists, agnostics, and even to notorious wrongdoers. People from all backgrounds and social levels have changed from their former course of conduct and are now in line for life in God’s new world. (Prov. 11:19) Therefore, we should not hesitate to approach people in all walks of life with the Kingdom message.
3 Consider These Examples: A man had planned to kill his stepfather but did not. Later he decided to commit suicide but could not. After he was imprisoned for stealing and drug trafficking, his marriage failed. Today this person is making an honest living and is enjoying a happy marriage as well as a fine relationship with his stepfather. What made the difference? He studied the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses and applied what he learned. Jehovah did not consider him to be beyond redemption.
4 A young woman’s fame as a TV actress did not bring her happiness. But having become impressed by the fine moral conduct of the Witnesses, she accepted a Bible study, and she was soon helping others to learn about the Kingdom good news. Everywhere she went in the door-to-door ministry she was recognized, but she happily explained that she wanted to be known as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses rather than as an actress.
5 When a Witness arranged for a Bible study with a Watchtower subscriber, a neighbor heard about it and attended the study. The neighbor immediately recognized the truth for which she had been searching! She and her husband canceled a divorce decree they had been granted and made peace. She was deep into astrology and was attached to a spiritistic cult, but she readily threw away expensive books and everything else she owned that was associated with demonism. She soon started attending meetings and talking to relatives and friends about her newfound faith. Now she witnesses enthusiastically to others.
6 We ought not to prejudge anyone. Rather, let us zealously share the good news with people everywhere. We have every reason to be confident that Jehovah, who “sees what the heart is,” will become the “Savior of all sorts of men.”​—1 Sam. 16:7; 1 Tim. 4:10.

