Question Box
▪ Why should we report our field service activity promptly each month?
All of us feel a sense of joy when we hear about good things being accomplished in preaching the Kingdom message. (See Proverbs 25:25.) Acts 2:41 reports that following Peter’s stirring discourse on the day of Pentecost, “about three thousand souls were added.” A short time later, that number had grown to “about five thousand.” (Acts 4:4) How exhilarating those reports must have been to the first-century Christians! We react the same way to encouraging reports today. We are thrilled to hear about the success our brothers enjoy in preaching the good news worldwide.
Since much time and effort are involved in compiling such reports, the cooperation of every Kingdom publisher is essential. Are you conscientious about turning in your report promptly each month?
Reports of increases bring us much joy. Additionally, reports help the Society to monitor the progress of the worldwide work. Decisions have to be made as to where more help may be needed or the type and amount of literature to be produced. Elders in each congregation use field service reports to determine where improvement can be made. Good reports are upbuilding, motivating all of us to examine our own ministry for possible improvements.
All publishers need to appreciate their individual responsibility to turn in a field service report promptly each month. Congregation Book Study conductors are in a good position to remind the publishers of this responsibility, since they are also alert to give personal assistance to those who may have some difficulty sharing in the field service regularly each month. This reminder could be given at the last book study each month or at another appropriate time. If there is no opportunity to turn in field service reports at the Kingdom Hall, the Congregation Book Study conductor can collect them and see that they are given to the secretary in time to be included with the congregation’s regular monthly report to the Society.
Our diligence in faithfully reporting our field service activity promptly makes the load lighter for those responsible for our spiritual well-being.

