Service Meetings for January
Week Starting January 6
Song 6
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Comment on October field service report for the country and for the local congregation.
20 min: Time to Renew the Advance Medical Directive/​Release Card. Qualified elder discusses importance of filling out card completely and carrying it at all times. This document speaks for you if you are unable to speak for yourself in an emergency. (Compare Proverbs 22:3.) A new card needs to be filled out every year to give a current declaration on refusal of blood, since some doctors and others have claimed that documents older than one year may not reflect a person’s current conviction. After the meeting, all baptized publishers will be given the Advance Medical Directive/​Release card, and those with unbaptized minor children will receive an Identity Card for each child. Explain that these cards are not to be filled out tonight. They should be filled out carefully at home but NOT signed. Signing, witnessing, and dating of all cards will be done following the next Congregation Book Study, under the supervision of the book study conductor. He will check to see that all assigned to his group received a card and have needed assistance. Those signing as witnesses should actually see the cardholder sign the document. Anyone missing at that time will be assisted by conductors/​elders at the next Service Meeting until all baptized publishers have their cards properly filled out and signed. (Review letter of October 15, 1991.) By adapting language from this card to their own circumstances and convictions, unbaptized publishers may write out their own directive to use for themselves and their children. Refer to Question Box of the December 1995 Our Kingdom Ministry. Explain that the health-care power of attorney (proxy) form provided by the Society is a legal document recognized by medical and legal personnel and that when it is properly filled out, it offers additional legal assurance that one’s wishes will be respected on blood and other health-care and end-of-life decisions. Baptized publishers may obtain a copy of this document from the secretary. (Unlike the Advance Medical Directive/​Release card, which is renewed annually, the health-care power of attorney (proxy) form needs to be replaced only when you elect to make a change in it.) Exercising insight in caring for these vital details will merit good from Jehovah.​—Prov. 16:20.
15 min: “Qualified and Equipped to Teach Others.” (Paragraphs 1-6) Make brief comments on paragraphs 1-2, stressing the need for us to be confident that with Jehovah’s help we can effectively teach others. Have two publisher-householder pairs demonstrate the presentations in paragraphs 3-6, with each pair showing how to make an initial call and a return visit. Remind publishers that when leaving literature, it is appropriate for us to mention that donations toward our worldwide work are gladly accepted.
Song 14 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 13
Song 16
15 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Highlight some talking points in current magazines. Offer suggestions on how to introduce ourselves when approaching people in order to witness informally. Invite audience to relate what opening words they have used when speaking to others in stores, on the street, in the park, on public transportation, and so forth. Outline special field service arrangements for January 20.
15 min: “Qualified and Equipped to Teach Others.” (Paragraphs 7-9) Relate experience about making return visits found in 1995 Yearbook, page 45, emphasizing the importance of following up on any interest found. Have qualified publisher demonstrate presentations in paragraphs 7-8. Although other publications are offered initially, we should concentrate our efforts on eventually conducting studies in the Knowledge book. Encourage all to schedule some time during the coming week to make return visits.
15 min: Local needs. Or “Always Throw Your Burden on Jehovah.” An encouraging talk based on The Watchtower, April 1, 1996, pages 27-30.
Song 15 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 20
Song 21
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “All Sorts of People Will Be Saved.” Questions and answers. Invite audience to relate briefly some experiences showing how they got a favorable response from people who come from different walks of life.
20 min: Witnessing by Good Conduct. An elder holds discussion with two or three youths. Discussion is based on August 15, 1987, Watchtower, pages 10-20. Include published experiences as well as any local experiences that demonstrate how observers have been favorably impressed by upright conduct of Christian youths.
Song 23 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 27
Song 20
 5 min: Local announcements.
10 min: Review of Question Box by secretary.
15 min: “We ‘Preach the Word.’” Questions and answers. Include some comments showing why we deeply appreciate the value of God’s Word.​—See March 22, 1984, Awake!, pages 9-11.
15 min: Review Literature Offer for February. Point out interesting features of the book, such as: (1) Striking chapter titles, (2) colorful illustrations, (3) teaching boxes and charts, and (4) thought-provoking printed questions. In harmony with the preceding meeting part, encourage the use of a well-chosen scripture in the presentation. Have one or two brief presentations demonstrated, with publisher remembering to mention the donation arrangement to the householder. Remind all to pick up books for use this week.
Song 26 and concluding prayer.

