VOL. XXIX MARCH 15 No. 6 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 83 

Our Losing Fight with the Criminal 83 

The Pre-Existence of Jesus 83 

Higher Criticism-Infidelity Not Satisfied 84 

Paid Music in Churches 84 

Popular Religion vs. Bible Religion 85 

"Miracle Wheat" 86 

The Memorial, April 14 86 

Holding Fast at the Mark 87 

Quarterly Review Lesson 88 

The Progress of Total Abstinence 90 

"Within the Vail" (Poem) 92 

The Shepherd, the Door, the Flocks 92 

page 82 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R4153 : page 82 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS WEEKLY 



THE CINCINNATI WEEKLY ENQUIRER, a clean paper of 
very large circulation, proposes to publish Brother Russell's 
sermons every week, and offers us a special clubbing rate. 
This enables us to supply it with the WATCH TOWER for $1.50 
per year. If you have already sent in your TOWER subscription 
send merely the balance, 50c. Moneys returned by the 
Woman's National Daily will be applied on the Enquirer. Act 
promptly. Order extra copies for your friends if you so desire. 

Humanly speaking, it seems quite unfortunate that the 
Woman's National Daily accepted subscriptions with the understanding 
that Brother Russell's sermons would appear weekly, 
and then discontinued them. Although it received nearly 
5,000 subscriptions through us, it declines to refund the money 
unless the subscribers so demand. We have asked you to send 
postcard demands for the stoppage of the subscriptions and 
the refund of the money through us, but evidently few of you 
have done this, for only a few have been refunded. Were 
you all to insist no doubt the sermons would be published. 

page 82 

GIVE PROMPT ATTENTION, PLEASE 



The Post Office Dept. is unwilling to restore second-class 
privileges to our Old Theology Quarterly unless we can show a 
larger list of specifically paid subscriptions. We suggest, therefore, 
that individually or in groups, classes or ecclesias, you 
send us bona fide paid lists for as many copies as you can use. 
The rate will be 6c per year; or, 10 to one address (40 tracts), 
20c; 50 to one address (200 tracts), $1; or more at the same 
rate. You may send personally, or bunch your orders 
through one of your number as your agent. Tract Fund subscriptions 
and Good Hopes may be applied on this account 
by explicitly authorizing us so to do. Please act promptly. 



R4150 : page 83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
OUR LOSING FIGHT WITH THE CRIMINAL 



"COMMISSIONER Bingham reports 4,470 arrests 

made by the Bureau of Detectives for felonies 

in 1907, against 2,091 in 1906. Convictions 

totaled 1,330. The increase in arrests for misdemeanors 

is still more startling: the total was 3,889, while in 

1906 it was 910. There were 1,566 convictions. Chief 

Wilkie of the United States Secret Service reports 216 

arrests, of which 160 were for counterfeiting. A substantial 

decrease in this crime is shown, largely due to 

the conviction of Irving Tolley, now confined in Atlanta, 

Ga., who was responsible for 50 per cent, of the 

raised notes. The most significant item in the report 

of J. C. Graveur, chief probation officer of the New 

York Court of Special Sessions, discloses 565 persons 

placed on parole. Only twenty failed to meet the requirements 

of their release. 

"Society not only fails to hold its ground but it is 
losing in its warfare against the criminal. In 1901 the 
Government published the conclusion of Eugene Smith 
that our annual tribute to crime was $600,000,000, and 
criminologists have recently computed a substantial 
increase. To our eternal disgrace, the United States 
leads all civilized countries in the number of homicides. 
Over 8,000 yearly is the average. William C. 
Clemens fixes New York City's quota at 240. In six 
years over 300 murderers have gone undetected. The 
Alabama State Bar Association has shown that in proportion 
to population there are twelve murders in New 
England to one in London; in California seventy-five 

R4151 : page 83 

to one; in Nevada 245 to one."— New York World. 



The above is from an editorial and we have no 
reason to doubt its correctness. The facts set forth 
are open to speculation as to why they are true. It is 
well that we remember that this indictment relates 
to the most favored and most prosperous, most 
wealthy, most awake and most generally educated nation 
on earth. Looking at the ghastly figures, let us 
learn the lesson that worldly prosperity does not spell 
happiness, contentment, peace and joy. We have 
every reason to believe that similar results would show 
in every civilized land under similarly prosperous 



conditions. 

The lesson to us is to emphasize the Bible's 
teaching that God alone can satisfy the soul;— that the 
Spirit of Christ is "the spirit of a sound mind." True, 
something should be credited to the fact that many of 
these murders, etc., were committed by emigrants suddenly 
transported into new conditions and unable to 
balance and adjust themselves to the new conditions. 
But why is it that the greater intelligence and opportunity 
do not make for peace and holiness instead of sin and 
crime? We reply, Because the chains of ignorance and 
superstition have been the blasphemous misrepresentations 
of the divine character and plan! These have 
caused the masses to fear and to hate God and his Book, 
which, it is claimed, reveals his plans as diabolical. 
Increased knowledge to such means doubt of all religious 
teaching— practically atheism or universalism, according 
to the bent of the mind. 

While zealous missionaries are teaching heathen 
children our civilization and our popular travesties 
upon the religion of the Bible, they fondly dream of 
thus converting the world and fulfilling our Lord's 
prayer, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth 
as in heaven." Alas! how blind we all have been not to 
have noticed these two facts: (1) That the numbers 
of the heathen in proportion even to the nominally 
Christian doubled last century; (2) That if we could 
bring all the heathen up to the standard of our most 
civilized and most progressive nation it would mean 
that God's will would be less done the world over than 
it is now. 

Let us console ourselves with the Bible's teaching, 
that the evils of our day, induced by greater worldly 
light and ambition, will end in their own destruction 
and prepare the way for the Kingdom of God's dear Son. 

THE PRE-EXISTENCE OF JESUS 



The Christian Commonwealth of London is firmly 
committed to "The New Theology." It publishes Rev. 

R4151 : page 84 

Morgan Campbell's sermons and now one of its editors, 
Rev. J. Warschauer, M.A., D.Phil., thus answers, in the 
columns of the Commonwealth, a correspondent's question 
on the preexistence of Jesus:— 

"In answer to a Scottish correspondent— to whom, 
by the way, I want to send a word of cheer, more even 
than a theological answer— I quite agree with his view, 
viz., that Jesus 'preexisted' only in the sense in which 
all men do, that is to say, in the mind of God, for 
whom there is neither past nor future, 'for all live unto 
him.' That our Lord had a conscious, individual 



existence prior to his birth some nineteen centuries 
ago, I see no reason for supposing. Having come into 
the world— with no more control over that event, as I 
hold, than other infants— and having reached maturity, 
he voluntarily adopted a certain course of action; 
but that he had determined upon that course in some 
previous heavenly existence, I simply do not believe." 



Thus the pendulum swings from one extreme to 
the other while the central truth is ignored. From 
holding and teaching that Jesus was one of three Gods, 
one of a trinity of Gods, the next step usually is to the 
above extreme— the claim that he was merely a 
member of the sinner-race. Oh! how much more 
rational is the Scriptural teaching that our Lord was 
Jehovah's "only begotten Son," "the first and the last," 
by and through whom angels and men were created, in 
fulfilment of the Father's wondrous plan. How this, 
the Bible presentation, glorifies the Lord Jesus more 
than any other! As the Apostle declares, "To us there 
is one God the Father, of whom are all things; and one 
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things." See afresh 
the proofs in DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. V., "The Atonement, 
Chapters III. to VII. 

HIGHER CRITICISM-INFIDELITY NOT SATISFIED 



In the Educational Review Mr. Chas. E. Witter 
complains that agnosticism is not progressing rapidly 
enough in the Sunday-schools of the world. We quote: 

"There can be no doubt that in many cases the 
teaching lags behind the real knowledge of the teacher. 
Many who have outgrown the crude and literal interpretations 
of earlier years, into whose minds religious 
truths have entered in new forms, are seemingly afraid 
to impart their real light to their young hearers. When 
they come before their classes in the Sunday-schools 
they feel obligated to give them, not the fresh views 
that have proved more satisfactory to themselves, but 
the traditional statements of orthodoxy in which most 
of them were reared. This may be due to a strained 
sense of loyalty to their church organization or to a 
feeling that these older views are commonly reputed to 
be safer for children, but in any case the results can be 
only bad. They are bad first of all because of the insincerity 
in the teacher himself. No amount of juggling 
and trimming for the sake of expediency can 
justify one in teaching as true what he knows to be 
false, in teaching as fact what he knows to be myth. 
In the second place, such teaching is in the end ineffective. 
One cannot teach satisfactorily and effectually 
that which he only half-heartedly believes himself. 



The secret of the wonderful power that the religious 
teaching and preaching of the fathers had over their 
hearers was just in this fact, that they believed with 
all the intensity of conviction every word which they 
uttered. The results are bad, moreover and chiefly, because 
of the great wrong that is thus done to the child's 
future. The time must inevitably come to those young 
people who read and think when they will awake to the 
superficiality and falsity of such teaching, and when 
that awakening comes the reaction will probably be 
more radical than it would have been had they been 
properly enlightened in the first place. The pendulum 
will swing so far that in rejecting these feeble and narrow 
views of spiritual truths they will in many cases be 
led to reject all versions of them. That this is a real danger 
can be seen by daily observation. It accounts for 
the absolute skepticism and agnosticism of many, and 
it also accounts for the fact, often noted, that the most 
confirmed infidels frequently spring from just those 
narrow denominational schools and influences that 
refuse obstinately to open to the light of more modern 
and better conceptions of the religious life." 



Alas! this modern infidelity, styled "New Theology," 
is all too rapidly gaining a footing in our Sunday-schools! 
Are not children deliberately taught that the 
Genesis account of creation is a falsehood contradicted 
by "Science"? Are they not taught that the flood of 
Noah's day is a myth, and that Jonah never was 
swallowed by a whale? Are they not taught to give no 
heed to what the Apostle Peter calls "the more sure 
word of prophecy to which we do well to take heed, as 
unto a light shining in a dark place until the day dawn"? 

True, these underminers of Biblical faith do not 
deny that there once was a great Teacher named Jesus, 
whose teachings have influenced the most enlightened 
quarters of the globe. That would be worse than 
wasting breath. Besides they want Jesus for a figurehead 
or rallying center for their "New Theology." But 
it does not take the honest child-mind long to draw the 
conclusion that when Jesus mentioned the flood of 
Noah's day and the fact that Jonah was three days and 
three nights in the belly of the great fish, and that he 
quoted from the prophets as inspired writings— that if 
these be false Jesus must have been a fraud and not 
the Son of God, else he would not have declared these 
truths. Not only so, it would imply that he was much 
less inspired and wise than were these modern wise men 
who claim to know so much. Alas! they are taking 
away from the children what little faith yet remains. 
"When the Son of man cometh shall he find the faith on 
the earth?"-Matt. 12:40; 24:38; Luke 18:8. 

PAID MUSIC IN CHURCHES 



Rev. Charles M. Sheldon writes in The Congregationalist 
against the spending of money for Church 
music, as follows:— 

"I see no reason why the finest singer or player in 
the parish should receive compensation for service rendered 
any more than the best teachers in the parish 
should receive money for teaching in the Sunday-school. 
I have in my parish a man who is a graduate 

R4151 : page 85 

of one of the best colleges in this country, who spent 
very many years in acquiring his education, who is a 
thorough scholar and a splendid teacher. He has a 
class in my Sunday-school. I do not think the thought 
of compensation for teaching that class ever entered 
his head. He is giving, however, out of the ripeness of 
his knowledge what it cost him many years and many 
hundreds of dollars to acquire. If he does not 
expect anything for his service to the Church, which he gives 
as service, why should the man or woman who has spent 
years acquiring a musical education in learning to play 
or sing expect money compensation for it? 

"I have always felt proud of the fact, I hope in a 
right way, that in our average Church for eighteen 
years we have never paid a cent for the service of musicians, 

R4152 : page 85 

either for playing or singing, accepting what 
was offered as service, and very many times it has been 
of the very best that the parish afforded. I know of a 
Church which has in its parish one of the finest lawyers 
in the State, and whenever that Church wants a public 
address or an inspiring talk to its young men it calls 
upon this member of the Church for service. He does 
not ask for pay, although he can get the highest price 
in the lecture-field when he goes out to give a public 
lecture. I think the more we dignify the service in the 
Church by drawing into it the finest talent we possess, 
and offer it as service, we increase the Church's 
efficiency, and very often the money that is spent for 
musical service or for flowers or decorations could be 
better used, it seems to me, directly in doing missionary 
work or in adding to the real effectiveness of the 
Church in ways where the money is more needed. 

"I hope I shall not be misunderstood in all this. 
What I mean is that the Church has a right to the 
finest service that can be rendered to it by its members. 
There is no man or woman so talented or so 
gifted in the parish that he ought not to feel that the 
finest he has can and should be offered upon the altar 
of religion." 



Very good! Very true! But why not return to 
apostolic usage also in the matter of a paid ministry? 
If singers and Sunday-school teachers should serve 
from love and not for pay, should not as noble a spirit 
actuate the preachers? Why not have the abler members 
of every congregation give public addresses on 
the Scriptures or conduct Bible studies which would 
bring out more of the true teachings of the Word and 
stimulate research? 

POPULAR RELIGION VS. BIBLE RELIGION 



The editor of the Christian Advocate (New York) 
tells us that he has been looking at the signs of the 
times and finds hardly a single point of harmony between 
the common standards and those of the Gospel. 
This he thinks "should awaken every sincere Christian 
to a thorough self-examination by Gospel standards 
and to determine to keep as far from evil as possible." 
We quote:— 

"It would be wise for every member of a Christian 
church and every minister thereof to read carefully 
what Christ said of his religion, his disciples, the 
method of preparing for the future life, and the intimations 
that he gives of the judgment and eternal destiny, 
instead of occupying themselves entirely or 
chiefly with the contemplation of great church edifices, 
great organs, great colleges, great Sunday-school 
parades, great hospitals, great congregations, great 
movements and great statistics. 

"Popular religion today avoids all conflict with the 
world. Against the grosser immoralities, indeed, it 
lifts up its voice; for it is respectable to do so, and a 
large proportion of all connected with the Church are 
above the more degrading forms of vice. But against 
pride-producing and extravagant fashions of the world 
it utters but a faint protest, or none. 

"Popular religion seeks wealth with as much 
greediness, and grasps as eagerly after honor, and 
runs as swiftly after pleasure as does the world. A 
large majority of the professors of Christ's religion 
seek their intimate associations in worldly society, and 
never think of lifting up their voices against the prevalent 
folly and dissipation. It is not in the least embarrassing 
for the most gay and thoughtless to be thrown 
into the company of Christians of the popular religion 
type. Days and weeks may pass away and no mention 
be made of Christ or of anything he ever did or said, 
or which might lead persons to think of his religion. 

"Popular religion has a very easy conscience, as is 
shown by many things. It makes a distinction between 



equally binding duties, performing those which 

are convenient, agreeable, and in harmony with the 

natural instincts or dispositions, and neglecting others 

which require self-denial. Thus there are many possessed 

of large incomes who will pray and sing, but 

will not contribute their means to the support of the 

Gospel. Others are willing to contribute liberally but 

pay no attention to the spiritual work of the Church. 

Popular religion enters upon doubtful enterprises if 

they promise large pecuniary rewards. It makes every 

form of excuse for neglect of duty. The merchant and 

mechanic declare themselves to be too busy. The contradiction 

between this and Christ's religion is expressed 

in the words, 'Seek ye first the Kingdom of 

God and his righteousness.' 

"Popular religion professes timidity whenever called 
upon to take part in the services of the sanctuary, 
a timidity never shown in performing conspicuous, 
remunerative or honorable public duties or functions 
of importance in the Church. Popular religion disregards 
the most solemn vows. Every member of the 
Christian Church has assumed the weightiest obligations. 
Every baptized person in the Methodist Church 
vows to 'renounce the devil and all his works, the vain 
pomp and glory of the world, with all covetous desires 
of the same.' When there is a controversy between 
them, popular religion places temporal interests before 
spiritual. It evinces this in the kind of preaching 
it likes and in the mode of its life. It would rather attend 
public amusements, political meetings, social 
companies, or spend the evening in business calculations 
than to discharge the plainest Christian duty. 
Popular religion never agonizes before the Lord in 
secret, never sets apart hours for meditation, never 
reads the Bible for devotional or life-regulating purposes; 
seldom observes family prayer, never does 

R4152:page86 

anything really inconvenient for Christ's sake, and 
almost wholly eliminates the element of self-denial." 



Alas! how true is this arraignment of Babylon of 
every denomination. The fault lies in false doctrines, 
which, under the lash of fear, have gathered to the 
Christian standard millions whose credulity is now giving 
place to a refined infidelity. 

Note the contrast in those who are the Lord's true 
sheep and who are now hearing the Great Shepherd's 
voice in the Millennial morning dawn. How zealous, 
how self-sacrificing, how willing to give their time, influence, 
money— yea, life itself— in the service of the 
"good tidings of great joy which shall be unto all 
people." 



Yet we do not boast! Nay, we admit that we can 
never do enough to show our appreciation of the God 
of love and his wonderful plan of the ages. We realize 
that we are not profitable servants, but on the contrary 
are our Lord's debtors to a degree that an eternity of 
his service will only continually increase. 

"MIRACLE WHEAT" 



The public press is telling of the origin of "Miracle 
Wheat" in answer to prayer. The description has the earmarks 
of truth to it, in that it gives the address of the 
man whose prayers are said to have been answered— 
"K. B. Stoner, a farmer of Fincastle, Botetourt county, 
Virginia." It would appear from the account that the 
original stalk of wheat appeared in the midst of a crop 
of the ordinary kind, but with " 142 heads of grain." 
We quote:— 

"Mr. Stoner was amazed. It seemed incredible. 
When a Frenchman, in 1842, announced that he had 
discovered a species of wheat in the Mediterranean 
country which produced four heads to the plant, people 
said he was crazy. 

"But here was a plant with 142 heads! 

"Naturally Mr. Stoner carefully preserved the 
heads, and the next year sowed the seed, continuing to 
do this each year, for he realized he had discovered 
a phenomenal brand of grain. And each year his 
amazement increased. 

"That first year after discovering the plant he got 
2000 grains. In 1906 he got sixteen bushels, and has 
now raised the crop of wheat, all carefully preserved 
for seed, to 800 bushels. 

"What is most remarkable about the wheat is this: 
Whereas there is produced in the wheat sections of that 
country an average at the best of seventeen bushels to 
an acre, the average yield of the "miracle wheat" during 
the last three years has been fifty-six bushels to 
the acre; and whereas from eight to ten pecks of seed are 
required to plant an acre in Virginia, Mr. Stoner uses 
only two pecks, and, in comparison to the yield of ordinary 
wheat in the neighborhood, which is eight bushels 
for each bushel of seed, Mr. Stoner gets about 
seventy-five bushels for one. An ordinary stalk of 
wheat covers about four inches of space. The miracle 
wheat covers twelve. 

THE GOVERNMENT REPORT 

"Last year United States government officials became 
interested in the remarkable wheat and sent Assistant 
Agriculturalist H. A. Miller to examine it. In 
his report he declares: 

"The wheat, which came from an unknown source, 



has been grown in the nursery every year since that 
time, and also has been grown under field conditions 
the last two years, giving excellent results. The yield 
has been from two to three times the yield of other 
varieties grown on the farm under the same condition 
of culture, except the rate of seeding, which was two 
pecks to the acre, while other varieties were sown at 
the rate of eight to ten pecks per acre, which is the 
common practice of farmers in the vicinity. 

'"Milling tests have been made of this wheat, and 
its quality seems to be as good as, if not superior to, 
other varieties of winter wheat.' 

R4153 : page 86 

"The average height of the wheat, according to the 
report, is four feet four inches. 

"It is said that the Russian government has secured 
an option on the wheat, and will buy a consignment 
of 80,000,000 bushels when that quantity shall 
have been raised. During the next year the seed will 
be distributed among farmers in Virginia and North 
Carolina, who will raise it and preserve the seed, keeping 
the seed only for planting until the required 
amount will have been produced. By next fall, it is 
believed, 30,000 bushels will have been produced." 

IS IT RESTITUTION WHEAT? 

If this account be but one-half true it testifies 
afresh to God's ability to provide things needful for 
the "times of restitution of all things which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 



R4153 : page 86 

THE MEMORIAL, APRIL 14 

AFTER six o'clock on Tuesday evening, April 14th, 
readers of this journal in all parts of the world 
will gather as ecclesias of Christ to memorialize 
his death with "unleavened bread" and "fruit of the vine" 
as emblems of his broken body and shed blood. The largest 
of these will probably assemble at Allegheny Carnegie 
Hall— not a great multitude meeting anywhere— while the 
little ecclesias will be numerous— for, as the Master said, 
"Wherever two or three are met in my name, there am I in 
their midst. "-Matt. 18:20. 

We urge that none neglect this annual privilege, for 
any reason. There is a special blessing in its observance. 
If you incline to feel discouraged, go partake of the broken 
loaf, asking the Lord for a fresh realization of your justification, 
and a fresh appreciation of your consecration to be 



broken (sacrificed) with him, as reckoned members of the 
one loaf— his Church, his Body. Then as you taste of "this 
cup" remember that it speaks of our Lord's sufferings on 
our behalf— his tasting death for every man. Remember, 
also, that this is "our high calling"— "to suffer with him 
that we may also reign with him." This is the significance 
of his words, "drink ye all of it." And, as the Apostle declares, 

R4153 : page 87 

it is the com[mon]union in his sufferings.— 
1 Cor. 10:16. 

Let us not forget that the Memorial is meaningless or 
worse unless thus accepted and appreciated. But let nothing 
hinder us— neither sins, nor coldness, nor feelings of unworthiness. 
Go to the Lord and make a clean breast of all 
your shortcomings. Go to your brethren or any whom you 
have wronged— make full acknowledgment, whether they 
acknowledge faults toward you or not. Get yourself 
right with your Lord and so far as possible with every man, 
and then eat— yea, feast upon the rich provision the Lord 
has made for all who accept, now or in a later "due time." 

Such a heart-searching and cleansing, we remember, was 
shown in the Passover type given to the Jews. Before they 
gathered to eat their Passover-lamb they searched everywhere 
throughout their habitations for anything containing 
leaven or putrefaction, bones, crusts, everything. These all 
were burned— destroyed. So must we fulfil the antitype 
and "put away the old leaven" of anger, malice, hatred, 
strife.- 1 Cor. 5:7,8. 

But remember that this kind of leaven of sin cannot be 
thoroughly put away unless it be burned; and only love 
can burn it out— heavenly love, the love of God. If we 
have that love shed abroad in our hearts it will consume 
everything of the opposite character— jealousy, hatred, evil 
speaking, etc. Put off all these, urges the Apostle, and put 
on Christ and be filled with his Spirit. Do not be discouraged. 
True, for the time you ought to be further along, 
nearer to perfect love. But learn the lesson and start again 
with fresh resolutions and increased appreciation of the fact 
that of yourself, without the Master's aid, you could never 
gain the prize. He knows this better than do we, and says 
"Without me ye can do nothing." It was because of our 
need that the Father thus arranged for us. "Be of good, 
courage!" is the Master's word to all who are longing and 
striving to be of the class called "Conquerors." 

YOUR ADVERSARY THE DEVIL 

Temptations seem to be specially permitted at this season 
of the year. "Roots of bitterness" seem to sprout and 
grow always, but at this season with ten-fold vigor. Let us 
remember that Love, not Knowledge, is the final test of our 
discipleship. "A new commandment I give unto you, that 
ye love one another." It was because the apostles had not 
enough love for one another that they disputed as to which 



should be the greatest in the Kingdom, and were so determined 

not to stoop to one another that they neglected also 

to wash the Master's feet, and gave him the opportunity even 

in menial things to be servant of all. It was this wrong 

spirit— this lack of the Lord's Spirit— that made them susceptible 

to the Adversary's power and led Judas to betray 

and Peter to deny the Lord's Anointed. 

Let us then take heed to ourselves and watch and pray 
and be very humble and very loving, lest we fall into temptation. 
Not since that time probably has our great Adversary 
been more alive than now to do injury or to entrap or 
to stumble the followers of Jesus. 

For the benefit of readers "at the ends of the earth" 
we published as early as in our February 1st issue a treatise 
on this Memorial subject; and again in our March 1st 
issue we discussed the Bread of Life. We commend a fresh 
examination of those presentations and of our treatment of 
the subject in DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. VI., page 457. 



R4153 : page 87 

HOLDING FAST AT THE MARK 

THERE is no doubt that in the divine schooling 

there is a mark or standard of fitness for graduation 

to the Church in glory. When first we 

surrendered our wills to the Lord it was necessary that 

the consecration should be a whole or perfect sacrifice 

of our wills to the Lord's will; but our wills were not 

at the mark or standard of perfect love. And if our 

experiences could be imagined as cut short in death 

immediately after our consecration we could not think 

of ourselves as "fit for the Kingdom," because the rewards 

are not promised to consecrators, but to "him 

that overcometh." Thus in the case of the Master himself, 

our forerunner, it was necessary that he should 

suffer and thus be proven worthy of entering into his 

glory. In a word, as the child cannot be graduated 

the day he enters school, no more can we who enter the 

school of Christ. 

The rapidity of progress in learning the lessons 
depends greatly on our temperament and our zeal. 
Some evidently make as much progress in one year as 
others do in twenty, and very many never graduate 
at all— never reach the mark or standard which God 
demands, perfect love. The Word of God, our textbook, 
informs us that "Love is the fulfilling of the 
Law" (Rom. 13:10); that "The end or purpose of the 
divine commandment is love out of a pure heart and a 
good conscience." (1 Tim. 1:5.) "As many, therefore, 
as be perfect [-willed, at the mark of perfect love] 
should be of this mind."— Phil. 3:15-17. 

R4154 : page 87 



Those who have "thus learned Christ," he has 
taught the meaning of (1) perfected love toward God, 
which would prompt them to do and to dare anything 
in his service; (2) of perfected love for the "brethren," 
which would prompt the laying down of life itself in 
their service; (3) of perfected love for the world, yea, 
even for enemies, which would lead to do good to them 
that hate us and despitefully use us, and say all manner 
of evil against us falsely. 

Alas! we cannot suppose that many of the consecrated 
have reached this standard or mark; hence we 
must expect that few have graduated as "fit for the 
Kingdom"; hence also the intimation of Scripture that 
the left-overs— non-graduates— will be "a Great Company" 
as compared with the Little Flock of overcomers 
who do attain to the mark, the fixed standard. Here, 
however, it is well to remember that this "mark" or 
standard of love is not of the flesh but of the mind or 
heart. As the Apostle says, "We cannot do the things 
that we would." Our blemishes of the flesh sometimes 
momentarily stumble us into an unloving word or act, 

R4154 : page 88 

which if repented of will not be reckoned against us 

nor put us away from the mark and the loving acceptableness 

of our Lord, which the mark represents. 

"LET NO MAN TAKE THY CROWN" 

"Hold fast that which thou hast; let no man take 
thy crown," seems logically to refer specially to those 
who have reached the mark or standard of perfect love, 
and not merely to those who have taken the first step 
of consecration, entrance into the school of Christ. The 
words, "Hold fast that which thou hast," implies a previous 
effort and attainment, and that the attainment 
has had something to do with the right to the crown; 
and that the position attained must be held if the crown 
would be ultimately possessed. The intimation is also 
clear that the holding fast will be at the cost of a 
severe struggle. 

This may be a new and a somewhat startling 
thought to some who have erroneously supposed either 
that consecration alone was necessary, or that to attain 
the mark or standard of perfect love would end the 
struggle. Apparently, the severest struggles, tests, 
temptations, assail those who are at that mark, and 
this is in accord with our Master's promise that we 
shall "not be tempted above that we are able to bear." 
The stalwarts at the mark should be able to bear 
most and they will be most severely tried. Mark 
the exhortations to these, "Watch ye, stand fast, quit 
you like men." No longer "babes in Christ," "no longer 
children," their special test is as men, strong in the 



Lord and panoplied in the whole armor of God. Hearken 

again to the Word: "Having done all, stand!" 

These words do not fit one entering the school or entering 

the race; they are most appropriate to those 

who have reached the standard of perfect love. Those 

who have "done all," who have attained the mark of 

character and "put on the whole armor," are the ones 

who are cautioned, warned, to "hold fast" and "stand 

fast" and "fight a good fight." 

"WHO SHALL BE ABLE TO STAND?" 

These fundamental truths have been true and applicable 
to the Lord's people throughout this Gospel 
Age, and hence the narrowness of the way and the few 
there be who have found and walked therein— in all a 
little flock. But now, more particularly than ever before, 
this warning applies and probably to a larger number 
of the Lord's people than at any time in the past; because 
we are in the "harvest" time, when the ripening 
and gathering seems chiefly to apply. It is doubtless 
for this reason that so many Scriptures seem to specify 
our time in connection with these warnings. For instance, 
we read, "Take unto you the whole armor of 
God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil day, and 
having done all to stand!"— Eph. 6:13. 

The logic of this situation implies that during the 
few years immediately before us will come the severest 
of trials and the most subtle tests of our love: (1) For 
God as represented by our love for his Truth and the 
honor of his name; (2) our love for the Lord's 
brethren; (3) our love for our enemies. And whenever 
the "brethren" (of whom so much might be expected) 
become our enemies the test of our love will be 
the severer. In view of these things, "What manner of 
persons ought we to be, in all holy living and God-likeness?" 
In view of the solemnity of the situation, how 
"circumspect" we all should be! How we should scrutinize 
our every act and word and thought! And our 
thoughts require our special care, because by the 
thoughts and intents of the heart we are being judged. 
And words and acts proceed therefrom. How often 
ambition hides its envious desires under the cloak of 
duty! How many of the fires of the "Holy Inquisition" 
were lighted by the torch of "duty!" Let us each be on 
guard. Ourselves or others we might deceive, but not 
God, who says, "Be not deceived, God is not mocked; 
he that doeth righteousness is righteous"— not merely 
he who professes. He whose acts and words are loving, 
gentle, kind, considerate under trying conditions 
gives evidence of being begotten of the God of love 
and of having developed much Christ-likeness! Consider 
our Lord's love for his enemies and his forbearance 
for them when railed at, "Come down from the 
cross!" Consider how, when reviled and slandered, he 
reviled and slandered not in return! Consider how 



gentle was his reproof of the perfidious Judas and how 
he merely hinted a reproof to Peter, who denied him 
with cursings! In his case surely Love was ready to 
cover a multitude of faults. Let us not be easily offended 
nor of implacable spirit. Let us with generous 
and forgiving spirit say with the Apostle, "None of 
these things move me"— from my stand at perfect love; 
it shall grow more rooted and grounded in proportion 
as it is tested. Let us also be on guard against the 
spirit which is envious of the honors, privileges and 
blessings granted to another. Contrariwise let us have 
so much of the spirit of love that we will rejoice with 
all who rejoice in the Lord and will mourn with all in 
distress. To feel even a coolness of sentiment in connection 
with the prosperity of a brother or a lack of 
interest in his welfare is a sign of serious danger— 
that we have slipped from the mark. This should 
alarm us and lead to fresh energy. 



R4154 : page 88 

QUARTERLY REVIEW LESSON 

-MARCH 22- 

Golden Text:— "In him was life; and the 
life was the light of men."— John 1:4. 

WE leave the review of the Quarter's lessons to 
each according to his time and preferences, 
merely suggesting that the entire subject of 
our Lord's life and ministry is well summed up in our 
Golden Text. It divides itself into two parts, the one 
the result of the other. (1) In him was life, (2) the 
life that was in him was the light of men. 
A strange statement, "In him was life." Is there 

R4154:page89 

not life in every man? We answer, No ! From the 

divine standpoint a death sentence passed upon Adam 

and was inherited by all of his descendants, and from 

this, the divine standpoint, the legal standard, the 

whole world is dead, under the sentence of death, because 

of transgressions and sins, the tendency to which 

was inherited when, as the Scriptures declare, we were 

all born in sin, shapen in iniquity. (Psa. 51:5.) The 

statement, therefore, that in Christ there was life implies 

much. It implies that he did not receive his life, 

as did other men, from an earthly father. It corroborates 

the testimony of the Scriptures that our Lord was 

begotten from above, that his life was transferred from 

a higher plane, that he left the glory which he had with 

the Father before the world was and humbled himself 



and took the bondman's form and was found in fashion 
a man.— Phil. 2:8. 

It was because Jesus had life in this special sense 
which no other man had that he could be the Redeemer 
of man; as was written of him prophetically, Let go 
the prisoner out of the pit, for I have found a ransom. 
(Job 33:24.) No member of Adam's race was able to 
give a ransom for his brother, because all were under 
condemnation, and one condemned life could not be 
substituted for another condemned life. Hence the 
necessity of sending God's Son in human likeness and 
nature that he, by the favor of God, as the perfect one, 
having life, "might give his life a ransom for many." 
Thus, as the Redeemer of the world, our Lord's life 
was given for father Adam's life, a substitute, and 
since all of Adam's posterity shared in his death sentence, 
therefore naturally, justly, properly all who 
shared thus in his condemnation shared through Jesus 
in Adam's redemption. Hence a redemption for all has 
been provided, and God's assurance is that in due time 
all shall learn thereof and receive a blessing therefrom, 
an opportunity to return to harmony with God. This 
opportunity cannot come except through knowledge, 
and hence it has come first to those who have the hearing 
ear and are blessed of the Lord thereby. Blessed 
are your ears for they hear and your eyes for they see. 
-Matt. 13:16. 

IN HIM WAS SPIRIT-LIFE 

But there was another sense in which this text applies 
to our Lord Jesus and to him alone. When he 
had laid down at Calvary his life and finished the work 
which the Father had given him to do, that life was 
gone and could never be taken back, except by rescinding 
the entire contract of redemption. We are glad 

R4155 : page 89 

that this was not done. We remember, however, at 
the particular time when our Lord made his consecration 
to death, namely, at the beginning of his ministry, 
when he was immersed in the symbolism of death, that 
he received of the Father a begetting of the holy Spirit 
—he was begotten to a newness of life, to a spirit life. 
We perceive that the spirit life or new nature progressed 
and developed during our Lord's earthly ministry, 
and that at his resurrection from the dead it was 
this New Creature, this spirit being, that was raised 
up to perfection, so that our Lord is not a glorified 
man but, as the Apostle says, "Now the Lord is that 
spirit."— 2 Cor. 3:17. 

Our text has a special application to this New 
Creature— "In him was life," the new life, life as a New 
Creature, partaker of the divine nature. It is this life 
which the followers of Jesus in the present time are 



invited also to share. The promise is made to them 
that if they are baptized into his death, they shall also 
be in his resurrection. In the divine program all the 
Church's spiritual rights and interests were thus made 
to center in Christ; as the Apostle declares, "When he 
who is our life shall appear, we also shall appear with 
him in glory." (Col. 3:4.) It is this divine nature 
which our Lord has that he has been privileged to 
give to his followers. Thus it is written, "As the Father 
hath life in himself, so he has given unto the Son to 
have life in himself," and that he should give this life 
of a divine nature unto as many as he would, according 
to the Father's good pleasure. (John 5:26; 17:2.) 
He has promised it to those who love him, who follow 
in his footsteps and become overcomers of the world. 
Thus the Church throughout this Gospel Age is to be 
a partaker of the divine nature and is being gradually 
transformed in harmony with this new life, prepared 
for the glorious resurrection change at the end of this 
age, that by this resurrection of the just they may be 
made partakers of the divine nature and elevated to 
joint-heirship with their Lord in his Kingdom. 

THE LIFE WAS THE LIGHT OF MEN 

This second part of the text is applicable to both 
of the lives of Jesus, to the perfect human life which 
was his as a man, and also to the perfect life as a 
New Creature which became his as a result of the 
begetting of the holy Spirit. The Apostle apparently 
refers to our Lord's human life when he says, 
"He was made flesh and dwelt among us and we 
beheld his glory, the glory [honor] as of the only 
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." 
(John 1:14.) This seems to picture our Lord Jesus 
as the man and refers to the glory and dignity 
of his manhood; as the same is again referred to 
in the eighth Psalm in the words, "What is man, 
that thou art mindful of him? and the Son of man, that 
thou visitest him? Thou madest him a little lower than 
the angels, thou didst crown him with glory and honor 
and didst place him over the works of thy hands." It 
is evident from this that there is a glory and an honor 
which belong to perfect manhood, and that our Lord 
possessed these is evident not only from this statement 
of the Apostle John, but also from the testimony of 
John the Baptist, who knew him before he was anointed 
and who at first declined to baptize him, declaring 
that he was in no sense of the word a sinner, and saying, 
I would rather need to be baptized of thee; and 
do you come to me for baptism? He recognized our 
Lord as holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from 
sinners, aside from his begetting of the holy Spirit. 
In this manner the life that was in him, the perfection 

R4155 : page 90 



of manhood in him, was the light of men in his day. 

We cannot doubt that it had much to do with his popularity 

with the common people. He was full of grace 

—not only graceful in form, in manner and in speech, 

but in every other sense of the word he was a favored 

man. This was the result of his perfection, of his having 

an unlimited life from an unimpaired source— by 

reason of his not having had a human father or life-giver. 

He was full of truth in the sense that his life 

was not biased or warped; he was not born in sin or 

shapen in iniquity.* 

We come now to the power of the holy Spirit which 
was in our Lord Jesus— the new life, the divine life. 
This, shining through our Lord in perfect accord with 
his perfect flesh, made him a most wonderful one. 
This indeed was the light of men. It not only shone 
forth as a burning lamp to reflect the divine character 
in all of our Lord's doings and words, but it enabled 
him to speak out to his followers, who had ears to 
hear the wonderful words of life. It enabled him to 
grasp the divine plan and to appreciate the pathway 
leading to the glory, honor and immortality, and to 
point it out to his followers, saying, "He who would 
be my disciple must take up his cross and follow me." 
Thus our Lord illustrated in himself to all who would 
be his followers the glorious words of the prophecy, 
"Thou wilt show him the path of life." (Psa. 16:11.) 
By the holy Spirit our Lord was shown that the path 
of sacrifice meant the path to glory, and similarly he 
pointed out to his followers that the light which was in 
him became the light of his followers. 

It is in full harmony with this double application 
that we read elsewhere that our Lord "brought life and 
immortality to light through the Gospel." (2 Tim. 1:10.) 
As the man he showed, illustrated, the perfection 
of human life and made it possible for the whole 
human family, sold under sin but redeemed by the precious 
blood, to come eventually to that grand standard 
of human perfection which he personally represented. 
This he also told us in his declaration that the Son of 
man came to seek and to save that which was lost. 
(Luke 19:10.) Thus we see in our Lord the manifestation 
of the perfection of restitution life, and we see in 
his sacrifice how he secured that restitution life for all 
who will have it at his hand, for the entire human family, 
and that thus he became the author of life, the 
Life-Giver to all who would obey him. The great mass 
of the world have not yet had opportunity to hear him, 
because their blind eyes and deaf ears have not yet 
been opened. But in due time they shall have the opportunity 
of gaining by restitution, through the Redeemer's 
merit, the life which he brought to light, 
which he manifested and which he declared he had 
provided for them. 

But what did he provide for the Church? Ah, we 



answer, the great Deliverer has provided some better 

thing than restitution life and blessing for the Church 

—wonderful, grand, as are those provisions for the 

world in general. For the Church he has provided 

immortality, the highest form or condition of life, the 

divine nature, life on the divine plane. This thought 

is too wonderful for us, it is incomprehensible; we 

must merely take it without hoping to grasp it or comprehend 

it fully as yet. It is a testimony to the unspeakable 

gift of God through Christ Jesus our Lord 

to all those who obey him, to all of his Little Flock. 

It is this, the very highest conceivable plane of life, to 

which our Lord is inviting his followers now, and 

everything in the divine plan is being made to wait until 

the Very Elect shall have been gathered from the 

four winds of heaven, until the Bride of Christ shall 

have made herself ready, until the polishing processes 

shall have made the jewels meet for the Master's use, 

and then by the resurrection change these may pass to 

glory, honor and immortality. "Sown in corruption, 

raised in incorruption; sown in weakness, raised in 

power; sown an animal body, raised a spiritual body!" 

"We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 

and share his glory." 



*See SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. V., Chap. IV., "The Undefiled 
One." 



R4155 : page 90 

THE PROGRESS OF TOTAL ABSTINENCE 

-MARCH 29.-PROV. 23:29-35- 

Golden Text:— "At last it biteth like a 
serpent, and stingeth like an adder." 

WE shall not attempt a special analysis of this 
lesson, believing that all of our readers are 
thoroughly competent to do this, each for himself. 
We do, however, with pleasure call attention to 
the fact that total abstinence has been making great 
progress recently, especially in our own land. Our 
readers are well aware that we do not admit that there 
is a total abstinence Gospel and that it is the duty of 
the Lord's people to be preaching it. On the contrary, 
while we have much sympathy with reforms along the 
lines of temperance and every other direction, we recognize 
the fact that only one Gospel commission has 
been given to the Lord's followers, namely, Go thou 
and preach the Gospel, good tidings of great joy which 
shall be unto all people. We are not turning aside 



from this divine commission to teach temperance, total 
abstinence, but we do take the passing opportunity of 
registering our sympathy with the cause, and the joy it 
would give us to see this great evil of intemperance 
put down. 

So surely as the Lord's people pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven," 
they are hoping the time will come when the 
liquor evil in its various multiplied forms will be 
thoroughly overthrown and banished as a part of 
the devil's instrumentality of evil whereby countless 

R4156 : page 91 

millions have been caused to mourn and 
helped into further sin and degradation. Whoever 
looks forward to the coming Kingdom and its 
work of blessing mankind, in the manner suggested 
and other ways, must also at heart be very much in 
sympathy with every endeavor on the part of the poor 
world to help itself and to get free from this terrible 
bondage. And such in turn in their own hearts and 
lives must feel like putting on restraints which would 
not only keep their bodies suitable temples of the holy 
Spirit but keep them ready, meet for the Master's use, 
and at their very highest degree of usefulness for his 
service. It would be in vain surely for any of this 
class to pray for God's Kingdom to come and not 
strive to have that Kingdom operative in themselves 
and illustrated in their own daily lives to the best of 
their ability. 

From letters received we perceive that the question 
of license or no license is being very widely discussed 
and made an issue. Our readers know that in general 
we advise that as followers of the Lamb it would be to 
the advantage of the Lord's dear people to avoid 
complications with political questions and that our 
privileges as citizens of this country of casting our 
votes at the polls be generally ignored as being 
to our disadvantage spiritually. Furthermore we 
have suggested that voting brings a measure of 
responsibility for the upholding of the party 
with which we have affiliated and voted and a 
partial responsibility for its right or wrong use of 
power, and might imply a certain responsibility to bear 
arms, etc. Our advice, therefore, has been that we 
who are seeking the heavenly city, the heavenly country, 
and who are praying, "Thy Kingdom come," should 
wait for that Kingdom, and not meddle with earthly 
affairs, politics, voting, etc. Now the question arises, 
Would it be right or wrong for us to vote on the question 
of local option? Our thought, dear friends, is 
that it would be perfectly right for us to express 
our sentiments on this subject at the polls. It is a special 
question and the law invites every citizen to express 
his preferences and we do well to express ourselves, 



not in a partizan manner, not in denunciation 
of those who think differently, but quietly, meekly, 
to say by our vote at the polls that we are quite willing 
to forego our own personal liberties in connection with 
spirituous liquors for the good which would thereby 
be accomplished for the masses. And if at the same 
election a choice were being made for a School Board, 
we see no objection that could reasonably be urged to 
an expression of one's preferences there that the best 
men might be chosen to supervise the school work. 
But we suggest to all that there is danger of being absorbed 
by the worldly and political spirit and of having 
our time and attention taken from other important 
matters. We would advise that politics in general be 
left to the children of this world who believe nothing 
and care nothing for our Kingdom for which we pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come." 
It may not be amiss to give a few quotations from— 

ADVOCATES OF TOTAL ABSTINENCE 

Mr. Andrew Carnegie, answering a question on this 
subject, replied, "The best temperance lecture I have 
delivered lately is my offer of ten per cent, premium on 
their wages to all the employees of my Scottish estates 
who will abstain from intoxicating liquors." 

The Brotherhood of Railroad Engineers, we are 
informed, "will do all they can to help a man to overcome 
the evil habit. They will bear with him, encourage 
him, but if he continue to drink they must for the 
safety of the public report him to the authorities and 
have him discharged." So says one of them. 

A military man, an inmate of an institution for 
reformation of those addicted to the liquor habit, when 
questioned respecting the necessity for his being there, 
told that he had tried hard to stop the periodical 
"bouts," but that he might as well have tried to stop 
an express train. He said that the helpers at the institution 
had succeeded in stopping his craving so that 
he refused a glass of whiskey after the fourth day. 
The minister who was questioning him said, "But were 
you not on your honor not to drink it?" "True," replied 
the major, "but if the craving had come I might 
have been on fifty honors and they would not have mattered 
a straw." 

A business man at the same institute said, "I came 
here because I was always telling myself that I could 
give up drinking just when I wanted to; but one day I 
was startled to find how my periods of sobriety had 
shortened from three months to three weeks." 

A BUSINESS FIRM RUINED 

"A number of years ago a certain firm of four men 
in Boston were rated as Al.' They were rich, prosperous, 
young and prompt. One of them had the curiosity 



to see how they were rated at Dun's agency and 
found the above rating and was satisfied; but at the 
end these words were added, 'but they all drink.' He 
thought it a good joke at the time, but a few years later 
two of them were dead, another was a drunkard, 
and the fourth was poor, living partly on charity. That 
little note at the end of their rating was the most important 
and significant of all the facts connected with 
embodied in their description." 

President Lincoln was once criticised by a friend 
for his seeming rudeness in declining to test some rare 
wines provided for his use. He answered, "I meant no 
disrespect, John, but I promised my precious mother 
only a few days before she died that I would never use 
anything intoxicating as a beverage, and I consider 
that promise as binding today as it was the day I 
gave it." 

ATHLETES CONSIDER LIQUOR INJURIOUS TO THEM 

Mr. Giannini, director of the New York Athletic 
Club, says, "Alcoholic liquors as a beverage, moderate 
or otherwise, are entirely tabooed by athletic trainers 
everywhere and under all circumstances." 

Mr. H. S. Cornish, director of athletics in the new 

R4156 : page 92 

Manhattan Club, says, "I have never used intoxicating 
liquor in training, and never will. I do not believe in 
it. I don't allow a man whom I am training to drink 
any liquor whatever, or to smoke either for that matter; 
it stimulates and affects unfavorably the action of 
the heart. " 

Total abstinence may be much more necessary today 
than it was centuries ago, because the race is gradually 
becoming weakened. It is the same in this as in 
the matter of marriage. Marriage between blood relatives, 
even of second cousins, is not sanctioned today 
because of the weakness of the race, whereas in Adam's 
time there was the closest of intermarriage, between 
brothers and sisters, without the slightest deleterious 
effect. Those who are strong ought to bear the infirmities 
of the weak, says the Apostle, and this argument 
should especially appeal to all who belong to the Lord's 
army, who are battling for righteousness and truth and 
for the uplifting of their fellow-men. Surely those who 
have their all upon the altar of consecration can well 
afford to deny themselves liberties in this direction in 
the interest of others so that their influence may be on 
the helpful side of this as well as every other 
question. 

R4156 : page 92 

"WITHIN THE VAIL" 



Homesick for heaven? and longing for its rest? 

And does the way seem long that leads thee there? 
Lift up thine eyes, the "vail" is growing thin 

That separates us from its glories rare. 
But yesterday a dear one passed beyond— 

"Within the vail"— and entered into rest; 
And as she passed we caught a radiant glimpse, 

As when effulgent glory shineth in the west. 

Another link is added to the chain 

Of precious gold that draws us surely home, 
Another strand is twined with the cord 

Of love that holds us that we may not roam. 
Yes, one by one his saints are passing o'er, 

His loved from shadows into heaven's pure light, 
Into the joy of his dear presence, where 

They feel no more the darkness of earth's night. 

But sweeter, grander still, "within the vail" 

That almost grows transparent to our gaze, 
We see our Master, our beloved Lord, 

And lift to him our rapturous songs of praise. 
So near we are, we almost catch the strains 

Of heavenly music from celestial choirs. 
Can we not bide with patience one more hour? 

We've almost reached the goal of our desires! 

Then let us not go mourning on our way, 

But let our hearts be light, our faces glad, 
These pressing burdens we shall soon lay down 

Forevermore; why, then, should we be sad? 
"A cloud of witnesses" behold our course 

With interest intense, and shall we fail? 
Our race is almost run;— Lord, nerve our hearts, 

And scatter every doubt that doth assail. 

So clarify our clouded vision, Lord, 

So lift our thoughts and hearts to things above, 
That earthly woes shall have no power to vex, 

Nor separate us from thy grace and love. 
While still we toss on life's tempestuous sea, 

Shield from the rocks our tiny barques so frail, 
Stand at the helm, and guide us safely till 

We, too, are anchored safe "within the vail." 
—Alice G. James. 



R4157 : page 92 

THE SHEPHERD, THE DOOR, THE FLOCKS 
-JOHN 10:1-18.-APRIL 5- 

Golden Text:— "The Good Shepherd 



giveth his life for the sheep."— V. 11. 

THE Scriptures assign many very beautiful and expressive 
titles to our Lord as descriptive of his relationship 
to his faithful. Amongst the most beautiful and 
impressive of these is the Good Shepherd, or, more literally, 
the grand Shepherd, the ideal Shepherd. Likewise amongst 
the various names applied to our Lord's followers, the term 
"sheep" is the one most familiar as well as one of the most 
fitting. Surely it would never occur to the natural man to 
use such an illustration. In illustration of what we mean 
note the fact that the barons and lords of England have 
adopted various signets, coats of arms, etc., on many of 
which animals or animals' heads appear. Did any one ever 
see a sheep's head on any of these? We think not. If we 
could imagine any earthly lord as adopting a symbol of a 
sheep, it would surely represent a surly-horned ram. Lions' 
heads, tigers' heads, eagles' heads, and nondescript heads of 
ferocious aspect, dragons, etc., are what are usually 
chosen. This represents the natural mind and the desire 
that the natural man has to appear strong and ferocious 
and to intimidate others. He who represented himself as 
the Good Shepherd and his followers as sheep had a very 
different idea of the whole matter from that of the natural 
man, and we who have become his followers should take 
note of this, and, appreciating it, should cultivate more and 
more of the sheep-like nature in our relationship to him as 
the Shepherd. 

THE DOOR INTO THE SHEEPFOLD 

The parable of our lesson divides itself into two parts, 
representing Jesus first of all as the door into the sheepfold 
and secondly as the Shepherd. The fold described in the 
parable is well represented in the accompanying illustration. 
It was a place of safety, of rest, of protection from prowling 
wild beasts and from robbers. There was but one doorway 
into these folds and it was supposed to be guarded by a 
porter who would know the true shepherd and admit him 
and no other. Our Lord declared himself to be the true 
Shepherd of Jehovah's flock, the only one to whom the porter 
would grant admission and the only one, therefore, who 
had the right to control the sheep and who alone could provide 
for their safety. The porter who could thus discriminate 
between the true and the false was the Law Covenant. 

R4157 : page 93 

Those who could not answer the Law, who could not fulfil 
its demands, could not substantiate their claims to being the 
Shepherd, the Messiah. But our Lord did meet the demands 
of the Law fully, completely— "in him was no sin, 
neither was guile found in his mouth." He was already 
holy, harmless, separate from sinners. He is thus identified 
to us as the rightful Shepherd. Others had come in his 
name, professing to be the Messiah— false Messiahs— and 



had endeavored to attract the sheep; but our Lord declares 
of them that they were fraudulent, "thieves and robbers," 
who were merely assisting to steal the sheep, and who were 
actuated not with a desire to profit the sheep but by personal, 
selfish ambitions. 

There was but one way to become the true Shepherd 
of the Lord's flock and to have a right to lead his flock- 
out to the green pastures and still waters of truth and grace 
and into the rest and security of the fold. That way was 
the way of the cross— to give himself a ransom for all. 
This our Lord did and thus he became the door to the sheepfold, 
opening up a new and living way, or, more correctly, a 
new way of life. Nevertheless, this is not the making of a 
new door into the fold, but the opening of the door which 
had previously been closed. The door was the Law, which 
could not open except by obedience to the Law; and now 
our Lord Jesus, having kept the Law, has made it possible 
for all of his true sheep to enter in by the same door, by the 
keeping of the Law— not, however, the letter of the Law, 
which would be impossible to us, but its spirit. Thus the 
Apostle says of the true sheep and their entering into the 
fold, "The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us who 
walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit," (Rom. 8:4); because 
our Shepherd has made an appropriation of his grace 
on our behalf which makes up for us all that we lack. 
So long as we are his and are striving to walk in his ways 
every deficiency is compensated out of his abundance. To 
him the porter openeth, to him the Law and the prophets 
bear witness. 

"BUT THEY UNDERSTOOD NOT" 

It is supposed that this parable was uttered in the hearing 
of the man born blind, who had been expelled from the 
synagogue, and in the hearing also of the Pharisees, who 
had so much to do with his expulsion. No doubt the man 
was feeling discouraged, downcast, because of his excommunication 
from the supposed fold of the Lord's people. The 
presumption, then, is that the Lord gave this parable to illustrate 
the fact that he had not really been cast out of the 
Lord's fold, but merely out of a human organization by 
those who had no power in respect to the matter. Our Lord 
would have him and the Pharisees and his disciples and us 
see that there is no flock of the Lord except that of which 
he is the Leader and Shepherd; that there is no way into 
that flock except through him, through the work which he 
would accomplish by his sacrifice and through our acceptance 
of the same by faith. But verse 6 says the hearers understood 
not the meaning of the parable, therefore the Lord 
repeated it in slightly different terms, proclaiming himself 
as the doorway by which any could enter into divine favor 
as members of the Lord's flock. Thus the man who had 
been cast out of the synagogue might perceive that he really 
had lost nothing, but that on the contrary he had been assisted 
toward the right door of the true fold, in which rest 
indeed could be obtained. Now he was invited to see that 



the Lord alone was the avenue to rest and salvation and to 
the spiritual refreshment of divine instruction. Others had 
selfishly sought to steal or to destroy the sheep, if thereby 
they could advance their own personal interests; but he, as 
the true Shepherd, instead of seeking his own welfare, was 
seeking the welfare and advantage of the sheep that they 
might have life and have it more abundantly. 

What a lesson for us! The Master did not say that he 
came to deliver the sheep from eternal torment, but that he 
came to deliver them from death. He does not say that they 
already have a life which they must spend somewhere either 
in joy or anguish, and that he had come to assist them, so 
that it should not be spent in anguish; his language, on the 
contrary, teaches that the sheep could have no life except 
through him, the Life-Giver; that he had come to give back 
in due time by restitution processes, to as many as would 
receive it, the life which was lost by father Adam's disobedience 
—human life. Yea, he declares that he intended to 
give life more abundant than that which was lost! How 
could this be, if father Adam was perfect and as such had 
everlasting life according to divine arrangement? We answer 
that the life which the Lord proposes to give to those 
who are his sheep of this Gospel Age, this Little Flock, is a 
still higher form and degree of life, namely, immortality, inherent 
life. These he proposes to make partakers of the 
divine nature by giving them a share with himself "in his 
resurrection," the "First Resurrection."— Phil. 3:10. 

HE GAVE HIS LIFE FOR US 

This is the central point of our lesson. The Good 
Shepherd, so far from self-seeking, gladly laid down his life 
for the sheep, and it was by virtue of thus purchasing the 
sheep by his own precious blood that their eternal life is 
possible; without his purchase there would be no flock, 
and it is by this that he becomes the Shepherd of the flock. 
How clear, how beautiful the thought, "Ye were bought 
with a price"! (1 Cor. 6:20.) No one else could give this 
ransom for us, no one else could purchase us or grant us 
life everlasting, no one else, therefore, could legally become 
our Shepherd or be able to lead us into the rest and peace 
of God, into the knowledge of the truth and ultimately into 
the heavenly fold, the rest that remaineth for the people of 

R4157 : page 94 

God. Worthy the Lamb that was slain to receive glory, 
honor, dominion and power! 

"THE SHEEP HEAR HIS VOICE" 

The tales told respecting the shepherds of eastern 
countries and their flocks are remarkable and illustrate well 
our Lord's declarations of this parable. Let us examine a 
few of these that we may sympathetically enter into the 
spirit of the Lord's words. Those who heard him were familiar 



with these facts. One writer says:— 

"It is one of the most interesting spectacles to see the 
number of flocks of thirsty sheep water at a fountain. Each 
flock in obedience to the call of its own shepherd, lies down 
awaiting its turn. The shepherd of one flock calls his sheep 
in squads, and when the squad has done drinking, orders it 
away by sounds which the sheep perfectly understand, and 
calls up another squad. The sheep never make any mistake 
as to who whistles to them or calls them. In a flock of 
hundreds or thousands each individual sheep has a name, 
knows it and is known by it. The Greeks had a similar 
custom. The names frequently corresponded to certain defects, 
as for instance, 'Torn' or 'Broken-Legged,' 'One Eye,' 
'Curly Horn,' 'Bald Head.' As lambs they are taught to 
answer to their names by patient drill, being led back and 
forth from the rest of the flock and not allowed to go to 
their mothers for food until they respond properly to the 
calls. The shepherd never drives his sheep in the East, but 
goes before them, they follow him, they run after him if he 
appears to be escaping from them and are terrified if he is 
out of their sight or any stranger appears instead of him. 
He calls for them from time to time to let them know that 
he is at hand, they listen and continue grazing, but if anyone 
else attempts to produce the same peculiar sounds they 
look around, startled, and begin to scatter. A Scotch traveler 

R4158 : page 94 

changed clothes with a shepherd, and thus disguised 
began to call the sheep; they remained motionless; then 
the true shepherd raised his voice and they all hastened to 
him in spite of his strange garments." 

"HE CALLS HIS OWN SHEEP BY NAME" 

The foregoing illustrations help us to appreciate this 
statement and assist us in applying it to the true sheep of 
the Lord's Little Flock. "The Lord knoweth them that are 
his," and it is also true that those who are his know him. 
"He goeth before them and the sheep follow him, for they 
know his voice and a stranger they will not follow, but will 
flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers." 
The voice of the Lord is the voice of justice, of truth and of 
love, and all who are his sheep are expected to be able to 
discriminate between his message and the various false messages 
which more or less particularly represent the Adversary, 
who seeks to mislead the flock, using human instrumentality 
to accomplish the purpose. We have the Lord's 
assurance that none of the true sheep will be satisfied with 
the false Gospel; it will not appeal to their hearts, and 
equally we have the assurance that the true sheep will be 
satisfied with the true Gospel, because it will satisfy their 
longings as nothing else will do. This is an important 
point to keep before our minds. It indicates to us the importance 
of becoming fully, truly, emphatically the Lord's 



sheep, of entering into covenant relationship with him and 
thus making sure his protecting care and instruction. 

"I KNOW MY SHEEP" 

It becomes an important question then as to how and 
when we become the Lord's sheep. Are all the wise and 
the learned, the rich and the great, the Lord's sheep? The 
Apostle answers, No, and says further that not many of 
those will be found amongst the sheep— not many wise, not 
many great, not many learned, not many noble, not many rich, 
but chiefly the poor of this world, rich in faith. (1 Cor. 1:26-28; 
Jas. 2:5.) Are all of the poor, then, the Lord's sheep? We 
answer, No ! These different flocks do in a general way indeed 
hold the name of Christ. But surely not many of them 
give evidence of being his disciples, his followers. Many of 
them know little about his Word, his voice; many of them 
know nothing about his leading into green pastures and by 
still waters of divine truth and grace, many of them know 
nothing about the real fold with its rest and peace and protecting 
care. Their lack in these respects shows that they 
are not of the true flock whom the Lord is leading, though 
true sheep of the Lord may be found in each denomination. 
But wherever they may be, if they are his, they are being 
led and being fed and know him and know his voice, his 
Word, and are dissatisfied with the husks of human 
tradition. 

"THE HIRELING FLEETH" 

Many, indeed, might have been glad of the honor of 
being the Shepherd, the caretaker of the Lord's flock, but 
the test, the cost, was too great for them. We may well suppose 
that many of the angels would have been glad to occupy 
such a position— but would they have been willing to 
undertake it at the cost involved? Many amongst men 
have coveted the office of a shepherd both before our Lord's 
day and since; but while none of them could have bought the 
sheep, since all were under condemnation, we have no reason 
to suppose that any of them would have been willing to purchase 
them at the cost of his all. The Lord's words seem 
to imply this. Only the true Shepherd was willing to make 
the sacrifice and to lay down his life for the sheep. We 
may remark here that while there is but one Shepherd of 
the Lord's flock, he, in his absence, has made provision for 
his flock, that he would give them pastors and teachers who 
were to feed the flock of God and to watch for their souls, 
for their lives, to protect their interests. 

It is in line with the Master's teaching that we find 
that he expects all who would be worthy of this position of 
feeding this flock, shepherding them, must have his spirit, 
his willingness to lay down their lives for the sheep, and in 
their defense, as his representatives, to protect them from 
the Adversary and his various snares and machinations and 
from the wolves in sheep's clothing who would make merchandise 
of them that they might bring them into bondage, 



into human pens separate and apart from the true fold 
opened by the true Shepherd and who would feed them 
upon the husks of human tradition, instead of leading them 
to the green pastures of "Present Truth." As the true sheep 
know the true Shepherd and are known by him, so the true 
Shepherd should know the true under-shepherds and they 
should know the sheep intimately. Those who utter a voice 
or call of their own cannot be recognized by the true Shepherd 
or by the true sheep; the faithful under-shepherd will 

R4158 : page 95 

speak not only the words but also in the tones, in the manner 
of the true Shepherd. 

How comforting the assurance of verse 14, "I know 
mine own and mine own know me, even as the Father 
knoweth me and I know the Father" ! (R. V.) What a 
beautiful description we here have of the precious relationship 
between the Lord and his own! The comparison between 
his knowledge and that of the Father is forceful, 
and, as our Lord elsewhere pointed out, they that know not 
him know not the Father. How important from the divine 
standpoint is knowledge, not merely head knowledge, but 
heart knowledge, intimate acquaintance with the Lord and 
his glorious plan! 

ONE FLOCK AND ONE SHEPHERD 

An important truth is set forth in v. 17: There is only 
the one fold now provided for the Lord's sheep, and in it all of 
his true ones of this Gospel Age find rest and peace through 
faith and obedience. This is the Little Flock, to whom it is 
the Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom. Many have 
supposed in the past that this Elect Little Flock which will 
receive the Kingdom glory, honor and immortality will be 
the only ones ever recognized of the Lord as his sheep, that 
all others will be consigned to purgatory or to eternal torment. 
But the erroneousness of this view is abundantly 
shown in this verse where our Lord distinctly declares that 
he has other sheep not of this fold, others who have not yet 
entered into its rest of faith which we have entered, hoping 
for the glories of the Kingdom beyond. Let us have a good 
view of the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 
divine love and provision in Christ: that the whole world 
was lost in sin and death through father Adam's disobedience, 
and that the whole world was redeemed by the precious 
blood of Christ! Let us see that as yet only a special class 
has been called out of darkness into the Lord's marvelous 
light and into the privileges of the present sheep-fold conditions! 
Let us note that the great mass of mankind are 
without God and have no hope in the world, because their 
eyes are blinded and their ears are stopped and they know 
not of the grace of God and have not yet received of the 
blessings! 

But let us hearken also to the declaration of the Lord 
that in due time all the blind eyes shall be opened and all 



the deaf ears shall be unstopped! Let us hearken to his 
declaration that the Little Flock now being selected are to 
constitute his Bride and joint-heirs in the Kingdom and that 
then, through him and his glorified Bride, the blessing of 
the Lord shall be extended to every member of the race. 
The Sun of Righteousness shall shine forth with healing in 
his beams, every knee shall bow and every tongue confess. 
Then the gathering of the sheep of the other flock will begin, 
as recorded in John 10:16. At that time the present 
flock will have passed beyond the vail into the Kingdom 
and its glories. Then the present fold will be at an end 
and there will be no use for such a fold in the future, for 
thieves and robbers will not be permitted then— "nothing 
shall hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain [Kingdom]." 
(Isa. 1 1:9.) Then the great Adversary shall be bound for 
a thousand years that he may deceive the sheep no longer 
until the thousand years are finished. Meantime the 
whole world of mankind will be under the instruction of the 
Lord and his Bride class, and the knowledge of the glory of 
God shall fill the whole earth. (Hab. 2:14.) The effect 
will be a test of humanity, and some will come gladly, voluntarily, 
into accord with the Lord as his sheep and be accepted 
to his right hand, to his favor, as the kind upon 
whom he is pleased to bestow everlasting life. Others under 
the same favorable conditions will manifest the goat-like, 
the wayward disposition and be gathered gradually to the 
left hand of disfavor as of those who have the spirit of the 
Adversary, which cannot be favored of the Lord. These 
ultimately with Satan, at the close of the Millennial Age, 
will be utterly destroyed in the Second Death. Their punishment 
will be everlasting, because their death will be 
everlasting; they will never be resurrected, theirs will be 
the Second Death— symbolically Gehenna, destruction. 
None will deny that throughout the Gospel Age there 
is a large class who have never heard of the only name 
given under heaven and amongst men whereby they must 
be saved and who, therefore, have never had an opportunity 
of becoming members of the Lord's flock. That they have 
gone to heaven without a knowledge of the "only name" is 
unscriptural as well as unreasonable, and that they have 
gone to eternal torment without an opportunity for salvation is 
equally unscriptural and unreasonable. That the Lord intends 
to use the Very Elect Little Flock of this Gospel Age as his 
kings and priests during the Millennium, to carry his mercy 
and favor to all of these and to give them an opportunity 
of becoming members of the human flock to whom he will 
be pleased to give eternal life, is both reasonable and 
Scriptural. 

ONE FLOCK, BUT NOT ONE FOLD 

Our common version declares, "There shall be one fold 
and one Shepherd," but this is not borne out by the Greek 

R4159 : page 95 



text, which is more properly rendered in the Revised Version 
and in the Diaglott— "There shall be one flock and 
one Shepherd." This is in full agreement with the Apostle's 
statement (Eph. 1:10) that in the dispensation of the 
fullness of times he might gather together in one [literally, 
under one head] all things in Christ, both which are in 
heaven and which are on earth, even in him. Ultimately 
all of God's creation will be under the headship of this 
great Shepherd, who is now the Head of the Church, the 
Little Flock, and who in future will be Head over angels 
also and over restored humanity. The flock will be one, 
but the sheep will be of various natures on various planes 
of being; as it is written, "In my Father's house are many 
mansions," many apartments, many planes, but all harmonious, 
grand. But the highest of all these planes, the plane 
of glory, is that to which the Lord has invited the Little 
Flock, the Bride class of this Gospel Age. Let us hear his 
voice, let us follow in his footsteps, let us make our calling 
and election sure! 



page 97 



SEMI-MONTHLY 