From Our Readers
Resisting Rapists
I wish to express my gratitude for the article entitled “They Resisted Rapists.” (February 22, 1984) A short time back while on my way home at about 8:15 p.m. I was attacked by a man. The aforementioned article came to mind immediately. After some time, when I wouldn’t comply with his request to be quiet I screamed again, this time “Jehovah help!” My assailant let go of me and walked away. Without your article I would not as readily have been able to protect myself.
L. G., Canada
I appreciate the articles in your magazine, especially the one on rape. As a teacher in the public school, I was able to share that information with the whole class. Many were quite surprised and now have a new attitude about rape.
A. C., Virginia
They Love It That Way
In your article “They Love It That Way!” (January 22, 1983) you forgot one group: yourselves, Jehovah’s Witnesses. Undisputedly your criticism of today’s governments is justified. But I find fault with you for not even trying to do it better. You are bound to have sufficient morally and professionally qualified people who could with good conscience accept positions in community administration and for whom a person could vote without need of anxiety. Your continual references to tomorrow’s new order does not excuse your behavior today at a time when this new order does not yet exist. It is not God’s will that everyone be allowed to carry on his atrocities without hindrance. It is therefore the duty of those recognizing this fact to take steps to change this. That is, unless we love it that way.
M. Z., Federal Republic of Germany
We agree that all who put faith in God’s coming New Order need to live their lives now in accord with his righteous principles. Jehovah’s Witnesses are known worldwide for being honest, hardworking people who are conscientious, dependable, law abiding and considerate of others. They also spend much of their free time teaching these important Bible principles to others, helping others to benefit by living in accord with Bible principles. On the other hand, Jesus Christ himself emphasized that his followers should not get involved in political affairs of this present world, stating to them: “You are no part of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world.” (John 15:19) When Jesus fed a multitude, certain men were about to seize him and make him king, but Jesus withdrew from them. (John 6:14, 15) He stated the principle that one does not sew a new patch on an old garment, nor does one pour new wine into old wineskins. (Matthew 9:16, 17) When he was arrested, Jesus could have involved his disciples and even angels in his defense, but he stated when before Pilate: “My kingdom is no part of this world.” (John 18:36; Matthew 26:52, 53) As to the conditions in this world, Jehovah’s Witnesses definitely do not “love it that way,” and this is shown in their example and activities worldwide. In this they follow Jesus’ commands and example.​—ED.

