





COVER SUBJECT | HOW TO HARNESS YOUR HABITS
2 Manage Your Environment




  You resolved to eat better, but that tub of ice cream seems to have your name written all over it.

  You decided to quit smoking, but once again, your friend—who knows you are trying to quit—offers you a cigarette.

  You planned to exercise today, but even digging through the closet for your running shoes seems like too much work!


Can you see a common thread in those scenarios? Time and again, experience has shown that our environment—the situations we put ourselves in and the people we spend time with—influences our success in building good habits and breaking bad ones.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: “The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself, but the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.”—Proverbs 22:3.
The Bible advises us to think ahead. By doing so, we can cautiously avoid situations that could undermine our goals, and we can thus actively put ourselves in more favorable situations. (2 Timothy 2:22) In short, we are wise to manage our environment.
Make it harder to do the wrong thing and easier to do the right thing




WHAT YOU CAN DO

  Make it harder to do the wrong thing. For example, if you want to eliminate junk food from your diet, try not to keep food in your kitchen that you know is not good for you. That way, when temptation strikes, giving in will require more effort than not giving in.

  Make it easier to do the right thing. For instance, if you plan to exercise first thing in the morning, set your exercise clothing next to your bed the night before. The easier it is to get started, the more likely you are to follow through.

  Choose your friends carefully. We tend to become like the people we spend time with. (1 Corinthians 15:33) So limit contact with people who encourage habits that you are trying to break, and seek out those who can reinforce good habits.





RELATED BIBLE PRINCIPLES
“The one walking with the wise will become wise.”—Proverbs 13:20.
“The plans of the diligent surely lead to success.”—Proverbs 21:5.


