Announcements
THE SECRET OF HAPPINESS
“Happy are those who are conscious of their spiritual need,” said Jesus, “since the kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.” One conscious of his spiritual needs is made happy by studying the Bible and learning the glories of God’s kingdom. Then he is in position to enjoy the secret of happiness—giving. Giving? Yes, giving the blessed information to others, for Jesus said, “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.” (Acts 20:35, NW) Jesus gave the truth freely at all opportunities and instructed his followers to share the life-giving truths with others. During the month of May, Jehovah’s witnesses and all persons of good will toward God will enjoy this happiness by going from house to house sharing the truth with others. The book “New Heavens and a New Earth” and the booklet After Armageddon—God’s New World will be offered on a contribution of 50 cents. If properly used they will help many to start enjoying the secret of happiness.
DID YOU LIKE THIS ISSUE?
Then why not subscribe for a year? Each issue of The Watchtower has a circulation of 1,800,000 copies. It has the greatest circulation of any religious magazine in the world. By turning to the inside cover you will see that The Watchtower is printed in 40 different languages. Further, on the inside cover you will find outlined in brief the purpose of The Watchtower. This magazine is read and enjoyed by people of all races, colors, creeds and religions seeking accurate Bible information. If you like this issue, you will like the next 24 issues of The Watchtower, published on the 1st and 15th of each month. Upon receiving your subscription with a remittance of $1, we shall be glad to send you the Watchtower magazine for one year. If you submit your subscription before May 1 three informative Bible booklets will be sent to you free.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 16: Missing the Mark of Integrity.
Week of May 23: The Way for Man’s Attainment to Perfect Integrity.

