Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, X. Y., JANUARY 15, 1!)1S 


No. 2 


ARE THE ADVERSARIES INCREASING IN POWER 


"Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, 

Why should anyone arm himself unless he expected to 
meet an enemy in combat? This seems to be the thought 
of the Apostle expressed in the text. The entire chapter 
evidently relates to the end of the Gospel age. It is in the 
nature of a warning against adversaries. "But", saya St. 
Paul, "it is not worldly warfare that we are waging; the 
weapons with which we fight are not human weapons, but 
are mighty through God in overthrowing strong fortifications." 
(2 Corinthians 10:3, 4, Weymouth.) Thus it is seen that 
it is the new creature that must arm preparatory to the final 
conflict. 

The new creation had its beginning at the baptism of 
Jesus in the Jordan. Then and there he was begotten to 
the divine nature. The progressive development of the members
 of the new creation has continued from Pentecost until 
now, and the evidence is cumulative that its completion is 
near at hand. All those who will ultimately be of this class 
must be of one mind — the mind of Christ. All the members 
thereof must meet the same adversaries and have combats 
of a similar nature. 

THE DIVINE PLAN 

Jehovah foreknew that Adam would disobey him and that 
all of his progeny would suffer sickness, sorrow and death. 
In the exercise of his loving kindness and perfect wisdom, 


arm yourselves likewise with the same mind" — 1 Peter 4:1. 
God provided redemption of mankind from death through the 
blood of Jesus, his beloved Son. He further foreordained 
and provided that because of his full obedience to the divine 
will and program, Jesus should be exalted above all other 
creatures (Jehovah alone excepted) and that he should be 
Head over the new ereation, which new creation should 
occupy the most exalted position amongst the creatures of 
Jehovah. This new creation is referred to by Jehovah under 
the title of "the seed of the woman." Satan is mentioned 
as "the serpent." At the time of Adam's condemnation Jehovah
 declared that in his own due time "the seed of the 
woman should bruise the serpent's head." In God's due time 
he will use that "seed" to undo all the wrong and wickedness 
resulting from Lucifer's disloyalty. It seems reasonable to 
conclude that Satan understood that God would develop this 
"seed", and that it is the purpose of Jehovah to bring to 
naught, through this "seed," all the schemes and efforts of 
Satan, that God intends to give to the "seed" the kingdom 
which Satan usurped. Hence Satan seeks to resist the development
 of the * ; secd" and, if possible, to destroy it. and 
to keep the homnn rnce under his control. 

The Prophet of the Lord (Zech. 3:1-10) gives us a brief 
picture of the staging and unfolding of the great Drama relating
 to the preparation and development of the new creation 


[6198] 


January 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(19-20) 


— the "seed", according to the promise — and the resistance 
to its development by its adversaries. In this picture we 
behold Jehovah as the great Designer and Architect of the 
plan; his only begotten and beloved Son the Executor of that 
plan; the members of the new creation being developed by 
the outworking of the plan; the selection of the members 
being made from the imperfect race of Adam; the world the 
stage; Satan as the villain, or opponent, with all the agencies 
he can bring to bear against the "seed." 

The new creation is referred to by the Prophet under 
the title "Joshua, the High Priest," He designates the 
ones called to become members of the Priesthood as those 
who are "clothed in filthy garments," thus picturing their 
own imperfection. The Prophet shows how the Lord provides
 a change of raiment, picturing the robe of Christ's 
righteousness furnished to each one who enters upon the way 
to become a member of the Priesthood. The "High Priest" 
is composed primarily of Christ Jesus, our Lord, but when 
completed will be composed of Jesus the Head and the church 
his body, all forming the "royal priesthood;" The picture 
furthermore shows that angel * of the Lord standing by to 
render aid to the new creation in the course of its development
. Other Scriptures confirm the thought of the Lord providing
 help through holy angels. "The angel of the Lord 
encampeth round about them that fear him and delivereth 
them." (Psa. 34:7) "Are they not all ministering spirits, 
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation
?"— Hebrews 1:14. 

SIN'S SMALL BEGINNING 
It seems quite evident that Lucifer, when starting upon his 
wrongful course, did not expect to go to such lengths of 
wickedness as he has gone. The Prophet pictures him as 
a beautiful creature, having authority and power over others. 
He became ambitious to have a kingdom of his own, like the 
most High God. 

Evidently Lucifer desired to have greater prominence than 
the Lord had given him, because he felt that his ability was 
not being properly recognized. He had observed that Jehovah 
hnd created Adam and Eve in his likeness, and as .Jehovah 
rules the universe he had given to Adam the dominion and 
rulership of the earth. Then said Lucifer, in substance, "Why 
did not Jehovah give me something according to my ability?" 
Then the Prophet represents him as saying in his heart, "I 
will be like the Most High" — "I will establish a kingdom 
of my own." His subsequent conduct shows a heart regardless
 of duty to others, fatally bent upon wrong-doing. He 
went to Eve and in substance said to her: "God is depriving 
you of these things that he is keeping secret from you. There 
is no danger of your dying. Eat the fruit, as I am doing. 
Exercise your own will power." We dare say that had he 
known to what great depths of sorrow his conduct would 
lead, he w«uld have long hesitated to take such a step, and 
probably would not have taken it. His purpose was to usurp 
or steal that which the Lord had not given to him. He witnessed 
the effect, namely, the fall of man and his degradation, and 
the sickness, decay and death that came upon all mankind. 

The Genesis account indicates that God permitted some 
of the angels of heaven to come to earth and attempt to 
uplift and bless mankind. The human race was therefore 
placed under the charge of the angels for a period of approximately
 1600 years, or until the great Deluge. (Hebrews
 2:5) Observing that Jehovah had placed the angels 
in charge of the human race, doubtless Satan again reasoned: 
"Why did not Jehovah let me take charge? I have more 
ability than they; he does not properly recognize my ability; 
he is doing me an injustice by keeping me out of what I 
am justly entitled to have and I will show him he cannot do 
it. I wrtl get control of the angels and through them I will 
control the human race." This unsatisfied desire for rulership 
led him on to envy, hatred and malice, until he deliberately 
set about to seduce, and did seduce, the angels from the 
right course, and led them into paths of wickedness. This 
is in harmony with his general course. The result was that 
these angels, misusing their power, dehauched the human race, 
except Noah and his family, and filled the whole earth with 
violence. "God spared not the angels that sinned, hut confined
 them in Tartarus with chains of thick darkness, delivering
 them into custody for judgment." (2 Pet. 2:4, 
DiagJott.) "Those angels which kept not their own principality
, hut left their own habitation, he has kept in perpetual
 chains under thick darkness for the judgment of 
the great day," — Jude 6, Diaglbtt. 

THE PRINCE OF DEMONS 
Satan therefore was the direct cause of the failure of the 
aiigels which resulted in their incarceration. Since the time 
of the Flood these imprisoned demons have been under the 


control of Satan as the prince of demons. (Eph. 2:2) In his 
speech to the Pharisees the great Master recognized that Satan 
is the prince of devils, having charge over the other demons, 
all of whom arc steeped in wickedness. {Matt. 12:24-29) 
Since the restraint of the demons Satan has attempted by 
various fradulent schemes and devices to control the human 
race, and at the same time thwart the purpose of Jehovah in 
the development of the new creation. 

At the baptism of Jesus in the Jordan, true to the picture
 shown by the Prophet, Satan stood by to resist, and has 
ever since resisted the development of The Christ. AntiChrist
 means that which is against Christ. Diverse and 
numerous movements and schemes has Satan instigated to 
overthrow the "seed." He has been the inspirer and instigator 
of every anti- Christ, or movement to retard the development of 
The Christ. He organized the Papacy, the symbolic "beast" 
of Revelation, which is a complete counterfeit of Messiah's 
kingdom arrangement. He has gained control of the Protestant
 systems, and has succeeded in forming the "image of 
the beast," now co-operating more or less with the "beast" 
and with the governments of earth. He is the author of 
Spiritism, Christian Science, New Thought, Theosophy, Hypnotism
, and many other fradulent schemes which he makes 
appear as being for the benefit of mankind, but the real 
purpose of which is to turn the minds of the people away from 
the merit of Christ's sacrifice and hinder the development 
of the "seed according to the promise." He has used every 
means his fertile mind could devise to destroy the new creation
, but he will not, as indeed he cannot, succeed. ( 'God*3 
Word shall not return unto him void, but shall accomplish 
that whereunto it was sent. " In due time the new creation 
will be completed, to the glory of the great Jehovah. — Isaiah 
55:8-11. 

BINDING OF SATAN 
Since the second presence of the Lord in 1874 the light 
of truth has been increasing in brightness. The tendency 
of this has been to restrain evil, and to that extent it has 
been binding Satan. Concerning the binding of Satan, Jesus 
said: "No man can enter into a strong man's house and 
spoil his goods except he first bind the strong man and then 
he will spoil his goods. " (Matt. 12:29; Mark 3:22-27; Luke 
11:22} "Thus we are taught that Satan must first be bound, 
restrained, and deposed, before Christ's reign of righteousness 
and peace can be established. This binding of Satan is accordingly
 shown to be the first work of the new dispensation." 
( A 68, 09 ) It has been suggested that as the binding of Satan 
progresses the other demons will be loosened or gain greater 
power. They could not be fully judged without first being 
released from prison. The disposition and evil bent of mind 
of these fallen angels or evil spirits must be taken into consideration
 in determining what course they will take, and the 
trouble they will cause when they are liberated from their 
incarceration. 

Russia has long been an autocratic government, practically 
an absolute monarchy. It has been a mixture of civil and 
ecclesiastical power exercised by one head — the Czslt. The 
arrangement is clearly the product of Satan. The Czar has 
been the head of the church and the absolute ruler of the 
people, and has held in restraint for a long time the subjects 
of that kingdom. Many of the subjects of Russia have long 
ago manifested an anarchistic spirit, and this is the class 
known as the "Bolsheviki." They have desired to disrupt the 
government, but have been restrained from so doing. As the 
Czar was deprived of his power gradually, so the "Bolsheviki" 
increased in power; and when the Czar was completely overthrown
, the "Bolsheviki" ran riot, and conditions in 'Russia 
are daily growing worse. 

In a measure this illustrates Satan'a realm. He has been 
an arbitrary ruler of the evil ones of whom he is the chief 
or prince. The evil spirits incarcerated in Tartarus have 
been measurably under the control of Satan. Thev have at all 
times manifested the disposition of anarchists or "Bolsheviki." 
An anarchist is one who defies all rule and rulers, and whose 
purpose is to destroy every form of government and everything
 in the form of order. We should therefore expect that 
when these evil spirits are loosed from their chains of restraint
 the great trouble will follow. Being anarchists, and 
having no disposition to be controlled hy any one, when they 
are released it would be expected that they would refuse to 
recognize any control. All their tendencies before incarceration
 were evil, and they filled the earth with violence, and 
hence we are not unaware of their disposition and not in 
darkness as to what course they will take. 

Realizing that their incarceration was due largely to 
Satan's leading them into the wrong course, without doubt 
envy, ill-will, malice, hatred and jealousy will fill their minds 


[6109] 


(21-22) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


and direct their actions. What might we expect them to 
attempt to do? We observe that Satan for many centuries 
has attempted to destroy the "seed of Abraham according 
to the promise." These fallen angels observe that he has not 
succeeded. We suggest that, move by envy, jealousy and rivalry, 
they may attempt to accomplish what Satan has failed to do, 
namely, to overthrow the Lord's people who constitute the 
"seed of Abraham," and who are yet this side the veil. 

"THE POTJB WINDS OF THE EABTH" 

St. John mentions them in the figure of "the four winds 
of the, earth," (Revelation 7:1.) Commenting upon this Scripture
 in The Watch Tower of June 1st, 1914, page 160, 
Brother Russell stated: 

"The winds of the earth referred to here are of course 
symbolic. The thought is that the winds from the four 
quarters — North, East, South and West — are being held back, 
and that when, the restraint is withdrawn they will rush 
together, and the result will be a whirlwind. Certain Scriptures
 tell of a whirlwind that will be raised from the coasts 
of the earth. See Jer. 23:19; 25:32, 33; 30:23, 24. We do 
not understand that this will be a physical whirlwind, but 
this symbolical expression is used to convey the thought of 
a severe strife of the powers of the air. 

"These 'powers of the air' or 'winds' are not powers of 
natural air, but are powers referred to by St. Paul when he 
speaks of Satan as the 'prince of the power of the air.' (Eph. 
2:2} These spirits who have been under the control of Satan 
— the fallen angels — were to be restrained in chains of darkness
 until the judgment of the great day. {2 Peter 2:4) 
The letting loose of the winds, or air powers, would seem to 
show that God has let go his hand of restraint; that he will 
have to do with the permission of the terrible trouble that 
will come upon the world as a: great cataclysm, which will 
result in the complete overthrow of the social order in anarchy. 
"These fallen angels have been under restraint for these 
many centuries, but they have exercised their influence to 
whatever extent they have had permission. If they had had 
unlimited power they would have wrecked the world long ago, 
but they have been restrained in darkness. 

"Apparently God will soon cease to restrain the fallen 
angels, and they will then proceed to vent their fury upon 
humanity, so that the whole earth will be full of violence, 
the same as inl the days of Noah. 'As it was in the days 
of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of Man.' — ■ 
Luke 17:28. 

"The power manifested by the demons when loosed will, 
we believe, be with a view to the injury of mankind. We 
do not know but that many of our readers will have a share 
in that injury. We have every reason to suppose that if these 
fallen angels get loose, they will vent their first anger upon 
the lord's people. We are not to fear this, however, but 
to take whatever the Lord's providence may permit to come, 
knowing that everything shall work for our good." 

Again commenting upon the same subject (Z '11, 359} 
Brother Russell said: 

"As soon as the power that is now controlling them shall 
be removed, we shall have a reign of evil all over the earth. 
The evil spirits will do all the evil that is in their power, 
and this will constitute the trial of all the fallen angels — 
the lifting of the restraints to see whether they will go 
contrary to the divine will. All who thus manifest their 
alliance with evil in any way will become subjects of the 
second death; while others who show their loyalty to God 
will mark themselves as worthy, presumably, of everlasting 
life. 

"It may be something in connection with the saints that 
will constitute the test of these angels." 

HOW WE MAT EXPECT THE ATTACK 
The true saints of God are the only ones on earth who 
have not the spirit of anarchy. Then we may expect the 
demons to try to put the spirit of anarchy into the mind of 
even the saintly class. Hence the importance of the warning
 of the Apostle to "arm yourselves likewise with the same 
mind." 

It is the new creature that the adversaries destroy. The 
new creature is composed of the new will and new mind, 
which has its habitation in an earthen vessel. We should 
expect, therefore, that the adversaries will assault the mind. 
The words of the text indicate this very clearly. There would 
be no occasion to arm ourselves with the same mind of Christ 
unless we expected to be attacked in the same way that he 
was attacked, by the adversaries. What was the mind of 
Christ? Humble submission to the Father's will, which meant 
gladly following the order marked out by the Father. It was 
to resist the adversaries with the Father's Word. 

The spirit of anarchy ia among all the inhabitants of 


the earth. Anarchy is prevalent in Satan's dominion. We 
should expect, therefore, that .the adversaries would seek to 
produce anarchy among the Lord's people; in other words, 
to put in the mind of such the thought that they should be 
subject to no order and no one, but that each one Bhould 
take his or her own course, pleasing only self; that to take 
any other course would be submission of the will to another 
person. While it is true that we are to submit our wills to 
no one except the will of God, yet we should remember that 
the will of God concerning his own is that they should be 
governed by his Word. "Order is heaven's first law," and 
all disorder tends to anarchy. "God hath set the members 
every one of them in the body as it hath pleased him." ( 1 Cor. 
12:18) Suppose 1 I think someone else is occupying a place 
that I should by right have, should I attempt to force myself 
into the position? Such a course would be prompted by the 
spirit of the evil one. Such is the course the adversary took. 
Rut suppose I am better qualified to fill the position than 
the one who holds it? Better leave it with the Lord. He 
knows all about it. 

So surely a3 there are "Bolsheviki" in Russia, just so 
surely we may expect the adversaries to attempt to put 
the spirit of "Bolshevism" or anarchy, into the minds of 
the Lord's people that, succeeding in this, they might overthrow
 some of his people and produce such a disruption 
of the work as to have seemingly triumphed in their purpose. 
But God will not permit anything to be done that will overthrow
 those who have the right spirit, the spirit of humility 
— the mind of Christ. Evidently Satan thought he had a 
great deal of ability (and he did have some) to become a 
king or ruler, but his ability could not be used of the Lord 
because of his lack of humility. Any creature's ability in the 
service of the Lord is measured by his true humility, and 
where humility is lacking, natural ability is nil, The same 
spirit actuated the fallen angels. The same spirit will work 
amongst some of God's people. Humility means a true and 
joyful submission to the will of God. If we find that the Lord 
has instituted a certain way to carry out his purposes then 
we should joyfully fall in line with that way and strive to 
perform what he gives us to do. Headiness, stubbornness, 
selfishness, leads to dissension and disruption — such ia not the 
mind of the Lord, but the mind of the adversaries. So surely 
as the Lord haa marked out a way and we seek to go contrary
 to that way, we remove ourselves from his special protection
 and open our mind to the assault of the adversaries, 
and, persisting in this course, we must finally fall. 
OUB SAFETY 
Wherein then lies the safety of the new creature? St. 
Peter says: "Arm yourselves with the mind of Christ." The 
Apostle Paul corroborates this in Ephesians 0:10-18, in plain 
language showing us that our warfare is not with our hands, 
not with carnal weapons, not with visible enemies, but with 
Satan and a host of evil spirits. He then shows us that 
our safety lies in putting on the whole armor of God and 
in keeping it on, and using it according to the Lord's will. 
It should be marked that this armor is not for a human 
being, but it is for the new creature, and therefore the figure 
of arming the mind is maintained with reference to the armor 
here. Mark what the Apostle says, "Take unto you the 
whole armor of God that ye may be able to withstand in the 
evil day, and having done all to stand. Stand, therefore, 
having your loins girt about with truth." The girdle around 
the loins indicates that the wearer is a servant, and when 
this girdle is tightly fastened it indicates that the servant 
is engaged in some strenuous work. This suggests, then, 
that the new creature must fill his mind with things pertaining
 to the Lord's work and see to it that he is a servant 
of the truth. How may he know whether or not he is a 
servant of the truth? We answer, by ascertaining whether 
or not he is using that which the Lord has provided for 
the church. The 14th chapter of Revelation, verses 13-16, 
clearly shows that the service of the church during the harvest 
is first the reaping of the saintly class; and the subsequent 
verses show that the saintly ones must participate in the 
reaping of the vine of the earth. It follows, then, that when 
the time arrives for this work to be done, each one who 
would be serving that message which the Lord had provided 
in his own due time must have the loins of his mind girded 
with the truth — engaging in the service according to opportunity
. If we have come to the end of the way, if we are 
nearing the very closing hours of the harvest, then we may 
know that the proclamation of the vengeance of the Lord 
against Babylon must be made. (Isa. 61:2) And to be thus 
engaged zealously in the Lord's service would mean to keep 
our mind upon such work, making ourselves the servants of 
his cause. 


[6200] 


January 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOW ER 


(22-36) 


LET US ABM 0T7ESELVES 

The Apostle then adds that we must have on the breastplate
 of righteousness. The breastplate fitted over the vita] 
organs. The heart is the most vital organ to the new creature
. The necessity for keeping the heart cannot be overstated. 
If, then, one finds bitterness arising in his heart, regardless of 
the cause he should take it at once as a warning that he ia 
not arming himself with the mind of Christ, and not properly 
using the armor. Failing to arm himself thus he would 
not be able to withstand the assaults of the adversaries. See 
1 Thess. 3:8. 

The Apostle then suggests that our feet should be shod 
with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. It is a noticeable
 fact in recent months that there has been much disturbance
 in the classes. These disturbances do not arise 
over doctrinal matters, but are more particularly concerning
 order or discipline or the manner of doing what should 
be done. In some places elders seek to lord it over the ecclesia, 
thinking their ability should be recognized. Other members 
insist on doing everything their own way. This is manifesting 
the spirit of the "Bolsheviki." It brings trouble instead of 
peace, which shows that such a one is not properly armed 
with the mind of Christ; that he has not on the armor in all 
its parts ; that instead of being shod with the message of peace 
his feet are shod with the hob-nails of anarchy. It is the 
duty of the elders to counsel peace and moderation amongst 
the brethren. 

Then, adds the Apostle, we should have the shield of faith 
with which we shall be able to resist the darts of the wicked 
ones. This means that we should be fully advised as to the 
manner of attack by the evil ones; that we obtain this advice 
from the Word of God, and relying Tipon it we properly fortify 
ourselves against all assaults. It means furthermore, that we 
know of the exceeding great and precious promises of the 
Lord which are sure to bring to the obedient ones an abundant 
entrance into the kingdom; and knowing these, that we rely 
upon them. 

Then, adds the Apostle, we must have the helmet of salvation
 and the sword of the spirit. The helmet is fitted over 
the head and therefore represents the intellectual part of 
the creature. This suggests that we must have an intellectual 
understanding and appreciation of what the Lord's Word is 
concerning us. This is the basis for the hope of our salvation
. The sword of the spirit is the Word of God. Then 
having the. helmet and the sword would mean that we both 
understand what the Word teaches and are striving to use 
it both as a defensive and an offensive weapon — as a defensive
 weapon against our adversaries, as an offensive weapon 
bv proclaiming the message of the Lord now due to be given. 
(G 466. Ezek. 21:15) Then, adds the Apostle, we should 
pray with all prayer and supplication for all saints, thus 
showing the necessity not only for keeping our heart and 


mind fixed on our welfare, but for having in mind the spiritual 
welfare of our brethren. 

OUR TEAK TEXT 

How appropriate, therefore, the text for the year — "The 
end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober and watch 
unto prayer. And above all things have fervent love among 
yourselves." That we are at the end of the Gospel age, we 
all agree. We are at the end of the harvest period of that 
age. The end of Satan's dominion is also here, and the beginning
 of the Millennial age. Important to us is the fact 
that we have come to the end of the development of the new 
creation, and soon the last member will be complete. Mark 
the conditions that prevail in the entire world today — discontent
, selfishness, passion, frenzy, hatred, malice and illwill
 are being manifested in a manner never before witnessed. 
After enjoying so many of the blessings of the first few years 
of the 20th century, the human race is now plunged into the 
most terrible war known, one which the Scriptures show to 
be followed by revolution and anarchy. The people are required
 to endure hardships such as they have never before 
known. The lack of food, the lack of comfort and ease, added 
to great burdens of taxation with no hope of relief therefrom, 
increase the spirit of discontent. Selfishness predominates 
everywhere. Millions of men, for years engaged in shedding 
human blo^od, now possess distorted minds, in fact, the entire 
human race is mentally upset. Added to all of these things, 
the world is drunken with the doctrines of Babylon. The 
''beast" is manifesting his power. The "image of the beast" 
is about to do likewise. The Revelator tells us that when 
these events take place that Babylon becomes the very habitation
 and hold of these evil spirits. If now we see so much 
wrongdoing in the world, what must we expect when the 
"powers of the air" shall be allowed to gain temporary liberty 
for the very purpose of manifesting the evil tendencies of 
the unregenerated heart? Surely, then, there never has been 
a time like the present when it is so necessary to be of 
sober mind and watch and pray. Never has it been so important
 for us to have overspreading love for all the brethren. 

That our enemies are increasing in power is manifest on 
every hand. That they may have more power shortly is to 
be expected. Let us not be at all discouraged, however. We 
have been many times warned of this; and to be forewarned 
is to be forearmed. Now as we are drawing nearer to the 
great crisis let us remember the admonition of the Lord, to 
have ourselves "armed with the same mind" that Christ had, 
having on the whole armor of God, and we shall be safe. 
And even though we may seemingly go down in defeat from 
the viewpoint of the world, yet such will mean the great triumph
 of the faithful and an abundant entrance into the 
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 
— - Psalm «:1; 2 Peter 1:11. 


ANNUAL MEETING 

Probably nothing that has occurred in recent months has 
called forth from the friends such earnest and fervent prayers 
as those offered in behalf of the convention that should assemble
 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and the annual election 
of officers of the Society for the ensuing year. With eagerness 
the brethren have been looking forward to the events that 
would transpire there, that the will of the Lord might be 
known. It is believed that their prayers were answered. 
The Lord very wonderfully manifested his presence and his 
spirit at the convention and at the annual meeting. 

On the morning of January 2nd the convention opened 
according to program, and closed Sunday evening, January 
0th, with a love feast. Approximately one thousand attended. 
The discourses of the pilgrim brethren were very timely and 
helpful. Particular emphasis was laid upon the fact that 
the kingdom of the Lord is near at hand and upon the great 
necessity for our preparation for the kingdom. Some bitter 
trials have been experienced during the year just past, and 
these seem to have whetted the appetites of the Lord's dear 
children to partake more fully of the spiritual food provided
 for them. A number of splendid prayer, praise and 
testimony meetings were a part of the program; and the 
testimony of the dear brethren at these meetings showed 
plainly their determination to do one thing, namely to press 
forward along the mark for the prize of the high calling of 
God in Christ Jesus. From every quarter of the country 
came encouraging messages concerning the Seventh Volume, 
and the many blessings the brethren have obtained by a careful
 study of it, and further blessings by its distribution. 
Many of the classes reported progress in this work, both in 
the widespreading of the message of truth and in their own 
personal spiritual development. 


OF SHAREHOLDERS 

AKXTTAI. MEETING 

Saturday, January 5th, was the day appointed for the 
holding of the annual meeting of the shareholders of the 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. In view of the 
events that have transpired during the Bix months ended, 
the dear friends frorn^ every part of the world were keenly 
interested in this annual meeting. Cablegrams from foreign 
countries expressed the keen interest the brethren there felt 
in the result, that they might see the manifestation of the 
Lord's will concerning the harvest work. 

The meeting convened at ten o'clock Saturday morning 
at Carnegie Hall, N, S. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, being opened 
with a song and with a prayer led by Brother Barber. Then 
followed an exhaustive report by the President concerning 
the work of the Society for the year just past. This was 
followed by a report from the Treasurer, the substance of 
which has heretofore been published in The Watch Toweb. 

It was the thought of some present that the recent misunderstanding
 with reference to the management of the Society
 should be discussed in detail; but it was manifestly 
the belief of the overwhelming majority of the shareholders 
present that full and complete publication had heretofore been 
made concerning such misunderstanding, and that further discussion
 or agitation of the same would do no good. It was 
pointed out by those who expressed themselves that the 
friends were fully advised as to the facts, and that further 
discussion of it was wholly undesirable; that having received 
the published statements of both sides and carefully considering
 them, the brethren had come there with their hearts lifted 
in prayer to the Lord to manifest his will; and that now was 
the time, not for talking, but for action. 


[6201] 


(24-24) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


BOAED OF DIBECTOBS ELECTED 

The. Charter requires that first a Board of Directors of 
seven members be elected, and that from the seven elected, 
the officers of the Society shall be chosen. The first thing in 
order, therefore, was the nomination and election of seven 
members who should compose the Board of Directors for the 
ensuing year. The order of business being announced, Brother 
Barber arose and stated that the friends throughout the 
country, on the 21st of November, had by referendum vote 
expressed their choice for directors and officers; and that 
he would take it therefore as the Lord's will that the brethren 
receiving the highest number of votes at that referendum 
should be nominated, and he therefore placed in nomination 
for directors the following named brethren, to-wit: 
Brother Rutherford Brother Macmillan 

Van Amburgh " Spill 

" Pierson «* Bohnet 

Brother Fisher 

Brother McGee, of Trenton, N. J., then placed in nomination
 for directors the following: 

Brother Menta Sturgeon Brother Isaac F. Hoskins 

A. I. Ritchie " R. H. Hirsh 

" H. C. Rockwell " J. D. Wright 

Brother P. S. L. Johnson 
Before the ballot was taken, however, Brother Johnson withdrew
 his name. 

Brother F. T. Horth, of Clinton, Iowa, Brother C. J. 
Woodworth, of Scranton, Pa., and Brother A. M. Zimmerman, 
of Lancaster, Pa., were appointed by the President as inspectors
 of election. After thev had taken and subscribed to 
the required oath to perform their duties as such judges and 
inspectors with fidelity, the ballot was taken. It required 
a considerable length of time to check up all the proxies and 
certificates and to count the vote; and although the ballots 
were cast in the forenoon the count was not completed until 
about 8:30 P. M. The result of the ballot was as follows: 
J. F. Rutherford 194,106 Menta Sturgeon 27,261 

A. H. Macmillan 161,871 R. H. Hirsh 23,198 

W. E. Van Amburgh 160,215 I. F. Hoskins 22,660 

W. E. Spill 118,259 A. I. Ritchie 22,631 

J. A. Bonnet 113,422 J. D. Wright 22,623 

C. H. Anderson 107,175 H. C. Rockwell 18,178 

G. H. Fisher 83,260 P. S. L. Johnson 6,469 

A. N. Pierson # 57,721 W. J. Hollister 3.931 

The seven receiving the highest number of votes cast were: 
J. F. Rutherford A. H. Macmillan 

C. H. Anderson W. E. Spill 

W. E. Van Amburgh J. A. Bohnet 

George H. Fisher 
and were thereupon declared by the judges of election as 
having been duly elected as members of the Board of Directors
 of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society for 
the ensuing year. 

ELECTION OF OFFICES S 

The next order of business was the election of officers 
who must be selected from amongst those duly chosen as 
members of the Board of Directors. Brother W. E. Page, of 
Des Moines, Iowa, placed in nomination for the office of 
President Brother J. F. Rutherford ; and a number of other 
brethren from different parts of the country seconded this 
nomination. Brother A. II. Macmillan placed in nomination 
for Vice President Brother Charles H. Anderson, of Baltimore, 
Md., whose nomination was seconded by several others. 
Brother W. E. Spill placed in nomination for the office of 
Secretary-Treasurer Brother W. E. Van Amburgh, whose 
nomination was also seconded by a number of the brethren. 
There being no one else nominated for either of these offices, 
the ballot was taken; and 1 the results showed that Brother 
J. E. Rutherford had received all of the ballots cast for the 
office of President, Brother Charles II. Anderson all the votes 
cast for Vice President, and Brother W. E. Van Amburgh 
all the votes cast for Secretary-Treasurer. Thereupon the 
judges of election declared that these brethren were duly 
elected to the respective offices named. 

PRESIDENT'S REMARKS 

Immediately upon announcement by the judges of election 
as to who were chosen as officers of the Society, Brother 
Rutherford spoke from the platform, calling attention to the 
fact that now, since the Lord had manifested his will and 
expressed it through his people at this election, he deemed 
it proper that he should make a statement relating to the 
recent misunderstanding with other brethren concerning the 
management of the Society. He further stated that his 
action in appointing four members of the Board of Directors 
in the month of July, 1917, was not done for the purpose 
of deposing any one, and did not depose any one as a member 
of the Board of Directors, but that he merely filled the 


vacancies in the Bo ird for the purposes stated in the Harvest 
Sittings heretofore published. He further stated that in taking
 this action personalties did not enter into the matter; 
that he had no personal feeling against the brethren who 
took issue with him at the time he made such appointments; 
that he had not had any feeling against them since, and did 
not now hold any ill-will toward them ; that his action was 
entirely official, because he believed it to be his duty as the 
President of the Society to take this action in behalf of the 
Society and the work that it is doing; that he deeply regretted
 that misunderstanding and trouble had followed; that 
he realized his imperfections and was aware that he made 
many mistakes, but that he still believed his action in filling 
the vacancies on the Board was entirely right and proper. 

Brother Rutherford then stated that he had no desire nor 
disposition to deprive any one of opportunities for service 
in 1 the harvest field, and that if these brethren who had been 
openly opposing the management of the Society for the past 
few months would cease their opposition and come forward and 
express their desire and purpose to preach the truth and 
to work in harmony with the Society, he would be glad to 
see that each of them was put actively into the service of 
the Society; that if they would do this he would be willing to 
forget the past, and hoped that the other brethren were likewise
 willing to forgot, and that all now who claimed to he 
fully consecrated to the Lord should join their hearts and 
hands in the common cause for righteousness and in spreading
 the glad tidings of the kingdom. All were invited to 
forget their differences, for, realizing that the church is a 
little band of consecrated followers of the Master, surrounded 
upon every side by enemies — the world, the flesh, the demons 
and the great adversary — the brethren above all peoples should 
stand firmly together and in love serve one another and 
serve tjie Lord. Nearly all of the members present manifested 
their hearty approval of the sentiments expressed, by repeated
 and prolonged applause. 

This concluding the business of the annual meeting, the 
same was adjourned amidst great rejoicing by the brethren 
present. Many were the expressions that the Lord had 
certainly been present and guided the deliberations of the 
meeting, and the result was joyfully taken as his expressed 
will. 

Brother Anderson was not formally placed in nomination 
for the position of a member of the Board of Directors. 
Nevertheless this did not preclude any one from properly 
voting for him, and his election was entirely in harmony with 
the laws of the land and the Charter of the Society. 

During the time occupied by the judges of election in 
examining the records and counting the votes the brethren 
present indulged in praise, prayer and testimonies, interspersed
 with discourses by several pilgrim brethren. The 
time, therefore, was very profitably spent. It was indeed a 
very blessed season together. 

THE CLOSE OF THE CONVENTION 

All the Sunday sessions of the convention were held in 
the Lyceum Theatre. Discourses were delivered in the forenoon
 by Brothers Perrin and Heard. In the afternoon Brother 
Rutherford addressed the public, there being approximately 
two thousand present, and splendid interest was manifested. 
This meeting was followed by a love feast, participated in 
by approximately one thousand brethren; and many were the 
expressions of love and joy that came from those who participated
. 

Just preceding the love feast a motion was made and duly 
seconded, requesting Brother R. H. Hirsh to resign as a 
member of the Editorial Committee of The Watch Tower. 
This motion was unanimously carried by the convention, not 
a dissenting vote being offered. In the evening, at the Lyceum 
Theatre, another gathering of the friends was addressed by 
Brothers Van Amburgh and Heard. 

Many were heard to say that this had been the most 
blessed convention they had ever attended and that never 
had they seen the spirit of the Lord so manifested by the 
many brethren. This is exactly what we should have expected
 to come from all those who realize that we are in 
the very end of the harvest, and that our work may soon 
he finished this side the veil. With sobriety of mind and 
calmness of heart and with the determination to continue 
steadfast, the dear friends are facing the concluding work 
of the harvest. 

REGARDING MILITARY EXEMPTION 

Quite a number of our brethren in different parts of the 
country have been denied military exemption. Some of them, 
because of their refusal to engage in military service, have 
been court-martialed and sentenced to long terms in prison, 
while others aro held in detention camps in different parts of 
the country. Those attending the convention felt it incumbent 


[6202] 


January 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(24-25) 


upon them to express their love and sympathy in support of 
these dear brethren who are so loyally standing for the 
principles represented by our Association ; and it was deemed 
proper to pass a resolution relating to the matter. A committee
 previously appointed for that purpose reported a 
resolution on Sunday mornings which was read before the 
convention and, upon motion, was seconded and unanimously 
adopted. The resolution follows: 

RESOLUTION 

"WHEREAS, under the terms of the Selective I>raft Act 
a number of our members and brethren have been called to 
military duty, and under the terms and provisions of said 
Selective Draft Act have made application to the proper 
authorities for discharge or exemption from military service, 
which right or privilege has been denied many of them, and 
they have been and are now forcibly restrained of their 
liberty in either military prisons or army detention camps; 

"AND WHEREAS, we believe our position as a religious 
organization, which has been organized and existing for manv 
years prior to the passage of said Act, is not fully understood 
by various officers and representatives of the United States 
Government, and that it is due and proper that we should 
make a statement as to the position of this religious organization
 that the attitude of our said members and brethren may 
be better understood; 

"NOW THEREFORE RESOLVED: By the members of 
the Lvternationai, Bible Students ASSOCIATION in annual 
convention assembled at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, composed 
of delegates representing our Association from all of the 
United States and Canada, that we make the following statement
 of our said Association or organization concerning our 
attitude and the attitude of our members toward the present 
great war: 

"FIRST. That we recognize in President Wilson a great 
man who is using his power and influence honestly and 
conscientiously and according to his best judgment in the 
interests of the peoples of the world and particularly of the 
United States, 

"SECOND. That we recognize the duty of every one living 
within the realms of the United States to be law-abiding; 
that the Congress of the United States, representing the people 
of the* nation, placed a provision in the Selective Act that 
no person should be compelled to engage in military service 
who is a member of a well-organized religious organization 
or association whose teachings or principles forbid its members
 to engage in war, or who are against war in any form; 
that in taking the position they do, our members are claiming 
only the protection the law provides against violation of 
conscience, 

"THIRD. That we are followers of the Great Master 
Christ Jesus our Redeemer, and have covenanted with the 
Lord to do his will; and that we are certain that it is not 
his will that we, as his followers, should participate in the 
great war now upon the earth. We recognize in the present 
great war one that is different from any other war ever before
 known, to wit: Thai it marks the end of the world — 
that is to say, the end of the present evil order of things — 
and is purging the nations and preparing the way for the 
kingdom of God for which followers of the Great Master, 
Christ Jesus, have prayed for many centuries; and that for 
forty years past this Association has held" and taught that 
the year 1914 would mark the beginning of this great international
 conflict which the prophets of the Lord foretold 
mus$ take place, immediately preceding the establishment of 
the everlasting kingdom of righteousness. 

"We agree with Ptesident Wilson that there can be no 
lasting peace while the present unrighteous systems exist. 

"FOURTH. We hold that the teachings of Jesus and 
the apostles forbid all his true followers to engage in mortal 
combat or war; that early in the Christian era this teaching 
was departed from by those claiming to be his followers and 
that for many centuries J>ast the clergy of both Catholic and 
Protestant church systems have departed from the teachings 
of Jesus and the Apostles, substituting therefor man-made 
doctrines, and have taught the divine right of kings to rule 
and that the kingdoms of this earth constitute the kingdom 
of the Lord, and have mixed the religion of Jesus Christ 
with the politics of the world, which has resulted in confusion
 amongst Christian peoples, and which the Lord denounces
 as Babylon and as an abomination in his sight; that 
the Lord through many of his holy prophets foretold that 
such an alliance would result between civil and ecclesiastical 
powers on earth which would bring upon both the indignation 
of God, causing wars, revolutions and anarchy, which would 


be overruled by him for the purging of the nations of the 
earth to the end that he might establish amongst the people 
a pure and righteous government. 

"FIFTH. With charity to all and malice toward none, we 
feel it our duty humbly to call attention to the fact that the 
nations are now passing through that great crisis foretold 
by the prophets of the Lord, and that God is expressing his 
displeasure toward the relationship existing between ecclesiastical
 and civil kingdoms of the earth, particularly as set 
forth in the following cited Scriptures, to wit: Revelation, 
chapters 17 and 18; Ezekiel, chapter 34. 

"SIXTH. That sincerely believing such to be true, a 
participation by our members in this war would be contrary 
to the Lord's will and- a violation of our own conscience which 
would put in jeopardy our eternal destiny and welfare. While 
we hold that it is the privilege of any and all persons to engage
 in war who desire to do so if they are not followers 
of Jesus Christ, yet we hold that they who do follow faithfully
 in hta footsteps cannot consistently participate in war 
in any form; and we have so held for more that thirty years. 

"SEVENTH. We, therefore, enter our solemn protest 
against the incarceration of our brethren and members in 
prison because of the refusal on their part to violate their 
conscience and to violate the law of God; that we respectfully
 call upon the officials of the Government of the United 
States to recognize that the members of our Association come 
clearly within the purvue and terms of the exemption clause 
of the Selective Draft Act because of the teachings and principles
 of this religious Association which principles and teachings
 have been held and taught by it and its members for 
more than a quarter of a century; and that we respectfully 
petition and ask that our said brethren and members, to wit: 

Herm. Abraham, Holyake, Mass. Joy Ferguson, Camp Upton 
Martin O. Bowin, Camp Upton Stanley Olson, Camp Grant 
Harold Bruber, Camp Dodge George Ruiz. Camp Upton 

A. W. Christy, Jr., Camp Upton Walford Marker, Seattle, Wash. 
Elmer Christy, Camp Upton Walter Mozee. Camp Upton 

Jerry Dc Cecca, Camp De-vens J. A. Mnrch, Cp. Zachary Taylor 
Stanley Dixon, Camp Bowie Carmelo Nicita, Camp Deven 

Frank DonogHo, Camp Dix S. Papageorges, Duluth, Minn. 

Charles Feldner, Camp Meade H. Pound, Camp Zachary Taylor 
Charles H. Walker, Camp Zachary Taylor 
and others, be fully granted the provisions of the exemption 
clause of the Selective Draft Act, as provided by Congress. 

"That a copy of this Pfesolution be furnished to the President
 of the United States, to the Secretary of the War Department
 and the Provost Marshal General Crowder ; and 
that the President of our Association appoint a committee of 
three to so present these resolutions/' 

PRESENTED TO PRESIDENT WILSOK 

Brother Rutherford as president thereupon appointed 
Brother Dr. Smith of Louisville, Ky v Brother E. D. Sexton
, of Los Angeles, California, and Brother E. W. Brenneisen
, of New York City, as a committee of three to bear 
these resolutions to Washington and there in person present 
them to President Wilson, Secretary Baker of the War Department
, and a copy to Provost Mjarshal General Crowder. 
The Committee proceeded to Washington for this purpose, and 
on Friday, January 11th, they were granted an audience with 
President Wilson. The Committee was very kindly and 
graciously received by the President who patiently listened 
to the reading of the resolution. The President expressed 
himself as fully sympathizing with our position. He suggested 
that some had exceeded their authority in dealing with our 
brethren and promised that these mistakes should be speedily 
rectified. Afterwards a copy of the resolution was presented 
to Secretary of War Baker and Provost Marshal Crowder. 

What effect this resolution may have we cannot of course 
know, but it is our hope that much good may result. While 
our brethren are refusing to render military service they 
are not doing so because of any desire to be against the 
Government but because they are conscientious and believe 
that for them to engage in this great war would be to forfeit 
their share in the kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ. Having made a consecration to be dead with Christ, 
all such count not the present life dear unto themselves. They 
desire above all things to be pleasing to the heavenly father 
and to do his will completely. 

For the encouragement of our de&r brethren in bonds we 
remind them of the great afflictions endured by the faithful 
ones of the past a* recorded by the Apostle Paul in Hebrews 
11. Those men proved their loyalty and faithfulness to God, 
and because thereof they will have a better resurrection than 
the world in general. Now some of his dear children are 


[6203] 


(25-30) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y 


having the privilege of proving their loyalty under somewhat constructing the world of mankind which is now engaged 
similar circumstances, and if faithful, will have the privilege, in the destruction of each other. What a blessed privilege 
together with the King of kings and Lord of lords, of re- that will be! 


FOUR KINDS OF GROUND 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "The Seed is the Word of God," published in issue of April 15, 1906, which 
please see.] 


THE GROWTH OF THE KINGDOM 

[The first nine and the last two paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Parables of the Kingdom
," published in issue of May 15, 1900. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "The Sowing and the Reaping," 
published in issue of May 1, 1900. Please see the articles named.] 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


SEEKING TO CAUSE DIVISION 
Dbab Bbethben: — 

I hardly know how to start this letter, but will say in 
passing that my motive is not to embitter any one but, if 
I know my own heart, to protect the Lord's people where 
possible from a similar experience. 

Wednesday evening at prayer, praise and testimony meeting
 I was very much surprised to see Brother Johnson walk 

in with Brother R . .... A motion was put and carried 

that Brother Johnson give us a discourse. He came forward 
and gave us one of the best discourses I have ever heard on 
"Christ having been rich, became poor for us, that we might 
be made rich — no reference being made to the trouble at 
Brooklyn or elsewhere. At the close of the meeting he was 
invited to address the class on Saturday night and Sunday 
afternoon. Saturday night he gave us a discourse on "Building
 up in Love," etc. Sunday morning his talk was along the 
lines of fiery trials. He started out, using Revelation the 
seventh chapter by stating that he accepted the Seventh 
Volume as the Seventh Volume, although he believed it contained
 some errors, but that the good in the book far exceeded
 the errors, and he believed it was being used of the 
Lord. But before he got through with his sledge-hammer 
blows the Seventh Volume got fixed up wrong, as you may 
be sure it would be. 

Sunday afternoon he gave a discourse along the line of 
the Parable of the Penny and of the Inkhorn. To make a 
long story short, he concluded by saying that Brother Russell 
shows that the chariot in Bymbol represents an organization; 
the Watch To web Bible and Tract Society is the chariot 
of the Elijah class; but that the legalities which you invoked 
are lurid legalities (the horses) ; that the separation is now 
taking place; and the lurid legalities are separating the two 
classes; that those who are putting out the Seventh Volume 
and the Babylon Tract are the great company; that they are 
smiting the Jordan the second time, as Elisha returning. He 
made the plain, unequivocal statement that Brother Rutherford 
would be of the great company, and that those adhering to 
the Societt and distributing the Seventh Volume, etc., would 
also be of that class 

I am trying to look for the Lord's' spirit continually. "If 
any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his." 
If these brethren really think they are of the little flock 
class, and we are doing the work of the great company class 
now, why do they take the trouble to hinder it? Why not let 
us do it and help them and us into the kingdom that much 
quicker? .... 

Our business is to do with our might what our hands 
find to do. I do not believe my sacrifice is complete. If it 
were I would not be here. If Brother Johnson and others of 
the opposition think their sacrifice is complete, and that 
they are merely waiting for their glorification, I trust they 
will be supremely happy; but I want to work while it is yet 
day, because I believe shortly no man can work 

We would be glad to have a few lines from you if you 
have any suggestions that you think would be helpful to us 
in our effort to serve and please the Lord in this work. 

With much Christian love for you, and believing that you 
are trying to do the Lord's will, however imperfectly, I am 

Your brother in Christ, G. M. K,— Va. 

OUE REPLY 
Dear Brotheb in Cubist: — 

It is with regret that we note the unhappy circumstances 
described in your letter, that a brother, once prominent and 
active in the service of the Society one who was held in 
the highest confidence by t the friends, would appear before 
the class and for a time apparently manifest the spirit of the 


Lord and then, taking advantage of the confidence of the 
friends, attempt to disrupt and hinder the work. — 2 Corinthians
 11:13-15. 

Having in mind what this unfortunate brother did in 
Great Britain and what he has attempted to do in this country, 
we feel duty-bound to warn the dear friends everywhere. 
If, as this Brother and his associates hold, those who are managing
 the Society's affairs are of the great company class, 
why have these brethren tried so strenuously for the past year 
to get control of the Society? Are they so desirous to be 
of the great company class? Wherein is their consistency? 
Of course, any one is entitled to hold any opinion he may 
desire, but if he is of the opinion that the Society and those 
working in conjunction with it constitute the great company 
class, and therefore it has become his duty to oppose the 
work of the harvest in which the Society is engaged, then 
it would be manifestly improper for the friends to receive 
him and extend to him the fellowship of a brother. 

The Society does not endorse his course at all; he is not 
sent out by the Society, and we feel impelled to call attention
 to the Apostle Paul's words as set forth in Romans 
16:17,18. We feel if we did not thus warn the flock, we 
would be negligent of our duty. If any brother docs not feel 
that he can work under the direction of the Society and in 
harmony with the Society, then those who are in harmony 
with the Society should avoid him. Any separation that may 
follow need not be in bitterness, nor in self-righteousne3s, but 
rather with a desire to be engaged consistently in the Lord's 
service. "Let every man be persuaded in his own mind," but 
let none seek to practice deception upon others, or to interfere
 with others who desire to serve the Lord. 

Our advice to you under the circumstances would be that 
all who desire to engage in the distribution of The Finished 
Mystery — Volume VII, and other literature which the Society
 publishes and sends forth— do so; and all others who 
do not feel disposed to engage should not interfere with 
those who want to work. If a brother is not in full harmony 
with the work of the Society, then he should not accept at 
the hands of the class appointment upon any committee that 
has to do with the distribution of the literature, The time 
is short in which to do the work, and it is evidently the 
Lord's will that it shall be done. Let us do with our might 
what our hands find to do and leave it to the Lord to determine
 whether we shall be of the little flock or great 
company class. The question that will determine to which 
class we belong will not be as to how much or how little 
literature we put out, or how many books we sell, but what 
is the real heart condition? If any are so situated that they 
cannot engage actively in the distribution of the message, 
this would in no wise preclude them from being of the kingdom
 class, provided they were of the proper heart condition. 
But if one is so situated that he could engage in the harvest 
work, but because of his heart condition refuses to do so, 
the result might be different. We leave the judgment entirely 
with the Lord. It is not for us to judge. Above all, let us 
do everything decently and in order, and dwell in peace, 
avoiding the spirit of rivalry and vain-glory. 

Let every one who desires to work in the harvest field 
enter quickly and work, and those who do not wish to work 
refrain from so doing, and at least refrain from interfering. 
Any one who seeks to disrupt the Lord's work surely has 
not the spirit of the Lord, and all such we are told to avoid. — 
1 Timothy 6:3-6; Proverbs 0:16, 19. 

to do aorrs will his chief desiee 
Bear Bbotheb Ruthebford: — 

I desire further to join my voice with those who have 
confessed to the wonderful blessings derived through the 


[6204] 


January IS, 1918 


T H E WA T C H T O W E R 


(30-31) 


reading of Volume VII, The Finished Mysteey. I am 
thankful indeed that the Lord has, by his grace, enabled me 
to "see the point" of the Sword; and it has led me to a renewal
 of my consecration to be faithful unto him and his 
truth even unto death, and to renewed energy and zeal in 
his service. 

Now, dear brother, my chief desire is to do the will of 
God in co-operation with the Society, which I firmly believe 
to be the angel of God having power (authority) over the 
coals of fire, and therefore I desire to plaqe my limited 
capabilities at the service and disposal of the Society to be 
used in whatever way the Society may deem wise. 

I wish to say, dear brother, that in reflecting over the 
past, I realize that your treatment of Sister Burgess and 
myself has been very kind and considerate, and I desire 
now to acknowledge it and to thank the Lord for all his 
undeserved favors, and yourself as an instrument in his 
hands to dispense them. 

T have boon greatly blessed and assisted to a right view 
of the present situation by the articles in The Watch Tower, 
"Concluding Work of the Harvest." Oct. 1st; "The Price of 
Exaltation, -'* Nov. 15th; and "The Light of the World," Dec. 
1st; and I praise the Lord for the grand food dispensed 
through The Watch Tower and for its continued spiritual, 
uplifting influence. 

May the blessing of the Lord be with you abundantly, 
dear brother, and with all those associated with you in this 
blessed work and labor of love, is my prayer. 

Your brother in his grace, A. E. Burgess. — N. Y. 

GOOD RESULTS OF VOLUNTEERING 
Dear Sirs: — 

Recently while riding on a street car a lady handed me a 
paper entitled The Bible Students Monthly in which I became
 very much interested, and would appreciate your sending
 me the issue treating "The Battle of Armageddon" and 
also a copy of "Where Are Thb Dead?" Please find enclosed
 $1.00 for which kindly send me The Bible Students 
Monthly for one year. I read in the paper the cost is only 
12c, which seems strange to me that a paper could be published
 at such a low cost. If so, keep the difference for 
papers to give out to otther strangers. 

Yours respectfully, C, A. B. — Ohio. 

EUPHRATES GRADUALLY BEING DRIED UP 

Gentlemen: — 

Your issue of The Bible Students Monthly, Vol. 9. 
No. 5, on "Why do the Nations War?" was placed at my 
door last Saturday. I read same to my wife and we both 
came to the conclusion that the truth you put forth fully 
coincides with our views in the matter. Please send me as 
many copies of this issue as you can conveniently spare, and 
any other issues which you may have. I will distribute 
them amongst my friends and co-workers that their eyes may 
be opened. There are upwards of 300 clerks in my department
. How I wish I could have them all read your "War 
Extra" ! It would wake them up, and remove the scales from 
their eyes. 

Correct you are: Priests and preachers have long since 
strayed away from Christ's teachings and are blinding his 
children with falsehoods for their own gain. Any priest or 
preacher — no matter of what denomination — who approves 
and agitates the killing of the innocent is far from the teachings
 of Christ and belongs to the devil. 

I want Pastor Russell's Studies in the Scriptures which 
you announce, and wish % to subscribe for your MbNTHLY. 
You will also hear from me again. God bless and prosper 
your good work. 

Yours very respectfully, R. D. Koerner. — III. 

WARRING AGAINST THE CREEDS 

Gentlemen: — 

I have just read your paper on "The Fall of Babylon" 
as treated by Pastor Russell. It agrees with my understanding
 of the truth. I am a scientific man — surgeon, chemist 
and astronomer — laboring in the fields of creation to the 
same ends that others are fighting the war on the creeds. 
I am with you in the great reconstruction where truth shall 
sweep the earth and the mind of man shall come into a full 
understanding of the divine wiU and do it completely. 

Faithfully yours, Edward Gates Davis. — Kan. 

CO-OPERATION ASSURED 
Dear Brethren : — 

RESOLVED, that we, the undersigned members of the 
York (Pa.) Ecclesia of Associated Bible Students, do hereby 
assure the faithful officers of the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society, and the Bethel Family, of our hearty cooperation
 and support in the remaining work of the Harvest, 
yet to be done. 

Be it further resolved that we will continue to pray for 
the general interests of the work, that it m.iy be carried out 
to its completion, to the honor and glory of our King. 

[Signed jiy forty-seven ukethre.v 1 
AS THE LORD HATH PROSPERED THEM 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

Enclosed please find money order, amounting 1o , our 

quarterly contribution to "Good Hopes," according as the Lord 
hath prospered us. It pleases us beyond expression that our 
contributions following the death of our beloved Pastor have 
been of increased amounts, so that you might be assured of 
our absolute confidence in those whom it pleases the Lord 
to place in charge of his great work, and that you might 
realize our desire to oc-ojx'rute heartily in that work. 

Our little class prays that our love for the Lord and the 
brethren may abound more and more. 
Yours in" the King's service, 

Ar.KXANDiu \ Ecclesia. — Pa. 
* 'GNAWING THEIR TONGUES TOR PAIN" 
Sirs: — 

I might call your attention to the sheet of paper called 
"The Fall of Babylon," which has been circulated around our 
city, much to the disgust of all denominations. As a Protestant
, 1 look upon it as one of the most narrow-minded, vile 
and decidedly untrue sheets printed for some time. I sincerely
 hope it will not come into the hands of our Catholic 
neighbors. 

Under the heading "Reformers vs. Antichrist" your jealousy
 of the pope and church is shown in its real* color. Has 
this circular been read before being distributed, by any responsible
 ( ?) sane person in your Association, of which 
there seems to be a scarcity? ¥ou quote St. Paul as saying: 
"That day shall not come except there come a falling away 
[Romish Apostasy] first, and that man of sin [Papacy]", etc. 
Why the words in brackets? Did you ever read or hear of 
anything so ridiculous? It is n pity that the world has to 
support such weaklings as your executives have shown themselves
 to be. Could you not use your time to better advantage 
by doing Red Cross work, or in fact anything but discussing 
"religion" of which you appear to be so ignorant? We shall 
certainly do our utmost to prevent any of the Sunday School 
classes reading or contaminating themselves with your publication
. I have given similar instructions to the Bible Class 
for men. , 

Trusting this will reach the hands of the publisher without
 delay, I am, Disgustedly, 
Sxjpt. ov Bible Class, "Church of England."— Montreal, Can. 

DISAPPOINTMENT TURNED INTO JOY 
Deab Brethren: — 

Greetings in the name of the dear Father. Mercy unto you ; 
grace, peace and love be multiplied unto you. 

I have been interested in present truth ever since I first 
heard dear Brother Russell in Lynn, Mass., about forty years 
ago, when he came to give his first six lectures there. T have 
followed the truth all these years; reading the volumes* as 
they came; finding The Tower very helpful; convinced from 
the beginning that it was the truth and Brother Russell was 
the special messenger, chosen by God for the last age of the 
church. 

At the time of his death, I recognized our great loss, but 
rejoiced that our dear brother had passed beyond into his 
reward, to the inheritance of the saints. I also felt disappointed
 because the long-Iooked-for Seventh Volume \vas not 
printed. But my disappointment was soon turned to joy when 
The Finished Mystery arrived. I have read it very carefully
. It is a wonderful arrangement of Brother Russell's 
words, "brought .together in one compact form. It is indeed powerful
. It surely -seems to be what the church needs in this 
trying time. 

We are rejoicing over Brother Rutherford's reelection. He 
was chosen by the Society last year, and again this year. Is 
not that the channel God had thus far used as his mouthpiece
? It seems the Lord's will was manifested at each election
. 

Enclosed please find check for Good Hopes. In conclusion, 
we pray that the dear Lord will give you needed strength to 
carry on the grand work still to be done. Assuring you of 
our loyalty to the cause, our fidelity to the truth, and our 
continued cooperation, I am, 

Your sister in Christ, Mrs. J. 0. Johnson, — Maine. 

CONTINUED APPRECIATIONS QT VOLUME SEVEN 
"The arrangement of Volume Seven, of chapter and verses 
with comments, is most satisfying. It makes the Sword of 


VII— 25 


[6205] 


(31-18) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


the Spirit shine brighter and renders its use more facile and 
effective. There is much in it to incite heart-searching as to 
faith, loyalty and love; much to arouse us to watchfulness, 
and to admonish, 'My soul, be on thy guard'; much to cause 
thanksgiving and praise. To all who in any measure had any 
share in compiling the Seventh Volume I simd my thanks and 
assure them of my prayers ascending to our heavenly Father 
in their behalf. Theirs has been a labor of love and of sacrifice
. It may bring them persecution and suffering. If so, 
let ours he the privilege of building around them a wall of 
prayer to help comfort and sustain them." I. M. F., — Fa. 

"The way Volume Seven came to me was a great surprise — 
withooit any notice of its being off the press! I assure you it 
brings us much rejoicing and blessing of heart, and this is only 
a beginning of what we will receive by our further studies of 
tins volume." E. L. M., — Tnd. 


VOLUME SEVEN QUESTION BOOKLETS 


The Questions to Volume Seven are now ready in booklet
 form, and orders thus far received are being filled. The 
Questions are in themselves an inspiration, and will, we are 
sure, greatly assist the friends in both personal and class 


study of The Finished Mystery. The booklet contains a 
qhart frontispiece which shows the chronological order of 
the Seven Churches, Messengers, Seals, Trumpets, Angels, 
Vials and Plagues. Price 10c each or 84c per dozen. 


CONTINUE THE DISTRIBUTION 


Some of the friends seem to have misunderstood our suggestion
 regarding the distribution of IS. S. M. Xo. 09 "Thk 
Fall of Babylon,'* assuming that the Society did not wish 
any copies given out after the date set for the general distribution
, viz., Dec. 30th last. This assumption is incorrect. 
If you did not receive your papers in time to distribute on 
that date, or if you were unable to cover your territory in 
one day, then we recommend that you continue to distribute 
them as rapidly and judiciously as possible. Many friends 
are now sending them out into the country districts, either 
by mail or by personal journeys, with excellent results, while 
others are having great blessings by distributing them in 


trains and street cars. If an additional supply of this issue 
is desired, please advise us and we will ship them promptly. 
Since the distribution of The Bible Students Monthly 
— 'The Fall or Bauylon' 1 — in greater New York, hundreds 
of letters have been received nt the office from strangers 
ordering The Finished Mystery. We wish to encourage the 
friends everywhere to greater activity in the distribution of 
this number of the Volunteer matter. Use this Bible Students
 Monthly at the public meetings for distribution. The 
public speakers will continue to use the subject "The Pall of 
J5abylon" for public addresses. The Lord is greatly blessing 
this work. 


ATTENTION AUSTRALIAN FRIENDS 


A large shipment of Volume Seven is on the way and 
should reach Melbourne about Feb. 1st. Australian Colporteurs
 will be promptly supplied by addressing our Melbourne 
Branch. 

