Comfort the Brokenhearted
1 At no other time in mankind’s history has there been such a need to provide comfort. Following the lead of our King, Christ Jesus, we also work to “bind up the brokenhearted.”​—Isa. 61:1.
2 Approach: To comfort people, our ministry should be characterized by a well-balanced, positive presentation. When we keep discussions about the world’s bad deeds and false doctrines to a minimum, Scriptural truth and the bright hope of God’s comforting promises are foremost in the conversation. This does not mean that Armageddon should not be discussed. Our commission is to proclaim both “the year of goodwill on the part of Jehovah and the day of vengeance on the part of our God,” and to “warn the wicked one from his wicked way.” However, the warning of Armageddon and a description of its destructive results is not meant to overshadow the theme of the good news of God’s Kingdom.​—Isa. 61:2; Ezek. 3:18; Matt. 24:14.
3 From Door-to-Door: It is not uncommon to find people who are downhearted because of sickness, the death of a loved one, injustices, or economic problems. As imitators of Christ, we are “moved with pity” and show a sympathetic attitude toward those whom we meet in the ministry. (Luke 7:13; Rom. 12:15) Although we share a scripture or two related to the problem, we must prove to be “swift about hearing,” thus allowing the person to express his feelings. (Jas. 1:19) After first listening, we are in a better position to provide comfort.
4 At an appropriate time in the conversation, we might say, “I would like to share with you some encouraging words from the Bible.” Good judgment should be used so as not to endeavor to refute every wrong view that the person may express. Rather, our focus should be to provide encouragement and comfort by using the Scriptures to fortify the heart. In this regard, you may consult Reasoning From the Scriptures pages 117-121 under the heading “Encouragement.” Or you may furnish the householder with a copy of the tract Comfort for the Depressed and review the encouraging material therein.
5 Look for Opportunities to Comfort Others: Do you know of a neighbor, workmate, schoolmate, or family member that is in need of comfort? Why not make an effort to visit such ones at their home with the goal of sharing comfort from the Scriptures? Knowing why they need comfort, you can prepare for that particular situation. In this regard some have written letters or made telephone calls. True love of neighbor will move us to show fellow feeling and to provide needed comfort from the Scriptures.​—Luke 10:25-37.
6 Yes, we are commissioned to comfort those who mourn, to lift saddened hearts, and to instill hope for a bright future. This is the comfort that people around the world need. Talking joyfully about the many good things God has promised will bring comfort and hope to the honesthearted. May we always remember the need to bind up the brokenhearted.

