Offer the Magazines That Bear Witness to the Truth
 1. What is the role of the The Watchtower and Awake!?
1 The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom and its companion magazine, Awake!, remain at the forefront of the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) We take delight in regularly presenting these two timely journals as we participate in various aspects of Kingdom service.
 2. What changes have been seen in the The Watchtower and Awake!, and why?
2 Over the years we have seen changes in the size and content of the magazines as well as in the methods we use to distribute them. These changes have been made with the objective of making the magazines more appealing and effective, so that the Kingdom message reaches the heart of ‘all sorts of men that they might be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.’​—1 Tim. 2:4.
 3. How will the magazines be used in the ministry?
3 Since January 2006, we have become adept at using various presentations for the one monthly issue of Awake! Now we will take a similar approach to offering just one of the two monthly issues of The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom in our public ministry. Sample presentations for each magazine appear on the back page of Our Kingdom Ministry. These usually highlight one of the opening articles in the magazine, but at times certain other articles with wide appeal are featured. The published suggestions can be used most effectively when we are well acquainted with the featured article and use our own words to adapt the presentation to our territory.
 4. Why may it be beneficial to use other presentations aside from the suggested presentations in Our Kingdom Ministry?
4 Although Our Kingdom Ministry includes two suggestions for each magazine, feel free to use an entirely different presentation. One reason for doing so could be that one of the other articles would have wider appeal in your territory. Or it may be that you feel that you could make a more effective presentation by using an article that holds greater interest for you.
 5. Before preparing a presentation for the featured magazine, what must you do?
5 How to Prepare Your Presentation: First of all, you must be thoroughly familiar with the article you choose to feature. You may not always be able to become familiar with every article in the magazine before you begin using it in the field ministry. However, you must reflect enthusiasm and sincerity with regard to the articles you choose to feature. You can do that only when you are well acquainted with the information you present.
 6. How can we prepare our own presentations?
6 Next, be flexible, or versatile, in preparing your opening words. A pointed interest-arousing question related to the article may be used to begin a conversation. Always rely on the power of God’s Word to touch the heart. (Heb. 4:12) Select an appropriate scripture that relates to the subject you introduce, preferably a text that is cited or quoted in the article that you are featuring. Consider how to tie in the scripture with the article.
 7. How may we further refine our presentations?
7 At Every Opportunity: For a presentation to be truly effective, it must be put to use. Share with the congregation in magazine witnessing on Saturday. Offer the magazines to people who have previously accepted other literature. Always offer the magazines to your Bible students and to other people who may be present when you make a return visit. You may be able to place magazines with people you talk with when you go shopping, while traveling, or while waiting at a doctor’s office. Refine your presentations as you use them throughout the month.
 8. In what ways are The Watchtower and Awake! unique?
8 The Watchtower and Awake! magazines are unique. They exalt Jehovah as the Sovereign of the universe. (Acts 4:24) They comfort people with the good news of God’s Kingdom and encourage faith in Jesus Christ. (Matt. 24:14; Acts 10:43) In addition, they keep watch on world events as these fulfill Bible prophecy. (Matt. 25:13) Help individuals in your territory to benefit from these journals by preparing to offer them at every appropriate opportunity!
 9. How can we lay the groundwork for a return visit?
9 When you succeed in placing a magazine, or even if you just have friendly spiritual conversation with someone, be prepared with a question or a thought-provoking statement that may open the way for a return visit and another spiritual conversation. If we are zealous in sowing seeds of truth, we can be sure that Jehovah will open the hearts of those who sincerely desire to know and serve Him.​—1 Cor. 3:6.

