The Greatest Preaching Campaign the World Has Ever Known!
For over 100 years, Jehovah’s Witnesses have been organized to share the good news. (1 Cor. 9:23) In what has become the greatest preaching campaign the world has ever known, we speak this message in hundreds of languages. We deliver it in more than 230 lands. (Matt. 24:14) But why is this work necessary? And how is it being accomplished on a global scale?
The video Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Organized to Share the Good News answers those questions by providing a close-up look at the many facets of our international activities. As you watch it, consider these questions: (1) How is our activity organized and directed? (2) How do the Writing, Translation Services, Art, and Audio/​Video Services Departments contribute to communicating the good news? (3) What is the purpose of our extensive printing and shipping operations? (John 17:3) (4) How many pieces of literature are printed in one year? (5) What have our Bible-based publications accomplished? (Heb. 4:12) (6) What is being done to provide spiritual assistance for those who are visually or hearing impaired? (7) How is our work financed? (8) How do we benefit from the work of Hospital Information Services, the Service Department, and the Convention Department? (9) As one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, how has this video enhanced your appreciation for (a) the effort that Jehovah’s organization is making to preach the good news? (b) the more than 100 Bethel families around the world? (c) the educational training provided for overseers and missionaries? (d) the importance of starting each day considering a Bible text and preparing each week for congregation meetings? (e) the benefits of attending our Christian gatherings? (f) what Paradise on earth will mean? (Isa. 11:9) (g) sharing personally in the ongoing harvest work?​—John 4:35.
What positive reaction have you seen when showing this video to your relatives, acquaintances, return visits, and Bible students? Why not share it and the good news with someone else very soon?​—Matt. 28:19, 20.

