Beware of Idolizing Creatures
“FOR the thoughts of you people are not my thoughts, nor are my ways your ways,” Jehovah God once said by one of his ancient prophets. Among the many examples of this that might be cited is one in regard to the idolizing of human creatures. This tendency is as widespread as the earth itself and goes back to the very first human pair. Yes, it started with Adam when he showed that he preferred the favor of his wife to the favor of Jehovah God his Creator.—Isa. 55:8; Gen. 3:6-19.
There is nothing wrong with giving proper respect and honor to those to whom it is due. The Bible tells children, “Honor your father and your mother.” Christians are commanded to “honor men of all sorts,” to “have honor for the king,” and to “render to all their dues, to him who calls for . . . honor, such honor.” It even tells that some are worthy of “double honor.” But such giving of honor is reasoned, based on sober judgment. It is entirely different from the emotional idolizing of creatures, which amounts to creature worship.—Eph. 6:2; 1 Pet. 2:17; Rom. 13:7; 1 Tim. 5:17.
Outstanding musical personalities have long been idolized, and especially by womenfolk. Johann Strauss, the “waltz king,” was idolized by many in the late nineteenth century, even as many idolized Frank Sinatra some sixty years later. In more recent times Elvis Presley was the idol of myriads of young women, and still more recently the Beatles became such, as well as their imitators.
Those who achieve unusual or spectacular success in the field of sports are likewise often idolized by many persons. Thus in the World Series of baseball in 1967, the enthusiasm of many of the ardent supporters of the competing teams bordered on idolizing, as with the woman who changed her name from Mrs. St. Louis to Mrs. Red Sox, hoping thereby to help her favorites to win. But they did not. In particular did the St. Louis fans go wild when their team returned to St. Louis after winning the pennant in Boston. A crowd of 15,000 admirers tuned up at the airport, jammed the downtown streets and got so emotional that eleven persons were injured and eight had to be arrested because of their disorderly conduct.
And then there are the many political as well as religious idols. How many Germans idolized Hitler! Many Russians still idolize Lenin, as can be seen from the mammoth statue of him that they erected in Moscow at the beginning of November 1967. Masses of Chinese idolize their chief of State, Mao Tse-tung. And what creature worship was extended to Pope Paul VI when he visited the United States and the United Nations! A literal frenzy of adulation was showered upon him by 90,000 as he rode around Yankee Stadium in an open auto.
WHAT ACCOUNTS FOR IT?
What accounts for this ‘perpetual fact of creature worship,’ as it has been called? Among the various causes that might be mentioned is a feeling of unworthiness on the part of some. This feeling causes them to regard with unreasoning admiration those who have distinguished themselves in such things as music, sports, science or war. It is as if by exalting a fellow human creature they are lifting themselves up also.—Rom. 1:25.
Another reason no doubt is the need to love someone. Persons lacking in emotional maturity are unable to love deeply an ordinary or average person and so they pick someone that has achieved distinction by reason of special gifts or accomplishments and idolize him or her. Thus when a social scientist asked some of a screaming crowd of thousands of teenage girls why the Beatles affected them the way they did, the girls replied that it was because they “loved” those four youths.
Then, again, a lack of proper perspective, of knowledge and understanding, both on the part of those idolizing and on the part of those idolized, may well account for their deporting themselves the way they do. True, those who excel deserve some recognition. A skillful man has the right to ‘station himself before kings,’ the Bible tells us. But is that a reason for his own heart to become exalted or others unduly to exalt him? Israel’s kings were commanded to read God’s Word daily lest they lose perspective and become exalted in their own minds.—Prov. 22:29; Deut. 17:19, 20.
While still other causes could be cited for the tendency to idolize humans, doubtless one of the most basic is a lack of understanding of one’s relationship to one’s Creator; how truly great he is and that in comparison with him all humans are but specks upon a speck. As Jehovah’s prophet long ago wrote: “Surely the people are green grass. The green grass has dried up, the blossom has withered; but as for the word of our God, it will last to time indefinite,” that is, forever.—Isa. 40:7, 8.
Originally the Creator implanted in man the need to worship as one of the means to tie his creatures to their Creator. But as the result of the rebellion of our first parents this instinct of worship has been sadly perverted, misdirected. As the Christian apostle Paul tells us: “Although they knew God, they did not glorify him as God nor did they thank him, but they became empty-headed in their reasonings and their unintelligent heart became darkened. . . . they became foolish and . . . exchanged the truth of God for the lie and venerated and rendered sacred service to the creation rather than the One who created, who is blessed forever.”—Rom. 1:21-25.
GOD’S WAY DIFFERENT
The idolizing of human creatures usually involves an unreasoning loyalty to the one idolized, an undue emotional attachment to such a one. It means giving such a one a measure of worshipful devotion, whereas Jehovah God explicitly stated that he does not tolerate such a thing: “I Jehovah your God am a God exacting exclusive devotion.” How Jehovah God feels about such idolizing of creatures can be seen from what happened to King Herod Agrippa I, who lived in the days of the apostles. Once, decking himself in resplendent robes, he basked in the adulation of his people as he gave a public address. Apparently his appearance and oratory were such that the people exclaimed: “A god’s voice, and not a man’s!” The record goes on to say, “Instantly the angel of Jehovah struck him, because he did not give the glory to God; and he became eaten up with worms and expired.” Is Jehovah God displeased with creature worship? He most certainly is!—Ex. 20:5; Acts 12:21-23.
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, when on earth did not make this mistake. He not only refused to bow down to Satan the Devil, even though offered all the kingdoms of the world and their glory, but he also would not let others idolize him. He refused to let the people crown him as king, and when someone addressed him, “Good Teacher,” he replied: “Why do you call me good? Nobody is good, except one, God.” Moreover, repeatedly he stressed that he did nothing of his own initiative but simply carried out his Father’s instructions.—Mark 10:17, 18; Matt. 4:8-10; John 5:19, 30; 7:28.
Jesus’ apostles and early disciples likewise kept themselves without spot as to idolizing creatures. Repeatedly they warned against it. (1 Cor. 10:14; 1 John 5:21) And they were very careful not to let others idolize them. When certain natives of the city of Lystra wanted to worship Paul and Barnabas because Paul had healed a cripple lame from birth, Paul and Barnabas “ripped their outer garments and leaped out into the crowd, crying out and saying: ‘Men, why are you doing these things? We also are humans having the same infirmities as you do,’” and then proceeded to tell them the good news about the Creator, and the need to worship him.—Acts 14:8-18.
Likewise, when Cornelius fell at the feet of the apostle Peter, Peter refused to accept this act of exaltation, but said: “Rise; I myself am also a man.” (Acts 10:26) From the account of the apostle John at Revelation 22:8, 9, we can see that not even an angel is to be accorded worship. The actions of Cornelius and the apostle John on these occasions illustrate how prone human nature is to accord undue respect to highly favored individuals.
HARMS IDOLIZERS AND THOSE IDOLIZED
The idolizing of creatures being contrary to God’s will, it can result in only harm, both to the ones extending it and to the ones accepting it. How much disillusionment came to the Germans who idolized Hitler, the Italians who idolized Mussolini, the Russians who idolized Stalin! People who idolize men and put their trust in them are bound to come to disappointment, even as God’s Word shows.—Ps. 146:3, 4; Isa. 31:1-3.
Those who accept undue honor from others likewise will come to grief, primarily because they incur Jehovah’s displeasure. In his due time “the haughty eyes of earthling man must become low, and the loftiness of men must bow down; and Jehovah alone must be put on high in that day.” “That day” is the day that Jehovah will rise up to express his “burning anger” against all who would compete with him, that all the “people may know that you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.”—Isa. 2:11, 17; Zeph. 3:8; Ps. 83:18.
Even at the present time those who accept the idolizing of others are harmed by it, as when it turns their heads. For example, one of the popular and much idolized Beatles was quoted as saying: “Christianity will go. It will vanish and shrink. I needn’t argue about that. I’m right and will be proved right. We’re more popular than Jesus Christ now; I don’t know which will go first, rock ’n’ roll or Christianity. Jesus was all right but his disciples were thick and ordinary.”—Time, August 12, 1966.
But how satisfactory has been their own philosophy? How much it has helped them can be seen by their admission that they have started taking drugs, including LSD; apparently to fill the vacuum created by their way of life and the idolizing of millions. The latest reports tell that they have turned to ‘spiritualism,’ under the guidance of a yogi seer, who promises that by two thirty-minute sessions of transcendental meditation a person will be able “to perceive the divinity within himself” and straighten out all his problems.a However, God’s Word warns against all forms of pagan religion and spiritism.—2 Cor. 6:14-18; Gal. 5:20, 21; Rev. 22:15.
GUARDING AGAINST IDOLIZING CREATURES
In particular must Christian youths be on guard against the snare of idolizing creatures. It will take a strong determination and resolve to hold ‘their own.’ Due to the example of youths all about them it is very easy for them to be swept along with the fervor, the excitement, the hysteria or the frenzy of those worshiping heroes, idolizing creatures. Then, again, a Christian youth may shrink back from feeling conspicuously different by not going along with the crowd; he may wince at the thought of being considered a “square” by others. But he should remember that the Bible warns against following “the popular course.”—Jer. 8:6.
Christian youths, unless on guard, can easily fall into the snare of idolizing creatures simply by according a person undue awe by reason of his exploits or achievements, as when a man sails clear around the world in a small boat all by himself. Unless a youth is careful he can readily fancy a sense of loyalty or kinship with his ‘hero.’ He may be quick to defend him or ready to make allowances for his indiscretions. A youth may feel excitement at the thought of seeing his ‘hero’ in person, delight to talk about him and spend much time dreaming about him. He may even want to imitate the way his ‘hero’ dresses or has his hair cut.
But the Christian youth should ask himself: Is this noted person a Christian? Does he love Jehovah God? Does he live by the Bible? Does he subscribe to the righteous principles God has laid down in his Word? If not, then should such a one be admired and imitated and have affection showered upon him by a dedicated Christian? Does not such a one belong to the world, concerning which Christians are told that they are not to love it? Most surely!—Jas. 1:27; 4:4; 1 John 2:15-17.
How can one guard against all idolizing of creatures? By getting the ‘mind of the Lord’ on such matters by a study of God’s Word, the Bible, and such Bible-study aids as this magazine, The Watchtower, and avoiding the inclination to admire or get excited about the exploits of human creatures. As a poet once aptly expressed it:
“The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth e’er gave
Awaits alike th’ inevitable hour:—
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.”
Jesus on one occasion said: “What is lofty among men is a disgusting, thing in God’s sight.” (Luke 16:15) Why idolize what is disgusting to God? Get his mind on matters, which is so different from the mind of men. Win God’s favor, for in his favor and loving-kindness there is life.—Ps. 103:17, 18.
[Footnotes]
Time, September 22, 1967.

