From Our Readers
Amazon Rain Forest  I was very impressed by the series of articles “The Amazon Rain Forest—Myths and Realities.” (March 22, 1997) As a plant ecologist with the U.S. Forest Service, I have to study a considerable amount of literature on the environment. Yet, I consider your article to be the best that I have ever read on the subject. It was very well researched, instructive, and up-to-date, and it was a real pleasure to read. It was heartening for me to see concepts such as biodiversity, extraction, fragmentation, and ecosystem appear in a journal with such a vast international distribution. This can only help matters.
D. S., United States
I am 12 years old, and I want to say a big thank-you for the articles. I just had to read them the very evening we received the magazine! Since we are dealing with this topic in geography class at school, I gave a copy to my geography teacher the next day. Of course, that made others in the class curious, and I hope to place some more magazines with them.
T. E., Germany
The articles were truly fascinating. The species of insects mentioned are so vast in number, each with its own duty to perform under the leaves on the floor of the forest. Jehovah sees that food is supplied for all who live there. I can understand why he will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.”—Revelation 11:18.
D. K. H., United States
Bullying—What’s the Harm?  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Bullying—What’s the Harm?” (March 22, 1997) At school everybody humiliates the weakest, and I too was pushed to do the same thing. But the counsel given in this article to put oneself in the other person’s position helped me a lot to hold back from bullying. Thank you once again.
M. N., France
I am 17 years old, and I thank you so much for the article. It is an answer to my prayers, and it really encouraged me. Knowing that Jehovah hates bullying has helped me greatly to make necessary changes in my conduct. The Golden Rule and the example of Jesus also impressed me, and they help me to act correctly.
V. T., Italy
Recently, in a waiting room, I picked up an Awake! and discovered this well-written article. I certainly understand the lasting harm bullying can cause. My brother was verbally, emotionally, and physically abusive [to me, his sister]. If confronted, he’d shrug, laugh, and claim it was just a joke. He’d tell me that the problem was mine because I lacked a sense of humor! When I was 13 and he was 15, he began to threaten me with sexual molestation. I lived in constant fear of him because he was older, bigger, and so much stronger! My parents never protected me. Thank you, Awake!, for taking on the serious issues of life. I know it does take courage. I feel you’ve touched many hearts with this article.
B. S. M., United States
Gardening Ants  After reading the article “An Expert Gardener” (March 22, 1997), I was able to visit an exhibition and witness the very activity you described. It looked as though leaves were moving along a rope that hung from the ceiling. Actually, ants were carrying those leaves, and nearby they were busy cultivating a fungus garden. To see what you mentioned was truly an awesome sight and brought me and my two little girls closer to our loving heavenly Father, Jehovah.
P. F., Scotland

