How You Can Cope With the Information Age
WE MUST face the fact that there are many aspects of the information age of the 1990’s that will continue to make us anxious. Over some of these, we have little or no control. On the other hand, there are steps we can take to eliminate much, if not all, such anxiety. We might say, then, that survival in the information age is a challenging yet rewarding task.
Receivers and Givers of Information
Whether we have classified ourselves in this way or not, throughout our lives we are all receivers and givers of information to some extent. Our brain, however, receives and processes information in different ways. One way involves the amazing capacity of the brain to process information subconsciously.
Another way involves conscious processing of information such as during conversation. We have a great deal of control over this type of information processing—both as givers and receivers. When it comes to trivial conversation, the Bible warns about those who are “not only unoccupied, but also gossipers and meddlers in other people’s affairs, talking of things they ought not.” (1 Timothy 5:13) In other words, be careful not to spend inordinate amounts of time talking about trivialities or even harmful information. Do not be the sort of person who lives from one piece of gossip to the next. Valuable time and energy can be wasted, and this can make us and others anxious. You may miss opportunities to absorb and distribute information that is truly upbuilding and crucial for surviving in this troubled world.
Information gathered by reading is processed consciously and hence takes the longest. The anxiety-laden lament, “I can’t keep up with my reading!” is only too familiar. Do you feel that you have too much to read and too little time to do it? Because of the time-consuming nature of reading, the art and pleasure of it is often lost in this age of instant information. Too many allow TV to monopolize their time. Yet, the written word is still the most powerful way of stimulating the imagination and transmitting information, ideas, and concepts.
How can we cope when so much reading matter is calling for our attention and competing with TV, computer games, and other recreational activities? The answer is screening. Screening, sorting out or prioritizing, what we need to hear, see, say, or read may eliminate much information anxiety. Effective screening can be done on two levels.
Do We Need So Much Trivia?
The perception of our needs is often distorted by what others think we need or by what the advertising skills of the media lead us to believe we need. To cut through this confusing information labyrinth, apply this basic rule: Keep it simple! Richard S. Wurman puts it this way: “The secret to processing information is narrowing your field of information to that which is relevant to your life . . . I believe it is a myth that the more choices you have, the more appropriate actions you can take and the more freedom you will enjoy. Rather, more choices seem to produce more anxiety.”
So when it comes to reading or watching TV, it is good to examine your habits. Ask yourself: ‘Is this necessary for my work or my life? Do I really need to know all the trivia and gossip about the famous and so-called beautiful people in the world? How would my life change if I did not watch this TV program, read this book or that magazine, or spend so much time with the newspaper?’ Some have been able to take stock of their reading and TV intake and have eliminated material that cluttered their minds and also their homes. For example, they have decided to subscribe to only one daily newspaper. Most papers carry the same basic news items anyway. Some people have specifically requested that they not receive unsolicited junk mail in their mailboxes.
Keeping life simple and uncluttered was advocated by the greatest man who ever lived, Jesus Christ. (Matthew 6:25-34) Simplicity is recommended and celebrated in many Asian cultures and is even recognized by many in Western cultures as a superior way of living. Writer Duane Elgin stated: “To live more simply is to live more purposefully and with a minimum of needless distraction.”
Now, having prioritized your information intake as far as your needs are concerned, do the same with interests, for interest is the motivating force for learning. The problem here, however, is to distinguish between what really interests you and what you might think should interest you in order to please others—perhaps people at your place of work. But if you can plan your reading and TV or computer intake just as you would plan any other activity, you will find that building it around genuine interest can make for a pleasant road to travel, without undue anxiety.
So, how can you cope with information anxiety? You may never be able to eliminate it altogether, but following the few simple rules we have outlined will help greatly. Keep it simple, and classify information according to your personal needs and interests. The time is coming when all complications of life, including information anxiety, will be a thing of the past, but in the meantime, keep the marvels of modern technology in their place. Treat them as a means to an end. Do not be their slave or stand in awe of them. Thus, useful information will be upbuilding, encouraging, and beneficial, without causing you anxiety.
[Box on page 11]
Try a Trade-Off
  “Cancel your cable TV service, . . . and apply that same [money] per month to one or more good books. Books are the opposite of television: They are slow, engaging, inspiring, intellect-arousing, and creativity-spurring.”
  “You could also consider limiting yourself to no more than a certain number of hours on the Internet each week, or at least balancing the amount of time spent online with an equal amount of time reading books.”—Data Smog—Surviving the Information Glut.
[Box on page 12]
Be the Master, Not the Slave
  “Turn the television off. There is no quicker way to regain control of the pace of your life, the peace of your home, and the content of your thinking than to turn off the appliance that supplies for all-too-many of us the ambiance of our lives. Millions of Americans have been discovering the serenity and empowerment that comes with using the OFF switch, not to mention hours and hours of newly acquired free time with which they can begin to do some of the things they’ve never found time for in the past.”—Data Smog—Surviving the Information Glut.
[Box on page 12]
Beware of the Internet
  Immoral individuals use the Internet to pursue their sex perversions and to try to contact willing partners or innocent victims. Others use the Internet to promote their own personal agendas. Apostates also create Web sites to catch the naive.
  Extreme caution is necessary when the Internet is used, and certainly parents should closely supervise any of their children who may be using it. It is true that there are many useful sources to be found, such as research libraries, bookstores, and news channels. For example, the Watchtower Society recently announced its own Web site (http://www.watchtower.org), which serves to give factual information about Jehovah’s Witnesses. Still, one has to recognize that there are some extremely harmful influences out there, including pornography and apostasy.
  A Christian should be conscious of Paul’s counsel: “This, therefore, I say and bear witness to in the Lord, that you no longer go on walking just as the nations also walk in the unprofitableness of their minds . . . Having come to be past all moral sense, they gave themselves over to loose conduct to work uncleanness of every sort with greediness. But you did not learn the Christ to be so.” (Ephesians 4:17-20) Also, “Let fornication and uncleanness of every sort or greediness not even be mentioned among you, just as it befits holy people; neither shameful conduct nor foolish talking nor obscene jesting, things which are not becoming, but rather the giving of thanks.” (Ephesians 5:3, 4) We have to realize that many Web sites have been created by people with immoral or dishonest intent. And many sites that may not be immoral or dishonest, such as chat groups, are a plain waste of time. From all such, stay away!

