Watching the World
Alcoholism in Mexico
Studies conducted by the Mexican Institute of Social Security indicated that there were more than four million alcoholics in Mexico in 1991. But by 1997, that number may have doubled, reports Mexico City’s newspaper El Universal. It quotes Alcoholics Anonymous as saying that of the eight million alcoholics in Mexico, three million are found in Mexico City. According to El Universal, most crimes in Mexico are committed under the influence of alcohol. Abuse of alcohol results in work absenteeism and poor school performance. José Manuel Castrejón, representative of the National Council Against Addiction, says that “50 percent of the cases of family violence and a fifth of the work accidents are closely related to alcohol use.”
Tips for Air Travelers
Long-distance air travel puts stress on mind and body, and The Times newspaper of London offers some suggestions for relief. These include “avoiding alcohol but taking plenty of soft drinks, eating only light meals and picturing yourself in a pleasant place.” Sitting still for long periods can cause swollen feet and can make clothing feel tighter. Thus, reports The Times, “doctors suggest loosening clothes, removing shoes and requesting an aisle seat so you can keep strolling to the lavatory.” Flexing and stretching your arms and legs during the journey helps to prevent circulation problems. To combat jet lag, “seasoned travellers sometimes adjust their daily routine in advance of their journeys. Those heading east get up earlier for a week and those heading west go to bed late.”
Tokyo’s Commuting Crows
Crows in Tokyo, Japan, have taken up the habit of commuting between the suburbs and the city each day, reports The Daily Yomiuri. Bird experts say that this started a few years ago when the crow population of Tokyo’s parks and temple grounds grew so large that crows were forced to build nests elsewhere. It was then that they discovered the comforts of suburban life. The one thing they missed, though, was sophisticated city food—garbage and discarded leftovers. They overcame this problem by developing “commuting patterns that are similar to that of salaried workers. They fly to urban areas in the morning to search for food,” says The Daily Yomiuri, “then return to the suburbs in the evening.”
Natural Wealth Threatened
◆ The northeastern region of India, rich in plant and animal life, now lists 650 species of plants and 70 species of animals as being endangered. The fragile ecosystem in the state of Meghalaya, on the border with Bangladesh, has been identified as one of 18 ‘hot spots’ where biodiversity is at risk. As reported in The Asian Age, the ecosystem has come under assault from human depredation and poaching, among other factors. The biodiversity of the seven northeastern Indian states is considered more fragile and sensitive ecologically than that of other parts of the country.
◆ In Italy the number of threatened plant species and subspecies is also on the rise. In 1992, 458 were considered endangered, but by 1997, that number had increased to 1,011. “About one seventh of the varieties that constitute the Italian flora are endangered in some way, and as many as 29 species have become extinct in the last few years,” explains Corriere della Sera. More than 120 species are “in serious danger of extinction in the immediate future,” and almost 150 may run that risk in the near future. In the view of botanist Franco Pedrotti, of the University of Camerino, “these figures reveal an alarming situation.” One plant became extinct in its natural habitat when the only area in which it grew was turned into a soccer field.
◆ In Argentina 500 of the 2,500 indigenous animal species are in danger, reports the Buenos Aires newspaper Clarín. “Even though preserving biodiversity is a key to assuring the present and future well-being of people, many animals are at risk of disappearing,” according to Claudio Bertonatti, coordinator of the conservation department of the Wildlife Foundation. Among the animals threatened in Argentina are varieties of armadillo, jaguar, vicuña, whale, and land tortoise. “Despite [the fact] that the sale of them is prohibited,” notes the report, in greater Buenos Aires “about 100,000 tortoises are sold each year.” Bertonatti observed: “Man, who ought to be the primary one interested in protecting this source of riches, is responsible for the majority of the threats that are taking many species to the brink of extinction.”
Mary First to See the Risen Christ?
Pope John Paul II has asserted that “it is legitimate to think that the Mother [of Jesus, Mary] was probably the first person to whom the risen Jesus appeared.” (L’Osservatore Romano) None of the four Gospel accounts speak of Jesus’ mother being present when his tomb was found to be empty. However, the pope also said: “How could the Blessed Virgin, present in the first community of disciples (cf. Acts 1:14), be excluded from those who met her divine Son after he had risen from the dead?” The pope used various arguments to try to explain the absence of a record in the Gospels of any meeting between Jesus and his mother. The fact remains that holy spirit did not inspire the Gospel writers to make mention of any such event. Nor, for that matter, is she mentioned in the apostolic letters.—2 Timothy 3:16.
Southern Summer Risk
In the Southern Hemisphere, January is one of the hottest months. In hot weather it is important to safeguard against heatstroke, explains FDA Consumer magazine. Although heatstroke causes hundreds of deaths each year, it is entirely preventable, states endocrinologist Dr. Elizabeth Koller. Heatstroke can occur as a result of exertion in the heat, but it also strikes older adults who do not have air-conditioning and who have an underlying health problem, such as diabetes or heart disease. When the temperature soars, FDA Consumer advises drinking lots of water—a quart [liter] an hour if exercising. In the sun, wear sunscreen, a broad-brimmed hat, and loose clothing. If you have no air-conditioning and there is danger of heatstroke, “take cool baths, spray yourself with water frequently, and sit in front of a fan. If you feel faint, call for emergency medical attention.” Dr. Koller warns: “If someone is overheating, you have only minutes to do something about it.”
“Torture” at Work
“Headaches, fatigue, impaired memory, visual disturbance, dizziness, respiratory problems, catarrhal deafness, tinnitus, [and] skin conditions”—all may result from sick building syndrome, or SBS, says John Moores University researcher Jack Rostron. SBS, officially recognized by the World Health Organization in 1986, can “transform the humdrum business of going to work into something approaching torture,” he claims. Centrally controlled air-conditioned buildings with sealed windows can accumulate air pollutants, such as the toxic gases and particles given off by photocopiers and printers, reports The Independent of London. To avoid SBS, air-conditioning systems must be cleaned frequently and thoroughly. Rostron notes: “Work performance improves when small groups of people share small offices with windows that open.”
Winter Warning
Anyone who spends time outdoors in winter cold and wind is at risk of hypothermia, a dangerous lowering of body temperature, states The Toronto Star newspaper. This occurs “when the body loses heat faster than it can generate it,” the report notes, adding that “temperatures do not have to be sub-zero for hypothermia to occur.” The metabolism of the elderly is often less able to compensate for heat loss. They, along with children, are at greatest risk. When a person is “cold, wet, tired, hungry, shivering, complaining, [and] not enjoying being outdoors,” he may be at risk of hypothermia, states the Wilderness First Aid Handbook. Such a person should be given shelter, dry clothes, food, and fluids but not alcohol or caffeine. If he does not show signs of recovery, medical help should be sought immediately.

