





LESSON 19
Are Jehovah’s Witnesses Real Christians?



As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we believe that we are real Christians. Why? Consider the basis for our beliefs, the name that sets us apart, and the love we have for one another.
1. On what do Jehovah’s Witnesses base their beliefs?
Jesus said: “[God’s] word is truth.” (John 17:17) Like Jesus, Jehovah’s Witnesses have always based their beliefs on God’s Word. Consider our modern-day history. In the late 19th century, a group of Bible students carefully began to examine the Bible. They based their beliefs on what it said, even when those beliefs differed from church doctrines. Then, they began sharing those Bible truths with others.a
2. Why do we call ourselves Jehovah’s Witnesses?
Jehovah refers to his worshippers as his witnesses because they tell the truth about him. (Hebrews 11:4–12:1) For example, in ancient times, God told his people: “You are my witnesses.” (Read Isaiah 43:10.) Jesus is called “the Faithful Witness.” (Revelation 1:5) Thus, in 1931 we adopted the name Jehovah’s Witnesses. We are proud to bear that name.
3. How do Jehovah’s Witnesses imitate Jesus’ love?
Jesus loved his disciples so much that they were like family to him. (Read Mark 3:35.) Similarly, Jehovah’s Witnesses are a united, worldwide family. That is why we call each other brother and sister. (Philemon 1, 2) We also obey the command: “Have love for the whole association of brothers.” (1 Peter 2:17) Jehovah’s Witnesses show this love in many ways, such as by helping our fellow believers around the world in times of need.


DIG DEEPER

Take a closer look at the history of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and see further evidence that we are real Christians.





Real Christians base their beliefs on the Bible and share them with others





4. We base our beliefs on the Bible
Jehovah foretold that Bible truth would be revealed. Read Daniel 12:4 and footnote, and then discuss this question:
  What would “become abundant” among God’s people as they continued to examine the Bible?


Consider how a group of Bible students, including Charles Russell, studied God’s Word. Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.







VIDEO: Rediscovering Bible Truth (7:45)


  In the video, how did Charles Russell and his fellow Bible Students study the Bible?





Did you know?
Occasionally, we have adjusted some of our beliefs. Why? Just as the rising sun reveals details of a landscape gradually, God grants an understanding of his Word progressively. (Read Proverbs 4:18.) So although the Bible does not change, we adjust our beliefs as our understanding of the Bible improves.



5. We live up to our name

Why did we adopt the name Jehovah’s Witnesses? Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.










VIDEO: A Name That Defines Us (2:56)




  Why is the name Jehovah’s Witnesses appropriate?


Why has Jehovah chosen people to be his witnesses? Because they would identify him as the true God, since many lies have been told about him. Consider just two of those lies.
Some religions teach their members that God wants them to use images in their worship. However, read Leviticus 26:1, and then discuss these questions:
  What is the truth? How does Jehovah feel about idols?


Some religious leaders teach that Jesus is God. However, read John 20:17, and then discuss these questions:
  What is the truth? Are God and Jesus the same person?

  How does it make you feel to know that Jehovah has sent his Witnesses to preach the truth about him and his Son?






6. We love one another
The Bible compares Christians to different parts of the human body. Read 1 Corinthians 12:25, 26, and then discuss these questions:
  How should real Christians react when other Christians suffer?

  What have you observed about the love among Jehovah’s Witnesses?


When Jehovah’s Witnesses suffer in one part of the earth, fellow Witnesses all over the world respond immediately. To see one example, play the VIDEO. Then discuss the question that follows.







VIDEO: Haiti Endures Hurricane Matthew (5:29)


  How are the relief efforts of Jehovah’s Witnesses evidence of love?







Real Christians show love to those in need





SOME PEOPLE SAY: “Jehovah’s Witnesses are just a new religion.”
  Since when has Jehovah been calling his worshippers witnesses?





SUMMARY
Jehovah’s Witnesses are real Christians. We are a worldwide family of worshippers who base our beliefs on the Bible and who make known the truth about Jehovah.
Review
  Why did we adopt the name Jehovah’s Witnesses?

  How do we treat one another?

  Do you think Jehovah’s Witnesses are real Christians?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Ask one of Jehovah’s Witnesses what convinced him that we have the truth.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Learn more about our history.
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Faith in Action, Part 1: Out of Darkness (1:01:27)









See an example of how Jehovah’s Witnesses have exposed false teachings.
God’s People Glorify His Name (7:08)









Get answers to questions you may have about Jehovah’s Witnesses.
“Frequently Asked Questions About Jehovah’s Witnesses” (web page)









Stephen participated in hate crimes. Find out what he saw among Jehovah’s Witnesses that moved him to change.
“My Life Was Going From Bad to Worse” (The Watchtower, July 1, 2015)





Our principal journal, The Watchtower, has published Bible truth consistently since 1879.

