





LESSON 47
Are You Ready to Get Baptized?



You have learned many things about Jehovah through your study of the Bible. Likely you made some changes to apply what you learned. Yet, there may be something holding you back from dedicating yourself to Jehovah and getting baptized. This lesson will discuss some common obstacles to baptism and how you can overcome them.
1. How much do you need to know before you get baptized?
To get baptized, you need to have “an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Timothy 2:4) This does not mean that you have to know the answer to every Bible question before you get baptized. Even Christians who have been baptized for a long time keep learning. (Colossians 1:9, 10) But you do need to have a basic understanding of Bible teachings. Congregation elders will help you find out if you have enough knowledge.
2. What are some steps you need to take before baptism?
Before you can get baptized, you must “repent . . . and turn around.” (Read Acts 3:19.) This means that you feel deeply sorry for any sins you have committed and you ask Jehovah to forgive you. You also firmly reject bad conduct and are determined to live in a way that pleases God. In addition, you begin to participate in congregation activities by attending meetings and preaching as an unbaptized publisher.
3. Why should you not let fear hold you back?
Some are afraid that they will not be able to do what they promised Jehovah. True, at times you will make mistakes, even as faithful men and women mentioned in the Bible did. But Jehovah does not expect his worshippers to be perfect. (Read Psalm 103:13, 14.) He is pleased when you do your best! He will help you. In fact, Jehovah assures us that nothing “will be able to separate us from [his] love.”​—Read Romans 8:38, 39.


DIG DEEPER

See how you can overcome any obstacles to baptism by getting to know Jehovah better and accepting his help.






4. Get to know Jehovah better







How well do you need to know Jehovah before getting baptized? You need to know him well enough to love him and to want to please him. Play the VIDEO to see how Bible students around the world have done so. Then discuss the question that follows.







VIDEO: The Road to Baptism (3:56)


  In the video, what helped some individuals to prepare for baptism?


Read Romans 12:2, and then discuss these questions:
  Do you have any doubts about what the Bible teaches or whether Jehovah’s Witnesses teach the truth?

  If so, what can you do about it?




5. Overcome possible obstacles to baptism







When we decide to dedicate ourselves to Jehovah and get baptized, we all face challenges. To see an example, play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.







VIDEO: Love for Jehovah Conquers Obstacles (5:22)


  In the video, what obstacles did Narangerel need to overcome to serve Jehovah?

  How did love for Jehovah help her to conquer those obstacles?


Read Proverbs 29:25 and 2 Timothy 1:7, and then discuss this question:
  What gives us the courage to overcome obstacles?




6. Trust in Jehovah’s help







Jehovah will help you to please him. Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.







VIDEO: Jehovah God Will Help You (2:50)


  In the video, what caused the Bible student to hold back from getting baptized?

  What did he learn that helped him to strengthen his trust in Jehovah?


Read Isaiah 41:10, 13, and then discuss this question:
  Why can you be confident that you can fulfill the promise you make at your dedication?




7. Deepen your appreciation for Jehovah’s love







The more you think about how much Jehovah loves you, the more thankful you will be and the more you will want to serve him forever. Read Psalm 40:5, and then discuss this question:
  What blessings from Jehovah do you especially appreciate?


The prophet Jeremiah loved Jehovah and his word, and he deeply appreciated the privilege of bearing Jehovah’s name. He said: “Your word became to me the exultation and the rejoicing of my heart, for your name has been called on me, O Jehovah God.” (Jeremiah 15:16) Answer these questions:
  Why is it a special privilege to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?

  Do you want to get baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?

  Does anything prevent you from doing so?

  What do you think you need to do to reach the goal of baptism?










SOME PEOPLE SAY: “I don’t think I could live up to the responsibility of baptism.”
  Is that how you feel?





SUMMARY
With Jehovah’s help, you can overcome any obstacle to baptism.
Review
  How much Bible knowledge do you need to get baptized?

  What changes may you need to make before you can get baptized?

  Why should you not let fear hold you back?



Section completed on: 




Goal


Review “Am I Ready to Preach With the Congregation?” and “Am I Ready to Get Baptized?” at the end of Section 4.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Consider what should be the basis for your decision to get baptized.
“Are You Ready to Get Baptized?” (The Watchtower, March 2020)









Learn how to overcome specific challenges that could hold you back.
“What Prevents Me From Getting Baptized?” (The Watchtower, March 2019)









See how one man successfully overcame some major obstacles in order to get baptized.
‘Why Are You Delaying Baptism?’ (1:10)









At first, a man named Ataa hesitated to get baptized. See what convinced him to take this important step.
Do I Really Deserve This? (7:21)





