





LESSON 36
Be Honest in All Things



Everyone wants friends who are honest. Jehovah expects his friends to be honest too. But this is not easy in a world where many people are dishonest. What benefits come from being honest in all things?
1. What is the most important reason to be honest?
When we are honest with others, we show Jehovah that we love and respect him. Consider: Jehovah knows everything we think and do. (Hebrews 4:13) He notices when we choose to be honest, and he appreciates it. His Word states: “Jehovah detests a devious person, but His close friendship is with the upright.”​—Proverbs 3:32.
2. What are some ways to be honest in our daily life?
Jehovah wants us to “speak the truth with one another.” (Zechariah 8:16, 17) What does this mean? Whether we are speaking to our family, workmates, Christian brothers and sisters, or government officials, we do not lie or give misleading information. Honest people do not steal from others or defraud them. (Read Proverbs 24:28 and Ephesians 4:28.) And they pay all the taxes that they owe. (Romans 13:5-7) In these and other ways, we “conduct ourselves honestly in all things.”​—Hebrews 13:18.
3. What are the benefits of being honest?
When we have a reputation for being honest, others trust us. We contribute to the safe, familylike atmosphere in the congregation. We enjoy a clean conscience. Our honesty can also “adorn the teaching of our Savior, God,” and attract those outside the congregation to true worship.​—Titus 2:10.


DIG DEEPER

See how honesty affects Jehovah and you, and learn how you can be honest in various situations in life.



4. Honesty pleases Jehovah
Read Psalm 44:21 and Malachi 3:16, and then discuss these questions:
  Why do you think it is unwise to believe that we can hide the truth?

  How do you think Jehovah feels when we choose to tell the truth, even when it is difficult to do so?







When children tell the truth, they make their parents happy. When we tell the truth, we make Jehovah happy




5. Act honestly at all times

Many people believe that honesty is not always practical. But consider why we should be honest at all times. Play the VIDEO.










VIDEO: What Contributes to Joy?​—A Clean Conscience (2:32)









Read Hebrews 13:18, and then discuss how we can be honest . . .
  with our family.

  at work or school.

  in other situations.




6. Honesty benefits us
Honesty may result in some problems. But in the long run, it is always the best policy. Read Psalm 34:12-16, and then discuss this question:
  How does honesty make your life better?









             Honest husbands and wives strengthen their marriage

             Honest workers earn the trust of their employers

             Honest citizens gain a good reputation with government officials



SOME PEOPLE SAY: “Some lies are so small that they don’t matter.”
  Why do you believe that Jehovah hates all lies?





SUMMARY
Jehovah wants his friends to be honest in all that they say and do.
Review
  What are some ways to be honest?

  Why is it unwise to think we can hide the truth?

  Why do you want to be honest at all times?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Ask yourself, ‘Would Jehovah view me as an honest person?’ Identify any areas where you need to make adjustments.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







How can parents teach their children to be honest?
Be Truthful (1:44)









What benefits come from keeping our promises?
Keep Promises, Receive Blessings (9:09)









Consider whether we must pay taxes even if they are misused.
“Taxes​—Must You Pay Them?” (The Watchtower, September 1, 2011)









What motivated a dishonest man to change his life and make an honest living?
“I Learned That Jehovah Is Merciful and Forgiving” (The Watchtower, May 1, 2015)





