





LESSON 48
Choose Your Friends Wisely



Close friends add to our happiness during good times, and they strengthen us during hard times. But the Bible warns us that not everyone is a good friend. So how can you choose good friends? Consider the following questions.
1. How will the friends you choose affect you?
We tend to become like the people we spend time with. This can be good or bad​—and that is true whether we spend time with them in person or on social media. As the Bible says, “the one walking with the wise will become wise, but the one who has dealings with the stupid [those who do not love Jehovah] will fare badly.” (Proverbs 13:20) Friends who love and worship Jehovah can help you to stay close to him and to make good decisions. But close friends outside the congregation can cause us to draw away from Jehovah. No wonder the Bible encourages us to choose our friends wisely! When our friends are people who love God, we benefit both ourselves and them. We are able to “keep encouraging one another and building one another up.”​—1 Thessalonians 5:11.
2. How will your choice of friends affect Jehovah?
Jehovah chooses his friends carefully. “His close friendship is with the upright.” (Proverbs 3:32) How would Jehovah feel if we were to choose friends who do not love him? He would be very disappointed! (Read James 4:4.) On the other hand, Jehovah will be pleased and will choose us as friends if we reject bad association and draw close to him and to those who love him.​—Psalm 15:1-4.


DIG DEEPER

Examine why our choice of friends is so important, and see how you can develop friendships that will truly enrich your life.



3. Beware of bad association
People who do not love God and his standards are bad association. Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.







VIDEO: Learn to Reject Bad Association (6:17)


  How could we become involved in bad association without realizing it?


Read 1 Corinthians 15:33, and then discuss these questions:
  What kind of person could be bad association for you? Why?


Read Psalm 119:63, and then discuss this question:
  What should you look for in a friend?







One rotten apple can spoil the rest. How might one bad associate affect you?




4. People who are different from us can become our good friends
The Bible describes David and Jonathan, two men in ancient Israel. They were very different in age and circumstances; yet, they had a remarkable friendship. Read 1 Samuel 18:1, and then discuss this question:
  Why do our friends not always have to come from our own age group or social status?


Read Romans 1:11, 12, and then discuss this question:
  How can friends who love Jehovah encourage each other?


In this dramatization, see how one young brother found friends in unexpected places. Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.







VIDEO: Find Friends in Unexpected Places (5:06)


  In the video, why were Akil’s parents concerned about his friendships at school?

  What factors initially made those friendships appealing to him?

  How was he able to overcome his loneliness?


5. How to cultivate good friendships

Consider how to find real friends​—and how to be one in return. Play the VIDEO.










VIDEO: What’s a Real Friend? (4:14)









Read Proverbs 18:24 and 27:17, and then discuss these questions:
  How do real friends help each other?

  Do you have good friendships like that? If not, how could you develop some?


Read Philippians 2:4, and then discuss this question:
  To have good friends, you need to be a good friend. How can you do that?








To have good friends, you need to be a good friend




SOME PEOPLE SAY: “Any friends are better than no friends at all.”
  What would you say?





SUMMARY
When we choose our friends wisely, we please Jehovah and benefit ourselves.
Review
  Why does Jehovah care about our choice of friends?

  What kind of friendships should we avoid?

  How can you build strong friendships with the right sort of people?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Get to know more people in the congregation.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







See how the right kind of friends can help us in times of trial.
“Build Strong Friendships Before the End Comes” (The Watchtower, November 2019)









Consider practical steps you can take to make good friends.
“How Can I Make Good Friends?” (Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work, Volume 1, chapter 8)









What should you know about online friendships?
Be Social-Network Smart (4:12)









In the story “I Yearned for a Father,” find out what caused one man to reevaluate his choice of friends.
“The Bible Changes Lives” (The Watchtower, April 1, 2012)





