





LESSON 53
Choose Entertainment That Pleases Jehovah



Jehovah is “the happy God.” (1 Timothy 1:11) He wants us to be happy and to enjoy our life. He is pleased when we set aside time from work to relax. In this lesson, we will see how we can use our leisure time in ways that are enjoyable and satisfying​—and that also please Jehovah.
1. What should we remember when choosing entertainment?
What do you like to do when you relax? Some prefer to spend their leisure time quietly at home​—reading a book, listening to music, watching a movie, or browsing the Internet. Others enjoy being more active with friends​—hiking, swimming, or playing a game. Whatever our preference is, we need to make sure that our choice of entertainment is “acceptable to the Lord.” (Ephesians 5:10) It is important that we understand this because a lot of popular entertainment features things that Jehovah hates, such as violence, sexual immorality, or spiritism. (Read Psalm 11:5.) What will help us to make wise choices in our entertainment?
If we choose friends who love Jehovah, they can have a good influence on us and on our choice of entertainment. As we learned in a previous lesson, “the one walking with the wise will become wise.” On the other hand, if we regularly associate with people who have no love for God’s standards, we “will fare badly.”​—Proverbs 13:20.
2. Why is it important to control how much time we spend on entertainment?
Even if the entertainment we choose is wholesome, we need to be careful not to spend too much time on it. Otherwise, we may not have enough time to spend on more important activities. The Bible encourages us to make “the best use of [our] time.”​—Read Ephesians 5:15, 16.


DIG DEEPER

Learn how to make good decisions about your entertainment.



3. Avoid unwholesome entertainment
Why should we choose our entertainment carefully? Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.







VIDEO: What Entertainment Should I Choose? (4:39)


  How were the ancient gladiatorial games similar to some modern entertainment?

  In the video, what did Danny learn about entertainment?


Read Romans 12:9, and then discuss this question:
  How should this verse affect your choice of entertainment?


What are some things that Jehovah hates? Read Proverbs 6:16, 17 and Galatians 5:19-21. After reading each scripture, discuss this question:
  Which of the things mentioned in these verses are common in today’s entertainment?





How to choose your entertainment wisely
Ask yourself:
  What? Does it include anything that Jehovah hates?

  When? Does it interfere with more important activities?

  Who? Does it bring me in close or regular contact with people who do not love Jehovah?






It is safer to stay as far away from danger as possible. That is why we should stay away from any entertainment that we suspect might not be good for us







4. Use your time wisely

Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.










VIDEO: What Controls Your Time? (2:45)




  Although the brother in the video was not viewing anything unwholesome, how was his use of leisure time affecting him?


Read Philippians 1:10, and then discuss this question:
  How could this verse help us decide how much time we spend on recreation?




5. Choose wholesome entertainment
Even though some entertainment displeases Jehovah, there are many enjoyable things that do not. Read Ecclesiastes 8:15 and Philippians 4:8, and then discuss this question:
  What wholesome entertainment do you enjoy?






You can enjoy wholesome entertainment and recreation




SOME PEOPLE SAY: “There’s nothing wrong with entertainment that features violence, immorality, or spiritism, as long as I’m not doing those things.”
  What would you say?





SUMMARY
Jehovah wants us to choose and enjoy wholesome entertainment.
Review
  What entertainment should Christians avoid?

  Why should we be careful about how much time we spend on entertainment?

  Why do you want to choose entertainment that pleases Jehovah?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Using the box “How to Choose Your Entertainment Wisely,” analyze the entertainment that you enjoy.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Consider who is responsible for choosing our entertainment.
“Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Ban Certain Movies, Books, or Songs?” (Web article)









See how you can make good decisions regarding recreation and leisure activities.
“Is Your Recreation Beneficial?” (The Watchtower, October 15, 2011)









In the story “I Even Overcame My Prejudice,” see why a man changed his choice of entertainment.
“The Bible Changes Lives” (The Watchtower, February 1, 2010)









See how a mother makes a wise decision regarding entertainment that features stories about the spirit world.
Avoid Entertainment That Features Spiritism (2:02)





