





LESSON 21
How Is the Good News Being Preached?



By means of his Kingdom, Jehovah will soon eliminate all of our problems. That news is too good to keep to ourselves. Jesus wanted his followers to share this message with everyone! (Matthew 28:19, 20) How have Jehovah’s Witnesses responded to Jesus’ command?
1. How is Matthew 24:14 being fulfilled today?
Jesus foretold: “This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth.” (Matthew 24:14) Jehovah’s Witnesses are happy to share in this important work. We are preaching the good news worldwide in over 1,000 languages! This colossal work requires tremendous effort and organization. It could not be done without Jehovah’s help.
2. What efforts do we make to preach to people?
We preach wherever we can find people. Like first-century Christians, we preach “from house to house.” (Acts 5:42) This systematic method allows us to reach millions of people each year. Since people are not always at home, we also preach in many public places. We are always looking for opportunities to tell others about Jehovah and his purposes.
3. Who has the responsibility to preach the good news?
All real Christians have the responsibility to share the good news with others. We take our responsibility seriously. We preach as much as our personal circumstances allow because we realize that lives are at stake. (Read 1 Timothy 4:16.) We are not paid to do this work, for the Bible says: “You received free, give free.” (Matthew 10:7, 8) Not everyone accepts our message. But we continue because preaching is part of our worship and it makes Jehovah happy.


DIG DEEPER

Learn more about the efforts of Jehovah’s Witnesses to preach worldwide, and see how Jehovah helps us.










Preaching around the world: (A) Costa Rica, (B) United States, (C) Benin, (D) Thailand, (E) Yap, (F) Sweden



4. We work hard to reach all people

Jehovah’s Witnesses make special efforts to preach the good news to people everywhere. Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.










VIDEO: Preaching in “the Most Distant Part of the Earth” (7:33)




  What impresses you about the efforts Jehovah’s Witnesses make to preach?


Read Matthew 22:39 and Romans 10:13-15, and then discuss these questions:
  How does our ministry show that we love our neighbors?

  How does Jehovah feel about those who preach the good news?​—See verse 15.






5. We are God’s fellow workers
Many experiences show that Jehovah is directing our work. For example, in New Zealand a brother named Paul met a woman in the house-to-house work one afternoon. That very morning, the woman had prayed to God, using God’s name, Jehovah, and asking that someone call on her. “Three hours later,” says Paul, “I arrived at her doorstep.”
Read 1 Corinthians 3:9, and then discuss this question:
  How do experiences such as the one in New Zealand show that Jehovah is directing the preaching work?


Read Acts 1:8, and then discuss this question:
  Why do we need Jehovah’s help to accomplish our ministry?





Did you know?
Each week at our midweek meeting, we receive training to help us preach. If you have attended one of these meetings, what did you think of the training offered?








6. We obey God’s command to preach
In the first century, opposers tried to stop Jesus’ followers from preaching. Early Christians defended their right to preach by “legally establishing . . . the good news.” (Philippians 1:7) Jehovah’s Witnesses do the same today.a

Play the VIDEO.










VIDEO: Legally Defending the Good News (2:28)




Read Acts 5:27-42, and then discuss this question:
  Why will we not stop preaching?​—See verses 29, 38, and 39.





SOMEONE MAY ASK: “Why do Jehovah’s Witnesses go from door to door?”
  How would you answer?





SUMMARY
Jesus instructed his followers to preach the good news to all nations. Jehovah is helping his people to do this work.
Review
  How is the good news being preached worldwide?

  How does our ministry show that we love our neighbors?

  Do you think that preaching can be a satisfying work? Why?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Ask some of the friends at the Kingdom Hall what challenges they had to overcome to preach and what blessings they have received.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







See how Jehovah’s Witnesses preach to people in large cities.
Special Metropolitan Public Witnessing in Paris (5:11)









How have Jehovah’s Witnesses reached out to refugees?
Satisfying Spiritual Thirst Among Refugees (5:59)









Hear firsthand how satisfying life can be as a full-time minister.
Glad I Chose This Career (6:29)









Learn about noteworthy court victories that have advanced the preaching of the good news.
“Kingdom Preachers Take Their Case to Court” (God’s Kingdom Rules!, chapter 13)





God is the one who authorizes our ministry. Thus, Jehovah’s Witnesses do not need permission from human authorities to preach the good news.

