





LESSON 06
How Did Life Begin?



“With [God] is the source of life.” (Psalm 36:9) Do you believe that? Some people think that life came from random, undirected events. If that is true, then we exist only because of an accident. But if Jehovah God created life, it would have a purpose, would it not?a Consider the Bible’s account of the origin of life and also why that account is reasonable.
1. How did the universe begin?
The Bible states: “In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.” (Genesis 1:1) Most scientists agree that the universe had a beginning. How did God create it? He used his “active force”​—his holy spirit—​to make everything in the universe, including galaxies, stars, and planets.​—Genesis 1:2.
2. Why did God create the earth?
Jehovah “did not create [the earth] simply for nothing, but formed it to be inhabited.” (Isaiah 45:18) He made our planet to be a comfortable and permanent home for humans. (Read Isaiah 40:28; 42:5.) Science reveals that the earth is unique. It is the only known planet that can sustain human life.
3. What makes humans unlike the animals?
After he made the earth, Jehovah created life on it. First, he filled the earth with plants and animals. Then, “God went on to create the man in his image.” (Read Genesis 1:27.) What makes humans unique? Since we are made in God’s image, we can reflect his qualities, such as love and justice. He also created us with the ability to learn languages, appreciate art, and enjoy music. And unlike any animal, we can worship our Creator.


DIG DEEPER

Consider the evidence that life was designed and that the Bible’s creation account is reasonable. Learn what the qualities in humans teach us about God.



4. Life was designed
Humans get credit for the designs they copy from nature. So who should get credit for the originals? Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.







VIDEO: Belief in God (2:43)


  What have human designers copied from nature?


Every house is designed and built by someone. But who designed and built the things in nature? Read Hebrews 3:4, and then discuss these questions:
  What designs in the natural world impress you?

  Is it reasonable to believe that the universe and everything in it were designed? Why?





Did you know?
You can find articles and videos about this topic on jw.org in the series “Was It Designed?” and “Viewpoints on the Origin of Life.”




“Of course, every house is constructed by someone, but the one who constructed all things is God”







5. The Bible’s creation account is reasonable

In Genesis chapter 1, the Bible describes the origin of the earth and life on it. Can you trust that account, or is it just a myth? Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.










VIDEO: Was the Universe Created?​—Excerpt (3:51)









  Does the Bible teach that the earth and life on it were created in six 24-hour days?

  Do you think that the Bible’s account of creation is logical and reasonable? Why, or why not?


Read Genesis 1:1, and then discuss this question:
  Scientists say that the universe had a beginning. How does their conclusion compare with what you just read in the Bible?


Some people wonder if God used evolution to create life. Read Genesis 1:21, 25, 27, and then discuss these questions:
  Does the Bible teach that God made a simple life-form and then let it evolve into fish, mammals, and humans? Or did he create all the basic “kinds” of life?b




6. Humans are a unique creation of God
We are unlike the animals that Jehovah created. Read Genesis 1:26, and then discuss this question:
  Because we are made in God’s image, what does our ability to show love and compassion suggest about God’s personality?



SOME PEOPLE SAY: “The Bible’s account of creation is a myth.”
  What do you think? Why?





SUMMARY
Jehovah created the universe and all life.
Review
  What does the Bible teach about the origin of the universe?

  Did God let the different kinds of life evolve from a simple life-form, or did he create them all?

  What is unique about humans?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Read an article or watch a video from the series “Was It Designed?” on jw.org.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Discover the design reflected in nature.
“What Does Nature Teach?” (Awake!, September 2006)









See how a father can explain the Bible’s creation account to his young son.
“Jehovah . . . Created All Things” (2:37)









Consider whether evolution is compatible with the Bible.
“Did God Use Evolution to Create the Different Types of Life?” (Web article)









Examine whether the fossil record or scientific experiments suggest that life was created or that it originated by chance.
The Origin of Life​—Five Questions Worth Asking (brochure)





Lesson 25 will discuss God’s purpose for humans.
In the Bible, the word “kind” refers to a broad group of living things.

