





LESSON 13
How False Religion Misrepresents God



If God is love, why have so many evil acts been committed by religions that claim to represent him? Put simply, these religions are false; they misrepresent God. How have they misrepresented him? How does he feel about that? And what will he do about it?
1. How does false religion misrepresent God by its teachings?
False religion has “exchanged the truth of God for the lie.” (Romans 1:25) For example, most religions have not taught their followers God’s name. However, the Bible says that God’s name must be used. (Romans 10:13, 14) Some religious leaders say that when something terrible happens, it is God’s will. But that is a lie. God is never the source of evil. (Read James 1:13.) Sadly, religious lies have pushed people away from God.
2. How does false religion misrepresent God by its actions?
False religion does not treat people as Jehovah does. The Bible says that false religion’s “sins have massed together clear up to heaven.” (Revelation 18:5) For centuries, religions have meddled in politics, supported wars, and caused or approved the death of countless numbers of people. Some religious leaders enjoy a lavish lifestyle and demand money from their followers to pay for it. These actions prove that they do not even know God, let alone have the right to represent him.​—Read 1 John 4:8.
3. How does God feel about false religion?
If the things done by false religion make you angry, how do you think Jehovah feels? He loves people, but he is angry with religious leaders who misrepresent him and mistreat their followers. He promises that false religion will be destroyed and “will never be found again.” (Revelation 18:21) Soon, God will put an end to all false religion.​—Revelation 18:8.


DIG DEEPER

Examine further how God feels about false religion. Learn more about what it has done, but also learn why this should not stop you from getting to know Jehovah.

4. God does not approve of all religions
Many people believe that religions are like different roads that all lead to God. But is that true? Read Matthew 7:13, 14, and then discuss this question:
  How does the Bible describe the road that leads to life?


Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.







VIDEO: Does God Accept All Forms of Worship?​—Excerpt (3:22)


  Does the Bible say that there are many religions that please God?


5. False religion does not reflect God’s love

Religions have misrepresented God in many ways. One notorious way has been their involvement in war. To see one example, play the VIDEO. Then discuss the questions that follow.










VIDEO: The Churches’ Role in World War II (2:22)




  What position did many churches take during World War II?

  How do you feel about the position they took?


Read John 13:34, 35 and 17:16. Then discuss these questions:
  How must Jehovah feel when religions get involved in war?

  False religion is responsible for many bad things. In what ways have you seen religions fail to reflect God’s love?









False religion has not reflected God’s love



6. God wants to free people from false religion
Read Revelation 18:4,a and then discuss this question:
  How does it make you feel to know that God wants to save individuals who have been misled by false religion?


7. Continue learning about the true God
Should false religion affect your view of God? Imagine a son who rejects the wise direction his father has given him. The son leaves home and leads a corrupt life. The father does not approve of his son’s actions. Why would it not be fair to blame the father for the way his rebellious son is living?
  Would it be fair to blame Jehovah and stop learning about him because of the actions of false religion?



SOME PEOPLE SAY: “I’m not interested in God because religion is the cause of so many problems.”
  Do you feel that way?

  Why should the actions of false religion not affect our view of Jehovah?





SUMMARY
False religion has misrepresented God by means of its false teachings and terrible practices. God will destroy false religion.
Review
  How do you feel about what false religion has taught and how it has acted?

  How does Jehovah feel about false religion?

  What will God do to false religion?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


At the next congregation meeting, ask someone, “Why did you become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?”



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Learn about two ways that most religions displease God.
“Are All Religions the Same? Do They All Lead to God?” (Web article)









Why does Jehovah want us to worship him along with others?
“Is It Necessary to Belong to an Organized Religion?” (Web article)









A priest was troubled by his religion. But this did not stop him from learning the truth about God.
“Why a Priest Left His Church” (Awake!, February 2015)









For generations, religions have told lies that make God seem distant and cruel. Learn the truth about three of those lies.
“Lies That Make God Seem Unlovable” (The Watchtower, November 1, 2013)





To find out why the book of Revelation describes false religion as a woman named Babylon the Great, see Endnote 1.

