





LESSON 14
How Can Our Worship Be Pleasing to God?



As discussed in the preceding lesson, not all religions please God. However, we can worship our Creator in a way that makes him happy. What is “the form of worship [or, religion]” that pleases him? (James 1:27, footnote) Consider what the Bible teaches.
1. On what should our worship be based?
Our worship should be based on the Bible. Jesus said to God: “Your word is truth.” (John 17:17) Some religions ignore the truth found in God’s inspired Word, the Bible. They replace it with human teachings and traditions. But Jehovah is not pleased with those who “disregard the commandment of God.” (Read Mark 7:9.) On the other hand, we bring joy to his heart when we stick to the Bible and follow its advice.
2. How should we worship Jehovah?
As our Creator, Jehovah deserves our exclusive devotion. (Revelation 4:11) This means that we must love him and worship only him, without the use of any idol, image, or icon.​—Read Isaiah 42:8.
Our worship must be “holy and acceptable” to Jehovah. (Romans 12:1) This means that we need to live by his moral standards. For example, those who love Jehovah love and follow his standards for marriage. And they avoid harmful practices, such as the use of tobacco or the misuse of drugs or alcohol.a
3. Why should we worship Jehovah with fellow believers?
Our weekly meetings give us the opportunity to “praise Jehovah . . . in the congregation.” (Psalm 111:1, 2) One way we do this is by singing praises to God. (Read Psalm 104:33.) Jehovah asks us to attend meetings because he loves us and he knows that they will help us to enjoy life forever. When we meet together for encouragement, we benefit ourselves.


DIG DEEPER

Examine why Jehovah does not approve of the use of images in worship. Learn important ways that we can praise God.

4. We should not use images in our worship

How do we know that doing so would be displeasing to God? Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.










VIDEO: Does God Approve the Use of Images in Worship? (3:26)









  What happened when some of God’s people in Bible times tried to worship him with the help of an idol?


Some people try to feel closer to God by using images in their worship. But could doing so actually push him away? Read Exodus 20:4-6 and Psalm 106:35, 36, and then discuss these questions:
  What objects or images have you seen people use in their worship?

  How does Jehovah feel about the use of images?

  How do you feel about using images?




5. Worshipping only Jehovah liberates us from false ideas

See how worshipping Jehovah acceptably can liberate us from false ideas. Play the VIDEO.










VIDEO: Liberated by Truth (5:16)




Read Psalm 91:14, and then discuss this question:
  What does Jehovah promise to do for us when we show that we love him by worshipping only him?




6. We worship God at congregation meetings
We praise Jehovah and build each other up by singing and giving comments at congregation meetings. Read Psalm 22:22, and then discuss these questions:
  Have you enjoyed hearing comments at the meetings?

  Would you like to prepare to give a comment?







7. Jehovah is pleased when we share what we learn
There are many ways that we can share Bible truths with others. Read Psalms 9:1 and 34:1, and then discuss this question:
  What is something you have learned from the Bible that you would like to tell someone else about?



SOME PEOPLE SAY: “It’s impossible to please God.”
  What do you think?





SUMMARY
We please our Creator when we worship only him, praise him at congregation meetings, and share with others what we have learned.
Review
  How can we learn how to worship God acceptably?

  Why should we worship only Jehovah?

  Why should we worship with others who want to please God?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Give a comment at a congregation meeting.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







In the story “I No Longer Slave for Idols,” read how one woman broke free from idolatry.
“The Bible Changes Lives” (The Watchtower, July 1, 2011)









Learn what can help you to give comments at congregation meetings.
“Praise Jehovah in the Congregation” (The Watchtower, January 2019)









See how one young man benefited from congregation meetings even though it was not easy for him to attend.
Jehovah Cared for Me (3:07)









Many people associate the cross with Christianity, but should we use it in our worship?
“Why Don’t Jehovah’s Witnesses Use the Cross in Their Worship?” (Web article)





These topics will be discussed in later lessons.

