





LESSON 22
How Can You Share the Good News?



As you learn Bible truths, you may think, ‘Everyone should know about this!’ True, everyone does need to know it! Yet, you may feel nervous about telling others what you have learned. Let us discuss how you can overcome that nervousness and begin happily sharing the Bible’s good news.
1. How can you share what you have learned with people you know?
Jesus’ disciples said: “We cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.” (Acts 4:20) They valued the truth so much that they wanted to share it with as many people as possible. Do you feel the same way? If so, look for opportunities when you can respectfully tell your family and friends what you have learned.​—Read Colossians 4:6.

Some ways to get started
  When talking with family, introduce a Bible topic by saying: “I learned something interesting this week.”

  Share an encouraging scripture with a friend who is sick or anxious.

  Tell workmates who ask about your week what you learned at your Bible study or at a congregation meeting.

  Show your friends the jw.org website.

  Invite others to sit in on your Bible study, or show them how to request one on jw.org.



2. Why is preaching with the congregation a worthwhile goal?
Jesus’ disciples did more than just share the good news with people they knew. Jesus “sent them out by twos ahead of him into every city” to preach. (Luke 10:1) That organized preaching work gave many more people an opportunity to hear the good news. Preaching together also brought much joy to the disciples. (Luke 10:17) Could you likewise make it your goal to preach with the congregation?


DIG DEEPER

Consider how you can overcome nervousness and experience the joy that comes from sharing the good news.








3. Jehovah will be with you
Some who want to preach may feel nervous about the impression they will make or the reaction they may receive.
  Are you nervous about sharing what you have learned? Why, or why not?


Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.







VIDEO: I Prayed to Jehovah for Courage (4:05)


  How did these young Witnesses overcome their fears?


Read Isaiah 41:10, and then discuss this question:
  When you feel afraid to preach, how will prayer help you?





Did you know?
Many of Jehovah’s Witnesses once thought that they could never share the good news with others. Sergey, for example, felt worthless and found it difficult to communicate. But then he studied the Bible. He says: “Despite my fear, I began to talk to others about what I was learning. To my great surprise, telling others about the Bible actually boosted my self-confidence. It also strengthened these new beliefs in my own heart.”





4. Be respectful
When sharing the good news, consider not only what to say but also how to say it. Read 2 Timothy 2:24 and 1 Peter 3:15, and then discuss these questions:
  How could you apply these verses when talking to others about the Bible?

  Some family members or friends may not agree with you. What could you do? What should you not do?

  Why might it be better to use tactful questions rather than forceful statements?









5. Sharing the good news brings joy
Jehovah gave Jesus the work of sharing the good news. How did Jesus view that work? Read John 4:34, and then discuss these questions:
  Eating good food sustains our life and makes us happy. Why did Jesus compare doing God’s will​—including sharing the good news—​to eating food?

  What joys do you think may come from sharing the good news?



Tips
  During the midweek meeting, look for ways that you can start conversations.

  Consider enrolling as a student on the midweek meeting. Student assignments can help you feel more prepared to tell others what you are learning.

  Use the “Some People Say” or “Someone May Ask” sections in this course to practice how you could reply to common questions and objections.




SOMEONE MAY ASK: “What’s new with you?”
  How could you use this opportunity to tell the person about what you have learned on your Bible study?





SUMMARY
Sharing the good news with others brings joy, and getting started may be easier than you think.
Review
  Why share the good news with others?

  How can you do so in a respectful way?

  How can you overcome any nervousness you may have about preaching?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Think of one person with whom you could share the good news. Think about what to say, how to say it, and when to say it.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Consider four simple ways you could share the good news using the jw.org contact card.
Sample JW.ORG Contact Card Presentation (1:43)









Learn about four qualities that can help you to share the good news.
“Are You Ready to Become a Fisher of Men?” (The Watchtower, September 2020)









Watch how a Bible example can give us courage to share the good news, even if we are young.
Jehovah Will Help You Be Bold (11:59)









Find out how you can talk about the Bible with family members who have not learned about Jehovah.
“Reaching the Heart of Unbelieving Relatives” (The Watchtower, March 15, 2014)





