





LESSON 10
How Can the Meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses Benefit You?



Have you been invited to a meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses? If you have not yet attended, you may feel a little nervous about attending for the first time. You may wonder: ‘What happens at these meetings? Why are they important? Why should I attend?’ In this lesson, you will learn how meeting with others can draw you closer to God and help you personally.
1. What is the most important reason for meeting together?
Note how a Bible writer expressed the most important reason for meeting with others: “In the great congregation, I will praise Jehovah.” (Psalm 26:12) Likewise, Jehovah’s Witnesses find great joy in meeting together. Around the world, they meet each week to praise God, to sing, and to pray. A few times each year, they also attend larger gatherings for worship.
2. What will you learn at our meetings?
At the meetings, we focus on God’s Word, “clearly explaining it and putting meaning into it.” (Read Nehemiah 8:8.) By attending, you will learn about Jehovah and his wonderful qualities. As you get to know more about his love for you, you will draw closer to him. You will also discover how he can help you to have a satisfying life.​—Isaiah 48:17, 18.
3. How can you benefit from associating with others at our meetings?
Jehovah directs us to “consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking our meeting together.” (Hebrews 10:24, 25) At our meetings, you will meet people who truly care about one another and who, like you, are interested in learning more about God. You will hear them share encouraging thoughts from the Bible. (Read Romans 1:11, 12.) You will also be able to talk to others who are dealing successfully with the problems that single and married people face. These are just some reasons why Jehovah wants us to meet together regularly!


DIG DEEPER

Find out what meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses are like and why it is worth the effort to attend these meetings.

4. Meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses
In the first century, Christians regularly met together to worship Jehovah. (Romans 16:3-5) Read Colossians 3:16, and then discuss this question:
  How did the early Christians worship Jehovah?



Today, the Witnesses also regularly meet together at their places of worship. To see what their meetings are like, play the VIDEO. Then, look at the picture of a congregation meeting, and discuss the questions that follow.










VIDEO: What Happens at a Kingdom Hall? (2:12)




  What similarities did you notice between what happens at a Kingdom Hall and what you read at Colossians 3:16?

  In the video or in the picture, did you notice anything else about the meetings that appeals to you?


Read 2 Corinthians 9:7, and then discuss this question:
  Why are meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses free of charge?


Along with your teacher, look at what will be discussed at one of this week’s meetings.
  What part of the meeting sounds most interesting or useful to you?



Did you know?
On jw.org, you can find out where and when meetings are held all over the world.












             Our meetings include talks, demonstrations, and videos. Meetings begin and end with song and prayer

             During some parts of the program, the audience is invited to comment

             Everyone is welcome​—families, single ones, the elderly, and children

             Our meetings are free. Jehovah’s Witnesses do not charge admission or pass a collection plate


5. Effort is required to attend meetings


Consider the example of Jesus’ family. To attend a yearly event, they had to walk some 60 miles (100 km) through mountainous terrain from Nazareth to Jerusalem. Read Luke 2:39-42, and then discuss these questions:
  Do you think that this journey to Jerusalem took effort?

  Why might you have to put forth effort to attend meetings?

  Do you think it is worth it? Why?










The Bible says that meeting together for worship is very important. Read Hebrews 10:24, 25, and then discuss this question:

  Why should we attend meetings regularly?



SOME PEOPLE SAY: “You don’t need to meet with others. It’s enough to study the Bible at home.”
  What scripture or Bible example reveals what Jehovah wants?





SUMMARY
Attending meetings will help you to learn more about Jehovah, to deepen your friendship with him, and to worship him with others.
Review
  Why does Jehovah encourage us to meet together?

  What will you learn at the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses?

  How else do you think you could benefit from attending the meetings?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Attend a meeting and get to know some of the people who are there.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







What if you are nervous about attending a meeting? See how a man who felt that way came to love the meetings.
We Will Never Forget the Greeting (4:16)









See how a young man enjoyed the meetings and what he did to keep attending.
I Liked the Meetings So Much! (4:33)









Learn how others feel about attending meetings.
“Why Attend Meetings at the Kingdom Hall?” (Web article)









Find out how a violent gang member’s life changed after attending a meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
“I Never Went Anywhere Without My Gun” (The Watchtower, July 1, 2014)





