





LESSON 11
How You Can Get the Most Out of the Bible



Have you ever felt overwhelmed at the thought of starting a big project? To make it seem less challenging, you might have broken it up into smaller, easier tasks. The same is true when it comes to reading the Bible. You may ask, ‘Where do I start?’ In this lesson, we will consider some simple things you can do that will help you enjoy reading and studying the Bible.
1. Why should we read the Bible regularly?
A person who regularly reads the Bible, or “the law of Jehovah,” will be both happy and successful. (Read Psalm 1:1-3.) To start with, try reading for just a few minutes each day. The more you get familiar with God’s Word, the more you will enjoy your Bible reading.
2. What will help you to benefit from reading the Bible?
To benefit the most from reading the Bible, we need to pause and think about what we are reading. We should both read it and “meditate on it.” (Joshua 1:8, footnote) As you read, ask yourself questions such as: ‘What does this tell me about Jehovah God? How can I apply this in my life? How can I use these verses to help others?’
3. How can you make time to read the Bible?
Do you struggle to find time for Bible reading? Many of us do. Try to make “the best use of your time.” (Ephesians 5:16) You can do this by setting aside a specific time to read the Bible each day. Some people make time to read the Bible early in the morning. Others choose a time later in the day, perhaps during their lunch break. Still others read the Bible in the evening before going to bed. What would be the best time for you?


DIG DEEPER

Learn how to make your Bible reading more interesting. See how to prepare well so that you get the most out of your Bible study.





Just as we can learn to like eating different foods, we can learn to enjoy reading the Bible





4. Learn to enjoy Bible reading
It may not be easy to begin reading the Bible. However, we can “form a longing” to do so, just as someone can develop a taste for a new food. Read 1 Peter 2:2, and then discuss this question:
  Do you think that if you read the Bible every day, it could become something you would enjoy and look forward to doing?


Play the VIDEO to see how some people started to enjoy reading the Bible. Then discuss the questions that follow.







VIDEO: Youths Learning to Love God’s Word (5:33)


  In the video, what challenges did the young people overcome?

  What helped them stick to their goal of Bible reading?

  How did they make their Bible reading more interesting?





Tips to help you get started:
  Choose a reliable, modern-language translation. Try the New World Translation if it is available in your language.

  First read portions that appeal to you the most. For ideas, see the chart “Get Started Reading the Bible.”

  Keep track of what you read. Use the “Track Your Bible Reading” chart in this publication.

  Use the JW Library® app. With it, you can read and listen to the Bible anywhere, using a smartphone or other such device.

  Use the appendixes in the New World Translation. They include maps, charts, and a glossary that can make your reading more interesting.







5. Prepare for your Bible study
Read Psalm 119:34, and then discuss this question:
  Why is it good to pray before reading the Bible or preparing for your Bible study?


How can you get the most out of each study session? As you prepare a lesson in this course, try the following method:
             Read the opening paragraphs of the lesson.

             Look up and read the scriptures, and try to understand how they relate to the material.

             Highlight key words or phrases that answer each question; this will help you to discuss the lesson with your teacher.










Did you know?
Jehovah’s Witnesses have used several different Bible translations. However, we especially appreciate the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures because it is accurate, it is clear, and it uses God’s name.​—See the Web article “Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Have Their Own Bible?”




SOME PEOPLE SAY: “Studying the Bible is too much work. I don’t have the time or the energy.”
  What do you think?





SUMMARY
To get the most out of the Bible, schedule time to read it, pray to understand what you read, and prepare for your Bible study sessions.
Review
  What will help you to get the most out of the Bible?

  When can you set aside time to read and study the Bible?

  Why is it worthwhile to prepare for your Bible study sessions?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Prepare for your next study session using the suggestions in this lesson.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Review some ideas that may help you get more out of your Bible reading.
“How to Get More From Reading the Bible” (The Watchtower No. 1 2017)









Learn three ways to read the Bible.
“How Can the Bible Help Me?​—Part 1: Exploring Your Bible” (Web article)









Discover how to enjoy Bible reading.
“How Can the Bible Help Me?​—Part 2: Make Bible Reading Enjoyable” (Web article)









Get some study tips from longtime Bible readers.
Effective Personal Study (2:06)





