





LESSON 49
How Can Your Family Be Happy?​—Part 1



Newlyweds hope that the happiness they felt on their wedding day will last forever. And it can. Christians who have been married a long time and who have worked hard to apply the Bible’s advice know that this is possible.
1. What advice does the Bible give to husbands?
Jehovah has appointed the husband as the head of the family. (Read Ephesians 5:23.) Jehovah expects him to make decisions that will benefit the family. The Bible advises husbands: “Continue loving your wives.” (Ephesians 5:25) What does that mean? A loving husband treats his wife kindly, both at home and in public. He protects her from harm and does his best to care for her physical and emotional needs. (1 Timothy 5:8) Most important, he takes the lead in caring for her spiritual needs. (Matthew 4:4) For example, he can pray and read the Bible with his wife. When a husband lovingly cares for his wife, he maintains his friendship with Jehovah.​—Read 1 Peter 3:7.
2. What advice does the Bible give to wives?
God’s Word says that a wife “should have deep respect for her husband.” (Ephesians 5:33) How can she do that? She can think about her husband’s good qualities and the efforts he makes to care for her and their children. She can also show respect by supporting the decisions he makes and by speaking kindly to him and about him, even if he is not a believer.
3. How can a couple strengthen their marriage?
The Bible says about married couples: “The two will be one flesh.” (Matthew 19:5) This means they must fight against any tendency to grow apart. They do so by regularly spending time together and by openly and lovingly sharing their thoughts and feelings with each other. They do not let anything or anyone​—other than Jehovah—​be more important than their mate. They are especially careful not to cultivate an inappropriate relationship with anyone else.


DIG DEEPER

See what Bible principles can strengthen your marriage.






4. Husbands​—love and take good care of your wife

The Bible says that “husbands should love their wives as their own bodies.” (Ephesians 5:28, 29) What does that mean? Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.










VIDEO: Husbands, Love Your Wife as Yourself (9:53)




  What are some ways in which a husband can show that he loves and cares for his wife?


Read Colossians 3:12, and then discuss this question:
  How can a husband display these qualities in his marriage?













5. Wives​—love and respect your husband
The Bible encourages a wife to respect her husband whether he serves Jehovah or not. Read 1 Peter 3:1, 2, and then discuss these questions:
  If you have an unbelieving husband, doubtless you want him to worship Jehovah. What do you think would be more effective​—constantly preaching to him or displaying good conduct and showing a respectful attitude? Why?


Husbands and wives can make good decisions together. However, at times a wife may disagree with her husband. She may then express her thoughts calmly and respectfully, but she must recognize that Jehovah has given him the responsibility to decide what is best for the family. She should do her best to support his decision. By doing so, she contributes to a happy atmosphere at home. Read 1 Peter 3:3-5, and then discuss this question:
  How does Jehovah feel when a wife shows respect for her husband?


6. You can overcome problems in your marriage

No marriage is perfect. Therefore, couples must work together to overcome difficulties. Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.










VIDEO: How to Strengthen the Marriage Bond (5:44)




  In the video, what were some signs that the couple were growing apart?

  What steps did they take to strengthen their marriage?


Read 1 Corinthians 10:24 and Colossians 3:13. After reading each scripture, discuss this question:
  How can applying this advice strengthen a marriage?


The Bible says that we should honor one another. Showing honor includes treating a person in a kind and respectful way. Read Romans 12:10, and then discuss these questions:
  Should husbands or wives wait for their mate to honor them first? Why, or why not?





SOME PEOPLE SAY: “My mate and I are not as close as we used to be.”
  How would you explain that the Bible can help them?





SUMMARY
A husband and wife can be happy when they love each other, respect each other, and apply Bible principles.
Review
  How can a husband contribute to a happy marriage?

  How can a wife contribute to a happy marriage?

  If you are married, which Bible principle could help strengthen your marriage?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


If you are married, discuss with your mate one of the articles about marriage on jw.org.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Learn practical suggestions that can help you enjoy life as a family.
Your Family Can Be Happy (brochure)









Watch a music video that highlights the blessings of applying God’s counsel in your marriage.
Truly in Love (4:26)









Examine what it means to submit to a husband’s headship.
“Women, Why Submit to Headship?” (The Watchtower, May 15, 2010)









See how powerful the Bible’s advice on marriage can be.
The Bible Saved Our Marriage (7:12)





