





LESSON 58
Remain Loyal to Jehovah



True Christians are determined never to allow anything or anyone to interfere with their worship of Jehovah. No doubt that is how you feel. Jehovah values your loyalty. (Read 1 Chronicles 28:9.) What situations could test your loyalty to him, and how can you deal with them?
1. How could others test our loyalty to Jehovah?
Some people will try to prevent us from serving Jehovah. Who would do such a thing? Some who have left the truth tell lies about God’s organization in order to destroy our faith. They are called apostates. Also, some religious leaders spread false information about us to cause unsuspecting ones to leave the truth. It is dangerous for us to argue with any opposers, to read their books or blogs, to go to their websites, or to watch their videos. Regarding those who try to discourage others from loyally serving Jehovah, Jesus said: “Let them be. Blind guides is what they are. If, then, a blind man guides a blind man, both will fall into a pit.”​—Matthew 15:14.
What if someone we know has decided that he no longer wants to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses? It can be heartbreaking when someone close to us does this. That person may force us to choose between him and Jehovah. We must be determined to remain loyal to God above all else. (Matthew 10:37) So we obey Jehovah’s command not to associate with such individuals.​—Read 1 Corinthians 5:11.
2. What personal decisions may test our loyalty to Jehovah?
Love for Jehovah will move us to avoid having any involvement with false religion. Neither our job nor the organizations we belong to nor any activities we engage in should be connected with false religion. Jehovah warns us: “Get out of [Babylon the Great], my people.”​—Revelation 18:2, 4.


DIG DEEPER

Learn how you can avoid letting anyone weaken your loyalty to Jehovah. Also see how you can show loyalty by getting out of Babylon the Great.

3. Beware of false teachers
How should we react if we hear negative things about Jehovah’s organization? Read Proverbs 14:15, and then discuss this question:
  Why are we careful not to believe everything we hear?


Read 2 John 10, and then discuss these questions:
  How should we treat apostates?

  Even if we do not interact directly with apostates, how could we come into contact with their teachings?

  How do you think Jehovah would feel if we were to pay attention to negative speech about him or his organization?


4. Remain loyal to God when a brother sins
If we learn that someone in the congregation has committed a serious sin, what obligation do we have? Consider a principle from God’s Law to ancient Israel. Read Leviticus 5:1.
As instructed in that verse, if we learn that a person has committed a serious sin, we should tell the elders what we know. Before doing so, however, it would be a kindness to urge the wrongdoer himself to go to the elders and confess his sin. If he fails to do so, our loyalty to Jehovah should prompt us to tell the elders what we know. How does such an approach demonstrate loyal love for . . .
  Jehovah God?

  the person who has sinned?

  others in the congregation?






If a fellow believer is in trouble, help him!



5. Stay out of Babylon the Great

Play the VIDEO.










VIDEO: Get Out of Babylon the Great! (5:06)









Read Luke 4:8 and Revelation 18:4, 5, and then answer these questions:
  Is my name still on the membership rolls of a false religion?

  Do I belong to an organization that is connected with another religion?

  Does my work support false religion in any way?

  Are there any other areas in my life where I need to separate from false religion?

  If I answered yes to any of these questions, what changes should I make?


In all cases, make a decision that leaves you with a clean conscience and reflects your loyalty to Jehovah.






What would you do if you were asked to contribute to a religious charity?




SOME PEOPLE SAY: “I need to know what apostates are saying about Jehovah’s Witnesses so that I can defend the truth.”
  Would that be wise? Why, or why not?





SUMMARY
To remain loyal to Jehovah, we need to avoid associating with those who are disloyal to him. We also need to separate ourselves completely from false religion.
Review
  Why should we not watch, read, or listen to the ideas of apostates?

  How should we treat those who no longer want to be Jehovah’s Witnesses?

  How can we heed the warning to flee from false religion?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


If you are connected in any way with false religion, take steps to separate yourself from it.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Learn how to react when others spread false reports about Jehovah’s Witnesses.
“Do You Have the Facts?” (The Watchtower, August 2018)









How can you identify organizations or activities that support Babylon the Great?
“Keep Busy During the Last of ‘the Last Days’” (The Watchtower, October 2019, paragraphs 16-18)









What have some opposers done to try to weaken our faith?
Beware of Deceit (9:32)









In the story “I Had Been Looking for God Since Childhood,” read about a Shinto priest who broke off ties with false religion.
“The Bible Changes Lives” (The Watchtower, July 1, 2011)





