





LESSON 28
Show Appreciation for What Jehovah and Jesus Did for You



How do you feel when a friend gives you a beautiful gift? Likely, it makes you very happy and you want to show your friend that you appreciate the gift. Jehovah and Jesus gave us the greatest gift we could ever receive. What is it, and how can we show that we are grateful for it?
1. What is one way to show appreciation for what God and Christ did for us?
The Bible promises that “everyone exercising faith in [Jesus]” can live forever. (John 3:16) What does it mean to exercise faith? It means more than just believing in Jesus. We also need to show our faith by the choices we make and the things we do. (James 2:17) When we show our faith by what we do and what we say, we strengthen our friendship with Jesus and his Father, Jehovah.​—Read John 14:21.
2. What special event helps us to show our gratitude for what Jehovah and Jesus did?
The evening before he died, Jesus told his followers about another way to show gratitude for his sacrifice. He introduced a special observance that the Bible calls “the Lord’s Evening Meal,” also known as the Memorial of Christ’s death. (1 Corinthians 11:20) Jesus instituted it so that his apostles​—and all true Christians after them—​would remember that he gave his life for us. Regarding this observance, Jesus commanded: “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.” (Luke 22:19) When you attend the Memorial, you show that you are grateful for the great love that Jehovah and Jesus have for us.


DIG DEEPER

Examine further ways to show appreciation for the great love shown by Jehovah and Jesus. Consider the importance of the Memorial of Christ’s death.

3. Gratitude moves us to action
Imagine that someone saved you from drowning. Would you simply forget about what that person did for you? Or would you look for ways to show him that you are grateful for what he did?
We owe our lives to Jehovah. Read 1 John 4:8-10, and then discuss these questions:
  Why is Jesus’ sacrifice a special gift?

  How do you feel about what Jehovah and Jesus did for you?


How can we show our appreciation for what Jehovah and Jesus did for us? Read 2 Corinthians 5:15 and 1 John 4:11; 5:3. After reading each scripture, discuss this question:
  Based on that scripture, what can we do to show our gratitude?


4. Imitate Jesus
Another way to show our appreciation is by imitating Jesus. Read 1 Peter 2:21, and then discuss this question:
  In what ways could you follow Jesus’ steps closely?








Jesus loved God’s Word, preached the good news, and helped others





5. Observe the Memorial of Christ’s death
To see what happened during the first observance of the Lord’s Evening Meal, read Luke 22:14, 19, 20. Then discuss these questions:
  What happened at the Lord’s Evening Meal?

  What do the bread and the wine represent?​—See verses 19 and 20.


Jesus intended for his disciples to observe the Lord’s Evening Meal once a year on the anniversary of his death. Thus, Jehovah’s Witnesses meet together yearly to remember Christ’s death in the way that he commanded. To learn about this important meeting, play the VIDEO. Then discuss the question that follows.









VIDEO: Remember Jesus’ Death (1:41)









  What happens at the Memorial?








The bread and the wine are emblems. The bread represents Jesus’ perfect human body that he sacrificed for us. The wine represents his blood








SOME PEOPLE SAY: “All you have to do to be saved is believe in Jesus.”
  How could you use John 3:16 and James 2:17 to show that more is needed?





SUMMARY
We show appreciation for what Jesus did for us by exercising faith in him and by attending the Memorial of his death.
Review
  What does it mean to exercise faith in Jesus?

  How would you like to show your appreciation for what Jehovah and Jesus did for you?

  Why is it so important to attend the Memorial of Christ’s death?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Attend the next Memorial of Christ’s death. Ask your Bible teacher when it will be, and mark the date on your calendar.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







What does Christ’s death motivate us to do?
He Used His Body to Honor Jehovah (9:28)









Learn more about faith and how we can exercise it.
“Exercise Your Faith in Jehovah’s Promises” (The Watchtower, October 2016)









In the story “I Feel Clean, Alive, and Whole,” see the effect that learning about Christ’s sacrifice had on one woman’s life.
“The Bible Changes Lives” (The Watchtower, August 1, 2011)









Consider why few partake at the Memorial.
“Why Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Observe the Lord’s Supper Differently From the Way Other Religions Do?” (Web article)





