





LESSON 55
Support Your Local Congregation



Around the world, millions of people joyfully worship Jehovah in thousands of congregations. They are grateful for the instruction and guidance they receive, and they eagerly support the congregation in many ways. Is that how you feel about your congregation?
1. What are some ways you can use your time and energy to support the congregation?
All of us can lend a hand in the congregation. For example, are some in your congregation elderly or infirm? Can you help them travel to meetings? Or can you help them with other practical matters, such as shopping or housework? (Read James 1:27.) We can also volunteer to help clean and maintain our Kingdom Hall. No one forces us to do these things. Love for God and our brothers moves us to “offer [ourselves] willingly.”​—Psalm 110:3.
Baptized Witnesses can support the congregation in additional ways. Spiritually qualified brothers can serve as ministerial servants and, in time, as elders. Both brothers and sisters may actively support the preaching work by serving as pioneers. Some Witnesses can assist by helping to build places of worship or by moving to an area where a congregation needs help in other ways.
2. How can we use our material resources to support the congregation?
We can “honor Jehovah with [our] valuable things.” (Proverbs 3:9) We count it a privilege to contribute money and other resources to support the local congregation and the worldwide preaching work. (Read 2 Corinthians 9:7.) Our donations also support disaster relief. Many choose to “set something aside” regularly as a donation. (Read 1 Corinthians 16:2.) We can donate using contribution boxes at our places of worship or online at donate.jw.org. Jehovah gives us the opportunity to show our love for him by the way we choose to use our material things.


DIG DEEPER

Consider some of the ways that you can support the congregation.



3. We can use our material things
Jehovah loves a cheerful giver, and Jesus feels the same way. For example, Jesus took note of a poor widow and her effort to make a contribution. Read Luke 21:1-4, and then discuss these questions:
  Do we need to make large donations to please Jehovah?

  How do Jehovah and Jesus feel about our heartfelt donations?


To learn how our donations are used, play the VIDEO. Then discuss the question that follows.







VIDEO: ‘A Gift in Hand to Jehovah’ (4:47)


  How are donations used to benefit congregations around the world?











4. We can volunteer our help
In Bible times, worshippers of Jehovah zealously worked to maintain their places of worship. But this involved more than just contributing money. Read 2 Chronicles 34:9-11, and then discuss this question:
  How did every Israelite help take care of Jehovah’s house, or place of worship?


To see how Jehovah’s Witnesses follow that ancient example, play the VIDEO. Then discuss the questions that follow.







VIDEO: Caring for Our Places of Worship (3:31)







  Why is it important to keep our Kingdom Hall clean and in good repair?

  What are some ways that you can help?











5. Brothers can reach out for more responsibility
The Scriptures encourage Christian men to reach out to do all they can to support the congregation. To see an example, play the VIDEO. Then answer the question that follows.







VIDEO: Brothers​—Reach Out for a Fine Work (5:19)


  In the video, how did Ryan reach out to support the congregation more fully?


The Bible explains what the qualifications are for brothers who serve as ministerial servants and elders. Read 1 Timothy 3:1-13, and then discuss these questions:
  What is expected of brothers who reach out to serve as ministerial servants and elders?

  What is expected of their families?​—See verses 4 and 11.

  When brothers strive to meet these qualifications, how does everyone in the congregation benefit?










SOMEONE MAY ASK: “How do Jehovah’s Witnesses fund their work?”
  How would you answer?





SUMMARY
Jehovah greatly appreciates our efforts to support the congregation with our time, energy, and material things.
Review
  How can we use our time and energy to support the congregation?

  How can we use our material things to support the congregation?

  In what ways would you like to support the congregation?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Volunteer to help clean and maintain the place where the local congregation gathers for meetings.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Consider why God no longer requires his worshippers to tithe.
“What Does the Bible Say About Tithing?” (Web article)









Learn what “reaching out” in the congregation means.
“Are You ‘Reaching Out’?” (The Watchtower, September 15, 2014)









Meet some courageous Witnesses who make great sacrifices to transport publications to their fellow worshippers.
Distributing Bible Literature in Congo (4:25)









Find out how our work is financed very differently from that of other religious organizations.
“How Is the Work of Jehovah’s Witnesses Financed?” (Web article)





