





LESSON 05
The Bible Is God’s Message to Us



Jehovah has given us a wonderful gift​—66 books collected into one volume, the Bible. But you may wonder: ‘Where did the Bible come from? Who is its author?’ To answer these questions, let us discuss how God’s message in the Bible has come to us.
1. If men wrote the Bible, how is God its Author?
The Bible was written by some 40 writers over a span of about 1,600 years, from 1513 B.C.E. to about 98 C.E. And the writers came from many backgrounds. Still, all parts of the Bible agree. How is this possible? Because God is the Author of the Bible. (Read 1 Thessalonians 2:13.) The writers did not record their own thoughts. Rather, they “spoke from God as they were moved by holy spirit.”a (2 Peter 1:21) God used his holy spirit to inspire, or motivate, men to record his thoughts.​—2 Timothy 3:16.
2. Who has access to the Bible?
“Every nation and tribe and tongue and people” can benefit from the good news found in the Bible. (Read Revelation 14:6.) God made sure that the Bible would be available in more languages than any other book in history. Almost everyone has access to the Bible. This is true no matter where people live or what language they speak.
3. How has Jehovah preserved the Bible?
The Bible was written on materials that do not last long, such as leather and papyrus. But men who loved the Bible carefully copied and recopied it by hand. Even though powerful people tried to eliminate the Bible, others were willing to risk their lives to safeguard it. Jehovah has not let anyone or anything stop him from communicating with us. The Bible says: “The word of our God endures forever.”​—Isaiah 40:8.


DIG DEEPER

Learn more about how God inspired men to write the Bible, how he preserved it, and how he made it available to humankind.



4. The Bible reveals its Author
Play the VIDEO. Then read 2 Timothy 3:16, and discuss the questions that follow.







VIDEO: Who Is the Author of the Bible?​—Excerpt (2:48)


  If men wrote the Bible, why is it called the Word of God?

  Do you think it is reasonable to believe that God could transmit his thoughts to human writers?







A secretary may write the letter, but its message came from the person who dictated it. Likewise, humans wrote the Bible, but its message came from God




5. The Bible survived attacks

If the Bible is from God, we would expect him to preserve it. Throughout history, powerful men have tried to destroy the Bible. Religious leaders have tried to hide it. But despite opposition and the threat of death, many people have risked their lives to protect the Bible. To learn about one such man, play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.










VIDEO: They Valued the Bible​—Excerpt (William Tyndale) (6:17)




  Does knowing that so much was done to preserve the Bible make you want to read it? Why?


Read Psalm 119:97, and then discuss this question:
  What has motivated many people to risk their lives to translate and distribute the Bible?




6. A book for all people
The Bible is the most widely translated and distributed book in history. Read Acts 10:34, 35, and then discuss these questions:
  Why does God want his Word to be so widely translated and distributed?

  What appeals to you about the Bible?









Nearly
100%
of the world’s population
have access to the Bible in a language they understand


Available in over
3,000
languages
in whole or in part


5,000,000,000
The estimated number of copies produced,
far more than any other book



SOME PEOPLE SAY: “The Bible is just an old book written by humans.”
  What do you think?

  What evidence suggests that the Bible is God’s Word?





SUMMARY
The Bible is God’s Word, and he has made sure that it has become available to all humankind.
Review
  What does it mean when we say that God inspired men to write the Bible?

  What impresses you about the Bible’s survival, translation, and distribution?

  How does knowing that God has made such an effort to communicate with you make you feel?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Begin reading the Bible regularly, using the chart “Get Started Reading the Bible.”



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Read about the Bible’s history​—from the original manuscripts to modern translations.
“How the Bible Came to Us” (Awake!, November 2007)









Learn how the Bible has survived three major threats to its existence.
“The Bible​—A Story of Survival” (The Watchtower No. 4 2016)









See the risks that people took to translate the Bible.
They Valued the Bible (14:26)









The Bible has been copied and translated many times. How can you be sure its message has been accurately preserved?
“Has the Bible Been Changed or Tampered With?” (Web article)





As will be explained in Lesson 07, the holy spirit is God’s active force.

