





LESSON 02
The Bible Gives Hope



People around the world deal with problems that cause them to feel sadness, anxiety, and even pain. Have you ever faced a situation that made you feel those things? Perhaps you are suffering because of an illness or because someone you love has died. You may ask yourself, ‘Will life ever get better?’ The Bible provides a reassuring answer to that question.
1. How does the Bible give hope?
The Bible not only explains why the world is filled with problems but also shares the good news that these problems are temporary and will soon be gone. The Bible’s promises can “give you a future and a hope.” (Read Jeremiah 29:11, 12.) Those promises help us to cope with our present problems, to have a positive attitude, and to find lasting happiness.
2. What kind of future does the Bible describe?
The Bible describes a future time when “death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.” (Read Revelation 21:4.) The problems that can make life seem hopeless today​—such as poverty, injustice, sickness, and death—​will no longer exist. The Bible promises that humans will be able to enjoy life forever in Paradise on earth.
3. How can you build up your trust in the hope the Bible gives?
Many people hope for good things to happen, but they cannot be sure that their hopes will ever be fulfilled. What the Bible promises is different. We can build up our trust in what it says by “carefully examining the Scriptures.” (Acts 17:11) As you study the Bible, you will be able to decide for yourself whether you can believe what it says about the future.


DIG DEEPER

Examine some of the conditions that the Bible promises for the future. See how the hope the Bible gives is helping people today.






4. The Bible offers the hope of everlasting life in perfect conditions
Look at the following list of promises found in the Bible. Which ones especially appeal to you? Why?
Read the scriptures cited next to those promises, and consider these questions:
  Do you feel that these scriptures give hope? Could they give hope to your family and friends?


Picture living in a world where
NO ONE WILL . . .

EVERYONE WILL . . .



  feel pain, weaken with age, or have to die.​—Isaiah 25:8.



  see dead loved ones resurrected, brought back to life on earth.​—John 5:28, 29.




  get sick or live with a disability.​—Isaiah 33:24; 35:5, 6.



  enjoy good health and youthful energy.​—Job 33:25.




  experience injustice.​—Isaiah 32:16, 17.



  have plenty to eat, a comfortable home, and satisfying work.​—Psalm 72:16; Isaiah 65:21, 22.




  suffer as a result of war.​—Psalm 46:9.



  experience complete peace.​—Psalm 37:11.




  be plagued by troubling thoughts or memories.​—Isaiah 65:17.



  live forever in ideal conditions.​—Psalm 37:29.













5. The Bible’s hope can make a difference

Many people are discouraged or even angered by the problems they see around them. Some fight to try to change things for the better. See how the Bible’s promise that things will get better helps people now. Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.










VIDEO: I Wanted to Fight Injustice (4:07)









  In the video, what injustice troubled Rafika?

  Although the injustice that she saw did not go away, how did the Bible help her?


The hope that the Bible offers for the future can help us to battle discouragement and cope with our problems successfully. Read Proverbs 17:22 and Romans 12:12, and then discuss these questions:
  Do you think that the message of hope found in the Bible could make a difference in your life now? Why?





SOME PEOPLE SAY: “The Bible’s promises for the future are too good to be true.”
  Why do you think it is important to examine the evidence?





SUMMARY
The Bible gives us hope and helps us to cope with challenges by promising a future filled with happiness.
Review
  Why do people need hope?

  What does the Bible say about the future?

  How can having a hope for the future help you now?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Become more familiar with the Bible’s promises by reading the verses listed in this lesson.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Learn more about the power of hope.
“Hope​—Where Can You Find It?” (Awake!, April 22, 2004)









Discover how hope for the future can help those who are living with chronic illness.
“Living With Chronic Illness​—Can the Bible Help?” (Web article)









When you watch this music video, picture yourself and your family enjoying life in the Bible’s promised future Paradise.
Imagine the Time (3:37)









Read how a social activist’s life changed once he learned the Bible’s hope for the future.
“I No Longer Feel That I Have to Change the World” (The Watchtower, July 1, 2013)





