





LESSON 12
What Will Help You to Keep Studying the Bible?



Studying the Bible is a rewarding journey. However, it may not always be an easy one. At times, you may wonder if you will be able to keep studying the Bible. Why is it worth making an effort to continue? What can help you to persevere despite difficulties?
1. Why is Bible study valuable?
“The word of God is alive and exerts power.” (Hebrews 4:12) The Bible is valuable because it reveals God’s thoughts and his feelings toward you. It helps you to gain not only knowledge but also true wisdom and hope. Most important, the Bible helps you to become Jehovah’s friend. When you study the Bible, you allow its power to have a positive effect on your life.
2. Why is it important to recognize the value of Bible truth?
The truths in the Bible are like precious treasures. That is why the Bible encourages us to “buy truth and never sell it.” (Proverbs 23:23) When we keep in mind the value of Bible truth, we work hard to keep studying​—even when we face obstacles.​—Read Proverbs 2:4, 5.
3. How can Jehovah help you to keep studying?
As your almighty Creator and Friend, Jehovah wants to help you learn about him. He can give you “both the desire and the power to act.” (Read Philippians 2:13.) Thus, if at times you need additional motivation to study or to apply what you learn, he can help. If you need additional strength to overcome obstacles or opposition, he can provide it. Regularly ask Jehovah in prayer to help you to continue studying the Bible.​—1 Thessalonians 5:17.


DIG DEEPER

Learn how you can keep studying the Bible despite a busy schedule or opposition from others. Then consider how Jehovah will help you to persevere.

4. Make your Bible study a priority
Sometimes life gets so busy that it seems we do not have enough time to study the Bible. What can help? Read Philippians 1:10, and then discuss these questions:
  What do you feel are some of “the more important things” in life?

  How can you make your Bible study a priority?








             If you fill a bucket with sand and try to add rocks, the rocks will not fit

             If you put the rocks in first, you will have room to add most of the sand. Similarly, if you put “the more important things” first in your life, you will be able to accomplish them and still have time for other things


Studying the Bible satisfies our spiritual need​—our need to know and worship God. Read Matthew 5:3, and then discuss this question:
  How do we benefit when we make study of the Bible a priority?


5. Persevere in the face of opposition

At times, others may try to discourage you from studying the Bible. Note Francesco’s example. Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.










VIDEO: Rewarded for Persevering (5:22)









  In the video, how did Francesco’s friends and family react when he told them what he was learning?

  How was he rewarded for persevering?


Read 2 Timothy 2:24, 25, and then discuss these questions:
  How do your family and friends feel about what you are learning?

  According to these verses, how should you respond when someone is not happy that you are studying the Bible? Why?




6. Rely on Jehovah to help you

As we draw close to Jehovah, our desire to please him increases. Still, we can find it difficult to make adjustments in our life to meet his standards. If you ever feel that way, do not give up. Jehovah will help you. Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.










VIDEO: Jehovah Helps Us to Make Changes (3:56)




  In the video, what changes did Jim make to please Jehovah?

  What impresses you about his example?


Read Hebrews 11:6, and then discuss these questions:
  What will Jehovah do for those “earnestly seeking him”​—that is, those who try hard to get to know and please him?

  What does this tell you about how Jehovah feels when he sees your efforts to study the Bible?





SOMEONE MAY ASK: “Why are you studying the Bible?”
  How would you answer?





SUMMARY
Although it is not always easy, studying the Bible can help you enjoy life forever. Continue to rely on Jehovah, and he will reward you.
Review
  Why are Bible truths precious to you?

  How can you “make sure of the more important things”?

  Why should you ask Jehovah to help you to keep studying the Bible?



Section completed on: 




Goal


Continue having your Bible study at least once a week. If your schedule changes, find another time for the study.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Consider four strategies that have helped many people to use their time wisely.
“How to Invest Your Time Wisely” (Awake!, February 2014)









Notice how Jehovah helped one woman whose husband did not understand her efforts to please God.
Jehovah Strengthens Us to Carry Our Load (5:05)









See how one man benefited from his wife’s perseverance.
I Put the Truth on Trial (6:30)









Jehovah’s Witnesses are sometimes accused of breaking up families. But is that true?
“Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Break Up Families or Build Them Up?” (Web article)





