





LESSON 31
What Is God’s Kingdom?



The main theme of the Bible has to do with God’s Kingdom. Jehovah will use that Kingdom to accomplish his original purpose for the earth. What is the Kingdom? How do we know it is ruling now? What has it already accomplished? And what will it do in the future? This lesson and the next two lessons will answer those questions.
1. What is God’s Kingdom, and who is its King?
The Kingdom is a government set up by Jehovah God. Its King, Jesus Christ, rules from heaven. (Matthew 4:17; John 18:36) The Bible says of Jesus: “He will rule as King . . . forever.” (Luke 1:32, 33) As King of God’s Kingdom, Jesus will rule over everyone on the earth.
2. Who rule with Jesus?
Jesus does not rule alone. Persons from “every tribe and tongue and people and nation . . . are to rule as kings over the earth.” (Revelation 5:9, 10) How many will rule with Christ? Since Jesus came to earth, millions of Christians have become his followers. But only 144,000 of them go to heaven to rule with Jesus. (Read Revelation 14:1-4.) All other Christians on earth will become citizens of the Kingdom.​—Psalm 37:29.
3. How is God’s Kingdom superior to human governments?
Even when human rulers try to do good things, they do not have the power to do everything they want. They are eventually replaced by other rulers who may not have the best interests of their subjects in mind. But the Ruler of God’s Kingdom, Jesus, will never be replaced by anyone else. God has “set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed.” (Daniel 2:44) Jesus will rule over the whole earth, and he will not show favoritism. He is loving, kind, and just, and he will teach people to treat one another in the same way​—with love, kindness, and justice.​—Read Isaiah 11:9.


DIG DEEPER

Consider why God’s Kingdom is better than any human government.







4. A powerful government will rule over the whole earth
Jesus Christ has more power to govern than any ruler in history. Read Matthew 28:18, and then discuss this question:
  How is Jesus’ authority superior to that of any human ruler?


Human governments change often, and each one rules over only a portion of the earth. What about God’s Kingdom? Read Daniel 7:14, and then discuss these questions:
  Why is it good that God’s Kingdom “will not be destroyed”?

  Why is it good that it will rule over the whole earth?


5. Human rule must be replaced

Why must God’s Kingdom replace human governments? Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.










VIDEO: What Is God’s Kingdom?​—Excerpt (1:41)




  What has been the result of human rule?


Read Ecclesiastes 8:9, and then discuss these questions:
  Do you think God’s Kingdom should replace human governments? Why?







6. God’s Kingdom has rulers who understand us
Because our King, Jesus, lived as a human, he can “sympathize with our weaknesses.” (Hebrews 4:15) The 144,000 faithful men and women who will rule with Jesus have been chosen by Jehovah “out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation.”​—Revelation 5:9.
  Do you find it reassuring that Jesus and all of his corulers know what it is like to live as a human? Why?







Jehovah has chosen men and women from all backgrounds to rule with Jesus




7. God’s Kingdom has superior laws
Governments make laws that are supposed to benefit and protect their citizens. God’s Kingdom too has laws that its citizens must follow. Read 1 Corinthians 6:9-11, and then discuss these questions:
  What do you think the world will be like when everyone follows God’s rules of conduct?a

  Do you think it is reasonable for Jehovah to expect citizens of the Kingdom to respect these rules? Why?

  What shows that people who are not obeying these laws can change?​—See verse 11.






Governments enact laws to protect and benefit their citizens. God’s Kingdom has superior laws to protect and benefit its citizens




SOMEONE MAY ASK: “What is God’s Kingdom?”
  How would you answer?





SUMMARY
God’s Kingdom is a real government in heaven that will rule over the whole earth.
Review
  Who are the rulers of God’s Kingdom?

  How is God’s Kingdom superior to any human government?

  What are some things that Jehovah expects of citizens of the Kingdom?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Read about Jesus’ rulership at Isaiah 11:1-10, and consider how it differs from human rule.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Consider what Jesus taught about the location of the Kingdom.
“Is the Kingdom of God in Your Heart?” (Web article)









Why do Jehovah’s Witnesses choose loyalty to God’s Kingdom over loyalty to human rule?
Devoted to God’s Kingdom (1:43)









Examine what the Bible reveals about the 144,000 whom Jehovah chooses to rule with Jesus.
“Who Go to Heaven?” (Web article)









What convinced a woman in prison that only God can bring about a just world?
“How I Found the Answer to Injustice” (Awake!, November 2011)





Some of these rules of conduct will be discussed in Section 3.

