





LESSON 33
What the Kingdom Will Accomplish



God’s Kingdom is already ruling. Soon it will make big changes on the earth. Let us consider some of the good things that you can look forward to under Kingdom rule.
1. How will God’s Kingdom restore peace and justice to the earth?
Jesus, the King of God’s Kingdom, will destroy wicked people and governments at the war of Armageddon. (Revelation 16:14, 16) At that time, the following Bible promise will be completely fulfilled: “Just a little while longer, and the wicked will be no more.” (Psalm 37:10) Through the Kingdom, Jesus will make sure that peace and justice fill the earth.​—Read Isaiah 11:4.
2. What will life be like when God’s will is done on earth?
Under the rule of God’s Kingdom, “the righteous will possess the earth, and they will live forever on it.” (Psalm 37:29) Imagine living in a world where everyone is righteous and all love Jehovah and each other! No one will get sick, and everyone will live forever.
3. What will God’s Kingdom accomplish after the wicked are destroyed?
After the wicked are destroyed, Jesus will rule as King for 1,000 years. During that time, he and his 144,000 corulers will help humans on earth to become perfect and sinless. By the end of that period, the earth will be turned into a beautiful paradise, filled with happy people who benefit from obeying Jehovah’s laws. Jesus will then hand the rulership back to his Father, Jehovah. As never before, Jehovah’s “name [will] be sanctified.” (Matthew 6:9, 10) It will have been proved that Jehovah is a good Ruler who cares about his subjects. Jehovah will then destroy Satan, the demons, and any others who choose to rebel against His rulership. (Revelation 20:7-10) The perfect conditions brought about by God’s Kingdom will last forever.


DIG DEEPER

Consider why we can trust that God will use the Kingdom to fulfill all the Bible’s promises for our future.

4. God’s Kingdom will end human governments
“Man has dominated man to his harm.” (Ecclesiastes 8:9) By means of his Kingdom, Jehovah will reverse this injustice.
Read Daniel 2:44 and 2 Thessalonians 1:6-8, and then discuss these questions:
  How will Jehovah and his Son, Jesus, deal with human governments and their supporters?

  How does what you have learned about Jehovah and Jesus assure you that their actions will be just and fair?







5. Jesus is an ideal King
As King of God’s Kingdom, Jesus will do much for the benefit of his earthly subjects. Play the VIDEO to see how Jesus has already shown that he has both the desire and the God-given power to help people.







VIDEO: Jesus Showed What the Kingdom Will Accomplish (1:13)


While on earth, Jesus gave a preview of what the Kingdom would accomplish. Which blessings listed here do you especially look forward to? Read the accompanying scriptures that relate to those blessings.
WHILE ON EARTH, JESUS . . .

FROM HEAVEN, JESUS WILL . . .



  controlled earth’s natural forces.​—Mark 4:36-41.



  solve the earth’s environmental problems.​—Isaiah 35:1, 2.




  miraculously fed thousands.​—Matthew 14:17-21.



  eliminate world hunger.​—Psalm 72:16.




  healed the sicknesses of many.​—Luke 18:35-43.



  ensure perfect health for all.​—Isaiah 33:24.




  brought people back to life.​—Luke 8:49-55.



  reverse the effects of death.​—Revelation 21:3, 4.





6. God’s Kingdom will bring a wonderful future

The Kingdom will fully accomplish Jehovah’s original purpose for humans. They will live forever on a paradise earth. Play the VIDEO to see how Jehovah is working through his Son, Jesus, to accomplish His purpose.










VIDEO: A Glimpse Into a Wonderful Future (4:38)




Read Psalm 145:16, and then discuss this question:
  How does it make you feel to know that Jehovah will “satisfy the desire of every living thing”?





SOME PEOPLE SAY: “If we all work together, we can solve the world’s problems.”
  What problems will God’s Kingdom solve that human governments cannot?





SUMMARY
God’s Kingdom will accomplish its goal. It will transform the earth into a global paradise filled with good people who will worship Jehovah forever.
Review
  How will God’s Kingdom sanctify Jehovah’s name?

  Why can we believe that God’s Kingdom will fulfill the Bible’s promises?

  What accomplishment of the Kingdom do you especially look forward to?



Section completed on: 




Goal


Use the tract What Is the Kingdom of God? to start a conversation.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Find out what Armageddon means.
“What Is the Battle of Armageddon?” (Web article)









Examine the events that will occur during and at the end of Jesus’ 1,000-year reign.
“What Will Happen on Judgment Day?” (The Watchtower, September 1, 2012)









See how families can meditate together on future Kingdom blessings.
See Yourself in Paradise (1:50)









In “I Was Troubled by Many Questions,” learn how a political rebel found the solutions he was looking for.
“The Bible Changes Lives” (The Watchtower, January 1, 2012)





