





LESSON 37
What the Bible Says About Work and Money



Have you ever felt weighed down by concerns about work or money? It can be challenging to care for our needs and also give Jehovah the worship he deserves. The Bible offers practical advice that can help us.
1. What does the Bible say about work?
God wants us to enjoy our work. The Bible says that “there is nothing better for a man than to . . . find enjoyment in his hard work.” (Ecclesiastes 2:24) Jehovah works hard. When we imitate him by working diligently, we please him and feel a sense of satisfaction.
Work is important. But we should never allow it to become more important than our worship of Jehovah. (John 6:27) He promises that when we put him first, he will care for our physical needs.
2. What is a balanced view of money?
While the Bible acknowledges that “money is a protection,” it also warns that money alone cannot make us happy. (Ecclesiastes 7:12) Thus, we are encouraged not to love money but to be “content with the present things.” (Read Hebrews 13:5.) When we remain content with what we have, we free ourselves from the frustration of always wanting more. We avoid unnecessary debt. (Proverbs 22:7) And we escape the dangers of gambling and pursuing get-rich-quick schemes.
3. How can money be used unselfishly?
Jehovah is a generous God, and we imitate him when we are “generous, ready to share.” (1 Timothy 6:18) We can use our money unselfishly by supporting the congregation and by helping others in need, especially fellow worshippers. Jehovah is most interested in, not the amount we give, but our motive for giving. When we give generously from the heart, we will be happy and we will please Jehovah.​—Read Acts 20:35.


DIG DEEPER

See the benefits of keeping work in its proper place and of being content.

4. Honor Jehovah by the way you work

Our friendship with Jehovah should influence our attitude toward work. Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.










VIDEO: Work Whole-Souled for Jehovah (4:39)




  In the video, what impressed you about Jason’s attitude and conduct at his workplace?

  What did he do to keep work in its proper place?


Read Colossians 3:23, 24, and then discuss this question:
  Why does our attitude toward work matter?










Work is important. But we should never allow it to become more important than our worship of Jehovah






5. Contentment benefits us
Many people try to accumulate as much money as they can. But the Bible encourages a different approach. Read 1 Timothy 6:6-8, and then discuss this question:
  What does the Bible encourage us to do?



Even if we have very little, we can be happy. Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.










VIDEO: Be “Content With the Present Things” (3:20)




  Despite having little money, what makes these families happy?


But what if we have much and still want more? Jesus illustrated this danger. Read Luke 12:15-21, and then discuss this question:
  What have you learned from Jesus’ illustration?​—See verse 15.


Read and compare Proverbs 10:22 and 1 Timothy 6:10. Then discuss these questions:
  What do you think is more important? Having a friendship with Jehovah or having lots of money? Why?

  What problems come from chasing after money?




6. Jehovah will care for our needs

Work and money problems can test our faith in Jehovah. Play the VIDEO to see how we can deal with such tests of faith, and then discuss the questions that follow.










VIDEO: Jehovah Will Care for Our Needs (6:21)




  In the video, what challenges did the brother face?

  What did he do to deal with the challenges successfully?


Read Matthew 6:25-34, and then discuss this question:
  What does Jehovah promise to do for those who put him first?





SOME PEOPLE SAY: “I have to work hard to support my family. I can’t go to congregation meetings every week.”
  What scripture convinces you that putting your worship of Jehovah first is always the best decision?





SUMMARY
Secular work and money are necessary, but they should never distract us from serving Jehovah.
Review
  What can help you to keep a balanced view of work?

  How does contentment benefit you?

  How can you show your trust in Jehovah’s promise to provide for his people?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Review whether your work has caused you to miss meetings regularly over the past few months. If so, make a plan to improve the situation.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Examine whether the Bible portrays money as evil.
“Is Money the Root of All Evil?” (Web article)









Learn what kind of giving pleases God.
“What Does the Bible Say About Giving?” (Web article)









Is gambling just an innocent diversion?
“The Bible’s Viewpoint​—Gambling” (Awake!, March 2015)









See what motivated a gambler and burglar to change his lifestyle.
“I Was Passionate About Racehorses” (The Watchtower, November 1, 2011)





