





LESSON 41
What Does the Bible Say About Sex?



Many people feel uncomfortable talking about sex. However, when the Bible mentions sex, it does so in a frank but dignified way. What it says benefits us. That makes sense. After all, Jehovah is our Creator. So he knows what is best for us. He shows us how our actions can please him and what will help us to enjoy life forever.
1. What is Jehovah’s view of sex?
Sex is a gift from Jehovah. He wants it to be enjoyed by a man and a woman who are married to each other. This gift allows couples not only to have children but also to express their mutual love and affection in a natural and pleasurable way. That is why God’s Word states: “May you rejoice with the wife of your youth.” (Proverbs 5:18, 19) Jehovah expects married Christians to be loyal to their mate, so they would never commit adultery.​—Read Hebrews 13:4.
2. What is sexual immorality?
The Bible tells us that “those who are sexually immoral . . . will not inherit God’s Kingdom.” (1 Corinthians 6:9, 10) Bible writers who wrote in Greek used the word por·neiʹa to describe sexual immorality. That word includes (1) sexual relationsa between people who are not married to each other, (2) homosexuality, and (3) bestiality. We please Jehovah and benefit ourselves when we “abstain from sexual immorality.”​—1 Thessalonians 4:3.


DIG DEEPER

Consider how you can avoid sexual immorality and how you will benefit by staying morally clean.






3. Flee from sexual immorality
A faithful man named Joseph struggled to stay morally clean. Read Genesis 39:1-12, and then discuss these questions:
  What motivated Joseph to flee?​—See verse 9.

  Do you think that Joseph made the right decision? Why?



How can young people imitate Joseph and flee from sexual immorality today? Play the VIDEO.










VIDEO: Flee From Immorality (5:06)




Jehovah wants all of us to reject immorality. Read 1 Corinthians 6:18, and then discuss these questions:
  What situations could lead someone to commit sexual immorality?

  How can you flee from immorality?




4. You can resist temptation

What can make it difficult to resist the temptation to commit sexual immorality? Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.










VIDEO: Fight Temptation With Bible Reading (3:02)




  When the brother in the video realized that his thoughts and actions could result in his being unfaithful to his wife, what did he do?


Even faithful Christians struggle at times to keep their thoughts clean. How can you avoid dwelling on immoral things? Read Philippians 4:8, and then discuss these questions:
  What kind of things should we think about?

  How can reading the Bible and keeping ourselves busy in Jehovah’s service help us resist the temptation to sin?




5. Jehovah’s standards benefit us

Jehovah knows what is best for us. He tells us how to keep morally clean and the benefits of doing so. Read Proverbs 7:7-27 or play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.










VIDEO: Lacking Good Sense (9:31)




  How did the young man walk into a tempting situation?​—See Proverbs 7:8, 9.

  According to Proverbs 7:23, 26, sexual immorality can have serious consequences. If we stay morally clean, what problems can we avoid?

  How can moral cleanness help us to enjoy life forever?


Some people think that what the Bible says about homosexuality is unloving. But Jehovah, the God of love, wants everyone to enjoy life forever. To qualify, we must live up to his standards. Read 1 Corinthians 6:9-11, and then discuss this question:
  From God’s viewpoint, are homosexual desires the only improper ones?


In order to please God, all of us need to make changes. Is it worth the effort? Read Psalm 19:8, 11, and then discuss these questions:
  Do you think that Jehovah’s moral standards are reasonable? Why, or why not?








Jehovah has helped many to conform to his moral standards. He can help you too




SOME PEOPLE SAY: “Sex between any two people is all right, as long as they love each other.”
  What would you say?





SUMMARY
Sex is a gift from Jehovah for a husband and his wife to enjoy.
Review
  What does sexual immorality include?

  What will help us to avoid sexual immorality?

  How do we benefit when we follow Jehovah’s moral standards?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Memorize one or two scriptures from this lesson that will help you to resist immoral temptations.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Examine why it matters to God whether couples marry or not.
“What Does the Bible Say About Living Together Without Marriage?” (Web article)









Consider why the Bible’s standard regarding homosexuality does not promote hatred.
“Is Homosexuality Wrong?” (Web article)









Learn how God’s laws regarding all sexual activity protect us.
“Is Oral Sex Really Sex?” (Web article)









In the experience “They Treated Me With Dignity,” see what motivated a homosexual to change his way of life to please God.
“The Bible Changes Lives” (The Watchtower, April 1, 2011)





These disapproved relations include a variety of acts such as sexual intercourse, oral sex, anal sex, and fondling another person’s genitals in a sexual way.

