





LESSON 24
What Is the Truth About Angels?



Jehovah wants us to learn about his family in heaven. That family includes angels, who are called “sons of God.” (Job 38:7) What does the Bible say about angels? How do they affect people? And are all angels part of God’s family?
1. Who are the angels?
Jehovah created angels before he made the earth. Like him, they are invisible spirits who live in heaven. (Hebrews 1:14) There are millions of angels, and each one is unique. (Revelation 5:11) They “carry out [Jehovah’s] word, obeying his voice.” (Psalm 103:20) In ancient times, Jehovah sometimes sent angels to deliver messages and to support and rescue his people. Today, angels guide Christians to people who want to learn about God.
2. Who are Satan and his demons?
Some angels did not remain faithful to Jehovah. The first angel who rebelled is “the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth.” (Revelation 12:9) Satan wanted to rule over others, so he influenced the first humans and later even other angels to join his rebellion. Those rebellious angels are called demons. Jehovah had them expelled from heaven to the earth, and they will be destroyed.​—Read Revelation 12:9, 12.
3. How do Satan and the demons try to mislead us?
Satan and the demons mislead many people through demonism, or spiritism, which is the bad practice of trying to communicate with spirits. For example, some people consult astrologers, fortune-tellers, psychics, and witch doctors. Others seek forms of medical treatment that involve spiritism. People are also tricked into believing that they can speak to the dead. But Jehovah warns us: “Do not turn to the spirit mediums, and do not consult fortune-tellers.” (Leviticus 19:31) He gives us this warning to protect us from Satan and the demons. They are God’s enemies, and they want to harm us.


DIG DEEPER

Learn about the good things that angels do, the dangers of spiritism, and how we can protect ourselves from Satan and the demons.







4. Angels help people to learn about Jehovah
God’s angels do not preach directly to people. Instead, they may guide God’s worshippers to people who want to learn about him. Read Revelation 14:6, 7, and then discuss these questions:
  Why do we need help from the angels to preach?

  Does it encourage you to know that angels can guide you to people who need to hear about the Bible? Why?








5. Reject spiritism
Satan and the demons are Jehovah’s enemies. They are our enemies too. Read Luke 9:38-42, and then discuss this question:
  How do the demons treat people?


We do not want to invite the demons into our lives. Read Deuteronomy 18:10-12, and then discuss these questions:
  In what ways do the demons try to influence us and communicate with us? What practices are common where you live?

  Does it seem reasonable to you that Jehovah forbids spiritistic practices? Why?


Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.







VIDEO: “Oppose the Devil” (5:02)


  Do you think that the amulet worn by Palesa’s daughter was harmful? Why?

  What did Palesa need to do to be protected from the demons?


Real Christians have always opposed the demons. Read Acts 19:19 and 1 Corinthians 10:21, and then discuss this question:
  Why is it important to destroy anything you have that is connected with spiritism?








6. Win the fight against Satan and his demons
The demons are ruled by Satan. But the faithful angels are directed by the archangel Michael, which is another name for Jesus. How powerful is Michael? Read Revelation 12:7-9, and then discuss these questions:
  Who is more powerful? Michael and his angels or Satan and his demons?

  Do you think that Jesus’ followers need to be afraid of Satan and his demons?


You can win the fight against Satan and his demons. Read James 4:7, and then discuss this question:
  How can you protect yourself from Satan and the demons?



SOME PEOPLE SAY: “There’s nothing wrong with playing games or watching movies about spiritism. It’s just for fun.”
  Why is that viewpoint dangerous?





SUMMARY
Faithful angels help us. Satan and his demons are Jehovah’s enemies, and they use spiritism to mislead people.
Review
  How are Jehovah’s angels helping people to learn about him?

  Who are Satan and his demons?

  Why do you want to stay clear of spiritism?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Consider whether any objects you have may be related to spiritism, and pray for wisdom to decide what to do with them.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Look at the evidence that Jesus is the archangel Michael.
“Who Is the Archangel Michael?” (Web article)









Consider proof that the Devil is not just a principle or quality of evil inside us.
“Is the Devil Real?” (Web article)









See how a woman broke free from demonic influences.
“She Found a Purpose in Life” (The Watchtower, July 1, 1993)









Learn how Satan uses spiritism to fool people.
“The Truth About Magic, Sorcery, and Witchcraft” (The Road to Everlasting Life, part 5)





