





LESSON 16
What Did Jesus Do While on Earth?



Many people think of Jesus as a helpless baby, a wise prophet, or a dying man. But can we learn more about him from examining his life on earth? In this lesson, we will consider some of the most important things that Jesus did and how they affect you.
1. What was Jesus’ main work?
Jesus’ main work was to “declare the good news of the Kingdom of God.” (Read Luke 4:43.) He preached the good news that God would establish a kingdom, or government, that would solve all of humankind’s problems.a Jesus tirelessly shared this positive message for three and a half years.​—Matthew 9:35.
2. What was the purpose of Jesus’ miracles?
The Bible describes many “powerful works and wonders and signs that God did through [Jesus].” (Acts 2:22) With God’s power, Jesus was able to control the weather, feed thousands, heal the sick, and even bring the dead back to life. (Matthew 8:23-27; 14:15-21; Mark 6:56; Luke 7:11-17) Jesus’ miracles made it clear that God had sent him. They also showed that Jehovah has the power to solve all our problems.
3. What can we learn from the way Jesus lived?
Jesus obeyed Jehovah in every situation. (Read John 8:29.) Despite opposition, Jesus faithfully did what his Father asked of him right up until his death. He proved that it is possible for humans to serve God, even under difficult conditions. Thus, Jesus left “a model for [us] to follow his steps closely.”​—1 Peter 2:21.


DIG DEEPER

Consider how Jesus shared the good news and performed miracles.

4. Jesus shared good news
Jesus walked hundreds of miles on dusty roads, sharing the good news with as many people as possible. Read Luke 8:1, and then discuss these questions:
  Did Jesus preach only to people who gathered to listen to him?

  What effort did Jesus make to find people?


God foretold that the Messiah would share good news. Read Isaiah 61:1, 2, and then discuss these questions:
  How did Jesus fulfill this prophecy?

  Do you think people today need to hear this good news?










5. Jesus taught valuable truths
In addition to preaching the good news about God’s Kingdom, Jesus taught practical lessons. Consider a few examples from his famous Sermon on the Mount. Read Matthew 6:14, 34 and 7:12, and then discuss these questions:
  What practical advice did Jesus give in these verses?

  Do you think that this advice is still helpful?









6. Jesus performed miracles
Jehovah empowered Jesus to perform many miracles. To see one example, read Mark 5:25-34 or play the VIDEO. Then discuss the questions that follow.







VIDEO: A Sick Woman Is Cured (5:10)


  In the video, of what was the sick woman convinced?

  What impresses you about this miracle?


Read John 5:36, and then discuss this question:
  What did Jesus’ miracles “bear witness” to, or prove, about him?








Did you know?
Most of what we know about Jesus comes from the four Bible books called the Gospels​—Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Each Gospel writer included different details about Jesus. These details all fit together to provide a fascinating picture of his life.
MATTHEW
wrote his Gospel first. It emphasizes Jesus’ teachings, especially what Jesus taught about the Kingdom of God.

MARK
composed the shortest Gospel. It is fast-moving and action-packed.

LUKE
gives special attention to prayer and to how Jesus treated women.

JOHN
reveals much about Jesus’ personality by relating many conversations that Jesus had with his close friends and others.




SOME PEOPLE SAY: “Jesus was just a good man, and nothing more.”
  What do you think?





SUMMARY
Jesus preached about God’s Kingdom, performed miracles, and obeyed Jehovah in every situation.
Review
  What was Jesus’ main work while on earth?

  What do Jesus’ miracles prove?

  What practical lessons did Jesus teach?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Watch the drama ‘For a Certainty God Made Him Lord and Christ’​—Part II or read Matthew chapters 5 to 7 to learn more about Jesus’ ministry.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







What subject did Jesus speak about the most?
“God’s Kingdom​—What It Means to Jesus” (The Watchtower, October 1, 2014)









Consider why we can trust that Jesus’ miracles really happened.
“The Miracles of Jesus​—What Can You Learn?” (The Watchtower, July 15, 2004)









Read how Jesus’ example of self-sacrifice affected one man.
“My Life Was All About Me” (The Watchtower, October 1, 2014)









See the main activities of Jesus’ ministry organized chronologically.
“Main Events of Jesus’ Earthly Life” (New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, Appendix A7)





Lessons 31-33 will discuss God’s Kingdom in more detail.

