





LESSON 15
Who Is Jesus?



Jesus is one of the most famous people in history. Yet, other than his name, many people do not know much about him, and many have different ideas about who Jesus really is. What does the Bible say about him?
1. Who is Jesus?
Jesus is a powerful spirit who lives in heaven. He was created by Jehovah God before everything else. For that reason, he is called “the firstborn of all creation.” (Colossians 1:15) The Bible refers to Jesus as God’s “only-begotten Son” because Jesus alone was directly created by Jehovah. (John 3:16) Jesus worked closely with his Father, Jehovah, helping Him to create all other things. (Read Proverbs 8:30.) Jesus continues to enjoy a close relationship with Jehovah. He loyally serves as God’s spokesman, “the Word,” delivering His messages and instructions.​—John 1:14.
2. Why did Jesus come to earth?
About 2,000 years ago, Jehovah miraculously used his holy spirit to transfer Jesus’ life from heaven to the womb of a young virgin woman named Mary. In this way, Jesus was born as a human. (Read Luke 1:34, 35.) Jesus came to earth to be the promised Messiah, or Christ, and to save humankind.a All the Bible’s prophecies about the Messiah were fulfilled in him, enabling people to identify Jesus as “the Christ, the Son of the living God.”​—Matthew 16:16.
3. Where is Jesus now?
After Jesus’ life as a human ended, he was resurrected as a spirit and he returned to heaven. There, “God exalted him to a superior position.” (Philippians 2:9) Now, Jesus has a position of great authority​—second only to Jehovah himself.


DIG DEEPER

Find out more about who Jesus really is and why learning about him is so important.







4. Jesus is not Almighty God

The Bible teaches that although Jesus is a powerful spirit creature in heaven, he is subject to his God and Father, Jehovah. Why can we say that? Play the VIDEO to see what the Bible teaches about Jesus’ position in relation to the almighty God.










VIDEO: Is Jesus Christ God? (3:22)




The following scriptures help us to understand the relationship between Jehovah and Jesus. Read each scripture, and then discuss the questions that follow.
Read Luke 1:30-32.
  How did the angel describe the relationship between Jesus and Jehovah God, “the Most High”?


Read Matthew 3:16, 17.
  At Jesus’ baptism, what did the voice from heaven say?

  Whose voice do you think that was?


Read John 14:28.
  Who is older and has more authority? A father or a son?

  What did Jesus mean when he called Jehovah his Father?


Read John 12:49.
  Does Jesus think that he and his Father are the same person? What do you think?





5. Jesus proved to be the Messiah

The Bible contains many prophecies that would help people to identify the Messiah​—God’s chosen one to save humankind. Play the VIDEO for a brief introduction to some of the prophecies that Jesus fulfilled when he came to earth.










VIDEO: Jesus Fulfills Prophecy (3:03)




Read these Bible prophecies, and then discuss the questions that follow:
Read Micah 5:2 to learn where the Messiah was to be born.b
  Did Jesus’ birth fulfill this prophecy?​—Matthew 2:1.


Read Psalm 34:20 and Zechariah 12:10 to see details that were prophesied about the Messiah’s death.
  Were these prophecies fulfilled?​—John 19:33-37.

  Do you think Jesus could have influenced the fulfillment of any of these prophecies?

  What does this prove to you about Jesus?




6. We benefit from learning about Jesus
The Bible stresses the importance of learning about Jesus and his role. Read John 14:6 and 17:3, and then discuss this question:
  Why is it vital to learn about Jesus?







Jesus opened the way to become God’s friend. He taught the truth about Jehovah, and through him, we can gain everlasting life




SOME PEOPLE SAY: “Jehovah’s Witnesses don’t believe in Jesus.”
  How would you reply?





SUMMARY
Jesus is a powerful spirit. He is God’s Son and the Messiah.
Review
  Why is Jesus called “the firstborn of all creation”?

  Before coming to earth, what did Jesus do?

  How do we know that Jesus is the Messiah?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Watch the drama ‘For a Certainty God Made Him Lord and Christ’​—Part I or read Luke chapters 2 and 3 to learn more about Jesus’ life on earth.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Learn more about Jesus’ role as the Messiah.
“Do Messianic Prophecies Prove That Jesus Was the Messiah?” (Web article)









Find out if the Bible teaches that God literally fathered Jesus in the same way that humans produce children.
“Why Is Jesus Called the Son of God?” (Web article)









Consider why the Trinity is not a Bible teaching.
“Is Jesus God?” (The Watchtower, April 1, 2009)









Read how a woman’s life changed after she investigated what the Bible says about Jesus.
“A Jewish Woman Explains Why She Reexamined Her Faith” (Awake!, May 2013)





Lessons 26 and 27 will consider why humankind needs to be saved and how Jesus saves us.
See Endnote 2 for a prophecy that foretold exactly when Jesus would appear on earth.

