





LESSON 04
Who Is God?



Nearly as long as humans have existed, they have worshipped many gods and goddesses. Yet, the Bible refers to one God who “is greater than all the other gods.” (2 Chronicles 2:5) Who is that? And what makes him greater than all the other gods that people worship? In this lesson, learn how this God introduces himself to you.
1. What is God’s name, and how can we be sure that he wants us to know it?
In the Bible, God introduces himself to us. He says: “I am Jehovah. That is my name.” (Read Isaiah 42:5, 8.) “Jehovah” is the translation of a Hebrew name that evidently means “He Causes to Become.” Jehovah wants us to know his name. (Exodus 3:15) How can we be sure of that? In the Bible he included his name over 7,000 times!a The name Jehovah belongs to “the true God in the heavens above and on the earth beneath.”​—Deuteronomy 4:39.
2. What does the Bible reveal about Jehovah?
The Bible says that among all the gods worshipped by humans, Jehovah is the only true God. Why? There are several reasons. Jehovah has supreme authority, and he alone is “the Most High over all the earth.” (Read Psalm 83:18.) He is “the Almighty,” which means he has the power to do whatever he chooses to do. He “created all things”​—the universe and all life on earth. (Revelation 4:8, 11) Unlike anyone else, Jehovah has always existed, and he will exist forever.​—Psalm 90:2.


DIG DEEPER

Examine the difference between God’s titles and his unique name. Then learn how and why he revealed his name to you.








3. God has many titles, but one name

To see the difference between a person’s title and his name, play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.










VIDEO: Many Titles, but One Name (0:41)




  What is the difference between a title, such as “Lord,” and a name?


The Bible acknowledges that people worship many gods and lords. Read Psalm 136:1-3, and then discuss this question:
  Who is “the God of gods” and “the Lord of lords”?





4. Jehovah wants you to know and use his name

What shows that Jehovah wants you to know his name? Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the questions that follow.










VIDEO: Does God Have a Name?​—Excerpt (3:11)









  Do you think Jehovah wants his name to be known? Why?


Jehovah wants people to use his name. Read Romans 10:13, and then discuss these questions:
  How important is it to use God’s name, Jehovah?

  How do you feel when someone remembers your name and uses it?

  How do you think Jehovah feels when you use his name?




5. Jehovah wants you to get closer to him

A woman from Cambodia named Soten said that learning God’s name helped her to enjoy “the best feeling on earth.” Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.










VIDEO: My Search for the True God (8:18)









  In the video, how did learning God’s name affect Soten?


Before you become someone’s friend, you usually learn his or her name. Read James 4:8a, and then discuss these questions:
  What does Jehovah invite you to do?

  How might knowing and using God’s name help you to feel closer to him?





SOME PEOPLE SAY: “There’s only one God, so it doesn’t matter what you call him.”
  Do you believe that Jehovah is God’s name?

  How would you explain that God wants us to use his name?





SUMMARY
Jehovah is the name of the only true God. He wants us to know and use that name so that we can draw close to him.
Review
  How is Jehovah different from all the other gods that people worship?

  Why should we use God’s name?

  What shows that Jehovah wants you to draw close to him?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


When talking about God, use his name, Jehovah.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







Examine five compelling lines of reasoning that give proof God exists.
“Does God Exist?” (Web article)









Consider why believing that God has always existed makes sense.
“Who Made God?” (The Watchtower, August 1, 2014)









Learn why we should use God’s name, even if its ancient pronunciation is unknown.
“Who Is Jehovah?” (Web article)









Does it matter what we call God? See why we can say that he has just one personal name.
“How Many Names Does God Have?” (Web article)





For more information about the meaning of God’s name and why some Bible translations have removed it, see Appendix A4 in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.

