





LESSON 08
You Can Be Jehovah’s Friend



Jehovah wants you to know him better. Why? He hopes that the more you learn about his personality, his ways, and his purpose, the more you will want to be his friend. Can you really be God’s friend? (Read Psalm 25:14.) What can you do to become his friend? The Bible answers those questions and reveals why friendship with Jehovah is the most important relationship you can have.
1. What invitation does Jehovah offer you?
“Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you.” (James 4:8) What does this mean? Jehovah is inviting you to become his friend. Some may find it difficult to imagine being friends with anyone they cannot see, let alone with God himself. Yet, in his Word, the Bible, Jehovah reveals everything we need to know about his personality in order for us to draw close to him. When we read God’s message to us in the Bible, our friendship with Jehovah grows even though we have never seen him.
2. Why is Jehovah the best Friend you can have?
No one loves you more than Jehovah does. He wants you to be happy and to turn to him whenever you need help. You can “throw all your anxiety on him, because he cares for you.” (1 Peter 5:7) Jehovah is always ready to support, comfort, and listen to his friends.​—Read Psalm 94:18, 19.
3. What does Jehovah expect of his friends?
Jehovah loves people in general, “but His close friendship is with the upright.” (Proverbs 3:32) Jehovah expects his friends to try to do things that he views as good and to avoid things that he considers bad. Some may feel that they could never live up to Jehovah’s standards of good and bad. However, Jehovah is large-hearted. He accepts everyone who truly loves Him and does his best to please Him.​—Psalm 147:11; Acts 10:34, 35.


DIG DEEPER

Learn more about how you can become Jehovah’s friend, and discover why he is the best Friend you can have.

4. Abraham was Jehovah’s friend
The Bible account of Abraham (also called Abram) gives us a glimpse of what it means to be God’s friend. Read about Abraham at Genesis 12:1-4. Then discuss these questions:
  What did Jehovah ask Abraham to do?

  What did Jehovah promise him?

  How did Abraham respond to Jehovah’s instructions?


5. What Jehovah asks of his friends
We usually expect certain things of our friends.
  What are some things that you like your friends to do for you?


Read 1 John 5:3, and then discuss this question:
  What does Jehovah expect of his friends?


In order to obey Jehovah, we may need to change our conduct or our personality traits. Read Isaiah 48:17, 18, and then discuss this question:
  Why does Jehovah ask his friends to make changes?






A good friend would remind us of things that can protect and benefit us. Jehovah does the same for his friends



6. What Jehovah does for his friends

Jehovah helps his friends cope with problems. Play the VIDEO, and then discuss the question that follows.










VIDEO: Jehovah Has Done So Much for Me (3:20)




  How has Jehovah helped the woman in the video to deal with her negative thinking and emotions?


Read Isaiah 41:10, 13, and then discuss these questions:
  What does Jehovah promise to do for all of his friends?

  Do you think Jehovah would make a good Friend? Why?








Close friends give you help when you need it. Jehovah will help you too





7. Friendship with Jehovah involves communication
Communication strengthens bonds of friendship. Read Psalm 86:6, 11, and then discuss these questions:
  How can we communicate with Jehovah?

  How does Jehovah communicate with us?







We speak to Jehovah through prayer; he speaks to us through the Bible





SOME PEOPLE SAY: “It’s impossible to be close to God.”
  What scripture would you use to show that we can be Jehovah’s friend?





SUMMARY
Jehovah wants to be your Friend, and he will help you draw close to him.
Review
  How does Jehovah help his friends?

  Why does Jehovah instruct his friends to make changes?

  Do you think Jehovah expects too much of his friends? Why, or why not?



Lesson completed on: 




Goal


Share with a friend something that you have learned about Jehovah.



Other: 

Your other goal






EXPLORE







How can friendship with God affect your life?
“Jehovah​—A God Worth Knowing” (The Watchtower, February 15, 2003)









Learn how to cultivate a friendship with God.
“How Can I Become God’s Friend?” (Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work, Volume 2, chapter 35)









Find out why one woman feels that her friendship with Jehovah saved her.
“I Did Not Want to Die!” (The Watchtower No. 1 2017)









Listen to teenagers express their feelings about Jehovah.
What Does It Mean to Be God’s Friend? (1:46)





