
Chapter Eight
Appointment and Deletion of Elders and Ministerial Servants





Considering Scriptural Qualifications 1-5

Cautions Before Recommending Certain Brothers 6-11

Previously Reproved, Disfellowshipped, or Disassociated 7

Guilty of Adultery in the Past 8

Separated or Unscripturally Divorced 9

Served as an Elder or a Ministerial Servant in the Past 10

Baptized for Many Years but Only Now Being Recommended 11



When an Appointed Brother Moves Out of the Congregation 12

When an Appointed Brother Moves Into the Congregation 13-14

Recommendations for Appointment During the Circuit Overseer’s Regular Visit to a Congregation 15-20

Recommendations for Appointment Between the Circuit Overseer’s Regular Visits to a Congregation 21

Situations That Require a Review of an Appointed Brother’s Qualifications 22-28

Member of His Household Gets Involved in Serious Wrongdoing 22

Allows Disfellowshipped or Disassociated Family Member to Move Into His Home 23

Supports the Marriage of a Baptized Christian to an Unbaptized Person 24

Committed a Disfellowshipping Offense Years in the Past and the Matter Was Never Addressed 25-27

Viewed Pornography 28



Situations That May Require a Review of an Appointed Brother’s Qualifications 29-30

Files for Bankruptcy 29

He or a Member of His Household Pursues Higher Education 30



Procedure for Reviewing an Appointed Brother’s Qualifications 31-33

Recommendations for Deletion During the Circuit Overseer’s Regular Visit to a Congregation 34

Recommendations for Deletion Between the Circuit Overseer’s Regular Visits to a Congregation 35

Resignations 36

Deletions for Judicial Reasons or Death 37

Announcements of Deletion 38

Appealing Deletions 39

Congregation File 40





CONSIDERING SCRIPTURAL QUALIFICATIONS

1. Before meeting to consider recommending brothers as ministerial servants or elders, each elder should personally review the inspired qualifications found at 1 Timothy 3:1-13; Titus 1:5-9; James 3:17, 18; and 1 Peter 5:2, 3. Helpful comments on the Scriptural qualifications can be found in chapters 5 and 6 of Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will.
2. After the meeting is opened with prayer, the Scriptural requirements should be read aloud from the Bible. Although no one could measure up perfectly to these requirements, the brother being considered should measure up to a reasonable degree, not significantly lacking in any one of the requirements. The circuit overseer relies on your good judgment and spiritual discernment in this matter.
3. Natural ability does not qualify a brother for appointment. He must be a spiritual man, giving evidence that holy spirit is operating on him. Is he zealous for fine works? Is he a good example in his attendance and participation at congregation meetings? Is he zealous in the ministry, doing what he reasonably can in view of his age, health, family obligations, and other theocratic responsibilities? (See 23:24-25.) Is he a student of the Bible? Does he endeavor to help his family spiritually, regularly studying with his wife and his children living at home? Does he manifest the fruitage of the spirit in his daily life?​—Gal. 5:22, 23.
4. Though it is the brother who must measure up to the Scriptural qualifications, you should also consider the spirituality of those in his household. If his wife is baptized, is she a good example? If she is spiritually weak, is he doing what he reasonably can to assist her? Is he making family worship a priority? Are his minor children well-behaved and “believing,” either progressing toward dedication to God or already baptized as Jehovah’s Witnesses? Do his family members participate in congregation meetings to a reasonable extent? What does the conduct of any adult children living in the home reveal?​—Titus 1:6; see 8:22.
5. The elders should help brothers in their late teens to reach out and qualify to be ministerial servants. The following factors will be helpful when considering the qualifications of such a brother. Does the congregation respect him as a spiritual man? (1 Cor. 2:15, 16) Does he display “the fruitage of the spirit”? Does he have a meaningful share in the ministry? Does his use of his time give evidence that he is putting Kingdom interests first? Do his conversation and comments give evidence of good personal study habits? What are his spiritual goals?​—Gal. 5:22, 23; Ps. 1:1, 2; Matt. 6:33; Eph. 4:29.



CAUTIONS BEFORE RECOMMENDING CERTAIN BROTHERS

6. Elders should make sure they have full and complete information regarding the brothers they intend to recommend to the circuit overseer, especially those in the following circumstances.
7. Previously Reproved, Disfellowshipped, or Disassociated: If he was reproved within the past three years or reinstated within the past five years, please provide the following information: What was the offense? In a case of reproof, did the judicial committee make an announcement? In a case of disfellowshipping or disassociation, what is the date of reinstatement? When were the last restrictions lifted? Are you aware of his having been reproved, disfellowshipped, or disassociated on any other occasions? What convinces you that he has lived down his past wrongdoing and that others now view him as a good example? If the wrongdoing took place in another congregation, how would that congregation view his appointment? Recommending him prematurely could minimize the seriousness of wrongdoing in his own eyes and in the eyes of others. It could also disturb those who still have his wrongdoing fresh in their memories.
8. Guilty of Adultery in the Past: When did the adultery occur? Was he reproved or disfellowshipped? If he was reproved, was an announcement made? Did the innocent mate reject him? How do you know this? If he divorced and remarried, did he marry the individual with whom he committed adultery? Is there evidence that he schemed to put away his former mate or that he pressured her to accept a divorce? Did the adultery break up the marriage of the other person? How were others affected by his adultery? Is the innocent mate still alive? Did the innocent mate remarry? What convinces you that he has lived down his past wrongdoing and is now viewed with respect? If the wrongdoing took place in another congregation, how would that congregation view his appointment?​—See 12:10-12.
9. Separated or Unscripturally Divorced: Who is primarily to blame for the marital problems? What were the circumstances surrounding the separation or divorce? Who was responsible for the separation, or who pursued the divorce? Did both sign the decree or in some other way indicate their agreement? How long ago did the separation or divorce occur? What is the brother doing to try to reconcile? Is his mate unwilling to cooperate with his efforts? If so, why? How is his situation viewed by the congregations involved? How do the elders of the mate’s congregation feel about the brother? When separation and divorce are involved, there may be deficiencies on the part of one or both mates that make it necessary to limit special privileges because one or both mates may not be viewed as exemplary.​—w00 12/15 pp. 28-29; lvs pp. 250-251.
10. Served as an Elder or a Ministerial Servant in the Past: With what congregation did he previously serve, and when did he stop serving? Why did he stop serving? What makes his circumstances different now? What progress has he made since he stopped serving? If he stopped serving in another congregation, how would that congregation view his reappointment? If he previously served as an elder and was not guilty of gross wrongdoing, it may not be necessary for him now to serve first as a ministerial servant, depending on the length of time since he stopped serving as an elder.​—See 13:8.
11. Baptized for Many Years but Only Now Being Recommended: What prevented the brother from being recommended in the past?



WHEN AN APPOINTED BROTHER MOVES OUT OF THE CONGREGATION

12. Unless there are serious reservations about the qualifications of an appointed brother who is moving, the Congregation Service Committee should send a letter of introduction to the elders in the new congregation plainly stating that the body of elders recommends that he continue to serve and in what assignments he has experience. (See 22:5-8.) If there are serious reservations, the body of elders should meet as soon as possible to determine whether they will recommend him for reappointment or not. (See 8:31-33.) If they do not recommend him, two or more elders should meet with him and explain the Scriptural reason for the body’s decision. The letter of introduction should clearly explain their concerns, the counsel they gave him, and whether he agrees with the decision. (See 8:38.) At the next visit of the circuit overseer, the elders should inform the circuit overseer of the brother’s move. This is true whether he received a favorable recommendation or not.



WHEN AN APPOINTED BROTHER MOVES INTO THE CONGREGATION

13. Elders and ministerial servants who move to a new congregation with a favorable letter of recommendation and who have a favorable recommendation from the elders of the new congregation but who have not yet been reappointed may be used to present parts on the midweek meeting and to give public talks, according to their abilities. (See 22:6.7.) They may attend a Kingdom Ministry School. In addition, they can be present with the ministerial servants during the meeting the circuit overseer conducts with the appointed servants in the congregation. If the circuit overseer’s outline includes additional information for elders only, recommended elders who have not yet been reappointed can remain as this information is discussed. However, they should not be present when recommendations and local congregation needs are considered. Neither should they serve on judicial committees or attend other meetings of the body of elders.
14. If an elder or a ministerial servant regularly moves away to live at a second residence, he should not be appointed in both congregations. One congregation should hold the Congregation’s Publisher Records (S-21). Each time he leaves, the elders should write a letter to the congregation he will be attending temporarily, explaining his circumstances and how he was being used. The elders of the congregation he is visiting can use him to care for duties and responsibilities in the congregation as outlined above. Even if he will be away for more than three months, he should send his field service reports to his home congregation.



RECOMMENDATIONS FOR APPOINTMENT DURING THE CIRCUIT OVERSEER’S REGULAR VISIT TO A CONGREGATION

15. At least one month before the circuit overseer’s visit, the Congregation Service Committee should send to the circuit overseer the full name, date of birth, and date of baptism of any brother the body of elders will be recommending for appointment as an elder or a ministerial servant. The Recommendations for Appointment of Elders and Ministerial Servants (S-62) form should be used for this purpose. Any ministerial servants who substitute as members of the service committee should not be aware of or be involved in any discussions regarding the recommendation. Ministerial servants should have no access to any forms or correspondence related to the appointment or deletion of elders and ministerial servants.
16. No earlier than a day or two before the start of the visit, perhaps when other congregation records are provided, the elders should provide the circuit overseer with any background information that has a bearing on the qualifications of the brother(s) being recommended for appointment. Such information would include letters of recommendation (or perhaps letters of introduction) from a previous congregation. (See 8:6-11.) During the meeting with the elders later in the week, the circuit overseer will discuss the Scriptural qualifications of each brother recommended. (See 8:1-5.) If the circuit overseer determines that the brother does not measure up to the Scriptural requirements to a reasonable degree, he will advise the elders accordingly and inform them how they can help the brother to qualify in the future.
17. When the circuit overseer decides to appoint a brother, the circuit overseer and another elder will meet with the brother to inform him of his appointment. If the brother is (1) being appointed for the first time as a ministerial servant or (2) being reappointed as an elder or a ministerial servant for reasons other than his move from one congregation to another, the circuit overseer will ask the following questions: “(1) Is there anything from your past, even before baptism, or in your personal or family life that disqualifies you or that would prevent you from accepting this appointment? (2) Is there any reason why your appointment should not be announced to the congregation? (3) Have you ever been involved at any time in the past with child sexual abuse?” If the brother answers no to the questions, the circuit overseer will provide the elders with a signed appointment letter that includes the brother’s name in the list of those appointed during the visit. The appointment should be announced to the congregation at the next midweek meeting.
18. If the brother approved for appointment is not present at the conclusion of the visit and it is necessary to ask him the questions mentioned in the preceding paragraph, the circuit overseer will not include the brother’s name in the appointment letter, if any, left with the elders at the end of the visit. Rather, when the brother returns, the coordinator of the body of elders should assign two elders to ask the brother the questions. The coordinator of the body of elders will then inform the circuit overseer of the brother’s answers. If the brother answers no to the questions, the circuit overseer will provide the elders with a signed appointment letter. At the midweek meeting following the receipt of the appointment letter, the brother’s appointment should be announced to the congregation.
19. If the brother approved for appointment is not present at the conclusion of the visit but it is not necessary to ask him the questions mentioned in paragraph 17, the circuit overseer will include the brother’s name in the appointment letter left with the elders at the end of the visit. When the brother returns, the coordinator of the body of elders should assign two elders to meet with the brother to inform him of his appointment before it is announced to the congregation.
20. If the circuit overseer decides not to appoint a brother, two elders may speak with the brother at an appropriate time and discreetly explain what he needs to do to qualify. The elders should not inform him that the body of elders recommended him. On occasion the circuit overseer will not approve a recommendation so as to allow time for the brother to develop maturity and experience or to live down past wrongdoing. In such cases, there may be no need to discuss matters with the brother.



RECOMMENDATIONS FOR APPOINTMENT BETWEEN THE CIRCUIT OVERSEER’S REGULAR VISITS TO A CONGREGATION

21. When an elder or a ministerial servant moves into the congregation with a favorable letter of recommendation for reappointment and the next visit of the circuit overseer is not in the near future, the body of elders may recommend his immediate reappointment. In such cases, the Congregation Service Committee should submit the Recommendations for Appointment of Elders and Ministerial Servants (S-62) form to the circuit overseer along with a copy of the letter of recommendation from the service committee of his former congregation. If the recommendation is approved, an appointment letter will be sent to the body of elders. A brother who has been reappointed as an elder or a ministerial servant should be informed of his appointment before it is announced to the congregation.



SITUATIONS THAT REQUIRE A REVIEW OF AN APPOINTED BROTHER’S QUALIFICATIONS

22. Member of His Household Gets Involved in Serious Wrongdoing: If a brother’s wife or child, including an adult child living in his home, is involved in serious wrongdoing, the body should seek to determine whether the brother was negligent. Was he permissive? Was he alert to provide needed direction, anticipating potential problems? Was he regularly conducting family worship? Was he giving his family needed time and attention? When he became aware of serious wrongdoing, did he promptly inform the body of elders so that they could properly investigate the matter? Did he shield his family from discipline or try to manipulate the elders’ handling of the situation? Does he continue to have the respect and confidence of the congregation as an exemplary family head? If one of his children was guilty of serious wrongdoing, are the other children doing well spiritually? If the brother has done all that can reasonably be expected and especially if he has had spiritual success with others in his household, rejection of his fine direction by one family member would not necessarily disqualify him if he continues to have the respect of the congregation.
23. Allows Disfellowshipped or Disassociated Family Member to Move Into His Home: Is the disfellowshipped or disassociated individual unable to live on his own, or has he moved because it is an easier life? Are there valid reasons for allowing him back in the home, or is it primarily so that the Christian family members can have a measure of association with him? Did the family avoid unnecessary contact with him when he was living outside the home? Is the arrangement short-term or long-term? What is the disfellowshipped or disassociated individual’s conduct? What spiritual effect is he having on others in the household, especially siblings? Is the congregation disturbed by the brother’s decision? Have a number lost respect for him? Similar questions should be considered when an adult child living at home is disfellowshipped or disassociated and allowed to remain in the home.
24. Supports the Marriage of a Baptized Christian to an Unbaptized Person: An appointed man should be loyal to Jehovah’s standards, including the Scriptural command to marry “only in the Lord,” that is, to marry a dedicated, baptized Christian. (1 Cor. 7:39; 2 Cor. 6:14, 15; Titus 1:8; w04 7/1 p. 31; lvs pp. 134-136) This command applies to all Christians, including those who are inactive. Questions about an appointed brother’s qualifications would result if he encouraged or gave unspoken approval to such a marriage, for example, by supporting the courtship or by supporting, attending, or participating in the wedding or wedding reception. A brother’s qualifications should also be reviewed if he did not get involved personally but allowed his wife or others in his household to do so. If an elder or a ministerial servant displays poor judgment in these areas to a degree that it raises serious questions in the minds of others, he may be Scripturally disqualified from serving.
25. Committed a Disfellowshipping Offense Years in the Past and the Matter Was Never Addressed: The body of elders may determine he can continue to serve if the following is true: The immorality or other serious wrongdoing occurred more than a few years ago, and he is genuinely repentant, recognizing that he should have come forward immediately when he sinned. (Perhaps he has even confessed to his sin, seeking help with his guilty conscience.) He has been serving faithfully for many years, has evidence of God’s blessing, and has the respect of the congregation.
26. If the sin occurred before he was appointed as an elder or a ministerial servant, the elders will need to take into consideration the fact that he should have mentioned this possible obstacle to his being qualified when elders met with him just prior to announcing his appointment. Moreover, the nature of the sin may reflect greatly on his qualifications to serve. For example, the sin may involve past child sexual abuse, which means that he would not qualify for many years, if ever.​—See 14:22-24.
27. If the wrongdoing occurred within the past few years while he was serving as an elder or a ministerial servant, he is disqualified from serving as such, not being “free from accusation.” (1 Tim. 3:2, 10; Titus 1:6, 7) Depending on the circumstances, the situation may also need to be handled by a judicial committee.​—See 12:57-59.
28. Viewed Pornography: See 13:5-6.



SITUATIONS THAT MAY REQUIRE A REVIEW OF AN APPOINTED BROTHER’S QUALIFICATIONS

29. Files for Bankruptcy: Have members of the congregation or the community become upset? Did the brother lack self-control in his spending or fail to use reasonable foresight in his business decisions? Does he have a reputation for being honest and responsible? Is he viewed as one who conscientiously tries to pay his debts? Does he feel a moral responsibility to repay canceled debts if former creditors would accept payment? Does he still have the respect of the congregation? Does he continue to have “a fine testimony from outsiders”?​—1 Tim. 3:7; w94 9/15 pp. 30-31.
30. He or a Member of His Household Pursues Higher Education: If an appointed brother, his wife, or his children pursue higher education, does his life pattern show that he puts Kingdom interests first in his life? (w05 10/1 p. 27 par. 6) Does he teach his family members to put Kingdom interests first? Does he respect what has been published by the faithful slave on the dangers of higher education? Do his speech and conduct reveal that he is a spiritual person? How is he viewed by the congregation? Why is he or his family pursuing higher learning? Do they have theocratic goals? Does the pursuit of higher education interfere with regular meeting attendance, meaningful participation in field service, or other theocratic activities?



PROCEDURE FOR REVIEWING AN APPOINTED BROTHER’S QUALIFICATIONS

31. When preparing to review the qualifications of a brother, elders should first research current direction that applies to the issue at hand. Avoid dogmatic viewpoints or quick decisions based solely on personal preferences. (Phil. 4:5) Do not be quick to recommend deletion unless there is a solid basis for doing so. It may be possible to assist the brother to make the needed adjustments and continue to serve. Has the brother served faithfully for many years? What has he done or failed to do that raises questions? How did he react to counsel? Has he had such difficulties in the past, and how did he then respond to efforts to help? Was his wrongdoing really so serious that it requires restricting his privileges? Possibly he just made a mistake, using poor judgment. The congregation in general may still have respect for him and confidence in him as an elder or a ministerial servant. Perhaps the matter is not widely known, if at all. If he realizes that his action was unwise, has learned from his mistake, has a good attitude, and wants to improve, it may be that he can continue to serve.
32. If it is necessary to review an elder’s qualifications, the body of elders should consider the matter, with the brother in question present, using the following procedure:
(1) After seeking Jehovah’s guidance in prayer, make sure all the facts are presented. Maintain a respectful, orderly atmosphere that is conducive to such a discussion.

(2) Allow the brother adequate time to express his feelings and to answer any questions. Ask him for his view of the matters being discussed regarding his qualifications.

(3) Ask the brother to leave the room while the other elders continue their discussion and decide what they will recommend.

(4) Invite the brother back into the room. If the decision is to recommend his deletion, inform him of this and the Scriptural reasons.

(5) Give the brother the opportunity to comment on the decision. It may be necessary for the brother to leave the room again so that the elders can discuss the matter further before making a final decision.


33. If the qualifications of a ministerial servant are being reviewed, the same basic procedure is followed except that rather than having the brother present during the meeting of the body of elders, it would usually be sufficient for two elders to speak with him in advance to hear him out. If the body of elders decides to recommend his deletion, the two elders would meet with him again to inform him of the recommendation and the Scriptural reasons and to give him the opportunity to express himself. Based on his comments, it may be necessary for the elders to discuss the matter further before making a final recommendation.



RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DELETION DURING THE CIRCUIT OVERSEER’S REGULAR VISIT TO A CONGREGATION

34. Recommendations for deletion because of poor judgment not of a judicial nature are usually best submitted during the visit of the circuit overseer rather than between visits. At the start of the circuit overseer’s visit, the elders should provide any background information, including any conclusion that the body of elders may have already reached, that will help the circuit overseer have a complete view of the matter. (See 8:31-33.) During his meeting with the elders later in the week, the circuit overseer will discuss the Scriptural qualifications of the brother. If the circuit overseer agrees with the recommendation, the brother will be informed of his deletion. If the brother agrees with the decision, the circuit overseer will generate a letter of deletion. The announcement of deletion should be made at the next midweek meeting. (See 8:38.) If the brother disagrees with the decision, he will be informed of his right to appeal.​—See 8:39.



RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DELETION BETWEEN THE CIRCUIT OVERSEER’S REGULAR VISITS TO A CONGREGATION

35. If serious questions arise concerning a brother’s qualifications and the next visit of the circuit overseer is not in the near future, the body of elders should follow the procedure outlined in Chapter 8, paragraphs 31-33. If the body of elders decides to recommend a brother’s deletion after reviewing his qualifications, the Congregation Service Committee should send the recommendation to the circuit overseer immediately. The letter to the circuit overseer should provide complete details and indicate whether or not the brother agrees with the recommendation. Meanwhile, the brother will continue to serve as an elder or a ministerial servant. The body of elders will determine what congregation responsibilities he will have in the interim, according to the circumstances. If the circuit overseer agrees with the recommendation and believes it should be processed immediately, he will send a letter of deletion to the body of elders. Upon receipt of the letter, the coordinator of the body of elders should assign two elders to inform the brother of the circuit overseer’s decision. If the brother accepts the circuit overseer’s decision, the announcement should be made at the next midweek meeting. (See 8:38.) If the brother does not accept the decision, he should be informed of his right to appeal, the announcement to the congregation should be held in abeyance, and the coordinator of the body of elders should inform the circuit overseer.​—See 8:39.



RESIGNATIONS

36. If a brother expresses a desire to resign, two elders should first discuss the matter with him. Why does he wish to resign? Is he Scripturally disqualified? If his personal circumstances hinder him from doing what he would like, can the elders be of any assistance and encouragement? Until his circumstances change, perhaps they can lighten his load for a period of time while he continues to serve. If he still feels he wants to resign after this discussion, the Congregation Service Committee should write the circuit overseer and provide full details as to why the brother chose to relinquish his privilege of service. The circuit overseer will send a letter of deletion to the body of elders.​—See 8:35.



DELETIONS FOR JUDICIAL REASONS OR DEATH

37. The Congregation Service Committee should immediately inform the circuit overseer of (1) the deletion of an elder or a ministerial servant because of judicial reproof, disfellowshipping, or disassociation or (2) the death of an elder or a ministerial servant. For deletions resulting from judicial reproof, disfellowshipping, or disassociation, the information sent to the circuit overseer should include the specific judicial offense and the action taken by the committee. In cases involving judicial reproof, the circuit overseer will send a letter of deletion to the body of elders. No letter of deletion will be sent in cases of disfellowshipping, disassociation, or death.​—See 8:38.



ANNOUNCEMENTS OF DELETION

38. Announcements of deletion, including those because of resignations, should read as follows: “Brother [name of person] is no longer serving as an elder (a ministerial servant).” When an elder or a ministerial servant moves out of the congregation, an announcement of deletion would not be made. When a brother resigns, an announcement should be made without waiting for the letter of deletion from the circuit overseer. After guilt is clearly established in a judicial matter, an announcement of deletion should be made to the congregation at the next midweek meeting, even if the judicial hearing is not yet completed.



APPEALING DELETIONS

39. If an elder or a ministerial servant disagrees with his deletion by the circuit overseer and wishes to appeal, he should immediately write a brief letter to the Service Department, with a copy to the body of elders and a copy to the circuit overseer, explaining why he disagrees with the deletion. It would be inappropriate to pressure a brother who wishes to appeal not to do so by suggesting, for example, that it would take longer for him to be reappointed or that the branch office would view him negatively. The announcement of deletion should be held in abeyance, and the letter of deletion should be destroyed (if one had been generated). Thereafter, the Service Department will select an experienced circuit overseer who, along with the original circuit overseer, will rehear the entire matter. The two circuit overseers will listen carefully to the brother and the elders and will deal justly and kindly with all involved. After the circuit overseers hearing the appeal reach a joint decision, there is no further right to appeal. If it is decided that the brother should be deleted, the circuit overseer who serves the brother’s congregation will generate a letter of deletion to the body of elders. Upon receipt of the letter of deletion, the announcement of deletion should be made at the next midweek meeting.



CONGREGATION FILE

40. Records related to the appointment and deletion of elders and ministerial servants should be retained indefinitely.​—See 22:19.




