
Chapter Ten
Circuit Overseer





Accommodations and Meals 1-4

Expenses During the Week of the Visit 5-7

Proper Use of Congregation and Circuit Funds 8





ACCOMMODATIONS AND MEALS

1. It is a privilege for the congregation to show genuine hospitality to the circuit overseer and his wife. This enables the circuit overseer to get the most accomplished and to cultivate a warm relationship with the brothers. (Rom. 12:13; 3 John 5, 6) Even if an apartment is provided by the circuit, the circuit overseer may on occasion need to stay locally instead of commuting to a distant apartment. (See Instructions for Circuit Accounting [S-331] for direction regarding circuit apartments.) It is the responsibility of the coordinator of the body of elders or another elder designated by him to ensure by personal observation that clean and suitable accommodations are arranged for the circuit overseer and his wife during the week of his visit. If there is a need to rent a place for the week, the elders should contact the Service Department.
2. Private accommodations should provide a clean place to store clothes and belongings. A chair, a table, and good lighting are important. Circuit overseers need adequate time to themselves and sufficient rest. The coordinator of the body of elders or another elder designated by him should ask the circuit overseer if he or his wife have any allergies or health problems that might affect the selection of accommodations. Additionally, it is best to avoid homes where there are family problems or where a family member has a serious illness requiring specialized attention.
3. Midday meals are fine occasions for upbuilding conversations, for forming close friendships, and even for shepherding. Thus, when visiting congregations, it is preferred that circuit overseers accept the hospitality of the local brothers as arranged by the elders. The elders should use good judgment when selecting those who will serve as hosts for the midday meal. Circuit overseers deeply appreciate the congregation’s hospitality. Wholesome, nourishing food enables them to feel well physically and to keep up with their schedule. The circuit overseer may decide whether he will accept invitations for other meals.
4. It is beneficial when the coordinator of the body of elders asks the circuit overseer at the end of his visit about the accommodations. It is not necessary to have the circuit overseer stay in a different home each time he visits the congregation.



EXPENSES DURING THE WEEK OF THE VISIT

5. Circuit overseers generally incur some expenses during the week of the visit. Such expenses may include food expenses, routine office expenses, transportation expenses that are not covered by the branch office, and certain moderate personal expenses. (See Instructions for Congregation Accounting [S-27] and Instructions for Circuit Accounting [S-331] for details on how circuit overseers are reimbursed.) At no time should the circuit overseer and his wife be a financial burden to any congregation.​—2 Cor. 11:9.
6. The circuit overseer will be considerate and discerning in submitting his expenses. Some personal expenses could be covered by the monthly allowance from the branch office or from personal contributions he may have received from individuals in the congregation. Other personal expenses, such as clothing, cosmetics, vitamins, over-the-counter drugs, insurance for personal property, or life insurance would not be submitted for reimbursement. Rather, they should be covered by the circuit overseer’s personal funds. A circuit overseer should not solicit funds from individuals.
7. If Internet or mobile telephone service is used to communicate with congregations and with the branch office, the expense incurred may be submitted for reimbursement. However, Internet or mobile telephone service beyond what is needed to communicate with congregations and the branch office would be covered by the circuit overseer as a personal expense, as would expenses related to Internet or mobile telephone service for the wife of a circuit overseer.



PROPER USE OF CONGREGATION AND CIRCUIT FUNDS

8. Congregation and circuit funds should not be used to make monetary gifts to circuit overseers or visiting speakers beyond their actual expenses. Likewise, it would be inappropriate for individuals to solicit money from brothers and sisters and then provide this as a gift to a circuit overseer. (2 Cor. 8:20) Nevertheless, if someone desires to make a heartfelt contribution to a circuit overseer, that is his prerogative and is a private matter that need not concern others.​—2 Cor. 9:7.




