
Chapter Two
Congregation Service Committee




1. The Congregation Service Committee works under the direction of the body of elders and consists of the coordinator of the body of elders, the secretary, and the service overseer. If a member of the service committee is absent, another elder may substitute. Certain responsibilities are delegated to the service committee to handle. These elders seek to make decisions that are in line with Scriptural and theocratic direction and that harmonize with the thinking of the other elders. These brothers do not function apart from the body, and their opinions do not carry more weight than those of the other elders. The service committee uses good judgment in determining when it would be wise to confer with the other elders. For example, if unusual factors are involved or if the service committee is unsure of the thinking of the body, the entire body of elders should discuss the matter and make a decision.​—See 1:5; 9:4; 23:4; od pp. 41-43.
2. In congregations in which there are not enough elders to fulfill the responsibilities of the service committee, qualified ministerial servants may substitute as members of the service committee. For example, they may be authorized to sign applications or letters of introduction as long as the documents do not contain sensitive or confidential information. If sensitive or confidential information needs to be conveyed in writing, the correspondence should be prepared and signed only by the elders. If there are no elders in the congregation, this could be cared for by an elder in a neighboring congregation who is familiar with the situation or by the circuit overseer.
3. The responsibilities of the service committee include the following:
(1) Determining the locations and meeting times for all meetings for field service and assigning publishers, including inactive ones, to field service groups after consulting with the group overseers involved.​—See 1:2.8; 25:14.

(2) Assigning publishers to conduct Bible studies with inactive publishers who temporarily need spiritual help.​—See 25:16.

(3) Determining whether it is advisable for another publisher to conduct a Bible study with the child of a Christian parent. When such approval is given, all elders should be informed.

(4) Approving publishers to report field service in 15-minute increments.​—See 22:14.

(5) Approving publishers who have special needs for convention accommodations.

(6) Signing correspondence on behalf of the body of elders.​—See 22:1-8.

(7) Sending a letter of recommendation to the appropriate branch office when a publisher plans to move and wishes to obtain information regarding congregations having a need for assistance.​—od pp. 100-101 par. 9.

(8) Making the final decision on public witnessing locations, determining what public witnessing equipment will be used and where it will be stored, and deciding which publishers are approved to participate in public witnessing.​—See 23:4-16.

(9) Approving publishers to participate in prison witnessing as well as witnessing at schools, universities, nursing homes, and retirement homes.​—See 23:17-18; 28:1-20.

(10) Approving the appointment and deletion of regular pioneers. Processing applications for service privileges such as auxiliary pioneering. Reviewing the field service activity of the pioneers who did not meet the yearly hour requirement.​—See 9:17-18.

(11) Approving use of the Kingdom Hall for weddings and funerals.​—See 27:6.

(12) Determining any additional jw.org roles assigned to elders and ministerial servants.​—See Instructions for JW.ORG Local Domain Administrators (S-135).

(13) Determining how to handle material in the confidential file when the brothers who handled the matter are unavailable or no longer qualified.​—See 22:26.

(14) Arranging for elders to visit or write a letter to addresses of households that have asked that no further visits be made.​—See 23:21.

(15) Developing, along with the field service group overseers, a plan to assist those with special needs in times of disaster or emergency.​—See Chapter 26.

(16) Developing a plan to protect congregation records in the event of an impending disaster.​—See Chapter 26.


4. At times, the service committee or the body of elders is called upon to determine whether a publisher is “in good standing.” In such cases, the elders must weigh the factors and circumstances that are unique to each situation. If an individual is not under any judicial or branch-imposed restrictions, if he is not bringing reproach on the congregation, and if his receiving a certain privilege would not raise serious questions in the minds of others or be a cause of stumbling, the elders may determine that he is in good standing. By way of contrast, being “exemplary” involves more than simply being in good standing. An individual whose conduct and worship are considered worthy of imitation is exemplary. His meeting attendance, share in the ministry, family life, choices of entertainment, dress and grooming, and so forth are good examples for others. An individual must be exemplary to represent the congregation in prayer, to serve as an auxiliary or regular pioneer, or to enjoy other special privileges.




