
Chapter Eighteen
Disassociations




1. Whereas disfellowshipping is an action taken by a judicial committee against an unrepentant wrongdoer, disassociation is an action taken by a baptized member of the congregation who no longer desires to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. (1 John 2:19; od pp. 142-143) In cases of disassociation, the body of elders should appoint a committee (not judicial) of three elders to consider the facts.
2. A judicial committee should discontinue its handling of a case as a judicial offense if the accused person makes known his decision to disassociate himself. However, at no time should the elders ask the accused if he desires to disassociate himself. If the elders are handling a particularly difficult case and there is a question about whether the person has disassociated himself, it would be best for the committee to contact the Service Department for further direction. If an individual is determined to disassociate himself, then the committee ought to prepare a summary of the alleged offense(s) and the evidence of such. This would be kept along with information regarding the disassociation. If the person later requests reinstatement, these matters would need to be considered with him at that time.​—See 22:21-27.
3. Actions that may indicate disassociation include the following:
(1) Making Known a Firm Decision to Be Known No Longer as One of Jehovah’s Witnesses: If the individual agrees to meet, a committee (not judicial) should first try to speak with him and provide spiritual assistance. (Gal. 6:1) Does he really desire to resign from being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, or does he simply no longer want to associate actively with the congregation? Is the desire to disassociate prompted by doubts or discouragement? If he is adamant in his decision that he no longer be considered one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, he should be asked to put this in writing and sign it. If he does not, then the witnesses to his oral statement should prepare a brief report for the confidential files and sign it.

(2) Joining Another Religious Organization and Making Known His Intention to Remain With It: If it is learned that a person has taken up association with another religion or religious organization and thus is identified with it, a committee (not judicial) should be selected to investigate the matter and endeavor to provide spiritual assistance. If the individual has joined another religion or religious organization and intends to remain with it, he has disassociated himself.

(3) Willingly and Unrepentantly Accepting Blood: If someone willingly accepts a blood transfusion, perhaps because of being under extreme pressure, a committee (not judicial) should obtain the facts and determine the individual’s attitude. If he is repentant, the committee would provide spiritual assistance in the spirit of Galatians 6:1 and Jude 22, 23. Since he is spiritually weak, he would not qualify for special privileges for a period of time. In some cases, it may also be necessary to remove other privileges, such as commenting at congregation meetings and presenting student assignments on the midweek meeting. Depending on the circumstances, the committee may also need to arrange for an announcement to the congregation at a midweek meeting: “The elders have handled a matter having to do with [name of person]. You will be glad to know that spiritual shepherds are endeavoring to render assistance.” On the other hand, if the elders on the committee determine that he is unrepentant, they should announce his disassociation.

(4) Taking a Course That Violates Christian Neutrality: (Isa. 2:4; John 15:17-19; lvs pp. 60-63, 244) If he joins a nonneutral organization, he has disassociated himself. If his employment makes him a clear accomplice in nonneutral activities, he should generally be allowed six months to make an adjustment. If he does not, he has disassociated himself.​—See lvs pp. 204-206.


4. As soon as possible after the hearing, a brief summary of the case should be prepared and signed by the committee and the Notification of Disfellowshipping or Disassociation (S-77) form should be filled out and submitted to the Service Department. (See 22:21-27.) The body of elders should be informed of the disassociation.
5. The coordinator of the body of elders should approve the announcement before an elder reads it to the congregation. It should read as follows: “[Name of person] is no longer one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
6. Since disassociation is an action taken by the publisher rather than the committee, there is no arrangement for an appeal. Therefore, the announcement of disassociation can be made at the next midweek meeting without waiting seven days.




