
Chapter Twenty-three
Field Ministry





Congregation Territory Assignment 1-3

Witnessing in Public Places 4-16

Selecting Suitable Locations 4-5

Site Permission and Insurance Coverage 6-7

Public Witnessing Equipment 8-9

Determining Who May Participate 10-11

Providing Practical Training 12-13

Displaying Literature 14

Use of Electronic Devices 15

Special Metropolitan Public Witnessing 16



Schools and Universities 17

Nursing Homes and Retirement Homes 18

Harbor Witnessing 19

Prison Witnessing 20

Witnessing Difficulties 21-23

Showing Consideration for Those Involved in Additional Theocratic Assignments 24-25





CONGREGATION TERRITORY ASSIGNMENT

1. The body of elders takes a keen interest in the progress of the preaching and teaching work in the congregation’s assigned territory. (Acts 10:42; od pp. 81-97). The service overseer will be helped to care for his assignment effectively if he has the support of his fellow elders.​—See Chapter 5.
2. The branch office provides a Congregation Territory Assignment (S-54) to each congregation. Local circumstances should be considered when determining the size of individual territories used for house-to-house work. For example, individual territories of 200 to 300 homes may be practical if the territories can be worked thoroughly within four months. Congregations having very limited territory might reduce the size of individual territories to 50 to 75 homes.​—od pp. 90-92.
3. The circuit overseer may provide helpful suggestions to assist the congregation to give a thorough witness to everyone in its assigned territory. However, if reasonable efforts have been made and it is not possible for the congregation to cover its territory and sections of it have not been worked for at least two years, the circuit overseer may recommend to the branch office that some portions of the territory be assigned to nearby congregations or listed as unassigned territory.



WITNESSING IN PUBLIC PLACES

4. Selecting Suitable Locations: After consulting with the other elders, the Congregation Service Committee will make the final decision as to specific locations for public witnessing. Primary consideration should be given to areas of high pedestrian traffic that are most visible, taking local regulations into consideration. Possible locations include transportation hubs, public squares, parks, busy streets, shopping malls, university campuses, airports, and locations of annual events. (km 7/13 pp. 4-6) If the elders become aware of an opportunity to set up a literature display at a large event, such as a national or international book fair, they should contact the Service Department for further direction.
5. Locations selected for public witnessing must be within the congregation’s territory boundaries. Where the territories of different-language congregations overlap, the service overseers should communicate with one another so as to accomplish the most good while not overwhelming pedestrians or impeding access to businesses.
6. Site Permission and Insurance Coverage: In some public locations, permission may be needed from a manager or secular authority before setting up a literature display. The service overseer or someone else designated by the body of elders should determine what may be legally required, if anything, in the way of permissions, permits, and insurance coverage. Any application to use a mobile cart or to set up a table or kiosk to display literature must be filled out in the name of an individual publisher, not in the name of the congregation, any corporation used by the organization, or “Jehovah’s Witnesses.” If a small administrative fee is needed in order to acquire space in a public area, it is to be paid by the individual publisher, not the congregation. Publishers should carefully review any such applications to see what responsibility they are taking upon themselves with respect to liability. Publishers who apply to distribute literature at these areas are doing so on their own initiative as part of their personal ministry.
7. At times, administrators or managers have waived insurance requirements when the voluntary and non-commercial nature of our Bible educational work was explained to them. Any meeting that is held with a location’s manager should be informal, such as one between neighbors in a community, and not a discussion of legal rights. If this meeting is unsuccessful or an excessive fee is required, the service committee should identify other public areas within their congregation’s territory where public witnessing could be effective.
8. Public Witnessing Equipment: The Congregation Service Committee will determine what equipment (including posters) will be used and where it will be stored. Only artwork approved by the branch office should be displayed. Poster artwork may be rotated periodically so that a variety of topics are featured throughout the month.
9. Public witnessing equipment can be requested in the same way that publications are requested. The Public Witnessing Supplies (S-80) form contains sample pictures and descriptions for the standard carts, stands, magnetic boards, posters, and so forth. The equipment will remain the property of the congregation. Care should be taken to request only equipment that will be put to good use by publishers who have been trained in its use and that can be financially supported by the congregation. The congregation may be informed that the cost of the public witnessing equipment will be covered by their contributions to the worldwide work.
10. Determining Who May Participate: The Congregation Service Committee will select qualified baptized publishers to participate in this feature of the ministry. Those selected should be ones who present themselves in a dignified way. Their appearance and dress should be professional, well-arranged, and modest. They should demonstrate discernment and a willingness to witness in different public settings, should enjoy and promote good relations with others, should be committed to taking the assignment seriously, and should be willing to cooperate with the body of elders. If a parent is approved to participate in public witnessing, his well-behaved minor child (baptized or not) may accompany him. The service committee should use good judgment in deciding whether a mature baptized minor may be approved to participate in public witnessing.
11. If it is possible and practical, the service overseer or someone designated by the body of elders should organize a midweek and weekend schedule for each selected location. There is an advantage to having the literature displays set up in the same location, on the same days, and at the same times. They serve as a constant feature readily recognized by those in the area.
12. Providing Practical Training: The service overseer or someone designated by the body of elders will provide the initial training to field service group overseers, their assistants, and publishers chosen to participate. The training should be based on Public Witnessing Guidelines (S-148), and a copy of that document should be provided to those participating. The group overseer and his assistant will monitor and assist publishers, and if additional training is needed, the group overseer and the service overseer will provide reminders.
13. Publishers should widely publicize jw.org and should be trained how to highlight its features. For example, those who hesitate to converse with us or accept literature may be more inclined to investigate our website. (km 12/12 pp. 5-6) Publishers should know how to help an interested person access material in his language on jw.org, including sign-language videos that would appeal to the deaf and audio recordings that would appeal to the visually impaired.
14. Displaying Literature: Taking into account local circumstances and interests, the service overseer will determine the quantity of literature to be displayed. Discernment is needed to ensure that literature will not be wasted or misused. (km 12/11 p. 2) The display should be neat and dignified. Experience has shown that a simple, appealing arrangement of literature is best. In many areas, it would be appropriate to feature just a few publications from the Teaching Toolbox that have wide appeal. During the annual campaigns for the Memorial and for the convention, the You Are Invited poster may be displayed and invitations distributed. Magazines and other literature in frequently-requested languages may be kept on hand. If more literature is needed than the quantity allowed for request on jw.org, the Shipping Department should be contacted. While Bibles should not be displayed on public witnessing equipment, they may be kept on hand to offer to individuals who request one or who demonstrate sincere interest in the truth. Additionally, a modest supply of the Return to Jehovah brochure should be kept on hand (though not displayed) for the benefit of any inactive ones who are encountered.
15. Use of Electronic Devices: If practical, a flat screen monitor connected to a portable electronic device may be used at a literature table or kiosk. The monitor could be used to display approved public witnessing posters, to demonstrate features of jw.org, or to play a short video, such as Why Study the Bible?
16. Special Metropolitan Public Witnessing: If this separate initiative has been arranged in your area, additional information will be provided to the circuit overseers and congregations so that all may work together in an orderly and organized manner.​—km 7/13 pp. 4-6.



SCHOOLS AND UNIVERSITIES

17. Before setting up a literature display at a school or university, it is usually best to approach the school principal, headmaster, or dean. Those making such visits should be forthright in identifying themselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses. Many educators gladly receive and make good use of our literature, videos, and online material once they are made aware of their availability and their educational value. (g 1/09 p. 32; g 8/07 p. 32) Schools or organizations for the deaf or the blind may especially appreciate knowing that Jehovah’s Witnesses provide literature in formats that may benefit such individuals. The service overseer may train well-qualified publishers approved by the Congregation Service Committee to visit schools and universities.



NURSING HOMES AND RETIREMENT HOMES

18. Some publishers have had success in reaching elderly persons by approaching the manager or activities director of the facility and volunteering their time to encourage residents who might enjoy Bible reading and discussion of Bible accounts. It may be explained that volunteers from the congregation would be pleased to read Bible-based material, to conduct a free weekly Bible study, or to show Bible-based videos to anyone who wishes to attend. Oftentimes, the staff, volunteers, family members of patients, and other visitors will join in the study. The service overseer may train well-qualified publishers approved by the Congregation Service Committee to make such visits.​—km 6/14 pp. 2-4.



HARBOR WITNESSING

19. Harbor witnessing is a specialized ministry that requires specific direction from the branch office. If there is a major harbor within a congregation’s territory and the elders have not yet received such direction, they should inform the Service Department of the name, location, and size of the port.



PRISON WITNESSING

20. See Chapter 28.



WITNESSING DIFFICULTIES

21. Individuals have a right to privacy and the right to prohibit anyone, including publishers, from entering their home or property. If a householder insists that no further visits to his home be made by Jehovah’s Witnesses, we respect his wishes. (Matt. 7:12; 10:13) A dated note should be placed in the territory record so that publishers working the territory in the future do not call at that address. Annually, the service overseer should provide the Congregation Service Committee the addresses of such households. The service committee should assign elders to visit or send a letter to these addresses every two years to confirm the person’s wishes. The body of elders can decide if the circumstances in a particular case make it advisable to handle things differently.
22. If a manager insists that no further visits be made by Jehovah’s Witnesses to a subdivision or an apartment complex, publishers should leave immediately. Thereafter, the elders should contact the Legal Department. If a government official seeks to impose some restriction on our ministry, the elders should contact the Legal Department. In such situations, publishers should always respond in a polite and respectful manner.​—Rom. 12:18; 1 Pet. 3:15.
23. If violent opposition arises, the elders should contact the Legal Department. Elders should be guided by Bible principles and direction from the branch office. (Matt. 5:44; 10:11-23; Rom. 12:17-21) Publishers may need to carry out their ministry very discreetly. (Acts 5:29) The elders should help publishers avoid unnecessary problems.​—Prov. 14:15; 17:14.



SHOWING CONSIDERATION FOR THOSE INVOLVED IN ADDITIONAL THEOCRATIC ASSIGNMENTS

24. Some brothers and sisters serve as commuter Bethelites, remote volunteers, or Bethel consultants. Others assist with construction and maintenance of Kingdom Halls, Assembly Halls, and Bethel facilities. Some brothers serve on Hospital Liaison Committees, Patient Visitation Groups, Disaster Relief Committees, or Convention Committees. The field service and congregation activity of those who care for these and other approved assignments in support of the organization may be affected. Even if such ones are not regular pioneers and thus do not receive hour credit for this work, it would be helpful for them to include in the “Comments” section of their Field Service Report (S-4) a description of the theocratic responsibilities they cared for during that month. The secretary should make a note of this in the “Remarks” column of the Congregation’s Publisher Record (S-21). The hours spent working on an approved assignment should not be included with the field service report submitted to the branch office. The figure recorded in the “Hours” column of the Congregation’s Publisher Record should reflect only the actual hours spent in field service.​—See Chapter 9, paragraphs 11-13, regarding how to note hour credits for regular pioneers involved in other theocratic activity.
25. Elders can show their appreciation for those who care for extra theocratic assignments by filling in for them when they must be away and not being critical of their reduced field service activity. Consideration along these lines should also be extended when reviewing brothers’ qualifications for recommendation as elders and ministerial servants.




