
Chapter Twenty-four
Foreign-Language Field





Forming Pregroups, Groups, and Congregations 2-5

Pregroups 2

Groups 3-4

Congregations 5



Territory Coverage 6-10

Host Congregation 11-12

Meetings 13-23

Pregroups 13

Groups 14-15

Location 16

Recordings and Audio/​Video Tie-In 17-18

Interpretation 19

Recording Attendance 20

Songs 21

Memorial 22

During the Visit of the Circuit Overseer 23



Assisting Publishers 24-26

Circuit Assemblies and Conventions 27

Signs, Yeartext, and Invitations 28


1. Our objective is to reach everyone possible with the Kingdom message and to make disciples. (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) Therefore, it is good for bodies of elders to understand and cooperate with arrangements made to support the foreign-language field.​—od pp. 92-96.



FORMING PREGROUPS, GROUPS, AND CONGREGATIONS

2. Pregroups: A foreign-language pregroup consists of a number of publishers who are preaching in a foreign language even though a qualified elder or ministerial servant is not available to conduct a weekly meeting in that language. The branch office may recognize a congregation as hosting a pregroup if the following requirements are met:
(1) A sizable population of people in the area speak a language other than the language of the congregation.

(2) At least a few publishers know the target language or are willing to learn the language.

(3) The body of elders is willing to take the lead in organizing the preaching in that language.


If the body of elders desires to host a pregroup, the elders should consult with the circuit overseer. He may be aware of other congregations attempting to preach to people of that language and may provide valuable information that would help in determining which congregation would be in the best position to host a pregroup. Once that congregation has been determined, the elders may send a letter to the Service Department and request approval to be formally recognized as a congregation hosting a foreign-language pregroup.
3. Groups: The branch office may recognize a congregation as hosting a foreign-language group if the following requirements are met:
(1) There are sufficient interest and potential for growth in a particular language field.

(2) At least a small number of publishers speak the language or are learning the language.

(3) A qualified elder or ministerial servant is available to take the lead and conduct at least one weekly meeting​—or one portion of a weekly meeting, such as a public talk or a Watchtower Study—​in that language.​—See 24:14-15.

(4) The body of elders is willing to host the group.


When these requirements are met to a reasonable degree, the body of elders should send a letter with complete details to the Service Department requesting formal recognition as a congregation hosting a foreign-language group. The elder or ministerial servant taking the lead would be considered the “group overseer” or “group servant” responsible for taking care of the group.
4. However, the group does not function independently. It works under the oversight of the body of elders. The elders should provide balanced direction and show initiative in caring for the group’s needs, including training publishers in the group to take on additional theocratic responsibilities. If the group is ever dissolved, the elders should notify the Service Department.
5. Congregations: The circuit overseer helps the elders to prepare the necessary paperwork and to verify that it is correct and complete before he submits it to the Service Department. There should be sufficient population in the target language to allow the publishers to have a meaningful ministry. The publishers involved must be spiritually strong and be able to keep the congregation functioning actively. There is no specific number of elders and ministerial servants needed to form a congregation. However, the appointed brothers must be able to provide the necessary spiritual oversight and to take the lead in the preaching work. Any who are not native speakers should work diligently to become conversant in the language of the congregation.



TERRITORY COVERAGE

6. The elders should be modest in deciding how much territory a pregroup or group should work. The elders should direct the publishers and pioneers to focus on the areas where there is a high concentration of those who speak the target language. In addition, since new ones will need to be directed to the host congregation in order to progress, areas within a reasonable traveling distance to the Kingdom Hall should receive the greatest attention. Once or twice a year, the elders may arrange to work more distant areas. The elders should direct the coverage of the territory so that the publishers and pioneers use their strength and valuable resources productively.​—1 Cor. 9:26.
7. The search work is often a key to growth. As noted in the article “Before Preaching, You May Need to Search” in the July 2012 Our Kingdom Ministry, pages 4-7, the search work involves making inquiries to locate those who speak a specific language. Implementing the suggestions in the article will lead to a more productive ministry.
8. A pregroup or group may engage in the preaching work outside the territory of its host congregation. The service overseer of the host congregation would take the lead in contacting the service overseers of nearby congregations that have a large number in their territory who speak the target language. However, the elders should determine the number of congregations he will contact. (See 24:6.) Good communication between the bodies of elders and the circuit overseers involved will ensure that all language groups receive a fine witness.
9. When a pregroup or group is ready to begin preaching in another area, the service overseer may contact the body of elders of the congregation there to request help in locating those who speak the target language.
10. Congregation territory assignments in multilingual areas are made according to language. The direction in chapter 9 of the Organized book should be followed when working the territory. At times there will be some overlapping of our efforts​—for example, when family members of the same household speak different languages. By concentrating our ministry on people who best understand or prefer the language of the congregation we attend, we can accomplish much good.



HOST CONGREGATION

11. The body of elders that hosts a pregroup or group must be willing to take an active interest in developing the target-language field. Generally, the host congregation should be in the proximity of the target-language community. Such a location enables the publishers to make the most of their field service time and makes it easier for interested persons to attend the meetings. Other factors to consider are the location of the publishers, the availability of a suitable Kingdom Hall, and access to public transportation. At times, an adjustment may need to be made as to which congregation serves as the host congregation. If so, the bodies of elders involved should send a joint letter to the Service Department explaining why the change is needed and stating that the bodies of elders are in agreement with the change.
12. The body of elders should be reasonable in what they expect of the publishers who are expending themselves in support of the group. For example, it would be a kindness to consider reducing the number of meeting parts that appointed brothers in the group present on the program of the host congregation. Consideration and mutual understanding will help all appointed brothers in the congregation to work together in carrying the load of responsibility.​—Gal. 6:2, 5.



MEETINGS

13. Pregroups: Though a pregroup does not hold weekly meetings, the body of elders of the host congregation may arrange for meetings​—or a portion of a weekly meeting, such as a public talk and/​or a Watchtower Study—​to be held periodically in the language of the pregroup. This would be helpful in determining the extent of support for meetings and the potential for growth in that language field.
14. Groups: In addition to the weekly meeting​—or one portion of a weekly meeting—​held by a foreign-language group, the body of elders of the host congregation may determine whether other portions of congregation meetings should be added and how often the meetings should be held during the month. For example, a group may hold a weekly Life and Ministry Meeting but arrange a public talk once or twice a month.
15. A group should follow the meeting schedule as outlined in the target-language edition of the Life and Ministry Meeting Workbook. If the Life and Ministry Meeting Workbook is not produced in the target language, the elders may request a Congregation Bible Study schedule from the Service Department. The only portion of the Life and Ministry Meeting that a foreign-language group should not handle on its own is the local needs part when it has been specifically chosen by the body of elders for the host congregation.
16. Location: It is preferred that the meetings of pregroups and groups be held in an auxiliary room while the host congregation is conducting its meeting. In this way, those in the pregroup or group will benefit from association with the host congregation. However, if there is an exceptional circumstance and the elders feel that such is not possible, the meeting of the pregroup or group may be held at another time, preferably at the Kingdom Hall. In such cases, all the bodies of elders using the Kingdom Hall must give their approval. (See 21:33.) If the meeting of the pregroup or group must be held at another time, publishers in the pregroup or group are expected to attend the host congregation’s regularly scheduled meetings.
17. Recordings and Audio/​Video Tie-In: It is preferable for congregation meetings to be conducted locally. However, if this is not yet possible, a pregroup, group, or small or isolated congregation may request approval from their circuit overseer to view recorded meetings or portions of meetings in the target language, preferably using JW Stream. (In most cases, the meetings available on JW Stream will be recorded on Monday evening and Saturday morning. Thus, pregroups, groups, and small or isolated congregations desiring to make use of such recordings should hold their meetings at times that will allow them to view the current week’s recordings.) The circuit overseer will approve which pregroups, groups, or small or isolated congregations in his circuit will view such recordings and to what extent. (See 24:13-15.) Some congregations may request approval to use the provision occasionally for the public talk. If a small or isolated congregation is approved to view recorded meetings periodically, it should strive to conduct all of its own meetings as soon as possible. Although recordings may be used for the meetings, prayers should be said locally.
18. If recordings of congregation meetings are not available, a pregroup, group, or small or isolated congregation may request approval from the circuit overseer to tie in to the meetings or portions of meetings of a congregation holding meetings in the target language. (See 24:13-15.) The circuit overseer will approve which pregroups, groups, or small or isolated congregations in his circuit will make use of this provision and to what extent. With the exception of sign-language congregations or groups, congregations transmitting video should transmit only what transpires on the stage. Footage of the audience or any other areas of the venue should not be transmitted. It is important for the body of elders of a host congregation to maintain good communication with those in the pregroup or group and with the body of elders of the congregation transmitting the meetings in the target language.
19. Interpretation: Generally, simultaneous interpretation at the congregation level for languages other than sign language is not recommended. (For direction on sign-language interpretation see Chapter 20, paragraphs 28-35.) Some who are not fluent in the language of the congregation find it helpful to prepare well for the meetings in their mother tongue to the extent possible before listening to the meetings. Others may appreciate help in locating certain Bible texts. Publishers who know the target language may also share the highlights of the meetings at another appropriate time. However, if the body of elders feels there is merit in having some of the program interpreted simultaneously, good judgment is essential. If the number of qualified interpreters is limited, it may not be possible to interpret each part. The parts to be interpreted and who will interpret them should be assigned well in advance. An auxiliary room should be used so as not to distract others. Interpreters should be exemplary baptized publishers.
20. Recording Attendance: The attendance of the meetings of a pregroup or group is included with that of the host congregation in the Congregation Meeting Attendance Record (S-88). The only exception to this is if streaming or recordings are used at a time different from the host congregation’s meetings. In such cases, the attendance would not be included with the host congregation’s, since it is expected that the pregroup or group would have also attended the host congregation’s meeting. Neither would the attendance of a pregroup or group that tied in to another congregation’s meeting be included with the transmitting congregation’s attendance. In any case, a separate record of the attendance of a pregroup or group may be kept so that the elders can review its progress.
21. Songs: In rare instances when the song being sung in the main auditorium is not available in the language of the pregroup or group, it may be possible to turn off the sound from the main auditorium and an alternate song may be selected and sung in the auxiliary room, provided it does not cause disturbance for those singing in the main auditorium.​—od pp. 95-96 par. 44.
22. Memorial: If a qualified speaker is available, the body of elders of the host congregation may make an arrangement to present the Memorial talk in the language of the pregroup or group.​—See Chapter 20, paragraph 10, for direction on use of recordings of the Memorial talk if a qualified speaker is not available.
23. During the Visit of the Circuit Overseer: A group may hold its meetings even when the circuit overseer is visiting the host congregation. However, the group will rejoin the host congregation for all of the service talks and the public talk that the circuit overseer presents. Consideration could also be given to simultaneous interpretation of the talks for the benefit of the group.



ASSISTING PUBLISHERS

24. A publisher desiring to support a foreign-language field should be commended and encouraged to count the cost. (Luke 14:28) This may involve learning a new language, adapting to a new culture, and traveling farther from home in order to support preaching arrangements and meetings in the target language. Therefore, elders should encourage publishers to do research in our publications and evaluate matters carefully and prayerfully. For example, family heads must evaluate their children’s needs realistically, putting their children’s spiritual well-being ahead of personal preferences. (1 Cor. 10:24; w17.05 pp. 8-12; w16.10 pp. 13-17) Discussions about what it takes to be successful in the foreign-language field should be positive and realistic. If publishers decide to learn another language, a copy of Suggestions for Publishers Learning Another Language (S-394) should be provided to them.
25. It may require considerable time for a publisher to become conversant in a new language. Many progress when they become fully absorbed in congregation activities. They should be encouraged to participate in the meetings as soon as possible, including making themselves available to present student assignments on the Life and Ministry Meeting. The elders may organize a special reading class. (be p. 285) If appropriate and practical, arrange for qualified publishers who are conversant in the language to work in the ministry with those who are learning the language. Use a simple vocabulary and speak clearly and correctly in your conversations with them. Commend them for their efforts to progress in the language.
26. A publisher who has moved to a foreign-language congregation may need personal assistance if his struggle with the language is impeding his spiritual progress. Is the publisher beginning to comprehend the congregation meetings? Does he participate at the meetings, making brief comments? Does he give understandable presentations in the ministry? Is he staying spiritually strong, cultivating the fruitage of the spirit, and working for the peace of the congregation? The answers to such questions will guide the elders in determining what may need to be recommended to the publisher so that he maintains strong spirituality. In some cases, they may recommend that the publisher consider returning to a congregation in his native tongue.



CIRCUIT ASSEMBLIES AND CONVENTIONS

27. Questions regarding the interpretation of circuit assemblies and conventions or tying in to or making use of recordings of foreign-language circuit assemblies and conventions should be forwarded to the circuit overseer. If approval is given for foreign-language pregroups or groups to view recordings of assemblies or conventions in the target language, it is preferred that these recordings be viewed at the same time and in the same location that their host congregation attends the event, perhaps in an auxiliary room. If this is not possible, the pregroup or group should attend the event with their host congregation and then tie in to or watch a recording of the event in the target language at another time and location.



SIGNS, YEARTEXT, AND INVITATIONS

28. Arrangements can be made for a Kingdom Hall sign to be posted in the language of the group if it is determined that the group is well-established and that it will continue to hold at least one weekly meeting or portion of a meeting at the Kingdom Hall. (km 1/90 p. 8) If possible, the sign listing the schedule for the meeting times of the congregations should also include the meeting schedule of the group. Consideration can be given to displaying the yeartext in that language. (See 21:38.2.) The host congregation may request invitations from the branch office in the language of the group to advertise its weekly meeting(s). The group should not make its own posters or flyers for advertising its meetings.




