
Chapter Twenty-one
Kingdom Halls





Ownership 2-3

Rented Facilities 4

Cleaning 5-7

Cleaning Coordinator 7



Maintenance and Repair 8-14

Maintenance Coordinator 14



Kingdom Hall Operating Committee 15-20

Expenses 21

Upgrades and Minor Renovation 22

Major Renovation and New Construction 23-24

Inspections 25

Security 26

Safety 27-29

Incidents 30-32

Meeting Times 33

Information Board 34

Phone Answering System 35

Internet Service 36

Video Equipment 37-38

Library 39-40

JW Broadcasting Monthly Programs 41

Use of Congregation Property 42

Kingdom Hall Dedications 43


1. The branch office is responsible for approving and overseeing the construction of new Kingdom Halls and for ensuring that existing Kingdom Halls are being maintained properly and fully utilized. Direction regarding these matters is provided to congregations through the Local Design/​Construction Department (LDC). Representatives of the LDC may be used to inspect and gather information on existing and potential meeting places. The local elders set a fine example for all in the congregation when they take the lead in coordinating and being personally involved in the cleaning, maintenance, and security of the Kingdom Hall.



OWNERSHIP

2. A Kingdom Hall is dedicated to the worship of Jehovah. Whether the property title, or deed, is held in the name of a local corporation or by means of a trustee arrangement or it is held in the name of a legal entity managed by the branch office, no congregation should conclude that it “owns” the Kingdom Hall. However, it is the responsibility of the congregations using the property to care for it and see that it is used in harmony with Kingdom interests.
3. As many as three or four congregations may be assigned by the branch office to use the same Kingdom Hall auditorium in order to make full use of the facility and to keep expenses to a minimum. The branch office will generally correspond with only one of the congregations using the facility regarding legal, property, and related matters. Usually, this contact congregation holds the documents related to the Kingdom Hall and the property on which it is located. This is for practical reasons only and does not provide a basis for the contact congregation to make unilateral decisions related to the use and upkeep of the Kingdom Hall.



RENTED FACILITIES

4. If a congregation needs to rent a facility for long-term use as a Kingdom Hall, the elders should contact the Local Design/​Construction Department. If a congregation needs to rent a facility for one-time use, such as for the Memorial, the elders should follow the instructions provided in Renting Facilities for Theocratic Events (TO-19).



CLEANING

5. The Kingdom Hall should be cleaned according to a regular schedule, depending on its use and needs. This usually involves a light cleaning after each meeting, a more thorough cleaning each week, and a major cleaning at least once a year. This should be carried out by volunteers from within the congregations meeting in the Kingdom Hall. All may have a share, including children who are properly supervised.
6. A schedule for Kingdom Hall cleaning should be posted on the information board. Some congregations choose to rotate the weekly cleaning arrangements according to field service groups. The thorough and major cleanings should include both the interior and exterior of the buildings, as well as any storage, parking, and landscaped areas. If snow removal or other seasonal maintenance or cleaning is required, this should be well-coordinated. Care should be taken to ensure the safety of all involved in this work.​—See 21:27-29.
7. Cleaning Coordinator: Each body of elders should assign an elder or ministerial servant to serve as the cleaning coordinator for the congregation. He is not responsible for performing all of the cleaning work himself, nor does he have the authority to make decisions that should be made by the body of elders. He should prepare cleaning schedules and ensure that adequate cleaning supplies and simple written instructions are kept on hand. He should ensure that appropriate safety equipment is on hand and is being used and that publishers have been trained to clean safely. He should monitor the cleanliness of the Kingdom Hall and provide kind reminders as needed.



MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR

8. A preventive maintenance program can lengthen the life of the Kingdom Hall and equipment. Regular maintenance also shows respect for the sanctity of life, since a lack of maintenance can result in unsafe conditions that put those who use the Kingdom Hall at risk. (See 21:27-29.) A meeting place that is well-maintained reflects favorably on Jehovah God. Therefore, each congregation should take seriously the responsibility to care for preventive maintenance and repairs.
9. It is expected that the majority of the maintenance and repair work will be done by local volunteers in the congregations using the Kingdom Hall and that the costs for such work will be covered by the congregations. If local volunteers are not available to coordinate or safely carry out the work, the elders should seek the direction of the Local Design/​Construction Department (LDC) before any work is started. Any work that will cost more than the average Kingdom Hall operating expenses for three months requires the approval of the LDC.​—See Appendix A.
10. When it is necessary to hire a contractor to perform a service and the cost is such that the approval of the LDC is not needed, the elders should obtain written estimates and signed written agreements. The details of the estimates or bids should not be shared with others wishing to perform the work. The elders should verify that the contractor has the skill necessary to complete the work and that he has the insurance and other legal protection needed. This should be done whether or not the contractor is a Witness. The congregation should consider requesting a copy of the contractor’s certificate of insurance to verify this coverage before the work commences and, if possible, should request to be named as an additional insured on the contractor’s insurance policy. If questions arise regarding the contract wording or specific local requirements, the Branch Risk Management Desk in the Accounting Department should be contacted for assistance. In most cases, it is advisable for a dependable local brother to be on hand to monitor the work of contractors.
11. The body of elders should be enthusiastic about and supportive of the maintenance training and the preventive maintenance program provided by the LDC so that all in the congregation are encouraged to take an interest in caring for the Kingdom Hall.
12. Immediate action should be taken if moisture-related problems are found. Left unchecked, moisture from water leaks, condensation, infiltration, or flooding can cause extensive damage. All leaks (affecting pipes, roofs, and so forth) must be repaired immediately by someone qualified in this field. If the affected area is not cleaned and dried within 48 hours, further problems may result. In high humidity areas, the HVAC system may have to be set to run for a period each day, even when the hall is unoccupied. This will aid in drying the air and preventing dampness and mold. If a serious moisture problem exists and it is beyond the ability of the elders to repair properly, the LDC should be contacted immediately for assistance.
13. If a congregation needs to rent a facility (or parking lot) for a one-time use, the elders should determine the level of repairs necessary to have a safe and suitable place to meet. (See Chapter 21, paragraph 4, for direction on rental of facilities for long-term use.) It is best to have the owner of the property care for such work. However, where this is not a viable option, the elders should seek an equitable arrangement with the owner. The terms of that arrangement should be put in writing prior to the work commencing. Any wording in a contract that indicates that the congregation is responsible for all liability should be avoided. If there are concerns with the wording in these agreements, the Branch Risk Management Desk should be contacted for assistance.
14. Maintenance Coordinator: If the Kingdom Hall is used by only one congregation, the body of elders should assign an elder or ministerial servant to serve as the maintenance coordinator. (Depending on the circumstances, this may be the same brother who serves as the cleaning coordinator.) He should ensure that the preventive maintenance program provided by the LDC is being followed. This involves verifying that maintenance tasks are being completed on schedule and according to the guidelines provided. In addition to coordinating maintenance activities, he is also responsible to coordinate any necessary repair work. He is not responsible for performing all of the work himself, nor does he have the authority to make decisions that should be made by the body of elders. It is imperative that the brother selected be well-organized and diligent yet submissive to the body of elders. He should also be good at delegating work and training others. The body of elders should allow the brother to show initiative in caring for regular maintenance and repairs. He should ensure that an adequate amount of tools are available and should keep a record of completed maintenance tasks. He should also ensure that adequate safety equipment is on hand and that publishers have been trained to perform tasks safely.​—See 21:27-29.



KINGDOM HALL OPERATING COMMITTEE

15. If the Kingdom Hall auditorium is used by more than one congregation or if there are multiple auditoriums on the same property, a Kingdom Hall Operating Committee should be appointed for organizing the cleaning and maintenance of all facilities on the property. These would include all auditoriums, storage buildings, and residences. Additionally, this may include caring for a residence of a special full-time servant located in the same neighborhood. (See Instructions for Circuit Accounting [S-331] for direction regarding circuit apartments.) Each body of elders should select one or two elders or qualified ministerial servants to serve on the operating committee. However, the operating committee should consist of no more than five brothers. If there are more than five congregations using the property, then the combined bodies of elders should select the five brothers who will serve on the operating committee.
16. The combined bodies of elders should select the operating committee member who will serve as the operating committee coordinator. He should be an experienced elder who has good organizational ability and the availability for this assignment. He should humbly work in harmony with the other members of the committee and seek direction from the bodies of elders when needed. It is likely that he will often be able to communicate with the other members of the operating committee without organizing meetings. However, the operating committee coordinator should (1) set up periodic meetings for the committee as deemed necessary to carry out their assignment, (2) make sure there is appropriate follow-through on decisions made, and (3) maintain good communication with the bodies of elders. If the bodies of elders agree that a joint meeting of all the bodies of elders is needed to resolve a matter, one of the coordinators of the bodies of elders would normally serve as the chairman of the meeting.
17. The operating committee should ensure that adequate safety equipment is on hand and that publishers have been trained to perform tasks safely. During cleaning or maintenance projects shared in by more than one congregation, the operating committee should assign one of their number to serve as the safety coordinator for the project.​—See 21:27-29.
18. The operating committee should care for regular maintenance and repairs of the Kingdom Hall. They should be willing to show appropriate initiative but should not run ahead of the direction provided by the bodies of elders or the branch office.
19. It is not the responsibility of the operating committee to determine when meetings are to be held, whether the building is to be used for weddings or funerals, and so forth.​—See 21:33; 27:6.2.
20. The bodies of elders of the congregations sharing the Kingdom Hall should record the decisions that have been made regarding Kingdom Hall matters. Among other things, the agreement should include a description of how the building will be cared for and used, when meetings will be held, any schedule for rotating meeting times, what the financial responsibility of each congregation will be in caring for the operating expenses, the amount of funds to be kept on hand in the operating account, and what the spending limits will be in connection with out-of-the-ordinary expenses. (See Instructions for Kingdom Hall Operating Committee Accounting [S-42].) A copy of the agreement signed by the Congregation Service Committees should be retained in each congregation’s file. The written agreement should be updated as needed in order to reflect the current decisions of the bodies of elders.



EXPENSES

21. See Instructions for Congregation Accounting (S-27) and Instructions for Kingdom Hall Operating Committee Accounting (S-42).



UPGRADES AND MINOR RENOVATION

22. Minor renovation projects are typically scheduled by the Local Design/​Construction Department (LDC), based on the facility evaluation that is performed every two years. Congregations should not install new elements or upgrade existing elements (whether these items are purchased or donated) or perform minor renovations (work that is beyond routine maintenance and repair) without approval from the LDC. The elders should explain to the LDC the need for the new element, upgrade, or minor renovation and then wait for approval and direction on how to proceed. If a project request is approved, it will then be determined whether the congregation has the means to cover the expense or if funding will be provided by the branch office. Any use of congregation funds to cover such expenses must be approved by a resolution, even if approval from the LDC has been obtained for the project. The LDC will decide who will coordinate the project based on the scope of the work.​—See Appendix A; for direction regarding the funding of the installation of a video system, see Chapter 21, paragraph 37.



MAJOR RENOVATION AND NEW CONSTRUCTION

23. The branch office prepares and maintains a master plan that indicates where Kingdom Halls are needed. This includes new Kingdom Halls needed based on congregation density and growth, existing Kingdom Halls needing major renovations, and Kingdom Halls needing to be replaced. The master plan may show that existing Kingdom Halls can be better utilized by merging congregations or assigning additional congregations to use a Kingdom Hall. The benefits of merging or consolidation may include improved meeting attendance, higher quality meetings, better distribution of experienced brothers, and a reduction in the number of Kingdom Halls needing to be constructed.
24. New construction and major renovation projects are prioritized and scheduled by the Local Design/​Construction Department (LDC). Inquiries regarding when a Kingdom Hall is scheduled for a major renovation or about a construction project should be referred to the LDC. No congregation should purchase property, accept property as a donation, or undertake major or minor renovation work on an existing Kingdom Hall without the full involvement of the LDC. Design standards and specifications are provided by the branch office, and construction work is overseen by Construction Groups appointed by the branch office. Funding will be provided through the branch office, although the involved congregations will be directed to set up a contribution box for the project. The branch office will handle the sale of Kingdom Hall property whenever this is deemed necessary.



INSPECTIONS

25. The Local Design/​Construction Department will arrange for an inspection and evaluation of each Kingdom Hall every two years. While it is not necessary for each elder to be present during the inspection, it is important that the Kingdom Hall Operating Committee or the maintenance coordinator be present. Further instructions regarding the participation of publishers will be provided when the inspection is scheduled. The inspection will help to ensure that the preventive maintenance program is being followed. Each inspection will include a review of any Kingdom Hall ownership and property documents and any regulatory permits related to building systems to ensure that these are in order and to arrange for further assistance if needed. After the inspection, a report will be given to each body of elders. It is expected that the elders will follow through on the recommendations in the report and will promptly address any safety or maintenance issues found.



SECURITY

26. All doors and windows should be secured before leaving the building. Depending on the circumstances, it may be advisable to store expensive equipment in locked cabinets or in the homes of local brothers. Some Kingdom Halls in higher-risk areas may install electronic security systems. If installed, these systems should be kept in good working order. Prior to installing a system, the body of elders should contact the Local Design/​Construction Department to determine if it is warranted for their Kingdom Hall.​—See 21:22.



SAFETY

27. Each elder should be alert to any hazardous conditions that may exist in the Kingdom Hall or on its grounds and promptly ensure that they are addressed. Walkways, parking lots, lighting around stairs and areas having changes of level or uneven surfaces, and the condition of mats or carpets at building entrances should receive particular attention. Fire hazards, such as overloaded electrical outlets or the accumulation of combustible material should not be allowed. Storage of hazardous materials on the property should be avoided when possible. Any necessary chemicals used for cleaning or maintenance should be clearly labeled and stored in a secure location inaccessible to young children.
28. All elders should be thoroughly familiar with Working Together Safely​—Standards for Theocratic Construction and Maintenance (DC-82). A printed or an electronic copy of Working Together Safely should be provided to each member of the congregation who volunteers to assist with a maintenance or construction project or with other tasks that involve a measure of risk, such as working with power tools, using ladders, accessing roofs, or performing electrical work.
29. A key aspect of working safely is identifying potential dangers and planning how to avoid them. Those overseeing Kingdom Hall projects are to review each activity planned, determine the potential hazards related to each task, and identify the appropriate safety measures that can be implemented. Ensure that qualified individuals with the health and skill needed to complete the work safely are chosen. The Congregation Job Hazard Analysis (DC-85) and Congregation Job Hazard Analysis Instructions (DC-85i) forms should be used. These forms are not intended to be used in connection with minor maintenance work and regular cleaning.



INCIDENTS

30. An Incident Report (TO-5) should be completed for any incident that occurred at a Kingdom Hall or at a facility rented for a theocratic event if it involved or nearly involved (1) property damage that may result in a request for financial assistance, (2) illness requiring hospitalization, or (3) personal injury requiring medical treatment beyond minor first aid. Incident Report Instructions (TO-5i) should be consulted for every incident or near miss. The completed report should be submitted to the Branch Risk Management Desk in the Accounting Department within 72 hours of the incident. If the incident is catastrophic or there is a threat of legal action, immediately call the Legal Department for assistance.
31. When property damage occurs, quick action can go far in preventing further damage. Break-ins, thefts, arson, or other incidents of vandalism should be promptly reported to the local authorities. The Local Design/​Construction Department (LDC) may be contacted for direction. For damage that can be easily repaired without assistance from the LDC, please send copies of the written estimate of repair costs (or repair bills, if it was an emergency) along with the Incident Report to the Branch Risk Management Desk.
32. The Global Assistance Arrangement cares for property damage to Kingdom Halls, such as losses resulting from natural disasters, fire, moisture damage, and vandalism, as well as for expenses related to incidents involving personal injury at Kingdom Halls.



MEETING TIMES

33. Unless there are extreme extenuating circumstances, the Life and Ministry Meeting is to be held during the week and should not be combined with the public talk and Watchtower Study, which are to be held on the weekend. When only one congregation meets in a Kingdom Hall, the elders should consider what meeting times will be most convenient for the majority and should present their recommendations to the congregation for discussion, possible adjustment, and final decision (by majority vote of the baptized publishers). When more than one congregation meets in the hall, the combined bodies of elders should discuss meeting-time preferences before submitting their recommendations to their respective congregations. (1 Cor. 10:24) Some congregations find that rotating the times and/​or the days of the meetings each year is desirable. When a rotation is made, it should take place during the first week of January. The Service Department should be notified of changes to congregation meeting times using jw.org or, if that is not possible, by submitting the Kingdom Hall Information (S-5) form. Good communication and cooperation contribute to mutual understanding and contentment, preventing the feeling that one congregation has certain advantages all the time. Good cooperation is also needed in connection with adjusting meeting schedules during a circuit overseer’s visit to a congregation. A sign with up-to-date meeting times should be displayed in accordance with local codes.



INFORMATION BOARD

34. The coordinator of the body of elders is responsible for approving all items posted on the information board. The information board should be used exclusively to provide information about congregation activities and should be kept neat. No wedding announcements or announcements about social gatherings should be placed on the information board. When more than one congregation shares the auditorium, each congregation should have its own information board or portion thereof.



PHONE ANSWERING SYSTEM

35. An answering machine or voice messaging system should be utilized, if feasible. A recorded announcement, approved by the Congregation Service Committees using the Kingdom Hall, should provide the Kingdom Hall address, brief directions to the Kingdom Hall (if necessary), and meeting times. During the Memorial season, the day, time, and location of the Memorial observance(s) should also be given. Callers should be directed to jw.org for additional information. The announcement should be provided in the languages of all congregations and groups using the Kingdom Hall.



INTERNET SERVICE

36. If the bodies of elders using the Kingdom Hall determine that having an Internet connection at the Kingdom Hall would benefit the congregations and that the congregations can afford it, the elders should present the publishers with a resolution to obtain such service. Please note the following direction in this regard:
(1) Access to the Internet should be password-protected.

(2) Only publishers in good standing should be permitted access.

(3) The password should not be announced publicly. Instead, it should be given to the approved publishers individually.

(4) If a publisher were to use the Kingdom Hall connection to access inappropriate websites, his connectivity privilege would be revoked.

(5) It is wise to change the password periodically.

(6) If the Kingdom Hall is equipped with a computer that is connected to the Internet, appropriate Internet security practices should be implemented, such as those listed on page 28 of the August 2009 Awake! Additionally, Internet browsers provide various built-in security features, such as automatic pop-up blocking, privacy settings, flexibility in specifying websites that should be blocked, and website certificate validation. Also, most Internet service providers offer some advanced protection that may, for example, block fraudulent websites, prevent phishing attacks, and put in place parental controls. Although there is usually an additional monthly charge for these advanced security features, their benefits generally outweigh such costs.





VIDEO EQUIPMENT

37. With the exception of new construction, major renovations, or sign-language congregations, the installation of video equipment in Kingdom Halls is the financial responsibility of the publishers who attend meetings at that hall. If the bodies of elders recommend the installation of video equipment and determine that the congregations can afford the equipment, they should first contact the Local Design Construction Department for approval and direction.
38. Please keep the following guidelines in mind if a video system is installed:
(1) The system should be configured so that minimal time will be lost when starting a video. For example, it is preferred, but not mandatory, that the primary video display(s) be positioned on one or both sides of the stage, not in the center. Regardless of the configuration, the speaker should be able to remain at the lectern while the video is played.

(2) The digital yeartext should be displayed before the opening song, after the concluding prayer, and during the meeting when nothing else is being shown on the screens. This may eliminate the need to purchase signage to display the yeartext. For Kingdom Halls that have a video display in the center of the stage, it may be more practical to continue to display the yeartext with a physical sign. No additional artwork should be combined with the yeartext, not even artwork from our publications.

(3) If the Kingdom Hall has Internet service, it is preferred, but not mandatory, that a wired connection to the provider be used and that the computer or media playback device in the Kingdom Hall be connected with a wired connection.​—See 20:21.

(4) Video playback equipment should be installed near the sound equipment. The brother running the system should start the video when directed to do so by the brother on the stage. Generally, the video equipment should not be operated from the stage.





LIBRARY

39. Each Kingdom Hall auditorium should have space for a library. (od p. 61 par. 19) The library should contain publications for each language group using the auditorium. The bodies of elders should determine whether the library will provide publications in printed form, electronic form, or both. Since some publishers and interested persons do not use computers or electronic devices, the elders should give careful consideration to the needs of such individuals when making decisions as to the Kingdom Hall library, especially before deciding to eliminate printed publications. If the publications will be provided in electronic form, such as on a device or on a computer, a printer should be made available. At least one responsible brother should be assigned to keep the library up-to-date and in good order.
40. In the event that the bodies of elders decide to eliminate printed publications from the library, care should be taken not to discard items that have historical significance. The branch office may wish to add such items to its library or to its archive of historical materials.



JW BROADCASTING MONTHLY PROGRAMS

41. To assist publishers who do not have access to the Internet, the bodies of elders in Kingdom Halls already having video equipment could set a time each month for the monthly broadcast to be shown at the Kingdom Hall. If more than one congregation is using the Kingdom Hall, it might be practical to have individuals in those congregations view the program together at a time when the Kingdom Hall is not normally in use. Because such showings are not considered to be congregation meetings, there is no need for opening or closing prayers. Disfellowshipped or disassociated individuals may attend such programs if held at the Kingdom Hall. Those attending should dress as they would for congregation meetings.



USE OF CONGREGATION PROPERTY

42. It is preferred that congregations not own or control property other than what is necessary for congregation meetings. Exceptions may be made for modest dwellings for circuit overseers, special pioneers, or others in special full-time service at the discretion of the branch office. (See Instructions for Circuit Accounting [S-331] for direction on circuit apartments.) If questions arise in connection with congregation property, such as regarding housing, use of land by other parties, and gifts of property, the elders should contact the Local Design/​Construction Department for direction.



KINGDOM HALL DEDICATIONS

43. See Kingdom Hall Dedication Guidelines (S-78).




