
Chapter Thirteen
Pornography





Determining Whether a Judicial Hearing Is Required 2-4

Reviewing Qualifications of Those Serving in an Appointed Capacity 5-6

Shepherding 7

Factors to Consider When Recommending Reappointment 8


1. Helping a Christian break free from the habit of viewing pornography requires firm Scriptural counsel by loving shepherds. (Jas. 5:14, 15) Therefore, when an elder learns that a Christian has deliberately viewed pornography, the body of elders should assign two elders to meet with him to establish the facts and determine the extent of the problem. If he is married, he should be kindly encouraged to reveal the matter to his mate. After the initial investigation, the assigned elders should provide an update to the body of elders.​—See 12:40-42.



DETERMINING WHETHER A JUDICIAL HEARING IS REQUIRED

2. The deliberate viewing of pornography is a sin. (Matt. 5:28, 29) It can result in an addiction to sex, perverted desires, and serious marital problems. (Prov. 6:27; lvs pp. 121-123 pars. 9-12) However, not all cases require handling by a judicial committee.​—See 12:1-2; w12 3/15 pp. 30-31; w06 7/15 p. 31.
3. An entrenched practice of viewing, perhaps over a considerable period of time, abhorrent forms of pornography would be considered gross uncleanness with greediness and needs to be handled judicially. (Eph. 4:19) Such abhorrent forms of pornography include homosexuality (sex between those of the same gender), group sex, bestiality, sadistic torture, bondage, gang rape, the brutalizing of women, or child pornography. It is equally wrong for a man or woman to watch two women engaged in homosexual activity as it is for a man or woman to watch two men engaged in homosexual activity.​—See 12:14-15.
4. If the body of elders learns that a Christian was promoting the viewing of pornography (whether abhorrent or nonabhorrent forms), such as by inviting others to view it, this could give evidence of a disrespectful, insolent attitude, which would require handling by a judicial committee on a charge of brazen conduct.​—See 12:16-17.



REVIEWING QUALIFICATIONS OF THOSE SERVING IN AN APPOINTED CAPACITY

5. If the body of elders determines that a judicial hearing is not needed but the matter involves an appointed person, such as a pioneer, a ministerial servant, or an elder, his qualifications should be reviewed. (See 8:31-33; 9:4.) The body of elders should consider: What type of pornography was viewed? Did the viewing of pornography consist of a few brief incidents, or was it a practice spanning many months, or even years? Was the viewing of pornography accompanied by masturbation? (See 12:4.) When was the last time the person viewed pornography? Was the person counseled in the past about viewing pornography? Did he come forward voluntarily? If married, has he informed his mate of the problem? What effect has this had on the marriage? Who else are aware of the problem? Does the person still have their respect? Does the person demonstrate an earnest desire to desist from viewing pornography? Does the person’s conscience allow him to continue serving in an appointed position?
6. The body of elders may determine that the person still qualifies to serve in an appointed position if (1) his involvement consisted of a few brief viewings of nonabhorrent forms of pornography, (2) he displays a heartfelt desire to desist from looking at pornography, (3) the elders are convinced that he will refrain from viewing it, (4) he retains the respect of others who are aware of what he did, and (5) his conscience allows him to do so. On the other hand, a Christian who persists in viewing nonabhorrent forms of pornography cannot be considered as exemplary and thus does not qualify for special privileges in the congregation.



SHEPHERDING

7. Elders need to provide ongoing shepherding to a Christian who is struggling to break free from viewing pornography. The frequency and nature of shepherding visits may depend on the extent of the person’s involvement with pornography in the past. Bible-based information from “the faithful and discreet slave” can serve as the basis for such visits. (Matt. 24:45) Every effort should be made to help the Christian establish a daily routine of prayer, personal study, and wholesome meditation. (Phil. 4:8) When dealing with a married person, the elders should provide spiritual assistance and comfort to the believing mate as well.



FACTORS TO CONSIDER WHEN RECOMMENDING REAPPOINTMENT

8. Before consideration is given to recommending a brother for reappointment as a ministerial servant or an elder who was deleted for viewing pornography, the brother (1) must have demonstrated over a sufficient period of time that he has overcome the problem and (2) must have the respect of the congregation, including his family. (See 8:10.) If so, and the brother was previously serving as an elder, it must be decided whether to recommend that he first serve as a ministerial servant. If his viewing of pornography was for a prolonged period, it would be best to recommend him first as a ministerial servant. However, if he was involved in only a few brief viewings of nonabhorrent forms of pornography and he took the initiative to confess to the elders, he may be recommended to serve again as an elder.




