
Chapter Nineteen
Reinstatements





Handling Requests for Reinstatement 1-4

Procedure for Reinstatement Hearing 5-8

If the Decision Is Not to Reinstate 9

If the Decision Is to Reinstate 10-12

Communication Between Committees 13-16





HANDLING REQUESTS FOR REINSTATEMENT

1. A disfellowshipped person or one who has disassociated himself from the congregation may be reinstated when he gives clear evidence of repentance and over a reasonable period of time demonstrates that he has abandoned his sinful course. (od pp. 143-144) When the body of elders receives a letter requesting reinstatement, the request should be handled promptly. Although the following direction refers to pleas for reinstatement from a disfellowshipped individual, it applies equally to one who has disassociated himself.
2. The body of elders should meet to determine who will serve on the reinstatement committee. If the elders who served on the original committee are available and qualified, they usually serve on the reinstatement committee. Otherwise, the elders should choose replacements.​—See 15:1-3.
3. If the person requesting reinstatement was disfellowshipped for child sexual abuse, see Chapter 14, paragraphs 20-21.
4. Even if the committee feels that it is much too soon to consider reinstatement, two members of the committee should acknowledge receipt of the request and briefly inform the person that more time must pass.



PROCEDURE FOR REINSTATEMENT HEARING

5. After offering prayer without the person present, the committee will invite the disfellowshipped or disassociated person into the room. The committee should endeavor to put him at ease, commending him for his progress and desire to be reinstated. In imitation of Jehovah, the elders will convey their desire to be helpful and will treat the person with tenderness. (Isa. 1:18; Acts 3:19; rj pp. 10-11) They must listen patiently and not draw conclusions before they have heard all the evidence. The chairman invites the person to make a personal statement. The committee should seek to determine what his conduct was during the time that he was disfellowshipped or disassociated and should ascertain his attitude. The person is then excused from the room while the committee deliberates.
6. The committee should be careful to allow sufficient time, perhaps many months, a year, or even longer, for a disfellowshipped or disassociated person to demonstrate that he is genuinely repentant. (See 16:6-17.) The committee should be especially cautious in some cases. For instance, the wrongdoer may have been deceptive, may have secretly practiced wrongdoing over a long period of time, or may have been repeatedly dealt with judicially in the past for the same or other wrongdoing. If such a person is reinstated quickly, others may be emboldened to commit serious sin, as they may feel that the discipline will be light. Where there is evidence of conspiracy between individuals to put away their mates and marry each other, considerable time should elapse for them to demonstrate sufficient repentance before they qualify for reinstatement.​—w83 3/15 p. 29.
7. The reinstatement committee needs to be balanced. Genuine repentance and a turning away from the wrong course​—not the attitude of others or merely the time elapsed—​are the chief determining factors in deciding when a person may be reinstated.​—1 Cor. 5:1, 11-13; 2 Cor. 2:6, 7; 7:10, 11.
8. The committee should guard against going to extremes by exacting a point-by-point admission of sins that may not have been clearly proved. Rather, the committee should consider the overall pattern of the wrongdoer’s life. Does it now show that he is repentant?



IF THE DECISION IS NOT TO REINSTATE

9. If it is determined that the individual should not be reinstated, the committee should explain to the individual its reasons and what he needs to do in the future to qualify for reinstatement. After he is dismissed, the committee will conclude with prayer. The body of elders should be updated on the result of the meeting.​—See 22:21-27.



IF THE DECISION IS TO REINSTATE

10. If the decision is to reinstate, the person can be invited back into the room and informed. At that time Scriptural encouragement and counsel should be given to help him continue to make spiritual progress. Until the reinstatement is announced, he should continue to conduct himself as a disfellowshipped person. The committee will conclude with prayer with the individual present. After the announcement is made, the chairman of the committee should write the date of the announcement of reinstatement on the congregation’s copy of the Notification of Disfellowshipping or Disassociation (S-77) form. He should then send a message to the Service Department including the person’s (1) full name, (2) date of birth, and (3) date of baptism, along with (4) the date of the announcement of reinstatement. (The same information should be provided by a member of the committee if a disfellowshipped or disassociated person dies, except that the date of death should be provided rather than the date of the announcement of reinstatement.) If the reinstatement involves someone who was accused of child sexual abuse, established or not, see Chapter 14, paragraphs 20-21. The body of elders should be updated on the result of the meeting.​—See 22:21-27.
11. In all cases of reinstatement, judicial restrictions are imposed. Thus, the wrongdoer may be helped to make “straight paths” for his feet thereafter. (Heb. 12:13) The privilege of sharing in the field ministry is restored when the individual is reinstated. Other privileges, such as commenting at meetings and presenting student assignments on the midweek meeting, are restored gradually when it is determined that the individual has progressed spiritually to the point that he is qualified and when it is judged by the committee that the extending of such privileges will not be offensive to the congregation. When a person is reinstated, he will still need much spiritual assistance. The committee should continue to monitor the person’s spiritual progress. It may be discouraging to the repentant wrongdoer if restrictions are imposed for a prolonged period of time. Therefore, when informing a repentant wrongdoer of restrictions, it would be helpful for the committee to inform him of the date for the next meeting when his progress will be reviewed. The committee may also arrange for a Bible study to be conducted, if needed, which would be reported as field service. In most cases, the elders will remove some or even all of these restrictions before many months have passed.
12. The coordinator of the body of elders should approve the announcement before an elder reads it to the congregation at the next midweek meeting. The announcement should read as follows: “[Name of person] is reinstated as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” There may be spontaneous, dignified applause when the announcement is made. (Luke 15:7) Judicial restrictions should not be announced.



COMMUNICATION BETWEEN COMMITTEES

13. The final decision to reinstate a disfellowshipped or disassociated person is always made by a reinstatement committee of the congregation that originally handled the matter. Therefore, if the person requesting reinstatement has moved, the body of elders in the congregation where he now attends meetings will appoint a local reinstatement committee to hear his request. If the members of the local reinstatement committee believe he should be reinstated, they will forward their recommendation to the body of elders in the congregation that originally handled the matter. The local reinstatement committee should not let the person know what recommendation they will make to the original committee, since the original committee may not agree. If the person becomes aware of a lack of unity between the committees, he may lose respect for the original committee. Thus, the local reinstatement committee should tell him that they must first correspond with the elders in the congregation that originally handled the matter and that he will be informed of the decision in due course.
14. The local reinstatement committee should not pressure the original committee to reinstate the person. Those elders may be aware of important factors not apparent to the local reinstatement committee, so it is usually best to respect their judgment. Likewise, the original committee should carefully consider the recommendation of the local reinstatement committee. Sufficient time may have passed, and the individual may have made drastic changes. The original committee should keep in mind that the elders making the recommendation have met the individual and have had opportunity to observe his conduct. If the original committee decides to reinstate, the announcement is made in both congregations. (See 19:12.) The committee where he attends will supervise the gradual removal of restrictions.
15. If the two congregations are reasonably close to each other, the original committee should promptly arrange to meet with the individual after receiving a positive recommendation from the local reinstatement committee.
16. If the elders on the original committee disagree with the recommendation to reinstate, they should clearly explain their reasons to the local reinstatement committee.




