
Chapter Twenty-five
Shepherding





Shepherding Calls 3

Training Ministerial Servants 4-6

Recognizing Spiritual Weakness 7-8

Giving Effective Counsel 9

Assisting Those With Marital Problems 10-11

Assisting Sisters 12

Assisting Inactive Ones 13-18

Assisting Victims of Abuse 19

Disfellowshipped or Disassociated Ones 20


1. In imitation of Jehovah God and Jesus Christ, elders “shepherd the flock of God” under their care. (1 Pet. 5:2, 3) This includes protecting the congregation so that no one is lost through neglect or because of the influence of Satan, the world, or apostate “wolves.” (Acts 20:29, 30) It involves taking a loving and active interest in the spiritual, emotional, and physical needs of others. (Jas. 1:27; 2:15, 16) The objective of shepherding is to impart a spiritual gift that is faith-strengthening and to provide needed commendation and encouragement. (Rom. 1:11, 12) This requires that elders maintain regular contact with each family in the congregation. (Prov. 27:23) While group overseers should arrange to shepherd periodically all in the groups, there is no need for the body of elders to keep records of shepherding calls. (See 7:2.4.) Nor is it necessary for the body of elders to assign one elder to make general shepherding call assignments. Whether serving as group overseers or not, all elders should sense their personal responsibility to shepherd the members of the congregation.​—Eph. 4:15, 16.
2. One way elders shepherd the flock is by giving well-prepared Scriptural talks. Another is by engaging members of the congregation in positive, encouraging conversations before and after the meetings and while sharing in the ministry. Still another means is by making shepherding calls. Effective shepherding calls may be made at the homes of the publishers, at the Kingdom Hall, or at other appropriate locations. Shepherding may also be provided by telephone or by letter.​—John 21:15-17.



SHEPHERDING CALLS

3. Elders and qualified ministerial servants who join the elders in making shepherding calls should keep the following points in mind:
(1) Prepare: Pray for Jehovah’s guidance as you consider the needs and circumstances of the individual or family to be visited. Although the visit should not be scripted, it is appropriate to give advance thought to Scriptural encouragement or counsel that will be most beneficial. Do research in the publications of the faithful slave. (Matt. 24:45; Heb. 12:12, 13) When making the visit, be willing to be flexible, since the need may not be what you had anticipated.

(2) Determine Whom to Take Along: It is usually best for two elders or an elder and a qualified ministerial servant to make a visit together. (See 25:12.) If you expect to discuss a confidential or serious matter, two elders should make the visit. Otherwise, a qualified ministerial servant may join an elder, with the elder taking the lead.​—See 25:4-6.

(3) Make an Appointment: It is usually best to make an appointment. If there is a serious problem to be discussed, use good judgment in deciding whether the publisher should be informed of this before the visit.

(4) Be Encouraging: Maintain a relaxed and positive atmosphere. Express genuine concern and be quick to listen.​—Jas. 1:19; 5:11.

(5) Use the Bible: The Bible should be the primary source of direction and encouragement. Skillful use of God’s Word allows Jehovah’s thoughts to reach the heart of the publisher.​—Isa. 30:21; Heb. 4:12.

(6) Duration of the Call: Keep to the agreed time. If necessary, another visit can be arranged.​—Eccl. 3:1; Matt. 5:37.

(7) Pray: In your prayer, mention the person or family by name and any adversity or trial they may be dealing with.​—Phil. 4:6, 7; Col. 4:12.

(8) Respect Privacy and Maintain Confidentiality: Do not meddle in personal matters. (1 Thess. 4:11) Spiritual shepherds promote a loving, familylike spirit in the congregation by being trustworthy friends who are known to maintain confidentiality.​—Prov. 10:19; 20:19; 25:9.





TRAINING MINISTERIAL SERVANTS

4. Timothy learned by serving alongside the apostle Paul. (2 Tim. 2:1, 2) Elders imitate Paul’s example by taking qualified ministerial servants along on shepherding calls when appropriate. This provides an opportunity for these ministerial servants to observe firsthand the teaching, faith, patience, and love required of Christian overseers.​—1 Tim. 3:1.
5. Prior to making a shepherding call with a ministerial servant, the elder should discuss with him how he hopes to handle the shepherding call. The ministerial servant could be asked to prepare an encouraging Scriptural point or a faith-strengthening experience that would fit the needs of the individual or family to be visited. The ministerial servant could also be asked to conclude the visit with prayer. After the visit, the elder should review with him how the visit went, providing commendation and suggestions as needed.
6. Under the direction of the elders, a group servant along with another ministerial servant may make spiritually encouraging visits on those in the group. The group servant should keep the elders updated after each such visit. If a confidential or serious matter comes up during the visit, the group servant should tactfully inform the publisher that it would be best for the matter to be handled by the elders.



RECOGNIZING SPIRITUAL WEAKNESS

7. Symptoms of spiritual weakness may include loss of enthusiasm for the truth, neglecting daily Bible reading and personal study or attendance at congregation meetings, missing entire months of field service activity, undue emphasis on the pursuit of pleasure or material things, or criticizing the elders and the organization.
8. When shepherds detect signs of spiritual weakness, they use the Scriptures to remind the publisher of the importance of praying for holy spirit; reading the Bible daily; studying Christian publications; meditating on Scriptural matters; regularly attending meetings, assemblies, and conventions; regularly participating in field service; and being willing to accept spiritual help from those taking the lead.​—Ps. 1:1, 2; 77:12; Luke 11:13; Acts 20:20, 21; Heb. 10:23-25; 13:17.



GIVING EFFECTIVE COUNSEL

9. Elders are alert to give Scriptural counsel before bad trends become ingrained. (Prov. 27:5, 6) Prayerful advance thought to the content of the counsel and how you will present it will increase its effectiveness. (Gal. 6:1) The following points will be helpful:
(1) Take sufficient time to listen and get all the facts.​—Prov. 18:13; Jas. 1:19.

(2) The tone of the conversation should be warm and loving. The publishers are Jehovah’s sheep and should be treated with tenderness. (Ps. 100:3) Exhortation should be prefaced by specific, sincere commendation.

(3) Elders should base their expressions on the Bible and Bible-based publications, not their opinion.

(4) On sensitive matters, such as dress and grooming and entertainment, it is wise to seek the observations of another elder before providing counsel.​—Eccl. 7:16.





ASSISTING THOSE WITH MARITAL PROBLEMS

10. If a Christian experiences marital difficulties resulting in one or both parties approaching the elders to seek help, the elders should provide loving counsel based on the Scriptures and Christian publications. If both mates are members of the congregation, it is usually best to have both present. However, if only one mate is present, the elders will discuss what that one can do to improve the situation. Because elders cannot know everything that occurs in a marriage, they should avoid taking sides.​—Prov. 18:13.
11. If a Christian is contemplating separation, the elders should direct his attention to the Scriptures and Christian publications. (1 Cor. 7:10, 11; lvs pp. 250-251) If the Christian is contemplating divorce, the elders should explain that a legal divorce of itself does not free an individual to remarry. (Matt. 19:9) Elders should not encourage separation or divorce; neither should they forbid such. These are personal matters, and each Christian will have to accept the consequences of his decision. (Gal. 6:7) However, the elders may determine that a publisher’s decisions in this area disqualify the individual from receiving special privileges normally given to those viewed as exemplary.​—See 2:4; 8:9.



ASSISTING SISTERS

12. An elder or ministerial servant must never meet alone with or become the sole confidant of a sister who is not closely related to him. (Prov. 22:3; Jer. 17:9) If possible, the body of elders should arrange for different pairs of elders to shepherd a sister who needs ongoing assistance. It is appropriate for an elder to speak with a sister while in full view of others at her home, at congregation meetings, or in the field ministry.



ASSISTING INACTIVE ONES

13. Jehovah never forgets his worshippers who stray from the fold. (Ezek. 34:11) Elders have the responsibility to search diligently for sheep who have strayed. (Matt. 18:12-14; 1 Thess. 5:14; rj pp. 4-5) Helping a fellow Christian who has become inactive calls for prayerful reliance on God, the guidance of his spirit, and skillful use of his Word. Elders may read scriptures, review an article, discuss meeting highlights, pray with the inactive one, and so forth. (2 Cor. 1:3-7; Jas. 5:13-15) A visit, a telephone call, or a letter can accomplish much good.​—w08 11/15 pp. 8-16; rj pp. 12-15; cl pp. 240-249.
14. To ensure that inactive ones are not overlooked, the Congregation Service Committee should assign each one of such to a field service group. Though the names of inactive ones should not appear on any list that is posted on the information board, the group overseer and his assistant should be made aware of the person’s circumstances and contact information.
15. Each year prior to the special talk and Memorial, a special effort should be made to contact all inactive ones living in the congregation’s territory. If group overseers and their assistants need help, the service committee may ask other elders and qualified ministerial servants to work along with the group overseers. The brothers making such visits should be warm and upbuilding. In addition to extending an invitation to the special talk and the Memorial, ensure that the inactive publisher is provided a copy of the Return to Jehovah brochure. If circumstances permit, Scriptural encouragement tailored to the individual’s needs may be shared.
16. If the inactive one expresses a desire to resume activity with the congregation, a Bible study may be offered. If the study is accepted, the service committee will then determine who will conduct the study and for how long, as well as what publication should be studied.
17. If a person has been inactive for only a short time, encouragement and practical assistance from an experienced publisher may be all that is needed to reactivate the individual. On the other hand, before inviting a longtime inactive one to share in the ministry, two elders should meet with him to see if he meets the basic requirements. This is similar to the procedure for approving new publishers as outlined in chapter 8 of Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will.
18. An inactive one who has been involved in serious wrongdoing and desires to return to the congregation may feel that if he confesses his wrongdoing to the elders, he will be disfellowshipped. But he will not be expelled from the congregation if he has discontinued the unscriptural practice and is genuinely repentant.​—Isa. 1:18; 55:7; 2 Cor. 7:10, 11; Jas. 5:13-16; w08 11/15 pp. 14-15 pars. 12-13; rj pp. 10-14.



ASSISTING VICTIMS OF ABUSE

19. See 14:12-17.



DISFELLOWSHIPPED OR DISASSOCIATED ONES

20. There is no formal arrangement to visit disfellowshipped or disassociated individuals each year. Rather, elders should use good judgment in determining whether and how to make brief contact with such ones. For example, if a disfellowshipped individual gives some evidence of changing his ways, an elder could provide him with a copy of the Return to Jehovah brochure and remind him of the steps he can take toward being reinstated. (Isa. 1:18; rj pp. 10-14) Such brief contact could be made while an elder engages in the house-to-house ministry. While shopping, an elder may see a disfellowshipped person who has not been contacted in years and choose to approach him. An elder may visit a disfellowshipped person at any time that is appropriate or even make contact by telephone. Elders should keep the coordinator of the body of elders updated when such contact is made. Of course, contact should not be made with active apostates, with those who are trying to lead others into sin, or with those who have made it known that they want nothing to do with the Christian congregation.




