
Chapter Six
Watchtower Study Conductor





Qualifications 1

Conducting the Study 2-9





QUALIFICATIONS

1. The body of elders selects the Watchtower Study conductor. Since The Watchtower is the principal means by which the faithful and discreet slave dispenses spiritual food, the conductor should be one of the best teachers on the body. (Jas. 3:1) He should also be one who has “great freeness of speech.” (1 Tim. 3:13) The body of elders may assign another elder to assist the Watchtower Study conductor. This brother would conduct in the assigned conductor’s absence.



CONDUCTING THE STUDY

2. The conductor presents brief, well-prepared opening remarks for no more than 90 seconds. He highlights the theme and theme text and in a warm and enthusiastic manner tries to stimulate interest in the lesson. He does this by commenting on the preview of the article, by calling attention to the subheadings, by mentioning the review questions, or by raising two or three rhetorical questions answered by the lesson.
3. He does not comment excessively and avoids the tendency to summarize or enhance comments from the audience. If the audience fails to comment on an important point, asking an auxiliary question may stimulate the thinking of the audience and prompt an appropriate comment. However, asking additional questions unnecessarily tends to stifle commenting.
4. He concentrates on the theme and main points, makes good use of the artwork, and highlights the practical value of the article. He avoids focusing on minor details and bringing into the discussion extensive outside theocratic or secular material from personal research.
5. He emphasizes the Bible. He may choose to have “Read” Scripture texts read by the assigned paragraph reader or by someone from the audience who reads well. The paragraph reading should not be interrupted by the reading of such texts. When a “Read” scripture is cited at the very beginning of a paragraph, the text should be read before the paragraph is read. When a “Read” scripture is cited in the middle or at the end of a paragraph, the conductor may determine when to have the text read after the reading of the paragraph has concluded. He may decide to have the text read before the question is asked, particularly if the answer to the question is found in the scripture. At other times, he may decide to have the text read during the general discussion of the material.
6. Footnotes and endnotes are not read by the assigned paragraph reader. The conductor decides to what extent the thought in a footnote or an endnote should be included in the discussion. After the paragraph has been read, the conductor might choose to have someone in the audience read the footnote or endnote or he might choose to ask for a comment on it. In some cases, he may not refer to it at all. Material in parentheses or in brackets within a paragraph is usually read aloud. A reference that simply identifies source material, such as a scripture citation, is not read aloud.
7. He encourages as many as possible to participate and tactfully reminds the audience that the first answer should be a direct answer to the printed question. After the direct answer is given, the audience may comment on cited scriptures, supporting arguments, practical application of the material, and so forth. He encourages individuals to comment in their own words, calls on only one person at a time, and does not scold the audience if answers are not forthcoming.
8. At the conclusion of the article, he asks the review questions. His concluding remarks should be no more than 90 seconds. The study should last no more than 60 minutes, excluding the songs and closing prayer.
9. Only exemplary individuals who read very well should be approved by the body of elders as paragraph readers. If no brothers meet these qualifications, then qualified sisters may be used. Readers should be assigned in advance. (See 3:3.19.) It is preferred that the paragraphs be read live during congregation meetings. However, if no qualified readers are available, it is permissible to use audio recordings found on jw.org.




