Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
What fine groundwork we have laid for our summer ministry! Reports for March and April are thrilling. Of special interest to us is the grand news that we had our fourth new peak in publishers this service year. Yes, in April we attained a peak of 380,550 publishers. How heartwarming to know that there are 5,672 more fellow praisers of Jehovah than ever before in this country! Isn’t that cause for rejoicing?
During April, when we were featuring special issues of the magazines, we also enjoyed a marvelous peak in magazine placements. Why, we placed an amazing total of 9,157,773! What a tremendous witness was given concerning God’s provision for those who love him to benefit from restoration of Paradise! At the same time our four-month subscription campaign moved well beyond any previous results with a total of 797,089 new subscriptions! Last year’s peak was 692,052.
Here are some other good reports for you: Back-calls in April reached a new peak of 3,283,549. This shows fine concern for those manifesting interest. Bible studies, up from March, totaled 327,159. Also commendable is the high number of regular pioneers​—a new peak of 15,235. What about vacation pioneers? Well, during our special spring campaign we had a total of 32,026! (22,404 of them in April) The previous peak for both March and April was back in 1965, when we had 27,748 vacation pioneers. What fine zeal shown! Think too of how much encouragement all these pioneers were to other publishers. And, of course, vacation pioneering was made possible in some cases because other family members cooperated.
You will also be interested to know that on May 5 Brother Knorr left for a three-week visit to Europe. He was to visit the branches in Wiesbaden and in London to handle problems in connection with the expansion of the Kingdom work there. And he planned to be present in Switzerland at the time of the dedication of the new branch office and printery in Thun. Just before Brother Knorr left, he told us some encouraging news at the Bethel table: During March we had publisher peaks in many parts of the world! For example, 20 countries in the Americas reported new peaks, 17 in Western Europe and 11 in Africa.
Here in the United States, as you know, Memorial attendance was very good. The final figure was 836,058​—up 87,583 from last year! There were 4,609 partakers. For the special public talk we had an attendance of 548,240. Now it’s our privilege to help these many interested ones to get to this summer’s district assembly.
Our spiritual blessings keep on ever increasing, don’t they? Meanwhile, the Devil’s system deteriorates and evils multiply​—all the more reason to go on conquering the evil with Christian good.
Your fellow servants,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE
[Blurb on page 1]
Conquering evil with Christian good.
[Blurb on page 4]
Let’s share to the full in the Bible-study work.

