Do They Know?
1 It’s wonderful to have so many new ones with us at our congregation meetings and taking part in Jehovah’s service. We enjoy having them with us to benefit from the fine spiritual feasts Jehovah provides. Too, we have been able to encourage and assist many of them to attend nearby circuit assemblies, which added to their spiritual growth. Thousands of them have yet to experience the joy of attending a district assembly. Can we assist many to attend a district assembly this summer? Do they know what to do in preparation?
2 As we all appreciate, attending a district assembly usually involves much more than attending a nearby circuit assembly. Unless one lives within a short distance of the assembly city, rooming arrangements must be made. Do they know what to do? where to get rooming forms? how to fill them out? where they are to be sent, among other things?
3 And, what about transportation? If they do not have a car, do they know what to do in arranging transportation? While most of us are used to traveling, having attended various assemblies, many people are not accustomed to travel and, unless encouraged, and at times assisted, they hold back from making travel arrangements. Perhaps we may even be able to include them in our own travel plans.
4 Many new publishers are looking forward to being baptized at the district assembly. Do they know what to do? In addition to covering the questions in the “Lamp” book, do they know that they are to have with them on the day of baptism a bathing suit and towel? Are they acquainted with the volunteer service arrangement and how to share in it, if that is their desire? And do they know of the moderate-priced meals made available at the assembly so all can care for physical needs and still be at the assembly location to enjoy Christian association and benefit from the entire program?
5 Why not spend some time encouraging newly associated ones to attend a district assembly, covering the above and other points that will be of benefit to them? By so doing, we will be sure they know what to do, and, additionally, this may be the encouragement they need to attend.

