Presenting the Good News​—Briefly and to the Point
1 We are all interested in using effective presentations to place the Bible-and-book offer. Often fine results are experienced by being brief and getting to the point quickly. Here is a presentation two pioneers used to place over a hundred Bibles in a single month!
2 ‘I’m engaged in an educational work, speaking briefly to people about world conditions. They’re not getting any better, are they? [Let them comment.] There is so much delinquency, no respect for law and order; problems and anxieties are everywhere. Do you think there is some significance to all of this or some reason why we are having all these troubles at this particular time? [Let them comment.] We’ve been directing people to the Bible as the place they can find a reliable answer as to why we are having these troubles and what God is going to do about them.
3 ‘The Bible tells us that we are living in the last days of the present wicked system of things and God is soon going to bring relief through his kingdom for which we pray. I don’t know if you are like I am, but I’ve found parts of the Bible rather hard to understand. Do you find it that way? [Display Bible.] This modern-English translation of the Bible uses our everyday speech. For example, note the clarity of 2 Timothy 3 regarding the “last days.” [Use appropriate points, verses 1 to 5, depending upon householder, then offer Bible and book.]’
4 The following short presentation may be of help to children and newer publishers and when we contact busy householders: ‘My name is ​———. I’m making brief calls on those who love God and who would like to have a better knowledge of the Bible. Many people say they do not understand their Bible and have longed for an easy-to-read translation of the Bible in the English spoken today. The New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures [display it] fills this need. This copy is yours along with this book [display Word of God book], which assures us that the Bible really is the Word of God, on a contribution of $1.25.’
5 Or you might try this abbreviated presentation: ‘Many people today desire to have the Bible in the English language used now. I’m pleased to offer you this complete Bible in easy-to-understand, modern English [show it] along with this book [show it] which aids us to know that the Bible really is the Word of God.’

