Thinking About It?
1 The Ethiopian eunuch, after having the truth explained to him and seeing his responsibility, did more than only think about it, didn’t he? He said: “What prevents me from getting baptized?” (Acts 8:36) Many of us who followed the Ethiopian’s wise decision as to being baptized have since been thinking for some time now about pioneering and most appropriately may ask ourselves, ‘What prevents me from pioneering?’ It is a good question to consider, isn’t it?
2 Pioneering is a field of service that deserves serious consideration. While some have family or other Scriptural responsibilities that prevent them from getting into the regular pioneer service now, many have been able to enroll as pioneers as is noted from the over 15,000 now serving as regular pioneers! Here are some encouraging examples to think about:
3 A young brother was offered a scholarship to a university. He (under the wise guidance of his parents) had been thinking about pioneering after graduation. What did he do? Having in mind Jesus’ words at Matthew 6:33, he followed through on his thoughts, became a regular pioneer and is now enjoying the special pioneer service, looking forward to attending Gilead School. Surely Jehovah has blessed him.
4 A sister who also did more than think about it wrote: ‘I talked it over with my husband and our son. We agreed that by cutting down on expenses I could quit doing secular work and we could have a pioneer in the family? As a pioneer she is enjoying added blessings and the family is benefiting in a very wholesome way.
5 Have you thought about pioneering but wondered if your health would permit it? A sister with this very question decided to check with her doctor and thereafter wrote: ‘I was very happy to learn that nothing really stood in my way.’ Today she is doing very well as a pioneer. A brother who had been thinking about it for many years summed it up nicely when enrolling as a pioneer: “I finally wound up my affairs and did what I should have done some time before this.”
6 Many are now thinking about pioneering and this is fine, for it is the first step to becoming a regular pioneer. The next step is to make definite plans to put these good thoughts into action. What can assist in this regard? Many pioneers tell us they had their questions answered and also received fine encouragement from attending meetings at the circuit assembly for those interested in pioneering. If you are not attending them, we encourage you to do so; you will enjoy them.
7 Another fine opportunity is when the circuit servant is with your congregation. As an experienced “pioneer” he will be pleased to discuss pioneering with you. Circuit servants’ wives have been most encouraging to sisters thinking about pioneering. And many others were encouraged after talking to pioneers themselves, as well as to servants and other mature publishers.
8 So, brothers, by all means, continue to think about pioneering. And, while you are thinking about it and arranging your affairs to that end, why not enroll as a vacation pioneer whenever you can? One regular pioneer wrote, “I enjoyed vacation pioneering so much I just couldn’t stop.” This may be your rewarding experience.

