Will You Be Flying on Your Next Trip?
By “Awake!” correspondent in Papua
FOR many, who feel the need to get to places in a hurry, the answer to the above question must be, “Yes!” And who can deny that flying has become a fast and comfortable way to travel? Tons of cargo, too, can now be quickly moved across continents and oceans by huge, modern airfreighters. With the increased pace of living, millions have turned to flying.
However, some have reservations about flying. In their opinion air travel is hazardous. They feel much safer on the ground. How about you? Will you be flying on your next trip?
Traveling in Papua New Guinea
Here in Papua New Guinea travel by air is often the only means to “get you there” in a reasonable length of time. Coastal towns can be reached by ship, of course. But after arriving, there are no provisions for regular passenger service to other places in the country. The only “highway” consists mainly of 200 miles of unpaved road from the coast to the interior. However, traveling it is no pleasure trip at any time of the year!
What makes travel by land so difficult is a mountainous obstacle​—a range of mountains with peaks up to 15,000 feet that runs like a huge backbone through the main island from east to west. From the towering, steep-sided mountains to the palm-fringed beaches, one passes through a spectacular array of wild, yet incredibly beautiful valleys, tumbling cataracts, tropical rain forests and mighty rivers that wind their way through vast swamplands. The aircraft is the only practical way to surmount these obstacles. So the question, “Will you be flying on your next trip?” appears to have only one answer if you want to go anywhere in this part of the world.
Here the advantage of flying has long been recognized. Already in 1927 a regular air service was introduced between Wau, in the interior, and Lae, on the coast. This served the gold fields. In just one month in 1931, cargo reportedly weighing 581 tons was freighted to Wau.
Aviation has thus been a tremendous factor in the development of Papua New Guinea. The majority of people here are Melanesians, whose ancestors may have arrived in different migrating waves from the Malay Archipelago. Because of the natural barriers, these groups were long prevented from mixing with one another and thus remained comparatively isolated. However, with the introduction of the aircraft their isolation was broken, and they realized that it was now possible to have a look “on the other side of the hill.” They fully accepted this new mode of travel.
Popularity of Flying
That flying has become increasingly popular is readily seen from the following figures: in 1966 the domestic airlines carried 176,383 passengers. In 1971 this grew to 508,814, an increase of more than 185 percent in those five years. General aviation operators carried an additional 195,547 passengers, bringing the total for 1971 to 704,361. Not included in these figures are private flying and helicopter operations.
Flying has certainly helped Jehovah’s witnesses in their preaching work. The airplane has aided traveling ministers of the Witnesses to visit isolated congregations on a regular basis, as well as Witnesses to attend conventions held throughout the islands; for example, the one in 1969 held near Port Moresby. Over 1,100 delegates from all over the islands came to this assembly! Except for the delegates from Wau, Bulolo, Goroka, Lae and Papua, all had to travel more than 200 air miles, and some traveled almost 1,000 miles to get there.
How Safe Is Flying?
Flying is not without danger. During 1970, which was a particularly bad year for flying here, thirty-seven people lost their lives in aircraft accidents. Of course, with all the rugged terrain, the hazards here are multiplied many times.
If you fly for the first time, you may feel a little nervous, or, for that matter, very nervous. You may have questions such as: “How safe is the aircraft? How does the pilot know his way between and over all the mountains? How can he be sure we will not collide with another aircraft flying in the opposite direction?”
Due to strict legislation and high standards of maintenance, serious in-flight mechanical troubles are few. In fact, none of the fatal accidents in 1970 were attributed to mechanical failure.
Also, airlines and charter operators have a pilot-checking system, to ensure that pilots maintain their high standard of flying procedures. Pilots who apply to the Department of Civil Aviation for licenses have to undergo a medical examination and a flight test by a department examiner. In addition, pilots must have a medical checkup every six months. So there is strict and careful control of the physical condition of the pilot, his skill and training. As far as can be ascertained, no fatal accidents in 1970 were due to a physically unfit pilot.
How the Pilot Finds His Way
Experience and a personal knowledge of the route are important, as well as a magnetic compass and aerial maps. But nowadays there is also a network of special navigational aids to help the pilot.
The aircraft can be equipped with distance-measuring instruments, which, when tuned in to a ground station, tell the pilot how many miles he has to go to reach that station. It acts like a signpost on the road, showing the traveler how many miles separate him from the next town. All major airports are equipped with distance-measuring beacons. Also, beacons define a narrow path extending from the runway to guide the pilot when landing. Lately, specially designed guide lights have been introduced that show the pilot if his approach is too high, too low, or just right. These navigational aids are themselves checked for accuracy.
Then there is a branch within the Department of Civil Aviation responsible for aircraft movements in controlled airspace. Pilots are directed by Air Traffic Controllers into these lanes. Thus planes are kept spaced at safe distances, and at various flight levels, so that there is no danger of collision.
Reports on weather conditions along the route and at destination points, airstrip conditions, and other useful information is also provided by representatives of the Department of Civil Aviation. These ground services operate very efficiently and contribute a great deal to safety in the air. But accidents, nevertheless, occur. Why?
Negligence and Human Error
Pilot negligence is usually the cause of air accidents. A number of recent fatalities, for example, were caused by pilots who, restricted to visual flight rules, nevertheless flew in weather conditions in which vision was restricted. As a result, they crashed.
Of course, jet planes can usually climb to a safe height and, unhindered, proceed to their destination. However, poor weather, along with rugged mountains, are an acute problem in conventional propeller-driven aircraft in this area. Wise pilots flying these planes do not take chances. They may try an alternative route when possible, or stay on the ground until conditions improve.
One day a passenger wanted to be flown to a clearing in the jungle that had only a landing pad for helicopters. It was located in one of the most rugged parts of the country. The passenger contacted the helicopter pilot and made arrangements for the flight. “When are we going?” he asked.
“Oh, soon, I think,” was the answer. “You see, there are a few clouds around; not that they worry me, for I can go around them. Of course, there are these mountains here, but they don’t worry me either as I can keep away from them.”
The passenger looked up as the pilot continued: “But there are those clouds and those mountains over there. They don’t worry me at all, because in this case I just don’t fly!” And they did not fly for three days. When the weather finally cleared, the passenger was flown to his destination safely.
It is the pilot who does not take unnecessary risks who can tell the story! Pilot error reportedly was the cause of all fatal accidents in Papua New Guinea in 1970.
Other Modes of Travel
There are no railways in Papua New Guinea. Thus the only other mode of inland travel is by road. How does the safety of flying compare with that of road travel? Perhaps the comparison is not a really fair one, as there are not many roads here. Yet in 1970 there were 103 persons killed and 998 injured in 688 road accidents. For flying in 1970 for the whole of Australia and Papua New Guinea, the number of accidents per 100,000 hours of air travel was only 1.77. There were no fatal airplane accidents in Papua New Guinea in 1969 or 1971.
Of course, you can decide for yourself which way you will travel: by air, boat, or road. It is good, though, to have a balanced view. Long ago the Bible said: “Time and unforeseen occurrence befall [us] all.” (Eccl. 9:11) So there is a certain element of risk that goes with all modes of travel.

