Finding a Meaningful Life
MANY people are searching for real meaning in life. They are confused and disillusioned by the hatred and corruption that are so prevalent today. In their search for something better, large numbers of persons have got involved with occult practices and drugs, only to experience greater frustrations and disappointments. Happily, some of these people have eventually found the way in which life can indeed be meaningful.
A young German woman who, after working for a time in the German embassy in Tunisia, moved to California to study, tells her experience:
“My college studies left me disappointed. So, I turned to another field, I met a girl who read my Tarot cards (cards of divination) and told me that I would meet a man with whom I would begin a relationship on a ‘higher level.’
“Well, I met a man while hitchhiking, and I felt that he was the one of whom the cards spoke. We began living together in a common-law relationship. Together we began to study the occult mysteries​—astrology, magic and divination. For over a year I studied these things with great intensity, looking for the answers about the laws of the universe. I experimented heavily with so-called mind-expanding drugs. I smoked ‘grass’ almost every day and took LSD often.
“All this time I was looking for the answers to the mystery of life and the laws of the universe. The drugs used seemed to give deeper insight each time. Nevertheless, I studied Buddhism and the theory of meditation, for my goal was to achieve enlightenment through meditation without drugs.
“I had a baby by the man with whom I was living, but our relationship was extremely strained. I felt that somebody had put a spell on him and that was the reason it did not work. We had several violent encounters and I tried to leave, but was not strong enough to do so.
“Later, some of Jehovah’s witnesses came by and talked to my baby’s father, and he asked them into the house. When I heard that they were neutral in politics, I was very angry. We told them we planned to move and gave them a very vague description of the new house.” The Witnesses returned, however, and, as an excuse, were told to come back when the baby’s father would be home.
She continues: “They came back at that time, but he was not in yet. However, just before they came I had thought that since I had studied everything that was to be studied and had tried anything that came by, I should at least have an open mind to what they had to say.
“So as the ladies were waiting for him, I very arrogantly talked about the pollution problem and the health-food ‘kick’ I was on. They patiently listened, so after I had talked for a while, I realized my arrogance, and thought, ‘Well, I’ll let them talk’​—and did they! I had never studied the Bible and was amazed at what it had to say about the world situation. I awaited the next visit with eagerness, and we studied the chapter in the Truth book on ‘Building a Happy Family Life.’ I could barely hold my tears back because it had everything in there that I have ever wanted, but could not put into words.
“That evening I talked about legalizing our marriage relationship, but found that the chapter did not have the same effect on my baby’s father. The next day we had another potentially violent situation. So I just packed a few things and moved to a hotel.
“Having gone to an assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses and to the Kingdom Hall and a book study, I realized that this was what I had been looking for all my life. I knew that this was the truth, and I hoped in my heart that I would not find any catch to it, financial or otherwise. I burned all my magical cards and books and all the things pertaining to demonism.
“I finally had found people who love and whom I could love; who help when it is needed in a selfless way and who practice what they preach. And, of course, the ‘good news of the kingdom’ is a never-ending joy to my ears. I can truly say that I have found peace of mind and an answer to all my questions. It is a continuous joy to help others learn the ‘good news of the kingdom.’”
If what this woman found appeals to you, why not avail yourself of the opportunity to study the Bible with Jehovah’s witnesses?

