His Delight Was in the Law of Jehovah
ALBERT D. SCHROEDER, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, finished his earthly course on Wednesday, March 8, 2006. He was 94 years old and had spent more than 73 years in the full-time ministry.
Brother Schroeder was born in Saginaw, Michigan, U.S.A., in 1911.a As a child, he learned much about the Bible from his maternal grandmother, who also instilled in him a love of reading Jehovah’s Word. He studied Latin, German, and electrical engineering at the University of Michigan. As his appreciation for the Scriptures grew, however, he discontinued his secular studies to take up the full-time Kingdom-preaching work. In 1932 he became a member of the Bethel family in Brooklyn, New York.
In 1937, at the age of 26, Brother Schroeder was appointed to supervise the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Britain. His zeal for the preaching work encouraged many there to take up the full-time service. One young man with whom he was associated at London Bethel was John E. Barr. They later served together for many years on the Governing Body.
Brother Schroeder’s work in behalf of Jehovah’s Witnesses did not go unnoticed during the war years. In August 1942 he was deported from Britain. After a harrowing wartime voyage across the Atlantic, he arrived back in Brooklyn in September.
At that time, Jehovah’s servants were already anticipating that a great work would need to be done after World War II. Brother Schroeder was surprised and happy to receive his next assignment​—to help develop the course of study for the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. For some years, he served there as an instructor, helping to train missionaries. Students he taught in Gilead and later in the Kingdom Ministry School have fond memories of his classes. He took delight in instilling love for God’s laws in his students and stressed the importance of getting to know Jehovah.
In 1956, Brother Schroeder married Charlotte Bowin, and in 1958 their son, Judah Ben, was born. Brother Schroeder was a fine Christian husband and father. In 1974, he began to serve on the Governing Body, where his insight was very much appreciated. He was a kind and humble man who, above all, wanted to magnify God’s great name. We are confident that Brother Schroeder has received his heavenly reward as an anointed Christian who truly did ‘take delight in the law of Jehovah.’​—Psalm 1:2.
[Footnote]
Brother Schroeder’s life story was published in The Watchtower of March 1, 1988.

