“How I Do Love Your Law!”
PSALM 119 is a song about its composer’s feelings toward God’s inspired message, or word. The psalmist sings: “In my heart I have treasured up your saying.” “For your statutes I shall show a fondness.” “My soul is crushed with longing for your judicial decisions all the time.” “Your reminders are what I am fond of.” “I have longed for your orders.” “I shall show a fondness for your commandments that I have loved.” “I will concern myself with your regulations.” “How I do love your law! All day long it is my concern.”​—Psalm 119:11, 16, 20, 24, 40, 47, 48, 97.
What heartfelt appreciation the psalmist had for God’s revealed word! Do you feel this way about the message of God’s Word, the Bible? Would you like to cultivate such a fondness for it? If so, you first need to form the habit of reading the Bible regularly, daily if possible. Jesus Christ said: “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matthew 4:4) Second, you should meditate on what you read. Reflecting upon the truth about God, his qualities, his will, and his purpose will enhance your appreciation for the Bible. (Psalm 143:5) And by all means, apply its sound advice in day-to-day living.​—Luke 11:28; John 13:17.
How will cultivating a fondness for what the Bible says benefit you? “Happy are those observing [God’s] reminders,” states Psalm 119:2. The reminders found in the Bible will help you to cope successfully with problems in life. (Psalm 1:1-3) You will gain wisdom, insight, and understanding, which will help you to ‘restrain your feet from every bad path.’ (Psalm 119:98-101) Knowing the truth about God and his purpose for the earth will make your life more meaningful and will brighten your hope for the future.​—Isaiah 45:18; John 17:3; Revelation 21:3, 4.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are very much interested in helping others to get to know the Bible better and to develop a love for its message. You have our heartfelt invitation to respond to the following offer.

