Kingdom Proclaimers Report
He Found a “Pearl of High Value”
“THE kingdom of the heavens is like a traveling merchant seeking fine pearls. Upon finding one pearl of high value, away he went and promptly sold all the things he had and bought it.” With these words, Jesus illustrated the exceeding value of God’s Kingdom. (Matthew 13:45, 46) Those who recognize the Kingdom’s value often make great personal sacrifices in order to take hold of it. This is illustrated by the following experience from Pingtung County, Taiwan.
In 1991, Mr. and Mrs. Lin began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. When a local clergyman found out, he tried to get them to join his church. Since the Lins had a business selling pigs’ and ducks’ blood at the local market, they decided to ask the clergyman’s view on the matter. “Everything that God has made can serve as man’s food,” he replied. The Witnesses, on the other hand, encouraged them to consider what God’s Word has to say. They learned that Jehovah God views blood as sacred, for “the life of a creature is the blood.” (Leviticus 17:10, 11, The New English Bible) True Christians therefore must “abstain . . . from blood.” (Acts 15:20) As a result of examining the Scriptures on this subject, the Lins decided to stop selling blood, even though it accounted for much of their income. Within a short time, however, they faced a still greater test.
Prior to learning the truth, the Lins had planted 1,300 betel nut palms on their property. Although it would take five years for the trees to become profitable, once they were in full production, the Lins could expect to make $77,000 per year. As the first harvesttime drew near, the Lins had to make an important decision. They had learned through their study of the Bible that Christians must cleanse themselves “of every defilement of flesh and spirit” by avoiding the use of, or the promotion of, such unclean habits as smoking tobacco, abusing drugs, and chewing betel nut. (2 Corinthians 7:1) What would they do?
Under pressure from a troubled conscience, Mr. Lin decided to quit his study. Meanwhile, Mrs. Lin sold the betel nuts from some of their older palms and made a profit of over $3,000. This was just a foretaste of what would soon come if they kept their trees. However, Mr. Lin’s conscience continued to smite him.
He struggled with the issue until one day he asked the local Witnesses to cut down his betel palms for him. The Witnesses explained that it was his decision to make; therefore, he would have to ‘bear his own load’ and cut down the trees himself. (Galatians 6:4, 5) They encouraged him to remember the promise at 1 Corinthians 10:13, which says: “No temptation has taken you except what is common to men. But God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear, but along with the temptation he will also make the way out in order for you to be able to endure it.” The Witnesses also reasoned with him, saying: “If we cut down your trees for you, you might regret it and blame us for the loss.” A short time later, Mrs. Lin awoke to the sound of a chain saw. Her husband and children were cutting down the betel palms!
Mr. Lin found that Jehovah is true to His promise. He obtained work that left him with a clear conscience, enabling him to become a praiser of Jehovah. He was baptized at a circuit assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses in April 1996.
Yes, Mr. Lin in effect “sold all the things he had” and bought a “pearl of high value.” Now he has the inestimable privilege of having a personal relationship with Jehovah God and serving His Kingdom interests.

