Questions From Readers
Since Jehovah’s Witnesses strive to be honest and they trust one another, why do they feel that it is important to make a written contract when there are business dealings between them?
Their doing so is Scriptural, practical, and loving. How so? Well, let us consider those aspects of business contracts.
The Bible presents a written record of God’s dealings with his covenant people, the Israelites. It includes business dealings involving true worshipers. Genesis chapter 23 contains one we might consider. When his beloved Sarah died, Abraham wanted to obtain a burial place. He began dealing with Canaanites living near Hebron. Verses 7-9 show that he offered a clear price for the piece of land he wanted. Verse 10 proves this offer was made publicly, in the hearing of others at the city gate. Verse 13 shows that the owner offered to give the land to Abraham, but he responded that he would take the land only as a purchase. And verses 17, 18, and 20 explain that this is how it worked out, being confirmed “before the eyes of the sons of Heth among all those entering the gate of his city.”
Would it be different, though, when the two having such a business dealing were both true worshipers? Chapter 32 of Jeremiah provides an answer. From verse 6 on, we see that Jeremiah was to purchase land from his cousin. Verse 9 shows that a fair price was agreed upon. Now read verses 10-12: “Then I [Jeremiah] wrote in a deed and affixed the seal and took witnesses as I went weighing the money in the scales. After that I took the deed of purchase, the one sealed according to the commandment and the regulations, and the one left open; and I then gave the deed of purchase to Baruch the son of Neriah the son of Mahseiah before the eyes of Hanamel the son of my paternal uncle and before the eyes of the witnesses, those writing in the deed of purchase, before the eyes of all the Jews who were sitting in the Courtyard of the Guard.”
Yes, although Jeremiah was dealing with a fellow worshiper, even a relative, he went through some reasonable legal procedures. Two written records were made—one being left open for ready consultation, the second being sealed so as to provide back-up proof should there ever be any doubt about the accuracy of the open one. All of this was transacted, as verse 13 says, “before their eyes.” So it was a public, witnessed, legal business dealing. Clearly, then, it is with Scriptural precedent that true worshipers handle matters in such a confirmed and documented way.
It is also practical. We know how true the saying is that “time and unforeseen occurrence befall them all.” (Ecclesiastes 9:11) That includes devoted and faithful Christians. James 4:13, 14 puts it this way: “Come, now, you who say: ‘Today or tomorrow we will journey to this city and will spend a year there, and we will engage in business and make profits,’ whereas you do not know what your life will be tomorrow.” Hence, we may begin a project, such as making a purchase, performing an agreed upon work or service, or producing an item for someone. But what will tomorrow—or next month or next year—bring? What if we or the other party were to have an accident? That might seem to make keeping the agreement impossible. What if we cannot do the work or perform the service, or he finds it next to impossible to keep up the payments or keep his end of the agreement? If there is no written agreement, real problems could arise, ones that could be settled or could have been avoided by having a simple written contract.
Further, we should not forget that the very uncertain nature of many aspects of life might even mean that someone else would have to take over or settle our (or his) business affairs. James added in verse 14: “For you are a mist appearing for a little while and then disappearing.” Realistically, we might die unexpectedly. A written agreement, a contract, could in practical terms allow others to carry on in handling matters should something unexpected occur on either side.
In a sense, this leads also to the third aspect—written contracts are loving. Certainly, if either party died or had an incapacitating accident, it would have been loving for a Christian to have provided a written record of his obligations or financial expectations. And rather than reflect distrust, it shows love for the brother with whom we are dealing to make a written contract that will state clearly and exactly what he is obliged to do or is in position to receive. This loving step will minimize any cause for hard feelings or resentment if one of the imperfect parties should forget some details or responsibilities. And who of us is not imperfect, forgetful, or prone to misunderstand details or intents?—Matthew 16:5.
There are other ways in which making written business agreements reflects love for our brother, our family, and for the congregation in general. But it should be clear that beyond being loving, such written records in adequate detail are practical and Scriptural.

