Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Kingdom Unity Manifest
KINGDOM UNITY certainly was manifest at recent conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses in New Zealand and the Philippines. In New Zealand, 13,408 attended the “Kingdom Unity” conventions and 167 were baptized. The three conventions in New Zealand were tied in by telephone lines with the six Australian conventions. “Many folks with relatives at other conventions in the link-up said that they could picture them listening at the same time to the same talk and it gave a wonderful feeling of unity,” stated the report. One deaf sister who had attended conventions for 30 years remarked that ‘this was the first time she had got something out of the program,’ because they had sign-language translators for the deaf for the first time.
□ Appreciating the need to assemble together, 120 traveled to the Auckland convention from Rarotonga, in the Cook Islands, some 1,800 miles (2,900 km) away. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) To provide money for their air fare, the sisters made and sold dresses, curtains, cushions, frangipani necklaces and shell necklaces. The brothers grew vegetables to sell and did fishing and harvesting to get money for the trip. Congregations in New Zealand heard about the need of their brothers in the Cook Islands and contributed enough money to make up the deficit so that nearly all of the Cook Island brothers were able to attend the Auckland convention. Some parts of the program were presented in the Rarotongan language for their benefit. The 17 missionaries that were in attendance at the three conventions in New Zealand rejoice with all these brothers as they unitedly serve Jehovah as King.
□ The 149,219 who attended the 20 conventions held in the Philippines also rejoiced to be unitedly assembled with their brothers and to see 1,858 baptized. Many showed great determination to attend. For example, those living in Davao del Sur, including some brothers of the Manobo tribe, walked 62 miles (100 km) to catch a bus for the convention in General Santos City in Mindanao. Another group walked across the mountains 124 miles (200 km), which took them three days. Then they took a boat that required another day of travel to reach the convention. They all agreed that it “was well worth it.”
The commander of the Integrated National Police came to the convention in Tuguegarao, Cagayan, and commented on the fine organizational aspect of the convention. He said: “Jehovah’s Witnesses do not need to have the police at their conventions since their gatherings are always peaceful and orderly.” An observer at the Binalonan, Pangasinan, convention remarked: “If all people in the community were Jehovah’s Witnesses, we would not have to worry about peace and order in the place . . . children were with their parents listening . . . no one was smoking. So when I felt like smoking I went outside.”
These experiences help us appreciate the unity and joy of these Kingdom proclaimers. It will certainly be a wonderful time when all people recognize Jehovah as King and submit to his rule. Then disunity will be a thing of the past.
[Maps/​Pictures on page 7]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
NEW ZEALAND
[Map]
PHILIPPINES

