Questions From Readers
▪ Once a person becomes one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, is he always counted as such?
No, Jehovah’s Witnesses are not like religions who hold, ‘Once a member, always a member.’ A small percentage of individuals choose to disassociate themselves from the Christian congregation or are expelled because they are unrepentant wrongdoers.
On one occasion many disciples turned away from Jesus and “would no longer walk with him.” (John 6:66) The Bible also explains that if a Christian unrepentantly practices gross sin, the congregation is to ‘remove the wicked man from among themselves’ and ‘quit mixing in company with him.’​—1 Corinthians 5:9-13.
Thus, today, if a Christian falls into a course of sin, a committee of spiritually qualified elders meets with him. They want to see if he is repentant and can be readjusted. (Galatians 6:1) If not, the elders obey the Bible’s direction to disfellowship the sinner so that the congregation will be “free from ferment.”​—1 Corinthians 5:7.
Or, as mentioned in John 6:66, occasionally a Witness on his own initiative will decide to leave the way of truth. He may even make known his decision after the committee begins to look into his wrongdoing. He may inform them in writing, or state before witnesses, that he wants to disassociate himself from the congregation and not be known as a Witness. Then it will no longer be necessary for the elders to continue their investigation. However, the elders would then make a brief announcement of his disassociation so that the congregation will know that he “went out from us.” (1 John 2:19) They then will adhere to the inspired injunction ‘not to receive such a one into their homes or say a greeting to him, so as not to become sharers in his wicked works.’​—2 John 10, 11.
Hence, people are not compelled to remain a part of the congregation. But the vast majority of Jehovah’s Witnesses have the attitude of the apostles who voluntarily stuck by Jesus, receiving his spiritual help and enjoying the warm fellowship of God’s congregation.​—Luke 22:28.
▪ If Moses truly was meek and modest, how could he write in Numbers 12:3 that ‘Moses was by far the meekest of all men’?
While it may not have been easy to do so, Moses could write that accurate description under inspiration from God.
A mark of the Bible’s being inspired of God is the candor of its writers. Moses and other men whom God used to pen portions of the Scriptures wrote things that were unusually candid.
For example, Moses recorded cases of failings and sins by his people, including those of his own brother and sister. (Exodus 16:2, 3; 17:2, 3; 32:1-6; Leviticus 10:1, 2) Nor did Moses spare himself; he frankly related his own errors, even such as resulted in his being reproved by God. (Numbers 20:9-12; Deuteronomy 1:37) So it was consistent for Moses to record objectively a fact that Jehovah evidently wanted included​—that Moses himself was unusually meek. The setting where this is found provides a case in point. Rather than becoming indignant when Miriam and Aaron challenged his authority, Moses allowed Jehovah to correct the situation.
Moses prefigured the Messiah. (Deuteronomy 18:15-19) So when Jehovah God called attention to Moses’ meekness, He was giving assurance that this desirable quality would be found in the Messiah. As we read the Gospels is not Jesus’ meekness appealing, drawing us to him and giving us reason to rely on him?​—2 Corinthians 10:1; Hebrews 4:15, 16.

