Do Restrictions Discourage You?
RESTRICTIONS! No one really likes them; yet all of us have to put up with them to some extent. Are you, though, sometimes discouraged because your life seems to be too limited? Perhaps you would feel better if you changed your point of view. Instead of fretting about what you cannot do, why not take the fullest advantage of whatever freedoms you do enjoy?
For example, many who are economically poor wish they were wealthy. However, while poverty limits what we can do in this system of things, the important things in life are available to all. Poor people as well as rich fall in love, get married, raise children, enjoy good friendships, and so forth. More important, poor people as well as rich know Jehovah and look forward to the promised new world. Poor people as well as rich progress in Christian wisdom and knowledge, which are better than riches. (Proverbs 2:1-9; Ecclesiastes 7:12) All​—rich and poor—​can make an excellent name for themselves with Jehovah. (Ecclesiastes 7:1) In Paul’s day the Christian congregation was largely made up of people of lowly station​—some of them slaves—​who made wise use of whatever freedom their circumstances permitted.​—1 Corinthians 1:26-29.
Scriptural Headship
In a Christian marriage, the wife is subject to her husband​—an arrangement designed to benefit the whole family. (Ephesians 5:22-24) Should a wife feel demeaned because of this? By no means. Husband and wife are a team. The man’s headship, when handled in a Christlike manner, puts relatively few restrictions on his wife and leaves her many opportunities to realize her potential. (Ephesians 5:25, 31) The “capable wife” of Proverbs chapter 31 was occupied with many interesting and challenging undertakings. Clearly, subjection to her husband was not frustrating for her.​—Proverbs 31:10-29.
Similarly, there is no provision for a woman to take the lead over qualified men in the Christian congregation. (1 Corinthians 14:34; 1 Timothy 2:11, 12) Should Christian women chafe under that restriction? No. Most are grateful to see that aspect of Christian service cared for in a theocratic manner. They are happy to benefit from the shepherding and teaching of appointed elders and concern themselves with the vital work of preaching and making disciples. (Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20) Christian women accomplish much in this field, and this brings them honor in the sight of Jehovah God.​—Psalm 68:11; Proverbs 3:35.
Restrictions on the Young
The young also at times complain that their life is too restricted, often because they are under the authority of their parents. Yet this too is Scriptural. (Ephesians 6:1) Instead of being irritated by restrictions their parents impose on them, wise young Christians focus on enjoying the freedoms they do have​—including, usually, freedom from weighty responsibilities. Thus they can take advantage of their youthful strength and circumstances to prepare themselves for adult life.
A former circuit overseer in Brazil well remembers a 12-year-old boy in a small isolated group who was restricted in what he could do. The one in charge of the records was busy in secular work and could not give much attention to the group, but he arranged for this young man to help him. He learned where all the forms were and was always around to give a hand. His interest was encouraging, and he was a faithful companion in the field service. That young man is now an appointed elder.
There are many situations that may limit a person’s freedom. Some are restricted by sickness. Some live in divided households and find their freedom limited by the demands of an unbelieving mate. While those living with restrictions may wish things were different, they can still live satisfying lives. This magazine has carried many accounts of such individuals who have been most encouraging to others because they rely on Jehovah and make the most of their circumstances.
Speaking of a common situation in his own day, the apostle Paul said: “Were you called when a slave? Do not let it worry you; but if you can also become free, rather seize the opportunity.” (1 Corinthians 7:21) What a balanced view! Some situations change. Young people grow up. Opposed mates sometimes accept the truth. Economic situations have been known to improve. Sick people may get better. In other cases, things may not change until Jehovah’s new world is here. Nevertheless, what is to be gained from fretting because one cannot do what others can?
Have you ever watched birds soaring in the sky above the earth and admired the beauty and freedom of their movements? Perhaps you wished that you could fly like that. Well, you cannot and you never will be able to fly as the birds do! But likely you do not complain. Rather, you rejoice in your God-given abilities. You manage very well walking around on the surface of the earth. Similarly, whatever our situation in life, if we concentrate on what we can do rather than fret about what we cannot do, life will be satisfying, and we will find joy in Jehovah’s service.​—Psalm 126:5, 6.
[Picture on page 28]
Do you feel that your parents fence you in?

