VOL. XVI. MAY 1, 1895. No. 9. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Item— Celebrations of the Memorial 102 

An Excellent Plan 102 

Views from the Tower— 103 

The Religious View 103 

The Social View 104 

Perfect Through Suffering 105 

Priestcraft Opposed to Liberty 109 

Bible Study: Jesus before the High 

Priest 110 

Bible Study: Jesus before Pilate Ill 

Encouraging Letters Ill 

page 102 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 

R1805 : page 102 

CELEBRATIONS OF THE MEMORIAL. 

WE have heard from about 70 celebrations of the Lord's Memorial 
Supper by various little companies of the consecrated. These varied 
from two to two hundred in Allegheny, and two hundred and fifty in 
New York, where the Brooklyn friends also met. As usual on such 
occasions, there were a number of immersions. Altogether the occasion 
seems to have been specially blessed to almost all from whom we have 
heard;— not excepting a few isolated ones who met with the Lord alone. 

However, let us not forget that this is specially a season of temptation, 
and let us continue to "watch and pray," to "stand" and to assist 
others to stand. "Let him that thinketh he standeth [securely], 
take heed lest he fall." 

R1808 :page 102 



AN EXCELLENT PLAN. 

FOR a few years past we have supplied the Scripture text calendars 
at very low prices; but this year, being unable to secure them at prices 
that would suit the majority of our readers, who are poor, we got none. 
Many have expressed regret at not having them, and in our own family 
we at first experienced quite a loss; but now have found a substitute 
which serves us much better in some respects. It is this: We sing one 
of the hymns from Poems and Hymns of Dawn every morning before 
breakfast. This, with the rendering of thanks at the breakfast-table, 
constitutes our family worship for the day (being preceded by such 
personal prayer or communion with the Lord as each may desire,— and 
the same before retiring at night). 

Since very few of the hymns are original, and since they represent 
the choice thoughts of many of God's saints for the past three hundred 
years, we may speak freely of them and say that we consider them most 
beautiful, soul-cheering and spiritual-life awakening. They are prayer, 
thanks and praise combined, in which all our hearts and voices can and 
do unite. 

We commend this plan to you all. Try it for a week. The collection 
is so choice that you can scarcely make a poor selection, and if 
you continue it for a week you will probably want to continue it indefinitely 
—until we all join our hearts and voices in glory, singing, Allelujah! 
to him who loved us and bought us with his own precious blood. 
To those who cannot sing well now, who must wait until their 
stammering tongues are changed, but who can and do make melody 
in their hearts unto the Lord, we suggest the reading aloud of one of 
the hymns, or, better still perhaps, of one of the poems in the forepart 
of the book. 

Try this ! we believe that there is a blessing in it for all who are in 
heart-harmony with the Lord. It will help to lift your minds from 
earthly things and the cares of this life and to fix them upon the things 
of greater worth, the things eternal. 

page 102 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN is a book of 494 pages (150 
poems and 333 hymns). It is published at $1.00, but supplied to 
TOWER readers at wholesale rate, 50 cents by mail, $5.00 per dozen by 
express. But as the plan proposed above would require several books 
for each family, we will make a special offer, good until June 1, of 
THREE COPIES FOR $1.00, postage paid by us. 



DO NOT SEND MONEY UNLESS "REGISTERED." 

COMPLAINTS of money lost in the mails continue. Send only by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order or Express Order. Then if letters be stolen 
the money can be recovered. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. I., II. and III., English and German; 
VOL. I. in Swedish and Dano-Norwegian, at uniform prices, 25 cents per 



volume in paper covers, $1.00 per volume in embossed cloth binding. 



R1804:page 103 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



RECENTLY, says the Catholic Mirror, at a meeting 
of the Sunset Club, Chicago, Howard L. 
Smith, a prominent Protestant, surprised his hearers by 
predicting that 

"The Church of the future would be the Catholic 
Church. He based this not so much on his own knowledge 
of Catholicism. The Church of the future would be 
due to organization. The Catholic Church, he said, would 
overcome the broken sects of Protestantism as easily as the 
regular army would defeat a mob of strikers. Independence 
in religion was chaos in religion. Let each man be his 
own pope, and you have religious anarchy, which is the 
same thing as sectarianism. Catholicism and Agnosticism 
[Infidelity] would divide the twentieth century between 
them." 

How remarkable it is that the very liberty which the 
Bible commends is regarded by many as "religious anarchy." 
In the early Church each believer was expected to prove 
individually every item of his belief. They were to accept 
nothing as a congregation, nor as a denomination. Thus 
each was to be bound only to Christ, and, so far as others 
were concerned, each one was to stand fast in the liberty 
wherewith Christ makes free, and not to be entangled 
with any human yoke of bondage. They had no denominational 
"ties," no clerical "fetters," no creed "yoke," 
no traditional "chains." Each one united to Christ could 
not do otherwise than "love the brethren," and "love the 
truth," as well as love the Lord; and this love constituted 
the only bond that held their hearts and lives together. 
Love to the Lord made them attentive to his Word through 
the apostles, and watchful for his providential leadings in 
all who attempted to teach them in his name— attentive to 
prove all that they heard, to reject all not in harmony, 
and to accept and hold fast all that, according to that 
standard, they found "good." 

But now the general sentiment is union: small unions 
and large unions are proposed; and all who would return 
to the primitive method of individual liberty will more and 
more be anathematized as "heretics" and "religious anarchists," 
just as they were during the dark ages when the outward 
union was most complete. Let all who are the Lord's stand 
fast in the liberty which his truth alone can give; but let 
them avoid arrogance, and in meekness "speak the truth 
in love." 



The following from The Sun (Baltimore) explains itself, 
and indicates that the way back to Rome can be made 
sufficiently smooth for English high church clergy. 

"A gentleman writes from Italy: I hear that Pope Leo 
is devoting considerable time daily to the study of the 
literature bearing upon the question of Anglican orders. 
He is disposed to abolish the law of compulsory celibacy 
for the secular clergy, confining its obligation to members 
of religious orders who take vows of poverty, chastity and 
obedience. It is not generally known that secular priests 
make no vows, though the law of the Roman Church forbids 
them to marry, and annuls their marriages if contracted 
in defiance of its precepts. This is a point of ecclesiastical 
discipline which applies only to the secular clergy of 
the Latin rite. 

"It is well known that the Oriental clergy of the various 
Eastern rites who are in communion with Rome are allowed 
to marry, provided they do so before reception of the 
order of priesthood. His Holiness, therefore, in order to 
facilitate the reunion of the Anglican Church with the Roman, 
is favorable to the extension of the same privilege to the 
secular clergy of the Latin rite. In point of fact, the sovereign 
pontiff is well aware that the law of compulsory celibacy 
has become a dead letter among the parochial clergy 
throughout South America, from Mexico to Patagonia, and 
to a great extent also in Spain, Portugal, Italy, and the dependencies 
of those countries. Cardinal Vaughan and the 
Anglo-Roman Bishops generally are unfavorable to any 
change in the existing discipline, but Dr. Brownlow, Bishop 
of Clifton, and Dr. Hedley, Bishop of Newport and Menevia, 
are believed to entertain the same sentiments as the 
Pope on this question." 



R1804:page 104 

A Catholic priest was recently appointed to teach 
"The Philosophy of St. Thomas," in a Protestant University 

R1805 : page 104 

of Amsterdam. 

Lord Acton, a Roman Catholic, was recently appointed 
Regius Professor of Modern History in Cambridge 
University, in the place of the late Prof. Seeley. 

Comment is unnecessary. 



The Episcopal Church of the United States proposes a 
change of its constitution. It is proposed to district the 
United States into "Provinces," in each of which there shall 
be a legislative body competent to manage all of the affairs 
of the Province (as do the State Legislatures in civil affairs). 



It is proposed to have a more definite head and mouth than 
ever before for doctrinal utterances;— that all questions of 
doctrine shall be submitted to the House of Bishops, whose 
decisions shall be final. Furthermore, it is proposed to elect 
one of the bishops a chief, to be called Primus, and in position 
therefore to correspond to the Roman Pontiff. 

This means that four thousand ministers and nearly 
half a million communicants shall, even more completely 
than at present, give up the liberty wherewith Christ proposed 
to make them free, and come completely under a 
yoke of bondage. It means probably much more. It is 
probably an outline or skeleton of the great Protestant 
Union, sure to come, clearly outlined in God's Word as 
an image or likeness to Papacy. 

THE SOCIAL VIEW. 



In Manitoba about one-fifth of the population is 
Catholic, and four-fifths Protestant. It had been the 
custom to divide the school funds of the State and let each 
sect have its own schools; but this was abandoned in 1890, 
and a free secular school system was introduced, similar to 
that in vogue in the United States. The Roman Catholics 
have since been fighting to get their share and have their 
separate schools. They appealed to the Canadian Parliament 
in the matter, and afterward to the Privy Council of Great 
Britain, and have been supported in their demands. But 
the people of Manitoba are so pleased with their present 
unsectarian schools that they threaten rebellion rather than 
abandon them. 

A leading Manitoba paper says,— 

"The restoration will never be made: Manitoba has 
too keen a sense of justice, too much regard for truth and 
equity... .As a civilized people attempting to realize 
in a measure the ideals of the nineteenth century, 
Manitobans will not quietly submit to the preposterous 
demand that they should turn back the wheels of progress 
three hundred years." 



Both France and Spain have been on the verge of 
Revolution during the past month. Indeed nothing is more 
evident than that discontent and revolt are the order of the 
day in matters religious, political, social and family. What 
little there is of national cohesion in Europe seems to be 
largely the result of fear of each other. Take away that 
fear, and disband the armies as has been proposed, and the 
result would surely be general revolution and anarchy within 
two years, probably within one year. 

Thus we see the social "earth" ready for the great 
social conflagration predicted in God's Word— "the day 
that shall burn as an oven," in which "the proud and all 
that do wickedly [unjustly] shall be as stubble," the great 



"time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation." 
But not yet: the conflagration must not come, the winds of 
war must not seriously blow, until the servants of God have 
first been "sealed in their foreheads" (intellectually) with 
the truth. Then the great storm predicted for twenty-five 
centuries will come "as a whirlwind." But meantime men 
speak of the assured peace of Europe, while France finds 
that her army is inferior to that of Germany by over one 
hundred thousand men, and proceeds to increase her army 
as an assurance of peace; and Great Britain finds that her 
navy is insufficient to maintain her dignity as the mistress 
of the sea, and will increase her navy. 



It seems a difficult matter for human brains to arrange 
laws which will protect the weaker elements of society from 
the mentally, physically and financially stronger elements 
without violating principles of justice and equality. For 
instance, the Illinois Legislature passed laws to prevent the 
employment of women in factories more than eight hours 
per day. The object was to benefit women by such restriction, 
and to do away with "the sweating system." But the 
Illinois Supreme Court has decided that the help cannot 
be constitutionally afforded in this manner; that such a 
law would be a restraint of a woman's rights to work as long 
as a man may work if she pleases,— a discrimination as between 
men and women the State constitution forbids. 

It is a sad case: competition and necessities on the one 
hand are grinding the life out of fellow beings, yet when 
benevolent people would render help justice, which all are 
bound to respect, says, Holding that men and women are 
equal, no legislation for or against either sex can be allowed. 



The U.S. Income Tax decision is somewhat similar. 
The tax is upon incomes above $4000 per year, under the 
general sentiment that those people who are by reason of 
superior ability or position so much more favorably situated 
than the masses should in justice pay a larger proportion of 
the expenses of government, etc. 

The U.S. Supreme Court has been called upon to decide 
as to the constitutionality of the law. A portion of 
the Court holds that the law is entirely unconstitutional— 
that no tax can be applied to one man that does not apply 
to another in equal proportion; that if, for instance, an Income 
Tax of two per cent be collected, it must apply proportionately 
to every man, whatever his income. The remainder 
of the Court upheld the law so far as it relates to 
profits or income not already taxed; but held that income 
from bonds and from real estate, having already paid 
taxes, cannot constitutionally be taxed again more than the 
real estate, bonds, etc., of others. 

R1805 :page 105 



In a word, the Constitutions, State and National, were 
designed to secure liberty and equality to all, male and female, 
rich and poor. If laws could be made to discriminate 
between males and females on one point, other laws 
might be made that would reduce one sex to slavery and 
make the other sex the masters. And if laws could be made 
to pinch the rich, the time might come when laws would be 
passed to pinch and enslave the poor. Hence these Constitutions 
were formed to prevent any partiality. 

The fact is that mankind are not at all equal; and hence, 
all being free, the inferior either in strength or intellect, as 
well as the superior in heart and benevolence, are apt to suffer 
more or less from the intellectual and financial giants, 
and need a paternal government that will recognize the inequalities 
and protect without enslaving the inferiors. But 
where can such a government be found? Who can be trusted? 
The one and only hope before the groaning creation 
is that set before us in the words: "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." Ah, 
yes! when that Millennial Kingdom comes, it will be indeed 
"the desire of all nations," although now they know it not. 



The London Spectator, after telling of the ravages of 
Influenza during the past winter doubling the death 
rate, suggests that the world is resting in a fancied security 
as to safety from plagues such as have visited the world in 
the past,— for instance, "the black death," with which 
physicians could do little,— that such or worse may come 
again, and gives some reasons for fearing them. It mentioned 
a fever approaching Europe from Russia, and now 
says:— 

"The disease which, when we wrote, had just crossed 
the German frontier, has now reached the low quarters of 
Berlin, causing many deaths and much suffering. It is a 
fierce fever which attacks the mouth, causing the loss of all 
teeth in a few hours, after which it kills, or departs leaving 
its victims toothless. Dr. Virchow believes it to be the 
'foot-and-mouth disease of cattle,' probably transmitted 
to the human subject by diseased milk. It is, however, infectious, 
and moves Westward. We shall know more about 
it in a few days; but if it reached our shores, it would be 
a terrible addition to our stock of painful complaints,— and, 
we repeat, there is no reason, except our short experience 
of exemption, why it should not." 

The Scriptures indicate that pestilences, as well as physical 
convulsions, will mingle with anarchy in making up 
the sum of the great trouble approaching, which will be a 
judgment from the Almighty to reduce the world to humility 
and submission, and make mankind ready to hear "Him 
that speaketh from heaven," whose voice shall thus "shake 
the earth [society], and also the heavens [ecclesiasticism]." 
-Heb. 12:26-29. 



R1806 :page 105 

PERFECT THROUGH SUFFERING. 



"Who, in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and 
supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save 
him from death, and was heard in that he feared; though he were a 
Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; 
and, being made perfect, he became the author of eternal 
salvation unto all them that obey him; called of God an 
high priest after the order of Melchisedec."— Heb. 5:7-10. 

WE take up the examination of this scripture under 
the following five heads:— (1) In the days of his 
flesh; (2) What he feared, and from what he was saved; 
(3) He was a Son; (4) In what sense he was made perfect; 
and (5) To whom he is the author of eternal salvation. 
These words of the Apostle give us an insight to the 
experiences of our dear Lord which help us to appreciate 
the load he bore for us in the days of his flesh. We notice 
particularly this expression— 

"IN THE DAYS OF HIS FLESH," 

because there are some who claim that in our Lord's existence 
there can be no distinction between days when he was in 
the flesh, and days when he was no longer in the flesh; for, 
say they, his resurrection life is his humanity, his flesh, 
glorified. Others there are who claim that he had no existence 
prior to his human life. But the reverse of both 
these ideas is not only implied in this statement of the 
Apostle, but is also definitely expressed in other scriptures, 
e.g., "Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh 
and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same;" 
he "was made flesh, and dwelt among us;" "Though he 
was rich, for our sakes he became poor." Then he said, 
"My flesh I will give for the life of the world." (See Heb. 2:14; 
John 1:14; 2 Cor. 8:9; John 6:51.) Yes, his human 
body was the body of his humiliation, the "body prepared" 
for sacrifice (Heb. 10:4,5), and which was sacrificed; 
and which, being sacrificed, was never taken back: 
it was given as the price of our redemption. Therefore 
he no longer lives the life in the flesh, the human life, 
but, having sacrificed that, he is now highly exalted and 
ever liveth as our divine high priest. "Yea, though we 
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now, henceforth, 
know we him [so] no more."— 2 Cor. 5:16. 

His humiliation, therefore, was not an eternal humiliation, 
but was followed by a glorious exaltation, even to the 
divine nature and to the glorious body which belongs to 
that nature— "the express image of the Father's person" 
(Heb. 1:3), who dwelleth in light which no man can approach 



unto, but which Christ's faithful followers may one 
day see; for it is written that "we shall be like him, and 
see him as he is"— not as he was. For this he prayed 
while he was yet in the flesh, saying, "Father, I will that 
those whom thou hast given me shall be with me where I 
am, that they may behold my glory."— John 17:24. 
And yet, though changed, our Lord is the very same 

R1806 : page 106 

Jesus; for, says the Apostle, "He that descended [into the 

grave] is the same also that ascended up far above all 

heavens, that he might fill all things." (Eph. 4:10.) 

The change of nature from the human to the divine 

no more destroyed his identity in this case than did his 

change from the spiritual to the human nature at his incarnation. 

Of himself he said after his resurrection, "I am 

he that liveth and was dead, and behold I am alive forevermore." 

-Rev. 1:4,18. 

It is with grateful hearts that we accept the statements 
of Scripture that the Son of God was indeed made flesh; 
and we thank God also that his days in the flesh were 
numbered and few. With him, as with us, they were "few 
days and full of trouble." Especially after his consecration 
to the work of sacrifice, they were days of affliction, 
sorrow, disappointment and trouble, days that led him 
often to the throne of the heavenly grace to find help in 
time of need. It was our Lord's custom, therefore, often 
to seek the place of prayer after the busy days of service 
were ended. The mountains and the deserts were his 
closets, and not infrequently he spent the whole night in 
prayer. 

It was from these seasons of secret communion with 
God that he drew spiritual strength, consolation and comfort. 
They were seasons of precious communion when he 
could open up his heart to the Father as to no one else; 
when he could tell him all his sorrows and burdens and 
fears; and when the Father manifested himself to him in 
tokens of loving approval and sustaining grace. 

WHAT HE FEARED, AND FROM WHAT HE WAS SAVED. 

What, says some one, in surprise, did our Lord have 
any fears? Yes, the above words of the Apostle indicate 
the great mental conflict through which the Lord passed on 
our behalf "in the days of his flesh." This conflict began 
in the temptations of the wilderness, immediately following 
his baptism, and reached its culminating point in the 
garden of Gethsemane, where, probably as never before, 
"he offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying 
and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, 
and was heard in that he feared." 

That which the Lord feared was not that the love or 
the promises of God would fail. He knew that "without 
faith it is impossible to please God," that God is a covenant-keeping 
God, and that all his conduct and dealings 



are founded on the eternal principles of truth and righteousness, 

from which to vary in the least iota would be a 

moral impossibility. But he knew, too, that the plan of human 

salvation was all made dependent upon the obedience 

of the anointed high priest to every jot and tittle of the 

law concerning him, as shown in the typical service of the 

tabernacle.* Not only must the sacrifice be made, but it 

must be made and offered exactly as prescribed. If the 

typical high priest, Aaron, had at any time failed to conform 

to the directions given for the offering (See Lev. 9:16), 

if he had forgotten or ignored any part of the directions, 

or if he had substituted some feature of his own 

ideas, he would not have been allowed to sprinkle the blood 

of such imperfect sacrifice upon the mercy-seat; his offering 

would not have been accepted: he would have died, and could 

never have come out and blessed the people.— Lev. 16:2,3. 

Thus we see that in undertaking the great work of 
redemption, the high priest not only bore in himself the 
issues of life and death for the whole human race, but for 
himself as well. Figuratively speaking, he took his own 
life also in his hands. No wonder, then, if, under the 
weight of his responsibility, the Lord feared. The tension 
of the great trials to which he was subjected was too great 
for even the perfect human nature unaided by divine grace. 
And therefore it was that he so often sought the place of 
prayer. Consider the great fight of afflictions through 
which he passed— the subtle and deceptive temptations in 
the wilderness,+ the contradictions of sinners against himself, 
and the base ingratitude of those he came to save: 
consider also his poverty, his loss of friends, his labors 
and weariness, and homelessness, his bitter and relentless 
persecutions, and finally his betrayal and dying agony. 
Surely the tests of endurance and of obedience to the exact 
requirements of the law of sacrifice under these circumstances 
were most crucial tests. What carefulness it wrought 
in the Lord; for he feared, lest the promise having been 
left him of entering into the rest that remaineth and the 
glory to follow the day of atonement, he should come short 
of the full requirements of his office as a priest to render 
acceptable sacrifice. So also, says the Apostle (Heb. 4:1), 
should we fear lest a promise being left us of entering into 
his rest, any of us should come short of it. 

When the Lord came to the last night of his earthly 
life, then it was that the questions came to his mind with 
increased force, Have I thus far done everything in exact 
accordance with the will of God? and now, in full view 
of the agony it will cost, am I able to drink the bitter cup 
to its very dregs? Can I endure, not only the physical 
agony, but also the ignominy and shame and cruel mockings? 
and can I do it all so perfectly as to be entirely acceptable 
with God in my own righteousness? Can I endure 
to see my disciples scattered and dismayed and my 
life-work apparently destroyed, my name and the cause of 
God covered with infamy, and my enemies triumphant and 
boastful? 

Such was our Lord's last conflict. Doubtless the powers 



of darkness were busy in that awful hour, taking advantage 

of the circumstances and of his weakness and weariness to 

discourage his hope and to fill his mind with fears that 

after all he should fail, or had failed to do the work acceptably, 

and that a resurrection therefore was by no means 

certain. No wonder that even the perfect human heart 

sank before such considerations, and that an agony of emotion 

brought great drops of bloody sweat. But did he 

yield to the discouragement and give up the struggle when 



*See TABERNACLE SHADOWS, page 78. 
+See our issue of Aug. 1, '94. 

R1806 : page 107 

the crucial test was thus upon him? No; he took these 
human fears to his Heavenly Father, "to him who was able 
to deliver him out of death," in order that his human will 
might be reinforced by divine grace to go forward and 
complete his sacrifice acceptably to God— to freely submit 
to be led away as a lamb to the slaughter, and, as a sheep 
before her shearers is dumb, so to open not his mouth in 
self-defence.— Isa. 53:7. 

And his prayers to the Father were not in vain: "he 
was heard in that he feared." Though his words were few 

R1807 : page 107 

because no words could express the emotions of his soul, 
his chastened spirit was all the while making intercession for 
him with groanings that could not be uttered. (Rom. 8:26.) 
And God sent an angel to comfort and minister unto him; to 
assure him still of the divine favor, and thus to give him 
fresh courage, strength of mind and steadiness of nerve to 
endure all that was before him, even unto death. With this 
assistance of divine grace our dear Lord went forward from 
that moment with undaunted courage to finish the work 
that was given him to do. Calmly he could come now 
and say to his beloved, but weary and bewildered, disciples, 
"Sleep on now, and take your rest." The bitterness of the 
mental conflict was now over, and the light of heaven shining 
into his soul had chased away the deep gloom that had 
hung over him like a funeral pall, making him exceeding 
sorrowful, even unto death. Yes, "he was heard in that 
he feared," the fear was all taken away, and, strong in 
the strength which God supplied, he felt that he was able 
to offer the acceptable sacrifice, to meet every jot and tittle 
of the requirement of the law in doing it, and hence that 
his salvation out of death, his resurrection, was sure. 
This fear on the Lord's part was not a sinful fear: it 
was a fear such as we also who are striving to walk in his 
footsteps are told to have, lest we fail to realize the precious 
promises vouchsafed to us upon conditions that are 
positive and unalterable. (Heb. 4:1.) It was a fear begotten, 



not of doubt of the Father's ability and willingness 
to fulfil all his promises, but of a knowledge of the 
righteous principles which must in every case govern 
the Father's course of action, of the inflexible law which 
righteously affixed the reward of eternal life and glory to 
his fulfilling of his covenant of sacrifice, while at the same 
time he began to realize that of himself as a human being, 
though perfect, his heart and flesh would fail unless reinforced 
by divine grace. The Psalmist expressed this fear 
of the Lord, and the source from which his help came, when 
he said, "My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the 
strength of my heart and my portion forever." (Psa. 73:26.) 
It was a filial fear, a fear entirely compatible with his 
relationship to God as a recognized Son; for 

THOUGH HE WERE A SON 

yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered. 
His continual recognition by Jehovah as a Son was a guarantee 
of his perfection, and to sin at any time would have 
been to forfeit that relationship. On the same principle, 
we, the Church, are recognized as sons of God, because we 
have the righteousness of Christ imputed to us by faith. 

And yet, though he was a recognized Son, and hence perfect, 
without sin, the Apostle speaks of him as being made 
perfect— as being perfected in some sense through a process 
of experience— of experience of humiliation and suffering. 
In what sense, then, we inquire, was he perfected? The 
answer is implied in the words of the text— "Yet learned 
he obedience by the things which he suffered; and, being 
made perfect [in this lesson], he became," etc. Although he 
was a recognized Son of God in whom the Father was always 
well pleased, and one who had never disappointed in the 
slightest degree the fondest hopes of that righteous Father; 
although he had always recognized the Father as the 
source of his being, and the fountain of all wisdom, goodness 
and grace, and as that superior Being to whom he 
owed the deepest gratitude for life and all its manifold 
blessings, in whom also dwelt all wisdom and honor and 
glory and power, and whose perfect will was therefore the 
supreme law, the expression of the most perfect righteousness 
and truth, the profoundest wisdom and the deepest 
love and grace; to whom, therefore, was due the most loyal 
and loving obedience at all times and under all circumstances; 
and although he was a Son who had always recognized 
and delighted to do the Father's will; yet he was not 
counted perfect in the sense of that established and demonstrated 
character which was the necessary requirement for 
the priestly office to which he was called. For this office 
he must be proved beyond all peradventure by the severest 
tests, and that before many witnesses, in order that all might 
know the strong foundation upon which they could build 
their hopes. It was for this purpose that his sense of loyalty 
was put to the severe test which it met in Gethsemane. 
Possibly even our Lord himself did not realize the strength 
of his righteous character until brought face to face with this 



last trial. There he was tried and proved to the uttermost, 
and under the fiery ordeal his character, always perfect to 
the full measure of its testing, gained by divine grace its 
glorious perfection of completeness. 

Thus, through suffering, he learned obedience to the 
perfect will of God down to the lowest depths of self-abnegation; 
and God permitted it so to be, because such proving 
was necessary, both for the development and manifestation 
of that perfection of character which would be worthy 
of the high exaltation to which he was called. 

It should ever be borne in mind that perfection of 
being and perfection of character are two different things. 
Perfection of being is the work of God, while perfection of 
character is the work of the intelligent creature, wrought 
out in obedience to divine law and under the divine direction 
and supervision. Adam was a perfect being, innocent, 
free and glorious in his pristine beauty; but in the work 
of character-building he soon failed, and hence lost his perfection. 
Character cannot be developed wholly without 
trial. It is like a plant: at first it is very tender; it needs 
an abundance of the sunshine of God's love; frequent 

R1807 : page 108 

watering with the showers of his grace; much cultivating 
through the applied knowledge of his character as a good 
foundation for faith and inspiration to obedience; and then, 
when thus developed under these favorable conditions, it is 
ready for the pruning hand of discipline, and is also able to 
endure some hardness. And, little by little, as strength of 
character is developed, the tests applied to it serve only to 
develop more strength, beauty and grace until it is finally 
fixed, developed, established, perfected— through suffering. 

In the case of our Lord, this valuable plant of character, 
perfect in its infancy, maintained its perfection through 
all the tests applied to it, until it was finally made perfect 
in completeness, being established, strengthened, settled. 
This brings us to the last topic of our text, viz.,— 

TO WHOM IS CHRIST THE AUTHOR OF ETERNAL 
SALVATION? 

"And being made perfect, he became the author of 
eternal salvation unto all them that obey him; called of 
God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec." 

There is much food for thought in this introductory 
phrase, "And being made perfect,"— and that, too, as previously 
shown, through the painful discipline of suffering. 
Being thus made perfect, he is now a suitable one to fill 
the office of a high priest, a mediator between God and 
men. This office, it is declared, he will fill on behalf of 
all men who obey him. The disobedient and wilful, who 
do not love the right ways of the Lord, and who have no 
desire to walk in them, will receive none of the benefit of 
his mediation; but to those who do obey him he will be 
"a merciful and faithful high priest;... for in that he 



himself hath suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor 
[to assist, comfort, relieve] them that are tempted. 

Ah, that was why he was first made perfect through 
suffering. The heavenly Father knew through what suffering, 
ignominy, shame and sorrow his beloved followers all 
through the Gospel age must pass. His omniscient eye 
foresaw the fagot, the torch, the rack, and the thousand refinements 
of cruelty with which Satanic ingenuity would 
fight the Church on her journey through this wilderness to 
the promised land. He foreknew how the fiery darts of the 
wicked, even bitter words, would wound them (Psa. 64:2,3), 
and therefore "It became him [Jehovah]... to make 
the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings." 
(Heb. 2:10.) He was tempted in all points like as we are, 
yet without sin, so that we might know that we have a high 
priest who can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, 
and so come boldly unto the throne of grace that we 
may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need. 
(Heb. 4:15,16.) Ah, how carefully and wisely our heavenly 
Father foresaw and considered the interests of all his 
people! Through these glimpses of his character and dealings 
we can see how true were our Lord's words to his disciples, 
—"The Father himself loveth you." 

But, aside from the process of perfecting for the office 
of priesthood,— through suffering,— there is the fact of the 
perfection of our High Priest, to be considered for our comfort, 
satisfaction and consolation. He is one who, though 
when surrounded by sin and tempted in all points to sin, 
yet "knew no sin; neither was guile found in his mouth." 
He was "holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners," 
yet acquainted with our griefs and bearing our sorrows. 
Through bitter experiences he was perfected as our 
High Priest— to mediate for us (1), by presenting to God 
an acceptable sacrifice which made our salvation a legal possibility; 
(2), by undertaking to cleanse, purge and purify 
us until we also can stand approved of God and blameless 
—a glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle or any such 
thing. 

The absolute perfection, both personal and official, of 
our great High Priest, and the fact that he was ordained 
of God for this office, is the strongest possible demand and 
incentive for the Church's obedience to him, just as the 

R1808 :page 108 

heavenly Father's perfection and office were the all-sufficient 
reasons to our Lord for his obedience to the Father. God 
has not set over us a novice, nor one actuated by selfishness, 
nor by any ignoble motive; but he has made us a great 
High Priest whose every command is wise and good and in 
love calculated to lead us on from grace to grace until we 
also, like him, shall be established, strengthened, settled. 
The discipline through which he leads to this glorious 
end must of necessity be, in some measure at least, such as 
he himself experienced, a discipline of suffering. And since 
the Church is called, not only to perfection in righteousness, 



but also to share with Christ in the priestly office as 
members of his body, it is theirs also to follow him in the 
pathway of humiliation and sacrifice, even unto death. To 
obey him now, in this age, signifies all of this; for this is the 
will of God and the will of Christ, even our sanctification. 
-1 Thes. 4:3. 

In submitting ourselves fully to this great High Priest, 
the Church has the fullest assurance of his love, of his perfect 
integrity of character and purpose, of his superior wisdom 
and grace, and that in all things he is actuated by the 
purest and loftiest principles of virtue, love and benevolence. 
Never once has he been swayed from the most exact 
line of perfection, though assailed by the fiercest temptations. 
Every exhibition and testimony of his character 
inspires the fullest confidence, so that obedience to him signifies 
progress toward perfection at every step of the way. 
And to those who follow in this way he is the author of 
eternal salvation. Praise God for such a High Priest!— 
glorious in his perfection and glorious in his office, one 
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but himself having 
no infirmities, no shortcomings, no sins. If he were 
an imperfect human being with only some superior qualifications, 
but liable like ourselves to err, to fail in judgment, 
or to be moved by selfishness or inferior considerations of 
policy, or who with a beam in his own eye would seek to 
extract the mote from ours, well might we fear to commit ourselves 
to his direction, and wonder why the Almighty gave 
us such a high priest. But our High Priest is not so. His 

R1808 : page 109 

perfection is testified by Jehovah himself, and his great love 
for us has been manifested in a thousand ways, chiefly in 
that he gave himself for us. 

Previous to his incarnation the evidences of our Lord's 
loyalty to the will of God— which always was the law of 
righteousness— were the acts of delightful service in cooperation 
with God in the works of creation and in things 
pertaining thereto. The humbling to human conditions 
was a step down from that exalted service, yet cheerfully 
and gladly undertaken. Then followed the trials of his 
earthly life; and last of all came the severe test of Gethsemane 
and Calvary. Here was a test of his fidelity to 
God which would cost him all that he had. Beyond this 
he could hope for nothing, save by the mercy and love of 
God, to whose wisdom, love and power he commended his 
spirit. (Luke 23:46.) It was indeed a crucial test, and 
though at the time he evidently could not see the necessity 
for every feature of it (Matt. 26:39,42,44), he nevertheless 
knew that the love of God was too great to allow a 
needless pain to afflict his beloved Son, and therefore he 
trusted him where he could not at the time trace his inscrutable 
ways. 



R1808 : page 109 

PRIESTCRAFT OPPOSED TO LIBERTY. 



SOME of the friends write us that their friends, 

ministers, etc., upon learning that it is the custom 

amongst us to celebrate the Memorial of our Lord's 

death, in little groups, or even alone when there are no others 

who appreciate and desire to commemorate it, have expressed 

astonishment, and pronounced such doings sacrilegious; 

—declaring that only the "clergy" have the right to administer 

to themselves or others the emblems of our Lord's 

broken body and shed blood. 

We reply that the entire expression of our Master's will, 
and the only authority upon the subject, is found in the New 
Testament; and there we find no restriction, no limitation, 
except such as every true Christian can answer to,— faith 
in the precious blood of Christ, and consecration to the Redeemer's 
will and work. 

The entire theory and arrangement marked by the 
terms "clergy" and "laity" is of Papal origin, and was 
arranged with the special object of binding and blinding 
God's children by taking from them the very liberty 
wherewith Christ made them free. Our Lord made 
no restriction as to who should serve it or give thanks for 
it, but intimated that all were to be ready to serve and in 
honor to prefer one another. His simple expressions were 
"eat ye all of it," and "drink ye all of it." Neither did 
the Apostles place any restrictions on the matter, nor say 
that when the clergy may please to prepare and bless and distribute, 
the laity may eat of the Lord's Supper. What 
restrictions did they place, if any? Like the Lord, they 
placed none, but advised that "a man examine HIMSELF" 
as to his worthiness to partake of the emblems. (1 Cor. 1 1:28.) 
It was not the "clergy" that were to examine 
and determine who might partake, but each one whom the 
Son had made free was to use his own freedom and examine 
himself before God and in the light of God's Word. 

The Apostles knew nothing about "clergy" and 
"laity," and those words do not occur in the Holy Scriptures: 
they were a part of Papacy's invention for keeping 
the masses subject to the priests. The Apostle Peter, whom 
they falsely style the first pope, contradicts all such popish 
ideas by declaring that the entire Church, including the 
very humblest one united by faith to Christ the Head, constitute 
together God's Royal Priesthood, God's Holy Nation, 
God's Peculiar People.— 1 Pet. 2:9. 

As a part of the scheme of the Papal priesthood for 
their own exaltation as a special or "clerical" class, it was 
assumed, without the slightest warrant of Scripture, (1) that 
there was a special or "clerical" class; (2) that only such 
are authorized to teach, preach, baptize, bury the dead, read 
the Scriptures, or arrange for a celebration of the Lord's 
Supper. The evident design was to fasten with the cords 



of priestcraft and superstition the infant a few days old (for 
the baptism of believers was changed to sprinkling of infants), 
and to keep those tightly drawn until the last spark 
of consciousness expired; and then the theory of masses and 
prayers for the dead was not only to get money but also to 
teach that the priestly cords extended beyond the present life, 
beyond the grave, and that the eternal blessedness or misery 
of every being was at their disposal. Can we wonder that 
our ignorant priestridden fathers of the dark ages feared the 
priests and regarded them as beings of a different nature 
than themselves? 

One of the strongest of these superstitious cords was 
the one associated with the Lord's Supper. This cord was 
doubled and twisted several times and made very strong and 
sacred, under the claim that literal bread and wine had to 
have a miracle performed upon them so as to change them 
into the actual body and blood of the Lord Jesus; for it 
was and is yet claimed by Papacy that in their Mass Christ 
is recreated by the priest, and then killed or sacrificed afresh 

R1809 : page 109 

each time the Mass is celebrated for those special persons 
or sins for whom the Mass is performed. 

The doctrine of the Trinity added to the homage 
paid to the priesthood; for it was said, and with reason, 
that if the priest can create Christ out of bread and wine 
(by merely pronouncing a few Latin words over it), he must, 
if Christ be God the Father, be considered able to create 
the great Creator of the universe by virtue of special power 
and authority of office conferred upon him. No wonder 
the people, the "laity," worshipped the "clergy," and 
reverenced and obeyed them as though they were God. 

R1809 :page 110 

But the people were not thereby lifted up and blessed; for 
nothing but the Truth sanctifies, and the Truth makes free 
and is in opposition to bondage. 

The Great Reformation of the sixteenth century made 
a wonderful and blessed change in many respects, not only 
with those who became Protestants against these enslavements 
of priestcraft, but also in that those still fully enslaved 
were thereafter less tightly bounden. 

But even those who thought that they had gotten free 
had been only partially released. Some of the cords were 
snapped asunder at once, but others were replaced by smaller 
and less noticeable cords, which nevertheless are very strong 
upon Protestants. They still retained the words "clergy" 
and "laity;" and, although robbed of much of their power, 
those words still imply a wide gulf between two classes of 
sheep in the Great Shepherd's fold. 

Hindrance to Bible study was a cord that was snapped 
promptly, but some Protestants still seek to restrain that liberty 
by implying that only the clergy are competent to explain 
the meaning of the Bible. The Protestant clergy still seek 



to give the inference that none but the "clergy" are commissioned 

to preach, but they rarely express themselves 

plainly upon the subject, knowing that the Bible recognizes 

no such special "rights" as they would wish the common 

people to infer. So, too, generally by inference and custom, 

they give the impression that baptism and burying of 

the dead belong to them. And while Protestants wholly 

reject the Papal doctrine of the Mass, and with it the thought 

that Christ is recreated by the officiating minister or priest, 

so as to be sacrificed afresh, yet they carry with them a portion 

of the shadow of the error. They have a feeling that 

in some way which they cannot explain, and for some reason 

not given in the Bible, it would be sacrilege for any one 

not of the "clergy" class to pass the emblems of the Redeemer's 

body and blood. Well, priestcraft is surely in 

danger wherever the Word of God is clearly understood; 

and ZION'S WATCH TOWER is published for no other purpose 

than to help God's benighted children out of the blindness 

and bondage put upon them by Satan, and to assist them 

into the light and liberty wherewith the Son makes free. 



R1809 :page 110 

JESUS BEFORE THE HIGH PRIEST. 



--MAY 12, MARK 14:53-64;-MATT. 26:47-75; 
LUKE 22:47-65; JOHN 18:2-27.- 

Golden Text— "He is despised and rejected of men."— Isa. 53:3. 

MARK 14:53. Jesus was first led to Annas (John 18:13), 

who, although deposed by the Romans, 

was the rightful high priest according to the law, the office 

being for life, and he was probably so regarded by the Jews, 

who, therefore, sought counsel of him first. His son-in-law, 

Caiaphas (the same who had prophesied that it was expedient 

that one man should die for the people— John 18:14), 

was the acting high priest appointed by the Romans. Apparently, 

Annas agreed with the general sentiments of the 

rulers, and, after asking Jesus a few questions about his doctrine 

and his disciples, sent him bound to Caiaphas.— 

John 18:19-24. 

Since it was contrary to the Jewish law to hold a session 
of the Sanhedrin for the trial of capital offences by 
night, and this being the night of the paschal supper, making 
it still more objectionable, it is clear that this was an 
irregular meeting of this assembly of the nation's representatives, 
drawn together by common consent to participate in 
the crime of condemning their Messiah, Jehovah's Anointed. 
From it, however, were carefully excluded, evidently, 
a few such men as Joseph of Arimathea, Nicodemus (John 19:38,39; 
7:50,51) and probably a few others known to 



be favorably inclined toward the new teacher. They probably 
knew nothing of it. 

Verses 55-59. What an astonishing fact is here stated: 
that the great men of the most favored nation on earth, 
—the learned men, the wise men, the rulers, the men of 
years and experience, the religious teachers— should thus 
deliberately, and of long premeditation, wickedly conspire 
against the purest and most noble character that had ever 
graced the earth. Not only had they frequently deputed 
emissaries to catch him in his words as he taught in public, 
but finally they had bribed an apostate disciple to betray 
him and a band of Roman soldiers to arrest him, although 
there was no charge against him. And then this august, 
learned and dignified assembly, having secured their hated 
prisoner, busied themselves to find some two witnesses whose 
testimony should agree together, according to the requirement 
of the law (Deut. 19:15), in order to his condemnation. 
They found many who willingly bore false witness 
against him, but none whose witness agreed together. 

Verses 60-62. Failing in their effort to satisfy this requirement 
of the law, the high priest then endeavored to 
force Jesus to criminate himself, saying, "Answerest thou 
nothing? what is it which these witness against thee?" 
But he (wisely) held his peace and answered nothing, knowing 
that the truth was not desired and would avail nothing 
with these men who so warmly cherished murder in their 
hearts. And, further, he had no disposition to defend himself, 
knowing that his hour was come for the sacrifice of his 
life. But when further urged to express himself by the inquiry 
—"Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?"— 
knowing that his reply would be like the signing of his death 
warrant, he deliberately answered, "I am," and added this 
prophecy— "And ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the 
right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven." 

This prophecy compassed the certainty of his death 
and resurrection, and pointed to his return in the end of 
the Gospel age in power and great glory— the power and 
glory of his Kingdom, which he had previously affirmed was 
not to be of this world, or dispensation, of which Satan is 
the prince (John 14:30), but of the world to come, wherein 
dwelleth righteousness.— Heb. 2:5; 2 Pet. 3:13. 

This frank and fearless acknowledgment of his divine 
origin and appointment as the long predicted Messiah, the 
Savior of Israel and the world, was taken as blasphemy, and 
the hypocritical high priest, whose very robes were symbolic 
of the blessed one who stood in their midst fulfilling to the 
letter the predictions of the prophets, rent his clothes in 
token of astonishment and horror at such blasphemy, saying, 
"What need we any further witnesses? Ye have heard 
the blasphemy: what think ye? And they all condemned 

R1809 :page 111 

him to be guilty of death"— the prescribed punishment for 
blasphemy. -Lev. 24:16; Deut. 18:20. 
Thus fell the Jewish hierarchy into the ditch of unbelief 



and crime, and the masses of the people, who had 

shifted upon them their personal responsibility in the matter 

of receiving and rejecting Christ, considering first whether 

any of the Pharisees or of the rulers believed on him, fell 

with them, crying, "His blood be on us and on our children." 

Well hath the Psalmist said, "It is better to trust in 

the Lord [in the word of his truth] than to put confidence 

in man; it is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence 

in princes." Let Christians of the present day heed 

this in this corresponding period of the Gospel age, when 

again the unfolding of truth in its due time is bringing the 

professed people of God to a crisis "which shall try every 

man's work [of faith], of what sort it is." If we lean upon 

human props, we shall surely fall; but the word of the Lord 

endureth forever. 



R1809 :page 111 

JESUS BEFORE PILATE. 



-MAY 19, MARK 15:1-15;-MATT. 27:1-30; 
LUKE 23:1-25; JOHN 18:28-40; 19:1-16.— 

Golden Text— "But Jesus yet answered 
nothing, so that Pilate marvelled." 

SINCE the informal meeting of the Sanhedrin 
described in the preceding lesson could not give 
a legal sentence before sunrise, this morning meeting and 
consultation were merely for the purpose of ratifying the conclusions 
then reached. They then delivered Jesus bound unto 
Pilate, the whole company escorting him thither to make sure 
that their purpose should be accomplished.— Luke 23:1. 
Verses 2-5. The wicked shrewdness of the Sanhedrin, 
in preferring the charge of blasphemy, for its effect upon 
the people before whom they desired to appear very zealous 
for the law, while an entirely different, but equally false, 
set of charges was brought against him before Pilate, the 
Roman governor, who cared nothing for their religious ideas, 
is very manifest. The accusation brought before Pilate involved 
the charge of treason, a charge most likely to arouse 
the indignation and wrath of the Roman rulers. They accused 
him of seditious agitation, of prohibiting the payment 

R1810 :page 111 

of tribute money, and of assuming the title of King of the 
Jews, and thus apparently of conspiring against Caesar and 
the Roman government. 

While the second charge was entirely false (Matt. 22:21), 
the other two had an appearance of truth, and to these 
were added numerous petty individual charges. But to none 



of them did the Lord make reply, so that Pilate marvelled 
that he made no effort at self-defence in the midst of such 
danger. 

Verses 6-14. The several efforts of Pilate to release 
his innocent prisoner, who, he discovered, had been delivered 
to him for envy, were unavailing before the boisterous 
mob who, instigated by their rulers, loudly clamored for 
his death, and that by the most ignominious and cruel 
method, crucifixion, so that his memory should ever be 
covered with infamy. 

Verse 15. Then Pilate, who was influenced more by 
considerations of policy than of principle, willing to satisfy 
the people, delivered Jesus to be scourged and crucified, yet 
at the same time protesting the innocence of his prisoner 
and washing his hands in token of his own innocence in 
thus delivering up to them this just person. Not until he 
himself was threatened by the mob to be reported to Caesar 
as one hostile to the government and a traitor to his trust 
in encouraging seditions and conspiracy against the government, 
did he relinquish his efforts to save Jesus.— John 19:12-16; 
Matt. 27:24,25. 



R1810 :page 111 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Sincerely desiring to render 
some assistance in the service of the truth revealed in 
the Divine Word, but realizing that there are now few opportunities 
open to me to engage in the present harvest 
work, I have concluded to furnish some means by which 
others better qualified may be enabled to carry forward that 
work. I own two 80-acre tracts of unimproved land in 
southern Illinois (Jefferson County). It is my wish that 
this land should be sold. Accordingly I have deeded these 
160 acres of land to you, and desire that you sell them to 
the best possible advantage, and use the proceeds according 
to your best judgment in spreading the true gospel of a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due time, with a full opportunity 
for all to be blessed thereby with everlasting life by 
obedience to the terms of the New Covenant, sealed with 
the precious blood of Christ. 

May the Lord graciously accept, use and bless my offering. 
Your Sister in Christ, CAROLINE BALDWIN. 

[Sister Baldwin's gift to the Lord's cause is accepted 
and greatly appreciated. The land is for sale; and the 
proceeds will be used to the best of our judgment in the 
Lord's service. May the divine blessing rest upon both 
giver and gift.-EDITOR.] 



DEAR BRETHREN: --About sixty brethren and sisters 
assembled here [Chicago] to commemorate the death of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Brother John and I spent a few minutes in trying to 
show the necessity of our Lord's death, as a man, for the redemption 
of the human race. You are well aware that a 
great deal is being said, to-day, about the example of Christ, 
but very little about his sacrifice. In fact, his sacrifice is 
being almost entirely ignored. Why is this? Is it not because 
we are living in the day when "a thousand shall fall 
at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand?" Is it not 
because the cross of Christ has become foolishness to the 
thousands, although it still remains "the power of God 
and the wisdom of God" unto them which are called? 
God forbid that we should in any way detract from or belittle 
the perfect example which our blessed Lord left us. 
His example was wonderful. Indeed, too much cannot be 
said about it. It will be well for us to consider Jesus in his 
perfect character and perfect example, and endeavor to become 
like him, following in his footsteps. For if we fail to 
do so, we will be sure to come short of the promised reward, 
which will be given simply to the overcomers. But 
while we are considering Christ's character and example, 

R1810 :page 112 

which were absolutely perfect, let us not forget that we 
were not redeemed by these. 

The Word of God very plainly teaches that our Lord 
Jesus was (1) perfect in character; holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate from sinners (Heb. 7:26); that he was 
(2) perfect in his organism; for he kept God's perfect law, 
which would have been impossible without a perfect organism, 
was "crowned with glory and honor" of perfect 

manhood (Heb. 2:9) and was "without spot or blemish" (1 Pet. 1:19); 
that he was (3) perfect in his example, which 
we should endeavor to follow. (1 Pet. 2:21.) But the 
Word of God very plainly teaches, also, that while Christ's 
character, organism and example were all absolutely perfect; 
and without this perfection he would not have been acceptable 
to God as man's ransom or substitute in death; 
yet it required something else to redeem us. "The man 
Christ Jesus" must give himself "a ransom for all." 

We were "redeemed [not with the example, but] with 
the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish 
and without spot (1 Pet. 1:19)— which was "shed for 
many [all] for the remission of sins." (Matt. 26:28.) 
"We have redemption [not through his example, but] 
through his blood." (Col. 1:14.) He has been set forth 
to be "a propitiation through faith [not in his example, 
but] in his blood."-See Rom. 3:24-26; 1 John 2:2; 4:10. 

Thank God for "the blood of Jesus Christ, his Son," 
which "cleanseth us from all sin!" (John 1:7) for without 
the shedding of blood there could be no remission of 
sins.-Heb. 9:22; Matt. 26:28. 

We tried to show how we "ate of the flesh of the son 



of man" and "drank his blood," and thereby passed from 
death unto life (justification); how we became part of the 
one loaf by consecration; and how, after having become 
part of the loaf, we are to be broken, "suffer with Christ," 
in order that we may "reign with him." 
Your brother in Christ, M. L. McPHAIL. 



DEAR BROTHER:— The congregations in Brooklyn, 
Yonkers and New York, including some from other near-by 
places, united for baptism service and the Lord's Supper. 
The baptism service was held at a Disciples church in the afternoon. 
After remarks by Brother Blunden, sixteen symbolized 
their consecration by immersion. In the evening, previous 
to the Memorial Service, Brother Martin explained portions 
of the Gospels, showing how our Savior spent himself 
unto death for us. Brother Blunden was requested to take 
the charge of the Memorial service, which he did, introducing 
the subject and explaining very briefly its meaning. 
There were at least two hundred and fifty present, and, with 
very few exceptions, all were in the race for the prize. 

It was a grand, spiritual feast for us all. Not ajar nor 
an inharmonious spirit amongst us. All seemed to receive 
a blessing. Yours in the one faith, EDWIN C. MOTT. 



page 112 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-At the request of the Church 
at Philadelphia, I met with them, after making arrangements 
with Bros. Gillis and Jackson to be with the little company 
at our house. At 2 P.M. we met to consider the subject of 
baptism, and at 4 P.M. we adjourned for this service to a 
small church building kindly put at our disposal. Four 
brethren and six sisters symbolized by water the burial of 
their wills into the will of their Redeemer and Lord. 

Between forty and fifty participated in the Memorial 
service, which was preceded by a praise and testimony 
meeting. The testimonies, in which nearly all took part, 
showed how firmly every brother and sister was grounded 
on the true foundation, Christ Jesus. 

The Church in Philadelphia is doing a good work. 
How wonderfully the truth is spreading ! May every one of 
the saints see his opportunity (the time is getting short) 
to use our talents in the Harvest work. While we cannot 
all serve in the same way, every one of us can use the talents 
which he or she possesses. May we all be up and doing, 
and not sleep as others, but work while it is called to-day, 
for "the night cometh wherein no man can work." "Not 
every one that saith unto me, Lord! Lord! shall enter 
into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that doeth the will 
of my Father which is in heaven." 

Your brother in our Redeemer, HENRY WEBER. 



R1810 :page 112 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I am glad that 
a few of us are still striving to walk the narrow way and 
trust that another year will still find his work in our hands. 
The interest here is increasing. 

We are very much interested in a little girl, not quite 
13 years old, that I found in my canvass. When I called 
at her home, she met me at the door, and insisted on my 
coming in. She said, "I am very much interested in 
Bible study, and would like to talk to you." I found her 
to be very earnest and well versed in the Bible. Since then 
she has read DAWN nearly through, and accepts it as far as 
she can understand. She is such a happy Christian, and 
says she has nothing to live for only to do the Lord's will. 

Yours in the Master's service, MRS. L. P. BEELER. 

[The above, and other cases show the readiness with 
which a child's mind, unprejudiced by human philosophies, 
can grasp the truth. Let us not fail to let our light shine 
before the children, also. 

Seeds sown in childhood, whether good or bad, take 
deep root and yield most profusely. It is a great mistake 
to suppose that spiritual development must wait until carnality 
has taken deep root, so that the remainder of life 
will be one of degradation or a fierce battle to overcome 
and root up what was sown in childhood.— EDITOR.] 



page 112 



DEAREST FRIENDS: -Please find enclosed the amount 
of our Good Hopes for the quarter. 

We had a two days' visit from Bro. McPhail. He 
came first to my house, and we at once notified all we could 
find who we thought would be interested and had a meeting 
in the evening; and I am glad to be able to say that 
it was just grand, especially bringing to view the grandeur 
of the High Calling. The next day another meeting was 
held, with a goodly number, some of whom are new readers 
of DAWN. The Chart was explained, and in all a very interesting 
time was had; and a happy few were left here 
with new hopes and renewed vows and fresh strength to 
help in the struggle against the wiles of the Adversary. 

For my part, I must say I never before saw more 
vividly than right now my duty to the truth and the necessity 
of living up to my consecration; and I earnestly pray 
that I may be able to lay aside every weight and the sins 
that so easily beset me and run with patience the race which 
is set before us. Truly it has been said by the Apostle that 
there is nothing in this world now, nor ever was, to be 
compared to the glory to which we are invited; and if we 
appreciate properly our privileges, there should be nothing 
allowed to stand in the way of our obtaining that to which 



we are called. In all I think Bro. McPhail's visit was beneficial. 
I felt better in his company than I have for a long 
time. It seemed to have a holy influence over me. We 
had a pleasant separation, wishing each other all the blessings 
that could attend us in our efforts to serve the Master. 
Your brother in Christ, S.M.TAYLOR. 



page 113 
