Announcements
“PRAISE JEHOVAH AS KING” TESTIMONY PERIOD
“Praise Jah, you people.” (Rev. 19:6, NW) In obedience to this compelling exhortation hundreds of thousands in 1951 have raised their voices in a mighty song of praise to the universal sovereign, Jehovah God. Other thousands are catching up the joyful words and joining in the chorus that lauds their Creator as King. What of you? Do you believe the Bible? the evidences of our day which prove Jehovah reigns, and a new world is at the doors? Perhaps, then, the desire to praise the Most High exists within your heart, too. You can use your faculties to “Praise Jehovah as King” during December, when that theme will be sounded in a special way world-wide. The Bible message extolling God’s greatness will be presented to the public in the form of the book entitled “What Has Religion Done for Mankind?” and a 32-page booklet, on a contribution of 50c. Literature for distribution may be obtained from a company of Jehovah’s witnesses, or from the Watchtower, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn 1, N. Y. Write us for information regarding a nearby company of Jehovah’s witnesses, or as to how you may have a further share.
THEOCRATIC MINISTRY SCHOOL
“Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.” (Dan. 12:4) In fulfillment of this prophecy many thousands are truly ‘running to and fro’ through the pages of God’s Word. For them, knowledge is indeed on the increase, knowledge of a most vital sort, rewarding the learners with peace, joy, freedom and the sure prospect of living forever in God’s new world. Contributing remarkably to the widespread increase of Bible knowledge are the numerous theocratic ministry schools conducted by congregations of Jehovah’s witnesses. At present a chapter-by-chapter analytical study of the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures is under way, this outstanding translation being critically compared with other Bible translations. Supplementary textbooks studied in the school treat such topics as Bible languages and manuscripts, Bible dictionaries and concordances and their use, proof of Bible’s authenticity, Bible doctrines, and religions—past and present. Other subjects needful for ministers and Bible students, such as composition and public speaking, are given ample attention. The publishers are happy to extend to the readers of this magazine an invitation to attend a theocratic ministry school and share in the increase of right knowledge. The school is held once each week, without cost. Feel free to write us for the location of the school nearest you.
1952 YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
“Which is the true religion?” How often has that question been asked! The 1952 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses will furnish overwhelming evidence showing God’s blessing upon the people bearing his name. Though a wicked world bans them, drives them underground, threatens imprisonment, torture and death, Jehovah’s witnesses in 116 lands fearlessly press on, refusing to compromise with enemy forces, but insisting on obedience to God and Christ. You will thrill to their amazing experiences, learn of marvelous increases, and come to appreciate that here indeed is the one organization of true peace, love and unity; this by reading the inspiring and revealing 1952 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Available on a contribution of 50c. Also released at this time is the attractive colorful 1952 calendar, containing the yeartext and appropriate Scriptural citations. Obtainable for 25c; 5 for $1.00, sent to one address. Companies, pioneers and groups are encouraged to combine their orders and send them in through the appointed servant.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 16: Baptism for Salvation and Fire Baptism, ¶1-18.
Week of December 23: Baptism for Salvation and Fire Baptism, ¶19-35.
Week of December 30: Request to God for a Good Conscience.

