They Are Finding True Happiness in “Paradise”
PARADISE! That word often comes to mind when people think of Hawaii​—and for good reasons. In abundant supply here are a temperate climate, blue skies, swaying palm trees, refreshing breezes, and sandy beaches​—elements that many might consider paradisaic.
These features have attracted people from far and near. They have come from Asia, the Pacific, the Americas, and even places like the Caribbean islands and Europe. Many have moved here for the year-round mild climate. Others have come seeking economic security​—and happiness, of course. The result is a melting pot of nationalities and ethnic groups, with a colorful variety of cultures and religious ideas.
There is, however, another side to the picture. Like so many beautiful places on the earth, Hawaii is plagued with crime, drugs, delinquency, pollution, and the many other problems rushing in on the human family no matter where one may live. Through human negligence and selfishness, the islands of Hawaii are gradually being robbed of their natural beauty. People want a paradise, but not all who live here care enough to make or at least keep these islands a paradise. It takes more than beautiful scenery and an agreeable climate to make a paradise.
There is, however, a growing group of people living here who are enjoying true happiness in this paradisaic setting. They are individuals who are embracing Bible truth and are taking to heart God’s marvelous promise: “I am creating new heavens and a new earth; and the former things will not be called to mind, neither will they come up into the heart.” These people are happily looking to the future with these words of the apostle Peter in mind: “There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.” (Isaiah 65:17; 2 Peter 3:13) Who are these people? How did they come to learn of the wonderful hope presented in the Bible? And what changes have been brought about in their lives?
Fear of Death Overcome
Isabel and her husband, George, are of Filipino extraction. She was brought up to follow her parents’ Roman Catholic religion, although she had never looked into the Bible. Isabel had been taught that the human soul is immortal. How did she react to this false doctrine? Well, she dreaded the thought of dying because she had the idea of being forever buried alive in a coffin, her soul supposedly unable to escape. In 1973, though, Isabel began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. When she learned that the human soul is not immortal and that God will undo death by means of the resurrection, she was overjoyed and felt greatly relieved. (Ezekiel 18:4, 20; John 5:28, 29) Bible truth made such an impression on her that she progressed rapidly.
What about George? He too sat in on the Bible discussions but only with the idea of proving the Witnesses wrong. However, he could not find anything amiss in what he and his wife were being taught. In fact, shortly after they started to study, the subject of blood arose. Up to that time, George had been fond of eating foods prepared with blood. But when he saw that the Bible plainly condemns the eating of blood, he quit. (Genesis 9:3, 4; Leviticus 17:10-12; Acts 15:28, 29) He continued to participate in the Bible study and was delighted that he had finally found the truth. Today, George, Isabel, and their four children are enjoying true happiness in living by God’s standards.
Attracted by True Christianity
A Japanese man named George and his Portuguese wife, Lillian, are in their 60’s. Both of them were born and raised in Hawaii. Since George was not given any religious instruction by his parents, he never took religion seriously. Yet, he has always believed in God. On the other hand, Lillian’s parents brought her up in their religion, as a Roman Catholic.
Although George was not an avid Bible reader, he had been reading the Watchtower and Awake! magazines for some 30 years. He had thus learned a great deal about the Bible. Being a heavy smoker and drinker, however, he was slow to make changes in his life. As the years passed, George continued to read the magazines and occasionally attended Christian meetings at the Kingdom Hall. Why? Because, as he put it, “the other religions are so hypocritical” in condoning many bad things condemned in the Bible. He could see that Jehovah’s Witnesses were different.
What attracted George’s devoted wife, Lillian, to the truth of God’s Word even though she was deeply influenced by the religion of her parents? Well, her fleshly sister invited her to the meetings at the Kingdom Hall. “I enjoyed the happy family atmosphere and the friendly smiles,” Lillian recalled. The genuine love she saw displayed among Jehovah’s people convinced her that this is the truth. (John 13:34, 35) She accepted a Bible study, eventually dedicated her life to Jehovah God, and was baptized a few months after her husband was.
George no longer smokes or gets drunk, and Lillian has thrown away all her religious idols. With hearts full of love, they are sharing what they have learned with others, including their 25 grandchildren and 4 great-grandchildren. Just look at their faces, and see how happy George and Lillian are!
Peace and Happiness Attained
Patrick, a middle-aged Irishman, and his Jewish wife, Nina, both moved to Hawaii from the southwestern United States. Previously, they had led the so-called free life-style of drugs, religious experimentation, and loose morals. They also spent many years as members of a cult, striving to attain higher consciousness by means of drugs, meditation, and their private guru. In time Patrick became fed up with the jealousy, contention, and constant bickering among cult members who claimed to have attained a ‘higher level of consciousness.’ He left the group and returned to Hawaii, where he had once lived, hoping to find peace of mind. Thereafter, Patrick convinced Nina, then his girlfriend, to visit. Eventually, they got married and settled in Hawaii.
Little did Patrick and Nina know that their search for peace and happiness would finally lead to a study of the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. A confirmed atheist all her life, Nina began to find satisfying Bible answers to such puzzling questions as why evil exists and why bad things happen to good people. Patrick’s ten-year search for truth likewise had a happy ending. Soon, what he and Nina were learning from the Bible began to change their moral outlook. After a long and hard struggle, Patrick was able to overcome his deeply rooted tobacco addiction. For almost a decade now, he and his wife have lived clean, moral lives according to God’s standards. With pure hearts and clean consciences, they are enjoying the peace they have been seeking.
Sacrifices and Rewards
“Exert yourselves vigorously to get in through the narrow door, because many, I tell you, will seek to get in but will not be able.” (Luke 13:24) Those words of Jesus Christ show clearly that it is not easy to serve God and live by Scriptural standards. Everyone desiring to do so must not only put forth the needed effort but also make the necessary sacrifices. This has certainly been the case with the individuals mentioned in this account. But how wonderfully they have been rewarded!
For instance, consider Patrick and Nina, just mentioned. They made a drastic change from a life-style wherein they made large sums of money to one of full-time Christian ministry supported by part-time secular employment. Yet, they are convinced that the spiritual gains far outweigh any material sacrifices they have made. And they are truly happy.
Because of their age, changes have not come easy for George and Lillian. Sharing in Christian meetings and the ministry requires time, attention, and physical effort. To their great delight, however, their health has improved, and the life they are leading now can only be described as a vibrant, full, and happy one.
As for George and Isabel, their greatest challenge lies in training their children and helping them onto the road to life. Much time and effort are needed to get four youngsters ready for Christian meetings or to have them go along in the Christian ministry. At one point the constant pressure caused George and Isabel to slack off in their parental responsibilities. But a Bible lecture entitled “Renewing the Spirit of Self-Sacrifice” moved them to redouble their efforts to give their four children all the attention and training needed to ‘bring them up in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.’ Needless to say, such efforts have been richly rewarded.​—Ephesians 6:4.
It is not the beautiful scenery, the agreeable climate, or the leisurely pace of life that brings true happiness to these individuals and many others. Rather, it is the knowledge that they are using their life according to the will of God and are living by the standards of his Word, the Bible. (Ecclesiastes 12:13) Moreover, true happiness wells up in their hearts as they contemplate the joyous time when an earthly paradise will be restored earth wide.​—Luke 23:43.
[Picture on page 25]
George, Isabel, and their children find pleasure in reading the Bible
[Picture on page 26]
George and Lillian find happiness in the Christian ministry
[Picture on page 27]
Patrick and Nina are enjoying true peace in Jehovah’s service

