Vol. XXXIX 


PITTSBURGH, PA. ? OCTOBER 15, 1918 


No. 20 


THE PURPOSE SERVED BY THE LAW COVENANT 


'Wherefore the law was our pedagogue to bring us unto Christ, that we might he justified by faith.' 

of good things to come" — Galatians 3:24; Hebrews 10:1. 


"The law had a shadow 


In coming into the family of God as sons, we are not to 
get the impression that we are thenceforth freed from all 
divine law. On the contrary, we may say that, so surely as 
God himself had no beginning, just so surely had law no 
beginning. But from the time that God's intelligent creatures
 began to be created, law began to operate; for his 
righteous will has always been the law incumbent upon those 
of his creatures who were mode in his own image. 

Since the government of Jehovah is universal and eternal, 
it follows that there never has been and never can be a time 
or a place without law, nor a being not subject to Jehovah's 
law, or under its control. God's will is the standard of 
righteousness; and this will be true throughout the eternity 
of the future, as it has been throughout the eternity of the 
past. 

In the creation of angels, God gave them intelligence to 
distinguish between right and wrong. Their minds are so 
perfectly balanced that right is always seen to be right and 
wrong seen to be wrong. Those in heart-harmony with their 
Creator never mistake wrong for right. This capability of 
moral discernment on the part of the creature is said to be 
God's "image" which, when possessed, obviates the necessity 
for the written law. The "image" was possessed not only 
by all on the spirit planes of life, but likewise by our father 
Adam in his creation. 

With the law of God — briefly comprehended in the one 
word love — written in their very being, how strange it would 

[4342] 


have seemed to the angels if Jehovah had set up in heaven 
the tables of the law afterwards given to Israel! Of what 
service could such a statement of the law of God be to beings 
who had a much higher conception of it? Such a presentation 
of the law of Adam in the garden of Eden would have been 
similarly inappropriate; and none was given. 

LAW IN MAN'S HEART BLUBBED BY SIN 

After Adam had violated the law of God written in his 
being, he passed under the sentence of death, which, working 
in his members, affected him mentally and morally as well as 
physically. Thus began the effacement from his heart of that 
power of discernment, or knowing right from wrong instinctively
. This fallen condition and the state of the unprepared 
earth into which Adam was driven, where he was compelled 
to labor in sweat of face for daily sustenance, were all conducive
 to the cultivation of selfishness; and hence selfishness 
soon became the rule of life, instead of love, as in God's 
original creation. 

As selfishness gradually gained control, the law of God 
became proportionately erased from man's heart. The effects 
of the fall continuing naturally from parent to child as the 
years rolled on, it is safe to say that in Moses' day the 
original law of God was almost obliterated with the vast 
majority. ,A general picture of the race aside from Israel is 
given by the Apostle Paul in the first chapter of the Epistle 
to the Romans, with an account of just what led to so dreadful
 a condition. 


October 15. 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(307-308) 


God chose, or elected, to give the law on tables of stone 
to the seed, or descendants, of his friend Abraham, according 
to a promise made to him, that Qod would especially use 
and bless his posterity, and make them a blessing to the 
remainder of the world. But as if to assure mankind that 
the Hebrews were not naturally superior to other men, God 
permitted them to go for centuries into slavery to the Egyptians
, then the greatest nation on earth. That law given at 
Mount Sinai was given, doubtless, because the law originally 
expressed in Adam's nature had become unintelligible; and it 
was given to a chosen people, at the hands of an especially 
chosen leader. 

God's law could not have been re-written in the hearts of 
the people of Israel; for that would have implied the restoration
 of that nation to Edenic perfection; and such restoration 
was then impossible, because the penalty of death rested 
upon Israel as well as all others of mankind, and would continue
 until a ransom for Adam was found and made effective* 
THE TWO CLASSES OF ELECT 

But the question naturally arises, Why did God give the 
law upon tables of stone to Israel? Why did he not wait 
until the "due time" to send his Son to be the ransom price 
for all mankind, and until that price had been applied for 
all, and then begin the work of "restitution of all things' 1 
(Acts 3:19-21) — the rewriting of the original law in the 
human heart? The Apostle Paul answers this important 
question. He declares that when God promised to bless all 
nations and families of the earth through Abraham's seed, 
he referred not to the patriarch's offspring as a people, but 
to Christ Jesus, who according to the flesh would be born 
of Abraham's descendants; and that for this Son the Father 
would select a "bride," a companion, of many members, but 
all of one spirit with the Son to be joined with him in his 
sacrificial sufferings, and later to be perfected with hjm 
in glory, to share in his great work of salvation and blessing 
for the whole world. — Galatians 3:16, 29; Romans 8:17, 18. 

The Apostle points out that the "due time" for the Lord 
Jesus to come to the earth to die as a sacrifice for sin must 
be before the selection and preparation of his bride; for the 
bride class must be redeemed before its members could be 
called and chosen. He shows that it was the Father's purpose
 that the merit of Jesus' sacrifice should be applied for 
this elect class before it would be applied for the world; that 
in the Father's purpose the sacrifice of these was to be joined 
to that of their Head as a part of the great Sin-offering 
for the world. Jesus, then, must first "appear in the presence 
of God" for this class. 

Moreover, it was a part of the Father's purpose that, 
before the age in which the bride should be chosen, another 
elect class should be prepared by testings and disciplinings 
during the interval between the fall of man and the coming 
of Jesus to die, but for the most part during the period 
when God dealt with Israel tinder the Law Covenant. Hence 
the greater number were chosen from Israel. 

UCPOETANT OFFICE OT THE LAW COVEKAMT 

This covenant which the Lord made with Israel, Abraham's 
children according to the flesh, would do them great good, 
even though they might thereby pass through some very 
severe experiences. It would keep them from sinking lower 
into degradation in proportion as they would endeavor to 
keep God's law, thus preventing their losing the image of 
God as completely as did other nations, and thus making 
the original law of God so much the more discernible. And 
not only so, but this law given to Israel would be to some 
extent a standard before the world; and in this way Abraham
's natural seed might "lift up a standard for the people," 
and to a slight extent bless all nations even in the present 
life, by calling a halt in the downward course and by reviving
 in all to some degree the dying influence of the original 
law of conscience. 

Of this covenant with Israel St. Paul declares, "The Law 
[Covenant] was added [to the Abrahamic Covenant] because 
of transgressions [because sin was spreading and men were 
becoming degraded very rapidly], tilt the promised seed should 
come [not only Christ Jesus the Head, but also the church, 
which is his body, to do the real work] to whom the promise 
[Abrahamic Covenant] was made." "For the Law [Covenant] 
made nothing perfect"; moreover, "the Law [Covenant], 
which was [given] 430 years after [the Covenant made with 
Abraham], cannot disannul [or in any manner change the 
terms or conditions of that covenant], that it should make 
the promise of none effect." — Galatians 3:19, 17; Hebrews 
7:19. 

There was more done at Sinai tihan is generally supposed. 
Not only was the law written upon tables of stone given 
there, but a covenant based upon the law was there entered 


into, between God on the one part and Israel on the other 
part, Moses being the mediator of that Law Covenant. The 
covenant was the important thing! With hearts leaping for 
joy Israel accepted the proposal to become God's covenant 
people. It seems not to have occurred to them, however, that 
theirs was a different covenant from the one made by God with 
Abraham. 

Great confusion of thought has resulted from a failure to 
notice the point just made; namely, that the transaction at 
Sinai was important, not because God there began to have 
a law over his creatures — for we have seen that God's empire 
never was without law — but because God there made a covenant
 with Israel according to the terms of which they were 
no longer to be treated as sinners, but to he accepted aB 
God's servants, if faithful to the requirements of that covenant
. The law written upon tables of stone was the basis 
of that covenant; for every blessing under their covenant 
was made dependent upon absolute obedience to the law. — 
Exodus 19:7, 8; 34:27, 28. 

Hence in speaking of their covenant, it became customary 
to think and speak of the law, upon which everything depended
. Thus in the New Testament, when speaking of the 
Law Covenant, the Apostle calls it "the law," leaving the 
word "covenant" to be understood. Yet in every instance 
a glance at the language and the context shows unquestionably 
that the Law Covenant is meant, and not merely the written 
Law of the Ten Commandments. For instance, the expression
, "the law made nothing perfect," could not refer to the 
law alone; for laws never make anything perfect. They merely 
show the perfect requirements. 

The law on tables of stone showed Israel God's requirements
, but it remained for the covenant to try to make the 
people perfect by promising blessings for obedience and curses 
for disobedience to the law. And this the Law Covenant 
failed to do; for it made nothing perfect. It served, however, 
to restrain sin in a measure, with those who endeavored to 
obey the law; but it could not lift any out of the mire of 
sin and out of the horrible pit of death. It could not give 
life. It left Israel under the same death penalty as they 
were under before the law was given. Additionally, as they 
were bound to it by a contract with God, it brought them 
under the additional penalty of their broken law. And this 
God knew when he made the covenant with them. 
THE LAW A OOVENAHT OTTO DEATH 

God's covenant with Abraham was not hampered by a 
law. It was unconditional, and was made as soon as Abraham
 entered Canaan — "In thy seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed." The seed was promised and was sure, 
and so was the blessing. But not so with the Law Covenant. 
It said, "The man that doeth these things shall live by 
them." — Leviticus 18:5; Romans 10:5. 

Israel did not seem to consider that they might be unable 
to keep the law perfectly. They promptly accepted the terms 
of the covenant, little realizing that it was a covenant "unto 
death," and not unto life. ' Its promise of life was on terms 
easy enough for perfect men, although impossible for fallen 
men; but having agreed to the terms, they were bound by 
them. Thus the Law Covenant "slew them," or took away 
from them the very hope of life it had helped to enkindle. 
It left them in a condition of despair. The Apostle Paul 
voices this hopelessness when he explains: "I was alive without
 the law once, but when the commandment came, sin 
revived, and I died! .... WTetched man that I am! Who 
shall deliver me from this body of death?" — Romans 7:7, 24. 

Is it asked, "In what way was the Apostle Paul or any 
Jew alive without the law covenant? Were the Israelites not 
under Adamic condemnation like the remainder of the world?" 
We understand the thought here to be that in his promise 
made just after the fall, that the seed of the woman should 
bruise (crush) the serpent's head, and in his promise to 
Abraham that in his seed all the families of the earth should 
be blessed, God had given clear intimation that mankind 
should in some manner be delivered from the penalty of death 
resting upon them. Before the children of Israel came under 
the Law Covenant, they had a share in that general hope 
of life. But now, having made a covenant with God that 
promised life if kept, but death if broken, they had lost 
the hope of the world in general and had come under an 
additional penalty of death. 

But God, in his infinite wisdom and mercy, purposed that 
the One who should redeem the world from the curse resting 
upon them as a whole, should at the same time redeem 
Israel, both from the Adamic penalty and from the curse of 
their Law Covenant; for "Cursed 'is every one that continueth
 not in all the words of the law to do them." This he 
would accomplish by dying upon a tree — a cross, thus be- 


[6343] 


(309-310) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


1»ITTSBURGH, Pa 


coming a curse for Israel. "Cursed is every one that hangeth 
on a tree." {Galatians 3:13; Deuteronomy 21:23) This 
"curse" of the Law Covenant, es well as its "blessings/' 
belonged only to the nation of Israel; for no other nations 
werte under that covenant. This fact needs to be clearly 
seen, ih order to understand why our Lord could not have 
redeemed Israel if he had not beeni a Jew. That the "one 
man/' Christ Jesus, could justly give the redemption price 
for our race is "stated positively by the Apostle Paul, and 
the reason is given ; namely, that all mankind died in the 
"one man" Adam. But how could one man redeem the entire 
nation of Israel from the curse of their Law Covenant? 
HOW MOSES COULD MEDIATE FOB ISRAEL 

We answer that in connection with Israel's covenant there 
is a point that few seem to have noticed. It is that God 
dealt with only one man in connection with the making of 
that Law Covenant; and that man was Moses, who stood in 
the position of a father to the whole nation, the nation being 
regarded and treated as children under age. (Numbers 11:11- 
15) The Lord talked with Moses in the- mount. He gave the 
tables of the law to Moses, and Moses gave the law to the 
people. Moses mediated between Israel and God in the establishment
 of the Law Covenant. (Exodus 24:1-8) All 
Israel were "baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the 
sea." "He that despised Moses* law died without mercy." — ■ 
2 Cor. 10:2; Heb. 10;28. 

So thoroughly was the one man, Moses, the representative 
and typical father of the nation of Israel, that because of 
Israels rebellion, God could purpose its destruction and the 
fulfillment of all his engagements with Moses' family instead. 
(Exodus 32:10, 31, 32) It was thus, as God's representative 
on the one hand and as Israel's representative on the other, 
that Moses could be the mediator of the Law Covenant between
 God and that nation. 

When the Man Christ Jesus, by full obedience to that Law 
Covenant, became entitled to life everlasting under its provisions
, he had the right to "Moses' seat" — the right to 
supersede Moses as the law-giver and representative of that 
nation. Moses, being a sinner like the remainder of Israel, 
could not give the Israelites life, nor gain it himself, under 
the law. But Jesus, by fulfilling its requirements, became 
the heir of the promise of life, and could bring them to perfection
, where they could keep Goo"s perfect law. And this 
same Jesus could redeem them from the curse of their Law 
by becoming a curse for them in his death on the cross, thus 
giving the redemption price for Mosee and all in him, at the 
same time that he was laying down his life for the world. 

The law given to Israel was to accomplish various purposes
. While they could not have perfectly kept the law, 
yet as a nation they did not make earnest effort to obey 
the requirements of their covenant. They did not do what they 
might have done. The humbling experiences which have come 
to them as a result of their experience under their Law 
Covenant will prove eventually a blessing to many of this 
people. Through the Prophet Ezdkiel, God declares of Israel: 
"Because they had not executed my judgments, but had 
despised my statutes, and had polluted my sabbaths, and 
their eyes were after their fathers' idols, wherefore I gave 
them also statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby 
they should live."— Ezekiel 20:24, 25. 

THE LAW A PEDAGOGUE 

From the beginning God designed that the Law Covenant 
should prove "a pedagogue fa servant who in olden days 
led children to school] to lead them [Israel] to Christ," as 
our first text declares. It has 'done a good work in convincing
 them that they are sinners and unable to save themselves
 by their good works; for they have never gained life 
through their law, but have continued to die; and for many 
centuries they have realized the Lord's disfavor. 

At the time that Jesus came there was quite a goodly 
number of Jews who Were in a holy condition of heart. When 
the number of Israelites then in Palestine and the surrounding
 territory is compared with the number of Gentiles throughout
 the world, it is remarkable that so many Jews were 
found to respond to the Gospel call. In the same length 
of time we believe that but a small proportion of that number 
from the Gentiles would have been ready to give a hearing 
ear. While only something over five hundred were found 
to become Jesus* disciples up to the time of his death, yet 
within' a comparatively few days thereafter many thousands 
accepted him as the Messiah and were baptized, as the result
 of the preaching of the Apostles on Pentecost and the 
days following. 

the full scope or the law 

Many Israelites, however, "were in the condition of the 
young ruler who came to Jesu3 asking. "Good Master, what 


good thing shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" The 
Master told him that if he would enter into life he must 
keep the commandments, must obey the law. Then Jesus 
enumerated the commands, ending with the comprehensive one, 
"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." The young ruler 
replied, "All these things have I kept from my youth up; 
what lack I yet?" Jesus looking upon him loved him, as 
any noble person would love a character of that kind. Then 
the Lord pointed out to the young ruler that he had not 
comprehended the full essence of the law, that there was a 
degree of consecration to which he had not attained. If he 
loved God with all his heart, he would wish to serve God 
with all that he had, whatever the cost. If he loved his 
neighbor as himself, he would wish to use his means for 
the blessing of others. 

Evidently the young man had not previously realized his 
responsibility. He was very rich and inclined to be selfish. 
Jesus struck right at' the root of his trouble: "Go, sell all 
that thou hast, and give to the poor; and thou shalt have 
treasure in heaven; and come, take up thy cross and follow 
me." (Matthew 19:16-22; Mark 10:17-22) Ah, this was 
too much! The relinquishing of his great fortune was requiring
 more than he was willing to give. He went away 
sorrowful. Never before had he surmised his real heart 
attitude. He had been merely keeping the letter of the law, 
while missing its spirit. 

MORE JEWS THAN GENTILES WERE BEADY 

When we turn to the Gentiles to see how the Gospel prospered
 amongst them, we perceive that it progressed very 
slowly. In every new city the first convert was a Jew, one 
who had been under . the law. Evidently the Jews had the 
basis for faith in God. After the door of favor had been 
opened to the Gentiles, the Apostle Paul went to Athens, 
the center of Greek culture and learning, and preached the 
message of the kingdom there. But apparently he did not 
make even one convert to Christianity. It has required more 
than eighteen hundred years to gather a sufficiency from 
among the Gentiles to complete the 144,000 which God has 
designed as the full number of the Gospel Church. — Revelation 
7:4; 14:3. 

So we can see that while the Law Covenant was not one 
that could give to the Jews everlasting life because of their 
own imperfections and the imperfections of their mediator, 
nevertheless it was not a curse to them, but a blessing — not 
only to those Jews who were living at the time when Jesus 
came, but to many previously; namely, the prophets and all 
the faithful ones who by their faith and heart obedience had 
won the favor of God. (Hebrews 11) AH other Israelites 
we understand, will come up in the Millennial age as Gentiles
; "for they are not all Israel who are of Israel/' as the 
Apostle declares, but only those who exercise the proper faith 
and render full obedience. 

METHOD 07 DEALING WITH THE GOSPEL OHT/BOH 

God's dealings with the church of Christ differ widely 
from his dealings with natuml Israel. The sanctified in Christ 
Jesus, spiritual Israel, need no such law of commands as 
was given to Abraham's natural seed. Love to God and to 
man, and sacrificial love for the brethren, is all that is enjoined
 upon the new creature in Christ. Love is the very 
essence of his new mind; for it is the spirit, or mind, of 
his Master. As we examine the commands of "Thou shalt" 
and "Thou shalt not," given to natural Israel, we realize how 
unfitting these would be for spiritual Israel. What saint 
would even think of being guilty of the sinB enumerated in 
the Ten Commandments! 

The preface to these Ten Commandments (Exodus 20:2) 
shows that these commands were given only to Israel after 
the flesh: "I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out 
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage." Moses 
also declares (Deuteronomy 5:1-15): "Hear, Israel, the 
statutes and judgments which I speak in your ears this day, 
that ye may learn them and observe to do them. The Lord 
our God made not this covenant with our fathers, but with 
us. even us who are all of us here alive this day." (See 
also Ezekiel ^0:10-13; Nehemiah 9:4-37) All God's commands
 to the Hebrew people are proper and suitable for any 
fallen man. But they are surely quite inappropriate to any 
new creature in Christ Jesus, whose very nature as a child 
of God is to do right and to please the Lord. 

Under our Lord's teachings we can see that to keep the 
law means more than its surface indicates ; that he who hates 
his brother has the murder spirit, and is a murderer; that 
he who desires to commit adultery lacking only a favorable 
opportunity, is in heart an adulterer (.Matthew 5:28) ; that 
he who loves and serves money, and spends time and talents 
in seeking earthly riches of any kind, is an idolator. Indeed, 


[6344] 


October 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(310-311) 


the full complement of the law is this: "Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy Cod with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with all 
thy soul, and with all thy strength; and thou shalt love 
thy neighbor as thyself." So broad and deep is this injunction
, so all embracing, that even new creatures in Christ 
cannot measure up fully to it in spirit. Because of the 
hindering weaknesses of our imperfect human body, Ave need 
the covering robe of righteousness furnished by our dear 
Redeemer. How thankful we are that we have been assured 
by the Lord through the Apostle that we are not under the 
law but under grace! — Romans 6:14. 

THE SUM OF THE MATTER 
We see, then, the blessing that the Law Covenant was 
designed to be to those to whom it was given — Israel after 
the flesh. It was indeed a pedagogue to lead them all to 
Christ — not only those who then became united to him; for 
it will prove a blessing in the time now near at hand, when 
the blindness which has afflicted Israel for nearly nineteen 
centuries shall be removed, and when the Jews shall recognize 
their long-looked- for Messiah. Their schooling under their law 
will be a great assistance to them, when the "time of their 
visitation*' as a nation shall again have come. 


As spiritual Israelites, we should exercise care that our 
liberty in Christ is not made an occasion of stumbling to 
others who do not see the Christian's liberty, who do not 
realize that Israel's law is not binding upon those who are 
in Christ. Our law of love demands this, as St. Paul forcefully
 points out. (1 Corinthians 8:9-13) But while thus 
seeking to exercise forbearing love toward the weak, we may 
rejoice indeed in our glorious liberty as sons of God. Let 
us stand fast in it; Let us enjoy to the full our rest of 
faith — the Christian's Sabbath! 

Our Sabbath abides seven days in the week, and twentyfour
 hours of the day. It is not broken by physical labor, nor 
is it dependent upon physical ease. It is a deep abiding rest 
of faith, and can be broken only by doubt, by unbelief, by 
disobedience to our God. We now see that Israel's Law Covenant
 was a foreshadowing of the good things which the Christian
 church enjoys. (Hebrew 10:1) We realize that Israel's 
Law Covenant was as far inferior to our covenant of sacrifice 
as their sacrifices are to the "better sacrifices" of the Gospel 
age, as their altar is to our altar, and as their candlestick and 
their table of shew-bread are to ours. In all these things the 
realities are far greater than were their shadows* 


For love of thee, for love of thee, with every friend I'd part, 
If only thou, my blessed Lord, wilt dwell within my heart. 

I'm willing, Lord, for love of thee, to be misunderstood, 
Accept whate'er thou dost permit of evil or of good. 

For love of thee, for love of thee, I'll dread no scorn nor shame, 

But seek each d«y, for love of thee, to honor thy dear name. 


FOR LOVE OF THEE, O LORD 

Content, my Lord, for love of thee, to be ignored, unknown, 
No joy to know in any love save only thine alone. 

For love of thee I'll strive, dear Lord, to keep the narrow way. 
For love of thee, I'll watch and pray and trust thee, come what 
may. 

For love of thee, of thee, dear Lord, the heaviest cross I'll bear, 
Assured that, through -thy love for -me, thy glory I shall share. 


GOD THE HELPER OF THE NEW CREATURE 

"The Lord is my helper, omd I will not fear what man shall do unto me." — Hebrews 13:6. 


Whoever would come to God finds that in order to do so he 
must possess a certain amount of knowledge of him and of his 
glorious character. The heathen, for instance, cannot come 
to him; for they do not know him, nor do thev know of the 
arrangements which he has made for human salvation. Quite 
a large number of those living in America and Europe have 
very little opportunity for knowing God; for during the dark 
ages "the faith once delivered to the saints" became contaminated
 with the teachings of pagan philosophy, and the resulting
 mixture brought a measurable degree of darkness. As a 
consequence, there is a great difference in the teachings of the 
different denominations which purport to be Christian, although
 they agree to some extent. But so little ie known of the 
fundamental truths of Christianity that many who accept our 
Lord Jesus as their Savior have not the remotest idea of the 
divine plan for the salvation of the children of Adam. 

Coming to the Bible teaching upon the subject, we perceive
 that God created man a glorious being, a human being, 
a little lower than the angels. In his perfect condition man 
had fellowship with God. He had the divine parental care, together
 with all the rigihts and privileges of a son of God. 
( Luke 3 :38 ) But when Adam became disobedient to the divine 
law, he forfeited his right to be a son of God; and because 
of his disobedience he w^as condemned to death. Because of the 
laws of heredity, all of Adam's posterity share with him in 
this alienation from God. 

For more than two thousand years the matter continued. 
The race of Adam were without God and having no hope in 
the world. True, God made slight manifestations of favor 
toward a few men, such a* Enoch, Noah and Abraham. He did 
not receive these few 'back into eonship, however. Then the 
children of Israel were accepted ae & nation, and had certain 
promises made to them on condition that they would keep 
the Law of God. But although they were granted an opportunity
 of demonstrating whether tliey could keep that Law, 
yet not one of them could dk> so perfectly. Therefore they could 
not come back into harmony with God and receive the divine 
blessing. They must remain under the curse pronounced in 
Eden. 

THE HIGH CALLING OF THE GOSPEL AGE 

Now we see that the six thousand years which have passed 
since Adam disobeyed the divine law were six great thousandyear
 days, man's work week, during which he has labored 
with sweat of face; and that now we are living in the great 
seventh day, earth's Sabbath Day. The six great thousandyear
 days of man's labor and sweat of face under the curse 
are ended ; and the great seventh day is God's time for blessing
 all the families of the earth, for rolling away the curse 
and rolling in the blessing. The Scriptures show us that God 


has a basis for the blessing of the world. That basis of restitution
 to all that was lost in E|den is the fact that Christ died 
for the sin of the whole world, that in due time he will make 
an application of the merit of his sacrifice on behalf of the 
whole world. This glorious message is the Gospel — the glad 
tidings that God is willing to be reconciled to mankind, that 
he has appointed our Lord Jesus as the One through whom he 
may be reached, and through whom the world may come back 
to God. 

Meantime, God sent word through the apostles that he was 
willing to make a covenant with those who would desire, during
 this Gospel age, to be in fellowship with him. Those who 
could exercise the faith he invited to become sons of God — 
not on the human plane, as Adam was, but on the spirit plane 
— and promised that in the resurrection they should hare a 
change to the spirit nature, the divine nature. This invitation
 went forth. Whoever heard of it was privileged to avail 
himself of it, if he wished to do so. 

When first we heard that God was willing to permit us 
to be his children, we inquired whether there were any conditions
 attached to the invitation; and we were told that there 
were very stringent ones. Our Lord Jesus declared that no 
man can come unto the Father except through him. In eome 
way all of God's niercv and love is hidden in Christ. "He that 
hath the Son hath life." We wished to get away from the 
death penalty, to be free from sin and death, and to return 
to God's favor. Those who heard the words of our Lord 
Jesus or of his twelve apostles, those who read the epistles 
written by those apostles or those who read, hymns containing 
the message — no matter how they received it— -had the terms 
and conditions in their minds; namely, that God was willing 
to receive us through Christ, and that to become Christ's wo 
must become his disciples. 

JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH 

A disciple is one who follows, one who imitates, one who 
seeks to do as his master does. So we had before us the 
proposition that whoever would come to God must believe that 
he is, and that -he is the rewarded of those who diligently seek 
him. We believed that our Lord Jesus Christ had given his 
life for the sins of the whole world, and that we must become 
disciples or followers of him. We learned that if we would 
reign with him we must also suffer with him. Our Lord himself
 said: "If any man will be my disciple, let him take up 
his cross and follow me." That is, let him practise self-denial 
and put it into effect; and then, as a reward, he will share 
with Christ in his kingdom. 

Aa we sought for further information, the Bible told us 
that the first thing for us to do was to take the step of justification
, to be made right, made just. By nature we were 


[6345] 


(312-315) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


sinners. Not only had we transgressed in the past, but we were 
imperfect and did not know how to do perfectly. To be justified
 is to be made right, not only as respects past sins, bu/t 
also as to further sins, so that God would be willing to receive
 us back into relationship with himself. The Bible shows 
us thai God's plan for the world in the future is that then 
whosoever will shall be made right actually. As mankind aceept
 the divine terms, they will grow stronger mentally, morally
 and physically, until finally at the end of Christ's Millennial
 reign they will be perfect human beings, ready to be approved
 of God and accepted to life everlasting, made fully 
right in the sense that Adam was right in the beginning. 

With the Church, however, it has been different. God did 
not justify them actually, but reckonedly — "justified by 
faith." Should any one ask, "Wihat do you mean by justification
 by faith ?" we reply : The Bible explains that in those 
who become the church God operates along the lines of their 
minds; that is to say, when we gave our hearts to him he 
henceforth reckoned our flesh as dead — not to be restored with 
the world by and by, but as consecrated to death. Our Lord 
Jesus Christ consecrated his human life to death; and whoever
 follows in his steps must do likewise. 

After we had agreed to consecrate our life unto death, God 
accounted it as done. He accounted us dead as human beings
, but alive as embryonic new creatures — not perfectly alive 
as spirit beings, however, In order that he might test our 
loyalty to himself and to the principles of righteousness, he 
permitted the new will, the new creature, the newly begotten 
spirit being, to use the old body and thus to demonstrate what 
we would like to do, to manifest whether we really wished to 
keep the covenant into which we had entered with him, whether
 we would use our time, our strength, our energy — all that 
fwe had — in the doing of the divine will. If our testing revealed
 the fact that we merely made a lip agreement instead 
of a heart consecration, then our covenant meant nothing; for 
God is not seeking those who worship him in a formal manner, 
but those who worship him in spirit and in truth. 

IMPORTANCE OF COOTBOLLZNCt THE TONGUE 

In testing us, the Lord was willing to take us according to 
our intentions. If we found that we had done something for 
which an apology should be made, he expected us to demonstrate
 thai our intention was right by going to the injured person
 and niaking the proper amends. Whoever is able to conquer
 his tongue is able to rule his entire body. While the 
tongue is a little member, yet it is very unruly. Therewith 
bless we God, and therewith curse we men (James 3:1-12) 
But the Scriptures give us the proper thought — "Speak evil 
of no man/* How many Christians there are who are continually
 stirring up strife with their tongues! The adversary 
controls many in this manner long after they have escaped 
from his domination in many other respects. This is largely 
due to the fact that they do not detect that they are doing 
Satan service, do not even detect that they are stirrers up of 
strife, hatred, envy, malice and are planters of roots of bitterness
 whereby many are defiled. — 'Hebrews 12:15. 

So by these various means we are demonstrating to God 
our obedience to his will. All this is because we have been 
justified by faith. Until we were justified by faith, we had no 
dealings with God. One who is not in justified relationship 
with God might be doing very good work ; and yet he could get 
no credit whatever as a new creature. The only way to obtain 
such credit is, first of all, to become a new creature, by taking
 the necessary steps. We are not actually justified now, 


but are justified by faith in the blood of Jeeus Christ. 
By faith we accepted the divine invitation to become followers
 of the Lord Jesus Christ. By faith we presented our 
bodies a living sacrifice, recognizing that these bodies were not 
actually justified, <but that God was willing to accept them 
through the merit of our Lord's sacrificial death. By faith we 
go on to fulfil the terms of our Covenant of Sacrifice, and to 
lay down our lives in the service of God and of the brethren. 
By faith we live in the world, although not of the world. By 
faith we live a life of resurrection; for we are reckoned dead 
as human beings, but alive as new creatures. While we are 
actually walking about in our old bodies, we are "risen with 
Christ'* to "walk in newness of life." If we finish our course 
faithfully to the end, we shall be granted a .share in the first 
resurrection. — Romans 6:4; 8:1-4; Colossians 3:1-4. 
THOSE WHOM GOD HELPS 

All this is by faith. Everything is of faith in the time of 
faith — the Gospel age. But after our Lord has brought actual
 salvation to us, it will no longer be of faith. It will 
then be actual. (1 Peter 1:3-9) Whoever will not walk by 
faith now cannot be of this class; for God is now seeking a 
class who are walking by faith, not by sight. To this class he 
has given promises and many strong evidences of his love; and 
yet it is all by faith, so that with the Psalmist we can say: 
"The Lord is my helper/' 

As children of God the church have a special reason for 
having faith that he is guiding- all their affairs. As St, 
Paul says : "We know that all things work together for good 
to them that love God, to them who are the called according to 
his purposed (Romans 8:28) Whoever would apply this 
promise to himself must first have come into personal relationship
 to God, under the special covenant of this Gospel age. 
(Psalm 50:5) Christ Jesus and his body members have entered
 into this covenant relationship with the heavenly Father, 
who has 'become their helper, their ■care-taker. But since our 
flesh has been laid on the altar of sacrifice, God is not to be 
expected to be the helper of our flesh. In some instances it may 
be to the advantage of his cause that our flesh should be 
spared ; hut as a rule the flesh is to be offered up. 

What then does God help? The answer is that the new 
creature is represented as saying, "The Lord is my helper." All 
things will work together for the good of the new creature and 
for the good of the Father *s work, which we have been invited 
to share through Jesus Christ. In other words, our spiritual 
interests will be forwarded, cared for. God being thus our 
helper, we need not fear what man might be able to do unto 
us. Although man might be able to do many things to hinder 
us and to cause trouble for us, yet we may be content that, 
since all our interests are in the Father's care, his grace will 
he sufficient for us, according to his promise. He will not permit
 us to be tempted above what we are able to stand, but 
with every temptation will provide a way of escape. 

God's people need not fear. It is the fear of man that 
bringeth a snare. (Proverbs 29:25). New creatures are to be 
free from this fear of man. They are to use the beat judgment
 they have; they are to use the spirit of a sound mind. 
Thus doing, they are not to fear what man shall do unto them. 
On the contrary, they are to be perfectly restful in God's 
(hands; for he will not permit anything to occur to them that 
will not be overruled for good. He will not permit us to endure
 any sufferings which we cannot bear. Therefore we are 
to trust him, and thus we shall receive a great blessing of mind, 
a rest of heart in Jehovah God. 


ENTIRE 

Haste thou on from grace to glory, 
Armed by faith and winged by prayer; 

Heaven's eternal day before thee, 

God's own hand shall guide thee there. 


SUBMISSION 

Soon shall close thine earhhly mission, 
Soen shall pass thy pilgrim days; 

Hope shall change to glad fruition, 
Faith to sight and prayer to praise. 


JACOB FLEEING FROM HIS ANGRY BROTHER 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "Responding to Divine Promise," published in issue of March 15, 1907, which 

please see.} 


JACOB WINS ESAU 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "Making Friends With Mammon," published in issue of March 15, 1913, which 

please see.] 


CHARTS OF EZEKIEL'S TEMPLE 


We are preparing a very fine chart of Ezekiel's Temple, in 
eight colors, size 33x36 in c lies, on white tax cloth, printed on 
both sides. The measurements of the various parts of the 


Temple are as accurate as we knew how to make them. These 
charts will be found to be very helpful in conjunction with the 
study of the vision of Ezekiel. Price $2.00 prepaid. 

[6846] 


PUTTING OFF ADAM AND PUTTING ON CHRIST 


"Yc )\avc put off the old man with his deeds, and have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of 

Kim that created him" — Colossians 3:9, 10. 


In the above text tire Apostle does not say: "Ye are intending
 to put off the old man, and intend to put on the new" ; 
i;or does he say: "Ye are putting off the old man, and putting 
on the new man/' lie says very definitely that the thing has 
been done: "Ye have put off the old man, and ye have put on 
the new man." What does he mean? Who is "the old man" 
to be put off? Who is "the new man" to be put on? When 
did we put off the one, and put on the other ? 

Apparently the Apostle is considering the whole human 
family as being part and parcel of Adam, who is the old man. 
God created the old man perfect, "in his own image and likeness
"; but sin wrought great havoc and alienated Adam and 
his race from God and from perfection. We are all therefore 
steeped in sin ; we have become slaves of sin, under the dominion
 of Satan, the Bible says. Thus the old man is in a 
very bad condition, and his Creator refuses to acknowledge 
him. But God has made preparation for the old man through 
the groat Messiah, so that in due time restitution may come 
to him. Those "times of restitution" have been deferred for 
6,000 years and are only now at the door. 

When the Apostle wrote these words, the restitution times 
were nearly 2,000 years in the future. We see that he did not 
mean that*the natural man, the world, had put off Adam. He 
was speaking of the church. TM3 class have put off relationship
 with father Adam. They have disowned that relationship. 
They have separated themselves from him. They have become 
united to another, a new man. 

FOBGETTING OTJB "FATHER'S HOUSE" 
We inquire, Who is this new man? The Bible answers that 
the Head of this new man, this person we have joined, is 
Christ; the church are members of his body. The Apostle 
says that some of the early members of this body were taken 
from the Jews, and that then the call went to the Gentiles, to 
complete the foreordained number. So this new man has now 
been in process of creation for eighteen hundred years and 
more. This man is the new Adam, the second Adam; the old 
man was the first Adam. The first Adam and his race having 
become enslaved, his works are bad. Anger, malice, hatred, 
envy and strife are represented in his children, because they 
have deflected from the heavenly Father and have been led 
astray by the sophistries of Satan. But nearly nineteen hundred
 years ago the Father began to take some out of the world 
who with our Lord are in a sense to take the place of the first 
Adam; and he gives them this name — the new man — showing
 that this class is in some respects the antitype of Adam. 
"The first man was of the earth, earthy; the second man is 
the Lord from heaven." Here we have what the Scriptures 
style "the old man*' and "the new man." 

When we consecrated ourselves to God we renounced Father 
Adam and all the things pertaining to him, all hope from that 
source. This i3 not something we are doing now, but something
 we have done, not by the flesh, but by the spirit, the 
mind, the will. In our minds we have renounced sin, renounced
 self, renounced Satan; we have forgotten our "father
's house," the human hopes; we have completely turned 
over a new leaf. We have given ourselves to God, having 
learned of his arrangement whereby he is able to accept us, 
without violating the principles of his own government; and 
this acceptance, we see, is through our Lord Jesus Christ. Our 
Lord Jesus by giving himself a ransom thus provided a way 
by which we might become associated with him, and he himself
 has been glorified to become the spiritual Head of this 
new spiritual body, of this new spiritual man—the Messiah. 
We heard this heavenly invitation, that we might step out 
of the old condition and into the new. The Lord's people have 
made this consecration of themselves, this renouncement of 
sin, renouncement of all hope of restitution. They gave up 
all earthly rights and privileges when they became members 
of the new man, when they became associated with Christ as 
members of his body. 

THE WILL THE NEW CREATURE 
This whole proceeding is in our minds, our human bodies 
being reckoned dead from the moment when we made this renouncement
; for the body is a part of the old man. Yet this 
body is not actually dead. Hence our wills as new creatures 
have the work of operating for a time in the old body. This 
body belongs to the old nature; it was formerly under the 
control of the old will, which is now dead. The new will, 
having taken the place of the old will, is controlling and directing
 our bodies, and should do so, the Apostle tells us. Our 
human bodies are now owned by the new creature, who is the 
master, and they have become quickened to serve the Lord. — 
Romans 8:11. 


This new man is "renewed in knowledge." The Lord does 
not give us new bodies when we come into membership in the 
body of Christ, He has promised that he will give us new 
bodies by and by, in the glorious change of the first resurrection
. The new creature will then receive the spirit body 
which God has designed for it. But now he wishes us to use 
the old bodies and to bring them under control, thus developing
 and crystallizing, through discipline, the character of the 
new creature. It is of God's provision that we have come to 
know of these glorious heavenly things through his message, 
his word; and it is this Word of God that has worked so powerfully
 thus far. 

By faith we accepted these wonderful provisions, and now, 
since we have come into God's family, his holy Spirit, which 
he gives through his Word, is working in us "to will and to 
do of his good pleasure." This is the message of God which 
St. Peter speaks of when he says that God "hath given unto 
us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these we 
might become partakers of the divine nature." (2 Peter 1:4) 
The promises of God reached us at the time when we were 
begotten of the holy Spirit. Then we began to grow ; and 
we continue to grow in knowledge and in grace more and 
more in proportion as we feed upon the truth which God's 
Word supplies. 

THE BBIDE OF THE "SECOND ADAM" 
But this knowledge, this transforming power, has had 
more effect upon some than upon others. If it has had its 
legitimate and proper effect upon us, and has done a thoroughly
 transforming work, so that it has quickened us to earnest
 zeal and love, then we shall become in due time partakers
 of the divine nature in the resurrection. So whoever of 
God's children will not permit the heavenly message and the 
Spirit of God to work in them unhindered, will receive less of 
divine favor. Such will not be accounted worthy of that 
4iigh position of membership in the foody of Christ, but must 
take a lower position, as members of the great company class. 
Such will have failed to make their calling and election sure 
to membership in the new man, the Christ. 

in contrasting the first Adaan and the second Adam the 
Apostle indicates that it is not Jesus in the flesh who is the 
second Adam, but that "The Lord of glory" is the second 
Adam. "The first Adam was of the earth, earthy." Jesus also 
was of the earth, earthy, when he was the man Jesus; but he 
was begotten of the holy Spirit at the time of his consecration 
of his earthly being to death, at Jordan, and the new creature 
there begun was developed to perfection. Finally, when he was 
"put to death in the flesh," it was that he might subsequently 
be "quickened in spirit," in the resurrection. Having become 
thus quickened and made perfect, as a new creature, as a 
spirit being, he became the glorified head of that class who 
will also become spirit beings of the divine order. He became
 "the Lord from heaven"— ^the One to be expected at the 
second advent. 

Our Lord's footstep followers are sometimes called his 
members, and sometimes called his bride. Either of these two 
pictures fits well the circumstances and conditions. In the 
case of the natural man, Adam, Eve was his mate, his bride, 
and was also a member of his body; for she was taken from 
his side. Similarly the church is a part of her Lord's body; 
and it was through him that life was made possible to her. 
She is to be the bride of the second Adam, who is to be the 
Life-giver to the world. 

The new man is "renewed in knowledge after the image of 
him that created him." God is creating this new man; and 
so the Scriptures tell us that we "are God's workmanship, 
created of God in Christ Jesus unto good works," This image 
of himself which God is working in us, he is not working by 
arbitrary power. He is not compelling us to become like himself
. He is merely working by his promises, with our hearty 
co-operation. There is no compulsion in any sense of the 
word. He is working in us first to will, and then after we have 
willed, after we have become Jesus* disciples, he works in "us 
to do. But all this work is through his word, through his 
promises. His providences, of course, co-operate with these 
promises ; and their influences upon us is that of transformation
. 

"We are changed into the same image from glory to glory" 
— the image of our Lord, {2 Corinthians 3:18} That is to 
say, in proportion as we are faithful to the Lord and are led 
by his -Spirit, guided by his Word, in that proportion we come 
to understand our heavenly Father better; and a* we seek to 
do those things which we see to be his -will, we are develop- 

[6347] (317-318) 


f.iJ8 319) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


ing in ourselves his glorious likeness, his character. Thus we 
are being transformed day by day; and we can readily see 
that unless we become thus developed spiritually we shaft 
not be ready for the glorious resurrection change, which St, 
Paul tells us will come in an instant — "changed in a moment
, in the twinkling of an eye"; for "flesh and blood cannot
 inherit the kingdom of God." So long as. we are in the 
flesh we are not perfect as new creatures. We are waiting, 
therefore, for the grand consummation, when we shall be perfected
 with the Lord and sharers of his glory. 


INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


1. Question: — Does a fear of death indicate a want of 
faith or a low grade of spiritual health or what? 

Answer: — We are to remember that our physical condition 
has much to do with our feelings, and that therefore these are 
not a trustworthy guide as to our spiritual condition. One 
might be in bo nervous a condition that erven a slight noise 
would make him very uncomfortable. Any one thus supersensitive
 might even have a fear* of death. But that physical condition
 would by no means prove that he was not a true child of 
God. Some people have the organ of vivativeness, love of life, 
much larger than do others. All such would naturally have a 
greater dread of death than would one in whom this organ was 
relatively small. Our Lord Jesus seemed to have this natural 
dread of death, which did not leave him until God had assured
 him that he had made his calling and election sure, and 
would have a resurrection from the death condition. — Hebrews
 5:7. 

If one of the Lord's children should have a dread of death, 
it would be welt for him to seek the Father's face in prayer, to 
seek the assurance that he had divine approval. God's Word 
enables us to know when we arc acceptable children; and as 
Christians we should endeavor to drive away our feara by 
giving heed to that Word, keeping' it before our minds and 
meditating upon the precious promises of divine love and care, 
and asking for the promised grace to help in time of need. If 
we do this faithfully, we shall find in our hearts more and 
more a loyalty and a willingness to walk in the footsteps of 
Jesus unto the end, cost what it may. Then we can say: "I 
will fear no evil; for thou art with me." 


2. Question: — What is included in the nime "Church of 
the First-born"? 

Answer: — To our understanding this term includes both 
the little flock and the great company. In the type the tribe 
of Levi was in two parts, the priests and the Levites. By divine
 arrangement this tribe represented all the first-born of 
the children of Israel. {Numbers 8:5-18) In the antitype 
the Church of the First-iborn is a name U9ed to include all the 
spirit-begotten of the Gospel age, whether of the priestly little 
flock or of the great company. 

3. Question: — What is the difference between the soul 
and the body? 

Answer: — There is a marked difference between soul and 
body. A body might lie here before us, but have no intelligence
. Thus it was in the creation of father Adam. God 
formed him out of the dust of the ground ; but the inanimate 
body thus formed had not yet become a soul. The second step 
was to "breathe into his nostrils the breath of life,*' to vitalize 
the inanimate body. As soon as the breath of life was given, 
the eyes began to see, the ears to hear, the brain to think. In 
other words, intelligence began. From that time on, Adam 
was called "a living soul." (Genesis 2:7) When he died, 
however, the process was reversed. The body was there, but 
bereft of life. A<lam was no longer a soul. Indeed, in one 
sense the soul might be said to have perished. But the Bible 
tells us that in his great plan for human salvation God has 
arranged for the revival of that soul in the resurrection. 
Therefore we are privileged to speak of that soul as not dead, 
but asleep, inanimate, to be awakened in the Millennium. 


CONVENTION REPORTS 


Four general conventions were planned by the Society for 
August 30, 31 — September 1 and 2, -so located as to serve the 
friends to the best advantage across the continent, the cities of 
Boston, Cleveland, Milwaukee and Oakland being chosen for 
this purpose. These conventions are now matters of history; 
and with one accord those who were privileged to attend them 
are agreed that they were "the best yet." We subjoin brief 
reports by brethren who attended. 

THE BOSTON CONVENTION 

Those who attended the Boston Convention realized "how 
good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in 
unity"; for there the dear Lord poured out such blessings 
that we could not contain them all. The Boston friends did 
all in their power to make the visiting brethren comfortable, 
and succeeded .to a remarkable degree. That the Lord blessed 
their efforts, and their loving hearts as well, was evidenced by 
their beaming, happy faces, and testified to by all. 

At this convention thirty-four were immersed; and the 
earnestness, the determination shown, as well as the spirit 
of the occasion, told us that great blessings still follow the 
consecration of our wills to God. Every discourse was 
pregnant with helpful thoughts; and these covered such a 
wide range that all present found just what their souls could 
feast upon. Surely it was the Master himself who guided and 
who came forth to serve us! If this convention was a foretaste
 of what the "General Assembly of the Church of the 
First-born," will be, th.n we should all strive with all that 
in us lies to be found worthy ef a share therein. 

The closing love feast was especially enjoyable; and not 
a few tear-stained faces were seen. How our hearts yearned 
for the grand feast of love beyond the vail, where no parting 
hand-shakings will cause us heartaches, but where we shall 
be forever with the Lord and be satisfied, yes really satisfied! 
Oh, what a hope! All our tears and trials will then be past; 
but their memory will be as pearls. 

At the closing session the audience voted thanks to the 
•Society for providing the convention and its speakers and to 
the Boston Churrh for its loving efforts to serve them so efficiently
. The chairman then called upon all to rise who desired
 to exnre*^ if possible, a more complete consecration to 
m T r TieavpTilv Father and a more cheerful sacrifice henceforth 
in his sprvipp. Forthwith tho audien/v* arr>se en masse. 
BRIEF REPORT OP CLEVELAND CONVENTION 

At Cleveland Cod's kind providence had arranged all essentials
 for a joyful time of fellowship and spiritual uplift. 
The attendance ranged from 800 to 1200. The stress of present 


conditions, together with the realization that the hour is very 
near for the great convention in glory, had developed in our 
hearts a deep desire for a special manifestation of God's power 
to strengthen and encourage. From the start the spirit of 
sweet fellowship and joy often witnessed toward the close of a 
convention seemed to pervade. 

On the first day of the convention inspiring messages on 
"Fellowship" were delivered by Brothers Bridges, Spring and 
Herr. On the second day the testimonials and discourses were 
in accord with the topic "Examination." The earnest searehings
 of hearts seemed to produce in those present a deep longing
 that the work of self-subjugation might be hastened to 
completion at whatever cost, and that our Lord's glorious 
image might shine where hideous Self once stood in the foreground
. Brother Bohnet, Hooper and Barker gave excellent 
discourses. 

Sunday was scheduled as "Our Lord's Day." Discourses 
were given by Brothers Crist, Nash and Baeuerlein. Many 
were the expressions of regret that but one day of the convention
 remained. Monday was "Kingdom Day" on the program
. Following a discourse on Baptism forty-two symbolized 
their full consecration to God. Among these was a boy seemingly
 about nine years old t but with an appreciation of God 
and of consecration which would put to shame many of mature
 years. By unanimous vote of the convention a love feast 
followed the afternoon discourse by Brother Baker, to permit 
participation by those whom necessity compelled to leave before
 the closing session. Later in the day, after an inspiring 
sermon by Brother Boyd, with lovelit countenances and expressions
 of deep joy evidenced by voice, by smiles and by tears 
the convention closed with the singing of "God be with yoti 
till we meet again." 

ECHOES FROM MILWAUKEE CONVENTION 

The convention at Milwaukee was acknowledged by all in 
attendance to be one of the best ever held. The sweet spirit 
of the Master seemed to pervade the whole atmosphere; and 
all were determined to be a blessing to one another. It was 
estimated that about 850 attended. Peace, joy and contentment
 seemed to shine out from each face; and the determination
 to be loyal to the Lord, the truth and the brethren was 
the keynote of all remarks. To realize that we are three and 
a half years into the great time of trouble and then to note 
the smiling faces of all present was a most wonderful evidence
 of our precious Master's promise: "Lo, I am with you 
alwav"; and again, the assurance: "I will never leave thee 
nor forsake thee." 


[6348] 


October 15. 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(306-323) 


The convention concluded with a love feast; and many 
eyes were tear-dimmed with the sorrow of parting and also 
with the joy of anticipation of the great convention when we 
shall be forever with the Lord. 

AT OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 

One unusual feature in connection with the Oakland Convention
 was that four brethren were sent there from the East, 
traveling together, serving the friends at Chicago, Denver 
and Los Angeles en route. At these cities two-day conventions
 had been arranged, and an average of 500 attended *t 
each place. 

About 650 were present at the Oakland Convention, which 
proved to be a most helpful and enjoyable concourse. It was 
remarkable for the sweet spirit manifested ; and as those present
 eagerly listened to the discourses or gave their testimony 
to the Lord's grace, their radiant faces outwardly attested the 
inward heart-condition. Many and fervent were the expressions
 of mutual Christian love among the conventioners. 
Twenty-three were immersed at Oakland. 

At all the conventions resolutions were passed expressing 
love and sympathy for the brethren at headquarters, and pledging
 co-operation with the Society and its work. 
OTHER CONVENTIONS 

Other two-day and four- day conventions were held at New 
Oastle, Pa,, Portland, Oregon, Seattle and Spokane, Boise, 
Omaha, Kansas City, St. Louis and Toledo, while still others 
are proposed. Altogether the year 1918 will be the banner 
year for conventions. It is expected that the Pastor Russell
 Memorial Convention at Pittsburgh Oct. 31 — -Nov, 1-3, 
will be the principal one of the year. The public activities of 
the Society being somewhat curtailed at present, these gatherings
 seem to supply the needed stimulus and encouragements 
for the friends. Evidently the Lord has wonderfully bleat the 
conventions. 


THE WATCH TOWER OFFICE 


The Society's removal to new headquarters in Pittsburgh is 
now completed, and all departments are now in operation, although
 it will take two or three weeks more to get fully 
settled. We have beautiful quarters on the third floor of the 
Martin Building, with plenty of room, well lighted and well 
ventilated. We are confident that the removal is providential ; 
for the Lord's hand has been continually manifested in connection
 therewith. In another column we print an up-to-date 


price list of our stock on hand. Please do not order anything 
not listed, until you see notice of replenished stock* in THE 
WATCH TOWER, Address all letters to th« Watch Tower 
Bible <S Tract Society, Room 310, Martin Building, N. S. 
Pittsburgh, Pa. 

To secure uniformity we suggest that our new headquarters 
be referred to as "The Watch Tower Office," and that paragraph
 two of the Vow be changed to harmonize therewith. 

