The World of Batteries
A BATTERY is a battery, right? Wrong! Depending on application and size requirements, there is a world of difference in the world of batteries.
Basically, a battery is a device that converts chemical energy into electrical energy. The two major types are called primary and secondary (or storage) batteries. The difference is that the latter can be recharged, which means that the chemical reaction producing electricity can be reversed, thereby restoring the battery’s electricity-making capabilities and greatly extending its period of usefulness. Because of the greater expense, buying a rechargeable battery is practical only if it is to be used often, as in a radio used daily, in contrast with a flashlight used only occasionally. One should not overlook, moreover, what is involved in recharging.
The more common primary household batteries include the following four:
Regular: The oldest and cheapest form. It has a short life and deteriorates particularly fast in extreme heat or cold. It is also susceptible to leakage.
Heavy-duty: Generally considered an improved version of the regular battery. It therefore costs more.
Alkaline: Performs better in extreme temperatures, lasts longer, is not as susceptible to leakage, and is the most expensive of the three types.
Miniature (button): Used in devices requiring small amounts of power (hearing aids, watches). It has long life but is expensive.
Battery Buyers, Beware of the Following:
Buying batteries solely on the basis of price. If your power drain is moderate to heavy and fairly constant, it will pay to buy a more expensive battery (alkaline), which will last much longer. For things used only occasionally (flashlights, seldom-used radios), a cheaper battery will suffice.
Buying batteries that have lost strength by long storage on store shelves. To ensure getting fresh batteries, look for a shop with rapid turnover of stock.
Storing unused batteries where it is warm or wet. Batteries keep best in a cool, dry place, for example, sealed in plastic bags in a refrigerator. Before removal from the plastic, however, let them come to room temperature, so as to avoid having the terminals rust from condensation.
Thinking that the staying power of all batteries is the same. Standard or heavy-duty batteries will run an appliance (portable TV set, video camera, cassette player) well when fresh, but since alkaline batteries maintain a more constant voltage, they will offer good service right up to the end, rather than slowly tapering off.
Mixing new and old or mixing different types of batteries. The mix will last only as long as the weakest battery.
Forgetting to remove worn-out batteries promptly to prevent leakage. Batteries should also be removed when devices are not in use, or are to be powered by household current over a long period of time.
Putting button-type batteries in your mouth or allowing children to play with them. If swallowed accidentally, internal burning can result in serious injury or even death.
So the next time you need to buy batteries for your portable radio, clock, calculator, tape recorder, or some other appliance, remember that in the world of batteries, there is a world of difference.

